                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               CORPORATE SAVINGS AND SHAREHOLDER CONSUMPTION




                              Alan 3. Auerbach
                               Kevin   Bassett




                           Working Paper No. 2994




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  June 1989




We are grateful to the NBER and the NSF for financial support, and to Angus
Oeaton, Tarhan Feyzioglu, Fuiuio Hayashi, Greg Mankiw, John Shoven, Joel
Slemrod, members of the NEER's program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics, and participants in workshops at Columbia Business School and
Wharton for comments on an earlier draft. The second author acknowledges the
support of a Sloan Foundation dissertation fellowship. This paper is part of
HSER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                      NBER Working Paper 2994
                                      June 1989


              CORPORATE SAVINGS AND SHAREHOLDER CONSUMPTION


                                ABSTRACT



This paper reexamines the implications of changing corporate aavings, testing
for the presence of a "corporate veil". We argue that previous tests for such

s veil have lacked proper focus, identifying influences of corporate saving on

private saving that are entirely consistçnt with a complete piercing of the

corporate veil.

We forcnulate two tests. Reaulta based on the first find that wealth-neutral

changes In corporate dividend policy do not significantly affect aggregate

consumption, suggesting that no corporate veil exists, The aecond test finds

the aggregate consumption response to changes in corporate wealth is close to

zero, consistent with the presence of a veil but also with heterogeneity in

the population with respect to consumption behavior.




   Kevin Hassetc                      Alan J. Auerbach
   Department of Economics            Department of Economics
   University of Pennsylvania         University of Pennsylvania
   3718 Locust Walk                   3718 Locust Walk
   Philadelphia, PA 19104             Philadelphia, PA 19104
   (215)898-7701                      (215)898-1503
I. Introduction
    The 1986 Tax Reform Act markedly altered the relative tax burdan of

corporations and individuala while also changing the incentives for corporate

dividend distributions. Over the period 1987-91. corporate tax revenues were

projected to rise by 120.3 billion dollars, with individual taxes being

reduced by 121.9 billion dollars.1 The act also repealed the 60% exclusion

previously afforded capital gains and raised the top marginal tax rate from a

high of 20% to a high of 33%. At the same time the top rate on dividends was

cut from 50% to 33%.

      The shift in after tax income from corporations to individuals combined

with the increased tax incentive to pay dividends has led some to predict

profound reductions in corporate savings. Since corporate savings typically

account for over half of private ssvinge. this has prompted concern chat

aggregate capital accumulation will be advereely affected, Indeed, a recent

Data Resources Inc. publication predicts that:

     "Private Savings are likely to decline because of the massive shift of
     post tax income from businesses to individuals.., over the 1986-91
     interval, personal savings are thus expected to be only $5 billion higher
                                                    .2
     while corporste savings are $24 billion lower.

This quote reflects the conception that the transfer of cash from corporations

to shareholders vill alter real activity, a view consistent with the

impression that shareholders do not "pierce the corporate veil" and recognize

the full implications of the transfer. While the belief that transfers from

corporations to individuals will have significant real effects may be commonly

held, there is very weak supporting evidence for the proposition that pr.t

 transfer   policies have any such effects.                               -




    This .paper   reexamines the implications of changing corporate savings. We

 begin with the straightforward proposition that the outcome depends crucially

 on the consumption behavior of shareholders.    If,   J4jpg   wealth   constant,
                                      2

shareholders are perfectly rational and recognize reductions in corporate

savings as a change in their own asset position, then they will counteract

any changes in corporate retentions with increased personal savings, leaving

private savings unchanged. It is this compensating response to wealth-neutral

changes in corporate saving that we characterize as 'piercing" the corporate

veil. We use this simple observation about shareholder savings to develop a

new test for the existence of the corporate veil.

     The next section discusses the theory behind the corporate veil and

srgues that much of the previous literature lacked a proper focus. There are.

several reasons why changes in corporate saving might be associated with

changes in national saving that are entirely consistent with a complete

piercing of tha corporate veil. Section III outlines and presents an Euler

equation test for the existence of the corporate veil. The test supports the

hypothesis that no such veil exists. Although the test's power is-not strong

enough to reject certain plausible alternative hypothesis, this finding still

cssts doubt on previous results purporting to demonstrate the existence of a

corporate veil.

    Because the Euler equation test is not powerful enough, by itself, to

dispose entirely of the possible existence of a corporate veil, we then

consider other approaches to the question. Using a switching regressions

eodel of consumption based on the Euler equation, we show in Section IV that

the observed significant excess sensitivity of consumption to predictable

changes in disposable income is associated with liquidity constraints, rather

than myopia or irrational behavior. This is further evidence against the

existence of a corporate veil, because such liquidity constraints are almost

certain not to apply to consumption supported by corporate wealth. Section V

uses recent advances in the theory of cointegrated processes to shed new light
                                      3

on the time series properties of consumption behavior and evaluate subtler

tests for the presence of the corporate veil. A significant finding in this

section is that the aggregate marginal propensity to consume out of corporate

wealth is considerably lower than that from other tangible wealth, This could

he associated with a corporate veil, or with marginal consumption propensitiss

differing across households according to wealth. Section VI concludes the

paper.

    Because the previous literature haa often been obscure on this point, it

is useful to provide at the outset a precise statement of what a corporate

veil would do. Our view is that a corporate veil would exist if a shift in

the distribution of an individual's wealth among corporate and noncorporete

fonts, holding his overall wealth constant, affected that individual's

consumption. We therefore rule out changes in relative asset values that also

affect aggregate wealth or the distribution of aggregate wealth among

individuals as useful in the search for a corporate veil.

    As we shall diacusa, tax-induced changes in corporate behavior can affect

individual consumption behavior without a corporate veil: these policies

could alter the overall value of private assets or the distribution of wealth

among individuals.



IL. The Coroorate Veil

     Reductions in corporate savings need not, of course, imply lower

aggregate private savings. Corporate savings can be thought of as that

investment which is financed out of retained earnings, rather than with new

debt or equity. Under certain well specified conditions, this should, as

first noted by Modiglieni and Miller (1958) and Miller and Modigliani (1961),

be of no consequence to the value of the firm. Any increase in dividends can
                                      4

simply be offset by a commensurate increase in the firm's debt or issues of

new equity. The Modigliani-Miller analysis will hold in general equilibrium,

provided that dividend recipients recognize that their apparent windfall is

merely a time reallocation of their asset's dividend stresm. Under perfect

markets, consumption will not be altered, because the consumer's optimization

problem is unchanged. Real behavior will not be affected by a financial

version of musical chairs.

     This "dividend irrelevance" view relies upon the shareholder's ability to

"pierce the corporate veil", i.e., to recognize wealth neutral changes in

financisl policy for what they are. It further requires that shareholders can

act to offset corporate savings decisions. If shareholders were liquidity

constrained, then an increase in corporate distributions would relax this

constraint and increase consumption, even with no change in perceived

shareholder wealth. The case is analogous to consumption increasing withcu a

change in human wealth if current labor income increases. However, there are

two significant differences between the two cases. First, shareholders can

sell stock or borrow against it to relax liquidity constraints, while such

trianssctions are severely limited with respect to human capital. Second, as

we discuss further below, the distribution of share ownership is so

concentrated among wealthy individuals that the sggregate importance of

liquidity constraints within this group is implausible.

     If the value of the fin increases because of some underlying change in

fundamentals, then a significant share of the concomitant increase in

dividends may be consumed because the wealth or permanent income of the

shareholder has increased. If, on the other hand, a firm reduces retained

earnings and increases dividends by one dollar without any underlying change

in the fin's real prospects, then, according to the permanent income
                                        5

hypothesis, consumption will not change in the absence of taxes because torai

wealth remains the same.3 When merkets are perfect, financisl structure, or

equivalently, the timing of dividends, should have no effect on real economic

behavior. This distinction is crucial to the proper understanding of rhe

"corporate veil", snd has been overlooked by much of the previous literature,

which seems to interpret consumption responses to fluctuating dividends as

evidence of a shareholders inability to see through the corporate veil, To

the extent that changes in dividends reflect real changes in the value of the

firm, as indeed signalling models would suggest, consumption will, of course,

change -

     This   point lends an interesting perspective to the quote on page one.

There, the shift in post tax income from corporations to individuals, in the

aggrsgate very close to a wealth neutral transfer, is predicted to reduce

aggregate savings by 19 billion dollars! This view suggests that simply

carrying wealth across the corporate threshold induces massive changes in the

consumption behavior of shareholders. Since it is implausible that liquidity

constraints could explain so large a shift in shareholders' consumption, some

other force must be perceived as operating here.

      Proponents of this view msy simply believe that some fundamental

shareholder irrationslity exists. Alternatively there may be s different

experiment being implicitly considered, one that does not preserve the

initial distribution of wealth among individuals. Changes in the distribution

of wealth could well alter aggregate consumption, but one needs no corporate

veil to explain such effects4 A problem one has in interpteting ststerents

relating corporate and personal saving is that the experiment being envisioned

is not explicitly specified. This vagueness has permeeted the statistical

evidence attempting to relate corporate and personal saving, in effect
                                      6

veiling the corporate veil.

     The modern empirical study of corporate saving can be traced back to

Denison (1958), who found that private saving was much smoother than its

components, suggesting that personal and corporate saving may offset each

other, Feldstein (1973) extended the inquiry by emphasizing that rational

consumers should recognize retained earnings as wealth accruals and consume

from then. Using a traditional consumption function, Feldstein found that

retained earnings were significantly positively correlated with consumption.

He interpreted this as evidence that consumers pierce the corporate veil.

Subsequent reaearch has come down on both sides of the issue.5 An example of

recent work finding evidence of a corporate veil is Poterba (1987)      Poterba

regressed private saving on several macroeconomic indicators and a dividend

tax preference variable. A negative and significant coefficient on dividend

taxes was interpreted as evidence that consumers don't completely offset

changes in corporate saving induced by tax-related changes in dividend policy.

A second test using dividend taxes as an instrument for changes in corporate

saving, in an attempt to isolate wealth-neutral changes, found corroborative

evidence. Since we have no a priori reason to believe that dividend taxes arc

orthogonal to wealth, Poterba's results are difficult to interpret.

     Reexamination of the empirical methods used in existing studies of

corporate saving reveals many shortcomings. Perhaps most important previous

studies have failed adequately to describe consumer behavior consistent with

shareholder rationality. Because of this there has been an improper focus on

sisple changes in dividends or retained earnings, which are certainly

correlated with changes in wealth. The response of consumption to these can

not be interpreted as a violation of the permanent income hypothesis and, as

such, is irrelevant to the investigation of the existence of a-corporate veil.
                                      7

In addition, by neglecting the duality of consuisption and savings, some

studies have needlessly introduced problems of measurement error as

researchers have struggled over proper definitions for personal and private

savings.6 This focus on saving has also divorced the inquiry from

breakthroughs in the study of consumer behavior and rational expectations

which, as we shall illustrate, are particularly useful here.

     Another problem with some previous research is from an econometric

viewpoint. Results typically based on regressions using levels of sggregste

tise series are difficult to interpret because of underlying nonstationarity

and the well known accompanying spurious regression difficulties.7

Significsnt correlation between corporate retained earnings or dividends and

consumption may simply reflect common trends in the date.

     In the following sections we illustrate chat all of these shortcomings

can be addressed through e straightforward application of the modern theory of

the rational consumer. We test two related propositions implied by the

absence of a corporate veil; first, that changes in dividend policy that are

anticipated, and hence provide no new information to shareholders in

estimating their wealth, do not affect aggregate consumption; second, that the

response of changes in consumption to changes in different forms of wealth

(corporate versus noncorporate) are equal. Each test is based on the idea

that, in the absence of a corporate veil, a shift in wealth should not affect

consumption.



III. Euler Equations and the Conorate Veil

 A. Rational Expectations end thtlheorv of the Consumer

      Assuming a constant real interest rate and quadratic utility, Hall

(1978) showed that one implication of the permanent income hypothesis is that
                                         8

consumption follows a random walk. If rational agents iiiaximize a

time-separable function of consumption then all currently available

information will already be included in current consumption Hence, current

consumption should provide the best available forecast of future consumption.

Subsequent generalizations to allow for interest rates that change over time.

      Following the previous literature (e.g. Grossman and Shiller 1981, Hansen

and Singleton 1983) consider a representative agent seeking to maximize the

expected utility of consumption, if this consumer has a CES utility function

with an intertemporal elasticity of substitution a and a pure rate of time

preference 6, then this his optimal consumption path will obey the Euler

equation:



(I)              E[(_)(_)] —         I

where r is the after-tax rate of return to savings. Equation (I) may also

be written:




(2)                            -1    +
                 !Y(tt)
where         is a stochastic term with conditional mean zero at time t-l.

Taking logs of both sides of (2), and imposing the approximation that

£n(1+x)     x for x small, one obtains



(3)              ct — -aS +   or +
where     Ac —                Since rt and       are potentially correlated, it
                 1nC2nC1.
is useful to decompose r into an expected component r uncorrelated with
                                          9

      and a "surprise" ten r-r, to obtain an estimable equation8



(4)        dc -aS        +or+o(c+r r)    -



                          5




       Much recant debate has focused on the observation of Flavin (1981) that

consumption seems excessively sensitive to anticipated changes in income,

which have a positive and significant effect when included in equation 1.

Interpretations of this positive coefficient have emphasized the idea that

some fraction of consumers face liquidity constraints and consume their incoma

in each period. To aid in this interpretation, Campbell and Mankiw (1987)

conaider a general model where A individuals are liquidity constrained.

"Keyneaian" consumers, and (1-A) individuals obey the permanent income

hypothssis. In thia case, if Ay         is defined to be the expected current

change in the logarithm of income of the liquidity-constrained group, equaticn

(4) can be rewritten:




(5)        ac —    Ady    + (l-Aflp + ur + eI



               —   s' +   u'r + Aty +



      The implications of the permanent income hypothesis are straightforward in

this context. Invoking rational expectations, i.e., instrumenting with

variables in the information set at the beginning of period t, ahould yield an

estimate of A insignificantly different from zero. Noting that, as first

pointed out by Working (1960), time aggregation could induce an MA(l) error in

equation 2, making period t-l variables inadmisaable as instruments, Campbell
                                        10

and Mankiw use twice lagged variables as instruments to obtain estimates of A

ranging from .413 to .668. They conclude that roughly 50% of income is held

by conaumera who face liquidity constraints.

       Similar reasoning can be applied to consumers as stockholders.

Predictable changes in dividends, already in the current information set,

should be incorporated into consumption plans       Thus, expected dividends

should affect only the consumption of the liquidity-constrained. If we divide

the income of liquidity constrained households          into dividend income

snd all other income Y, then, in logaiitbma, Ay t         (l-)tsy   +   tMt. where
y     is the proportion of total income that dividends represent for these

households. Thus, equation (5) may be rewritten:



(6)        Ac —   çs'
                            e
                        + o'r + A1y*e + AzAde   +
                                                    e
where A1 —    A(l-y)     and A2 — Ay.

      The notion that liquidity constraints can be significant in explaining

consumption out of expected dividends is, as we suggested earlier, difficult

to support. Put simply, -y must be very small. Row I of Table 1, taken from

the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finsnces1 gives estimates of the proportion of

corporate equities held by individuals in different strata of the income

distribution.9 Our measure of income includes all money income received by

the members of the sample in 1982. Notably, nearly all stock ownership is by

those individuals at the top of the income distribution, with almost 78% of

all corporate wealth held by the top 5% of the income distribution. In

addition, as mentioned before if stockholders did face constraints they

could easily relax them by selling their stock.

      Absent liquidity constraints, the coefficient on expected dividends, A2,
                                            11

should be zero unless the corporate veil exists. Since expected changes in

dividenda are already included in agents' current inferences about their asset

positions, they should not affect consumption. Thia ia true regardleas of

the tax treatment of thoae dividends, and whatever the process is that dri.ves

dividend changes. The coefficient on dividenda, A2, measures the response of

consumption to perceived wealth neutral changes in dividenda. If there is a

corporate veil, this will be positive and significant.

      As a fidal extension of the Euler equation approach we will further

decompose disposable income into components attributable to capital and lahor,

keeping dividends separate. This will aid in the interpretation of excess

sensitivity aa liquidity constraints in the form of an individual's inability

to borrow against future labor income. The equation we estimate is:




(7)       Ac a p'    +   a'r   +
                                   A1pyle
                                            +
                                                 A2aSyk
                                                          + A3d   +
                                                                      eL



Tc guard against a possible aggregation induced first order moving average

error term, we can estimate this equation using doubly lagged instrumental

variables 11




B. The Data

      For our estimation we use quarterly and annual data from 1948-85 taken

from the Citibase dataset. For consumption, we use aggregate consumption of

nondurables and services. Our interest rate variable is the average 6-month

Treasury bill rate for the quarter less the inflation rate based on the

implicit price deflator for nondurable consumption.12 Income is defined as

aggregate disposable income and excludes after-tax dividends when these are

included in the Euler equation. After-tax aggregate labor income, capital
                                      12

income and dividends are constructed in a manner similar to that used by

Blinder and Deaton (1985). Variables are converted to real values with the

aggregate deflator for nondurable consumption. Every variable but the

interest rate is in logs and per capita. Further diacussion of the

construction of our variables ia available in the appendix.



C. Results

     We review first the results from our quarterly regressions. As a

starting point, our eetimation of equatiàn 5 is reported in Table 2, which

reports the instrusiental vsriable results based upon an instrument set which

includes second, third and fourth lags of consumption and income the second

lag of the six month T-bill rate, and second, third and fourth lags of pre-ax

corporate profits and the after-tax return to shareholders of a dollar

distributed versus a dollar retained, taken from Poterba (l987)J3 Our

finding of a a insignificantly different from zero agrees with results

reported in Hall (1988), and Campbell and Mankiw. Our estimate of A of .431

is very close to Campbell and Mankiw's reported estimates which range from

.413 to .668. The accompanying t-atatistic is 3.56, implying that there is

clear excess sensitivity of consumption to expected changes in disposable

income.

     The estimates of equation 6 are reported in the second roy of Table 2.

We use the same set of instruments but include three lags of dividend

changes, starting with the second lag. Again, our estimate of a is

insignificantly different from zero. Our estimate of A1 decreases slightly

to .378 but is again statistically significant. The estimate of 12, our

measure of the corporate veil, is slightly positive but insignificsntly

different from zero, indicsting that consumption is not excessively sensitive
                                     13
                                                       -


to dividends.

     Equation 7, a further generslization of the Euler equation, is reported
in the third row of Table 2. Again, second, third and fourth lags of the

differenced variables and the second lsg of the inteiest rate are used as

instruments. Here, disposable income is broken down into its labor and

capital components. The estimate of A, interpretable as the proportion of

labor income held by those who are liquidity constrained, is a statistically

significant .458. Both coefficients on capital income are insignificantly

different from zero, with the coefficient on nondividend capital income equal

to -.085.

    The annual results in Table 3 use the same specification, but are based on

instrument sets including once-lagged variables. We include such instruments

because some variables are quite hard to predict using instruments lagged at

least two years; our test of a corporate veil has little power unless a

ressonsble prediction of future dividend changes ia possible)-4

    In comparing equstions 5-7 in Table 3 to those in Table 2, we see few

qualitative differences, The coefficients on disposable income sre somewhat

higher and those on dividends somewhat lower, but the conclusions are

basically the asme.

     We have estimated these equations using different measures of the

interest rate, different sets of instruments, different deflators. and

different measures of consumption. In every case, we obtained results of a

similar nature: we have found no evidence that consumption is excessively

sensitive to changes in dividends, i.e., no evidence of the existence of the

corporate veil. In each case, the error is serially uncorrelated making the

standard error estimates used to calculate the reported t-statistics

admissible)-5 All of the variables used in the estimation are difference
                                      14

stationary, so no problems of spurious regression are present.

    How conclusive crc these results concerning the existence of the corporate

veil? The insignificance of the predicted chsnges in dividends is an

important finding in light of previous claims to have "proved" the corporate

veil's existence. The fact that predicted disposable labor income is

consistently highly significant in these regressions while being no easier to

predict shows thst the insignificance of dividends is not due simply to the

use of poor instruments.1'6

    Yet, one must recognize that the results in Tables 2 and 3 are not

powerful enough to reject all alternative hypotheses corresponding to the

corporate veil. For example, under the alternative hypothesis thst the same

fractions of dividend income and labor income accrued to households facing

liquidity constraints and hsving a marginal propensity to consume current

income of unity, we would expect the coefficient on expected dividends, A2, to

equal the frsction of consumption accounted for by such households, A,

multiplied by the ratio of dividends to dispossble income. Since this ratio

is of the same order of magnitude as the coefficients of predicted dividends,

we would be unable to reject the alternative hypothesis. We have already

suggested, however, that there are fundamental inconsistencies with an

alternative hypothesis based on liquidity constraints. The only plausible

alternative must invoke myopia or irrationality to explain excess sensitivity.

Thus, it is important to determine the source of the documented excess

sensitivity of conaumption to predictable changes in labor income. Unless a

source compatible with the corporate veil is found, the results will support

our conclusion against the veil's existence.
                                           15

IV. Credit Crises as Switching.Regressions -

      As we have noted, there is more than one interpretation of the above

result that consumption is excessively sensitive to changes in income. In

this section we provide further evidence, based on a Markov switching model,

that this excees sensitivity does indeed reflect the impact of liquidity

constraints. We find that excess sensitivity has been episodic and confined

to a relatively small number of postwar years, typically during recessions

and/or credit crises.

       In their concluding remarks, Campbell and Mankiw remark that the

violation of the Euler equation is only a recent phenomenon.

      "The evidence against the permanent income model comes primarily from the
      second half of our eample period, l9698S,t1l7

Since a portion of this period is one of intreaaed national debt and higher

real interest rates, it is not inconceivable that borrowing behavior somehow

changed after 1969, but testing this is not straightforward, because, as

t4eftci (1984) noted, arbitrarily splitting data and testing for parameter

differences may biae results in favor of finding multiple parameter regimes.

This observation suggests an alternative specification of the model of the

consumer: we consider a model where all consumers consume according to the

permanent income hypothesis, except for occasional aurpriae episodes of

nonoptimal consumption caused by economy wide "credit crises". Specifically,

we estimate the following switching model:



(8)        cit* —     ortt    +   AiAyt         +   eit
                  —   Aclt*   if I —   I
                  —   dc2t* if i-'2


where cit is the logarithm of observed consumption, r?t is the expected
                                      16

interest rate, Ay is the expected change in the logarithm income, and °it

are independent, normally distributed errors. If liquidity constraints only

appear occasionally, there will be 2 distinct states.18 The liquidity

constrained state will have a lsrg.e, positive and significant coefficient on

income. The unconstrained state will look like the random walk predicted by

the permanent income hypothesis. Following Coldfeld and Quandt (1973) we

model the transition from state I to state 2 as a first order Markov process.

     Even with the simplifying Markov assumption, the likelihood function for

this model is quite cumbersome, since the likelihood of each possible

"trajectory" through the data must be investigated. At first glance, this

seems to require the summation of 2 terms in the calculation of the

likelihood, something infeasible even in small samples. But, as Coalett and

Lee (1985) have shown,the likelihood function can be rewritten using a

recurrence relation which tskea advantage of the assumed Msrkov structure and

greatly reduces the computational burdenj9 Even with this simplification,

the model is a difficult nonlinear estimation problem, with the usual

accompanying problem of possible local maxims snd minims, To estimate the

model we use the same data used in the shove Euler equations,20 but in this

case we use only annual dats since our earlier results suggests that time

aggregation will not siter the results significantly and the use of annual

data further reduces the required computation time. Since our analysis is

only meant to be suggestive of the benefits of this approach, we further

simplify by approximating the expected interest rate with the actual lagged

interest rate, and expected income with lagged income, rather than using

instrumental variables. The Davidson Fletcher-Powell nonlinear search

algorithm was used to find the optimum. Since the likelihood function is very

nonlinear, and may have numerous local maxima, different starting values were
                                      17

tried in order to assure that the maximum attained is global. Finally ,    the

Coslett-Lee algorithm was started up by assigning the initial probability of

being in each state its unconditional value.21 The estimated matrix of second

derivatives is used to construct the standard errors.

     The results of the parameter estimation are reported in Table 4. We find

clear evidence of multiple regimes. In regime I, the unconstrained regime,

our estimate of a is a statistically insignificant .047. The estimate of the

coefficient on lagged changes in income is -.023, which is also insignificant.

Sensitivity to the interest rate is slightly higher in the second regime, with

a a estimste of .082, but this coefficient is. given its standard error, still

insignificantly different from zero. The liquidity constraint estimate for

the second regime is .526. The accompanying t-statistic of 6.07 is

significant at the .999 level of confidence. These estimates mesh quite well

with previous estimates of the model's parameters, suggesting that our

alternative nonlinear (because of the interaction of the switching model and

the linear consumption model) specification and our simplifying assumptions

are reasonable. The estimated transition matrix and the accompanying

t-statistics are slso given in Table 4. Both regimes are significantly

persistent. The probability of the economy being in the unconstrained state,

given that it was unconstrained yesterday is .90. The probability of moving

from a constrained state to s constrained state is .74. These values imply an

unconditional probability of being in the constrained state of only .28.

     To gain further insight into the nature of the two regimes, we calculate

the conditional inference of the probability that the current year is in the

constrained regime. The calculation of these probabilities follows the

observation of Hamilton (1987), that time t information can be combined with

our inference about the Marlcov probabilities to construct the heat estimate of
                                      is

the state of the world at time t, conditional on our beet guess about the

state of the world at t-l. For example, if the probability of being in each

state at time t-l is .5. and the transition probsbilitiee are aleo .5, then

the conditional probability of being in state 1 at time t is simply the

proportion of the total likelihood attributable to that state. If the Harkov

probabilities are different from .5, than the likelihoods are reweighed to

account for the Markovian information about the likelihood of each path

through the data.   If, for example, we have a atrong inference that yesrerday

waa in regime one, and the Markov probability of remaining in state 1 is very

high, than we might classify today as regime 1, even if the state 2 model

appeared to fit the current observation better, Starting at time zero, a

chain of successive inferences can be used to estimate the most likely

trajectory teken through the two underlying models.

     table 5 contains the conditional state probability for each year. The

probability estimates are in accordance with the view, expressed by Campbell

and Mankiw, that liquidity constraints first emerged in that late 1960's.

However, if we label a year a 'credit crisis year' if the probability of being

in the constrained regime is greater than .5, then the first constrained year

is 1966, not 1969, with the probability of being in the constrained regime

being quite low before that and for sustained periods after 1970 as well.

After 1966, the economy switches periodically from constrained to

unconstrained regime. Overall, only 10 years in our sample are in the

constrained regime. Table 5, column 4 lists an alternative measure of credit

tightness, the differential between the average and prime lending rates, On

average, this is much larger during the 'credit crunch' periods providing

further indication that the credit crisis interpretation of liquidity

constraints is valid.22
                                      19

V. A Time Series Investi,gtion of Conewiotion from Assets

 A. The Consumption Function arid Cointeeration

     In section II we showed that one implication of the piercing of the

corporate veil is that wealth neutral dividend changes should have no effect

on consumption. Our findings in Section 111 confirmed the absence of any such

effect. In section IV, we supported the plausibility of this result by

demonstrating that the observed sensitivity of consumption to other forms of

current income then dividends is attributable to liquidity constraints, which

are very unlikely to apply to corporate shareholders,

     This section considers another implication of shareholders piercing the

corporate veil. We focus our attention on a question that wss not easily

addressed with our previous methodology: is the marginal propensity to

consume out of corporate wealth as high as the marginal propensity to consume

out of other forms of wealth? A lower propensity to consume out of corporate

wealth would imply a permanent increase in consumption as a result of a shift

in resources from corporations to individuals. This heterogeneity of response

could be seen as evidence of a subtler form of corporate veil than we

considered above. Our previous test found that a chenge in the portion of

existing wealth held in corporate form does not affect consumption. Our new

tests address whether the composition of chanees in wealth affect

consumption. While such differences would be consistent with the presence of

a corporate veil, there is at least one other potential explanation. Given

the wealth distribution statistics reported in Table 1, a lower aggregate

marginal propensity to consume out of corporate wealth would be consistent

with a marginal propensity to consume declining with the overall level of

wealth. In such a case, a wealth neutral transfer from corporations to

individuals would increase consumption via distributional effects, not
                                      20

because of an effective corporate veil. This possibility is discussed further

below.

     The outcome of these new tests cannot be inferred directly from the

findings to this point. For example, shareholders could understand and

compensate for changes in dividend policy while at the same time being more

reluctant to raise their consumption to respond to increases in share prices.

This reluctance could be attributable to a lack of faith in efficient markets,

for example, a belief thst a market that had risen might be above its "true"

value.

    This distinction helps to clarify the alternative poasible sources of a

corporate veil. We have already dismissed the idea that shareholders are

sfflicted by the "bird-in-the-hand" fallacy, that a dollar distributed by

corporations is intrinsically more valuable once in their hands (holding

taxes and other real differences constant). However, dividend policy is but

one very simple mechanism by which corporate ahare values could change.

Shareholders might be reluctant to respond to other changes in corporate

wealth, as just suggested. Alternatively, they might respond as we predict to

changes in shareholder wealth, but the change in the market valuation of

corporate shares may not accurately reflect "true" changes in corporate

values. In either case, a corporate veil could exist, although by focusing on

responses to changes in the market value of corporate wealth we do not

consider the latter case.

     To effect these alternative tests of the impact of corporate wealth on

consumption, we take advantage of recent results concerning cointegrated time

series.

     One implication of the permanent income hypothesis is that, holding

interest rates constant, consumption is a constant fraction of wealth. The
                                         21

concept of wealth, of course, is total wealth, and includes the presenc

discounted value of returns to human capital, human wealth. According to the

theory, there should be an equilibrium relationship between consumption and

assets, or, in the terminology of Engle and Granger (1987), consumption and

assets should he cointegrsted.23 The error term froa the equation




(9)          Ct — p(At + Ht) +     at

where H is human wealth, should be stationary. Any deviation from the long

run equilibrium relationship is stationary and short-lived. If currant income

affects   consumption, and is itself not stationary, then the error term in

equation 9 will not be stationary. Rather, the equilibrium relationship will

be of the fore:




(10)        Ct —    /A(At   ÷ Fit) +    + at

i.e.,    consumption will be cointegrated with assets end income. If interest

rates matter, p will change over time, and there need be no cointegrating

relationship between consumption and assets.

        We examine the relevance of the additional explanation of the corporate

veil mentioned at the beginning of this section by estimating consumption

functions similar to equations 9 and 10. If wealth is decomposed into its

corporate, human, and noncorporate components, then we can relax the

assumption that the propensities to consume from these are equal.24

        If we difference equation 10 we obtain:




              Act
                    —
                        p(aAt + AHt) ÷ AAYt +   et   -
                                                         etl
                                     22

The presence of etl could lead to inconsistent estimates because it is

correlated with the explanatory variables. An alternative approach if

consumption, assets and income are cointegrated, is to substitute the lagged

estimate of the error from equation 10 in as a proxy for ej. In this

"error-correction" model, we can also obtain consistent estimates of the

coefficients on assets because the remaining error is orthogonal to the

beginning of period explanatory variables.25 For continuity, we exclude

after-tax dividends from diaposable income and include these separately in the

regression. Notice that in these regresSions, the coefficient on dividends no

longer reflecte simply the existence of a corporate veil. Actual current

dividends are likely to include new information about future income and hence

current wealth as well. The same is true of actual disposable income.

However, our focus in this section is not on these coefficients,and the wealth

coefficients should not be affected, since consumption responses to new

information are assumed to be orthogonal to beginning of period wealth.



 B. The Opts

    We construct our financial asset measure from the quarterly Flow of Funds

tables supplied by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Bank.26

Noncorporate wealth includes total financial assets net of corporate equities.

and owner occupied housing. From this we subtract total liabilities net of

installment consumer credit. This is consistent with our exclusion of

durables from our consumption measure, which is the same aa that used in

previous sections. Beginning of period values are used for all wealth

variables. Corporate wealth is item 26 in the Flow of Funds table, "corporate

equities". Our measure of human wealth is the present discounted value of

future expected after tax labor earninga, calculated as a rolling forecasc.
                                      23

These earnings are discounted at the arbitrary rate of .ois.27 Specification

tests indicated chat this assumption was not crucial to the results. The tine

period considered is 1952.85.28 Preliminary testing indicated that all of

the variables used are difference stationary.



C. Results

   Table 6, row one, gives the result of the estimation of equation six using

quarterly data, splitting off corporate equities and not imposing equality of

wealth coefficients. The coefficients on human wealth and noncorporate wealth

are very similar, but the coefficient on corporate wealth is small and

negative. The test for cointegration is essentially a teat for the

nonstationarity of the error term, i.e. ,   in   the simplest case, a test of the

null hypothesis the errora are first-order autocorralated with a unit root,

Following Sargan and Bhargava (1983), we test the null that the Durbin-Watson

statistic is zero. The DurbiniJataon statistic is a very low .316, which is

close to the 5 percent critical value of the test of .28.29 Since the

relevant critical value depends upon the data used, this can only be

interpreted as weak evidence of cointegration. Two       further   teats of

cointegration shed more light on the issue. The Dickey-Fuller and augmented

Mckay-Fuller teats reported in Table 8, Row I, both accept noncointegration

of asaeta and conauzaption. Row 2 of table 6 presents an estimate of thia

model with disposable income and dividends included. The coefficients on

noncorporate assets and human wealth are somewhat smaller, and more plausible.

The coefficient on corporate equities is again small and negative. The

inclusion of these variables has increased the Durbin-Watson statistic to

.65,30 leading to a clear conclusion that these variables are cointegrated.

The Dickey Fuller and augmented Dickey Fuller tests both accept cointegration
                                       24

at the 10% significant level,    (The 10% critical values from Engle and Yen

(1987) are 4.26 and 4.06 respectively). Row 3 contains the estimates of the

differenced error correction model. One lag of the error correction term is

reported since no further lags were found to be significant in this

specification. With the exception of the coefficients on corporate equities

and dividends, the coefficients are all smaller. The large drop in the human

wealth coefficient may well reflect the noisiness of our imputation method

(see footnote 24).

     Table 7 presents results for the same model using annual data. These

results are quite similar to those based on quarterly data.31 The pure life-

cycle model rejects cointegration. and the inclusion of income leads to the

acceptance of cointegration.32

     The moat startling conclusion in both sets of regressions is that the

aggregate marginal consumption out of corporate equities is so close to

zero.33'34 As already suggested, this could simply be a reflection of a

declining marginal propensity to consume as wealth increases, combined with

the high position in the income distribution of shareholders. The

distribution of corporate wealth is indeed more skewed than that 0f

noncorporate wealth. Row 2 of Table I, again taken from the 1983 Survey of

Consumer Finances, shows the percentage of noncorporate wealth held by

 different strata of the income diatribution. Contraating this with the

 distribution of corporate equities depicted in row 1, it is clear that the

 distribution of noncorporate wealth is more equal, eapecially in the top

 brackets. Strong evidence of a declining marginal propensity to consume out

 of asset wealth is supplied in Hoyt (1988), who shows that differences in the

 ratio of wealth to permanent income across income claaaea grow dramatically

 over the life cycle. Hoyt concludes that this indicates a much higher saving
                                     25

propensity among the wealthy. Other evidence of different propensities to

consume across the income distribution is supplied in Drobny and Hall (1987)

who use a relative tax variable to identify distributional effects in an

aggregate consumption function. They find that the marginal propensity to

consume is much higher among low rate, i.e., low income, taxpayers.35

    Given the existing evidence of differing propensities to consume among

income classes, comhinsd with the right skewed distribution of corporate

wealth, one may explain the very low observed coefficient on corporate wealth

without requiring the presence of a corporate veil, as we have defined it.

This explanation is entirely consistent with our rejection of the corporate

veil in section TI. because the previous experiment of altering dividend

policy holds constant the distribution of wealth across the population, while

the current approach need not. Nevertheless, even without a corporate veil,

such a low coefficient could still imply important consumption effects of

shifts in the distribution of income away from corporate shareholders.

However such distributional effects have little to do with the separate

existence of corporate entities end depend very much on the psrticular policy

experiment being envisaged.



 V. Conclusion

     This paper has used tbe sodern theory of the consumer to devise a new

test for the existence of the corporate veil. We find evidence thst

consumption is not excessively sensitive to fluctuations in dividends,

reconfirming the view that shareholders successfully pierce the corporate

veil. This finding is corroborated by other results suggesting that the

significant excess sensitivity of current consumption to other forms of incone

is due to liquidity constraints which, unlike irrationslity and myopia, csnnot
                                      2R

plausibly be associated with consumption from corporste equity wealth.

     We find very, little consumption from corporate assets in our consuniption

functions. This could be interpreted as evidence for s corporate veil.

However, one may also explain this as representing the presumably very low

propensity to consume of shareholders, 77% of whom are in the top 5% of the

income distribution. For many purposes, this distincticn could be important.

Future research, perhaps using panel data to isolate differences in propensity

to consume from various assets, should examine these distributional issues

                                           -
more closely.       -
                                         27

Data Mrnendix

       The variables used in our analysis are constructed as follows

(all veriables not taken froa the Flow of Funds tables are taken from the NIPA

section of the Citibase dataset):

l)Consumption is personal consumption expenditures on nondurables end

services.

2)Disposable income is broken down into its capital and labor components by

assigning proprietors' income and personal income taxes to each according to

its factor share. Dividends are also converted to after-tax values in this

way. Capital income includes interest payments. Labor income also includes

wages and salaries, other labor income and transfer payments.

3)Human wealth is the present discounted value of all future labor income (as

defined above), and is calculated as a simple univariate forecast of lahor

income. This forecast is constructed by first regressing full sample labor

income on a constant and a trend, subtracting these, then performing en 8-lag

VAR on the detrended series. These VAR coefficients are then used to forecast

labor income given period t information, then the constant and trend are added

back in,

4)Corporate wealth is item 26 of the FOF sector balance sheets for households.

As there is a separate entry for pension fund reserves (item 30), our variable

excludes equities held by pension funds. Such pension assets are included in

our measure of noncorporate wealth.

5)Noncorporate wealth is   also   taken from the FOF sector balance sheets for

households. It equals owner occupied housing (item 4) plus total financial

assets (item 11). less corporate equities (item 26) and total liabilities ret

of   installment consumer credit (item 35 minus item 40). We exclude

installment consumer credit and consumer durables for consistency with our
                                     28

consumption definition, which excludes durables.

6)The interest rates used are quarterly averages of the 6-month and 3-month

treasury bill rates.
                                         29

Fe 0 tno t SA


a-u.s. House    of Representatives, Tsx Reform of 1986, Conference Report, Volume

Ii, September 18, 1986, Table A 1.

2"Tsx Reform Requires Cramm-RudmanIlollings", Data Resources U.S. Review,

September, 1986. p. 17.

3tven with dividend taxes present, consumption should chsnge only to the

extent that the dividend payment reduces the shareholdera wealth. This

effect should be smsll, and under the "new view" of corporate equity valuation

(Aucrbach 1979) should be nonexistent. In any event, since the teats derived

below examine the effects on consumption of changes in dividend policy,

holding wealth constant, any effects on wealth of pure financial policy

associated with taxes will be purged from the estimated consumption response.

4Another possible channel for increased consumption effects would be wealth

induced changes associated with the shift in the tax burden. While there is a

plausible theoretical argument that the provisions of the 1986 Act should have

increased the value of corporate shares (Auerbach, 1989), this does not seem

to be the mechanism the authors hsve in mind. However, this ambiguity

highlights the problem in identifying the source of the perceived impact on

consumption.

5For further evidence of the existence of the corporate veil see Shatia

 (1979), or Hendershott and Peek (1987). For recent evidence against the

corporate veil eec von Furstenburg (1981).

6lndeed, corporate savings is extremely difficult to define. For example, an

 increase in share repurchases and reduction in dividends appears ss an

 increase in corporate savings and a concomitant decline in personal savings.

 7See Phillips (1986) for a recent discussion of spurious regressions.

 8several issues arise in considering whether it is acceptable to apply such
                                      30

"representative agent" equations to aggregate time series data. Several

authors have addressed these questions in the past with no clearly preferable

alternative resulting. We do not claiNi exception from the ususi criticisms

hut neither do we view the current tests as especislly sensitive to the types

of aggregaticn bias involved, since the absence of a corporate veil implies a

particular zero restriction for each individual's consumption behavior.

  Je are gratefuZ to Scott Hoyt for making this table available to us. In

principle, one would prefer a distribution of corporate wealth by capital

income classes, since individuals with low tangible wealth but high labcr

inccme would not be in a position to sell assets in order to consume. Hcwever

this change would probably not alter the table's basic messsge significantly.

     alternative test suggested to us would consider whether responses of

consumption to unanticipated dividends were zero once unanticipated changes in

wealth were accounted for. in principle, this test should yield the same

results as ours, but it has the considerable disadvantage of requiring us to

observe unanticipated wealth changes. (In our specification, this is not

needed hecause observable lagged consumption is assumed to incorporate all

information about wealth). Otherwise, conditional dividend surprises are

likely to convey positive information about wealth, and contaminate the test.

11The use of doubly-lagged instruments is also appropriate to correct fcr the

presence of transitory consumption. If transitory consumption is white noise,

then it will also cause differencing to introduce an MA (1) error component.

12Alternative specifications using an after tax interest rate yielded

virtually identical results and are not reported.

13This variable is only calculated (and only rakes sense) annually, so in

quarterly regressions the annual value for the corresponding year is used.

14In the regressions presented the first-stage      values for the changes in
                                        31

dividends are in some cases higher than those for other forms of disposable

income. For example, in equation (4) of Table 2, the     is .06 for labor

income, .05 for non-dividend capital income, and .13 for dividends. For

equation (4) of Table 3, the corresponding values are .33, .17 and .28. The

annual estimates using doubly lagged instruments were similar to those

reported in table 3, except for the coefficient on dividends which was

slightly negative. The fit of the first stage regressions using doubly lagged

instruments were quite poor, however, making the power of our test

questionable. While aggregation problem most definitely still exist when

using annual data, we report our estimates using singly legged variables since

these results are moderately more favorable to the existence of the corporate

veil.

151n this light, it ahould be unsurprising that application of the Hayashi-

Sims (198?) correction for serial correlation also had little impact on our

findings. For this reason, we do not report them.

1tWe investigated a second alternative explanation for the insignificance,

that dividend changes in general might.have little influence on consumption,

by including dividend aurptiaaa in the second stage regreasion. We found the

coefficient on unexpected dividends to be positive and significant.

1-7Campbell and Mankiw (1987), p. 32.

18Actually, consumer behavior in such a model would be different in the

transition years between states, perhaps making a four state model the proper

specification. Unfortunately, the addition of two eore states greatly

increases the computational burden and will be pursued at s later date.

19The basic ides is that the model is simply a mixture of two normal

distributions, with the relative weight of each depending on all information

up to time T and the Markov probabilities. The algorithm passes through the
                                          32

data, using new information to recalculate the weights given each

distribution at each time period.

20The interest rate used is the annual average of quarterly 3-month T-bill

rates.

21For example, the unconditional probability of being in state I is:

p21/(p12-ep2l). See Ohiang for more details.

22the differential reported is the average rate on short term commercial loans

minus the prime rate taken from the Federal Reserve aulletin. We were unable

to ohtain a full series of another alternative measure of credit tightness

attributable to Jaffee (1971) .   We   interpret the relatively low differential

during   the 1960s credit crisis as    reflective of the well   known quantity

rationing   in lending markets which occurred at that time, most notable the

credit crunch of 1966. in an alternative specification, which interacted the

differential with income in an Euler equation, we found that the interaction

term had the correct sign but was not significantly different from zero. This

is   perhaps a reflection of the noisiness of the measure during the l9tOs.

23This assumes, of course, that they are both the same order of integrstion

All of the variables we use are integrated of the first order, or 1(1).

24since equations 6 and 7 also hold in differencee, one might also make

inferences about the relative speeds of adjustment to changes in different

forms of wealth by comparing the estimates from the levels regressions to

 those   using differences. Since differencing is equivalent to passing the data
 through   a filter which gives little weight to the low frequencies in the data,

 one would interpret the differenced estimates as "short run" coefficients and

 the levels estimates as the long run coefficients. However, given the errors

with which noncorporate assets and, especially, human wealth are computed, one

 would   also expect differences to depress the coefficients of the variables.
                                      33

Separating these two effects (errors in variables and lagged adjustments) is

not a simple task.

25The ertor correction coefficient can also be interpreted as representing an

estimate of (p-i), where p is the first order aerial correlation coefficient

from the levels regression.

26The quarterly FOF data was taken from the 9lousehold Net Worth' tables

published by the Board of Covernors of the Federal Reserve Board, March, 1988.

27This value of the discount rate might be slightly lower than the actual

rate. Increasing the discount rate translates into a slightly higher

coefficient on human wealth in our regression. Following Hayashi (1982) ,   it
is possible to construct a model to estimate the discount rate of human

wealth. Our estimates of Hayashi's model were very unreliable, however, and

quite sensitive to the detrending technique and convergence criterion used.

Because of this, we omit reporting of these estimates in this paper.

28We start at the later date of 1952 because that year marks the beginning of

the availability of the quarterly wealth numbers from the FOE tables.

29The choice of the proper test is quite e complicated issue. We use the

Durbin-1atson test because of its ease of computation and intuitive appeal.

The Dickey-Fuller snd augmented Dickey-Fuller tests are also reported.

30The 10% critical value reported in Engle and Yoo (1987) for s higher order

model is .46 for sample size 100.

31For the annual regressions, we also tried including estimates of social

security wealth, kindly supplied by Selig Lesnoy of the Social Security

administration. However, this variable was computed only through 1974. The

resulting reduction in degrees of freedom may in part explain the erratic

results that followed.

32The 10% critical vslues in this case are .83 (DW), 4.42 (OF) and 3.85 (ADF).
                                     34

33This result is consistent with earlier findings. Bean (1987) repcrts

similarly small estimates of the impact of corporate wealth on consumption.

Blinder and Deaton (1985) report only en eatintate based on total net worth as

a measure of wealth. Their estimate is approximately equal to our estimated

coefficient for noncorporate wealth. In an alternative specification (not

reported) that excluded human wealth, we obtained a slightly higher

coefficient (.015) for corporate wealth, but interpret this simply as evidence

that the stock market is useful in predicting future labor income.

34one potential explanation of this result is that the induced relationship

between owner-occupied housing and the imputed rent on such housing raises the

coefficient on noncotporate assets above its true value. Leaving these two

variables out of aaaets end consumption. respectively, actually leads to an

increase in the gap between the two coefficients on assets. In equation (3)

the coefficient on corporate wealth goes from .009 to .010 and that on

noncorporate wealth rises from .039 to .058.

35Additional evidence on the effects of income redistribution on aggregate

consumption is supplied in Borooah and Sharpe (1986).
                                          35

Re ferenc.gs

Auerbach, A. .3., 1979. "Wealth Maximization and the Coat of Capital"

    Quarterly Journal of Economics, August.

                   lasues in the Measurement and Encouragement of Business

    Saving," in Savings and Covernmeiit Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston

    conference series no. 25. 79-100.

       ,   1989. "Tsx Reform and Adjustment Costs: The Impact on Investment and

    Market Value," International Economic Review, forthcoming.

Bean, C.R. .   1986, "The Estiaation of 'Surprise' Models and the 'Surprise'

    Consumption Function," Review of Economic Studies 53, 497-516.

Blinder, A. S., and A. S. Deston, 1985. "The Time Series Consumption Functicn

    Revisited," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2. 465-511.

Bcrooah, V.K. and D.R. Sharps, 1986. "Aggregate Consumption and the

    Distribution of Income in the United Kingdom: An Econometric Analysis,"

    Economic Journal,, vol. 96.

Campbell, J.Y, ,   and NC. Mankiw, 1987. "Permanent Income, Current Income and

    Consumption," NBER working paper no. 2436.

Chiang, C. L. ,    1980.   An Introduction to Stochastic Processes and Their

    &p_lications, (Krieger, New York).

Cosslett, SR., and L.F. Lee, 1985. "Serial Correlstion in Discrete Variable

    Models, Journal..of_Econometrics, 27, 79-97.

Deniaon, E.F. ,    1958. "A Note on Private Saving," Review of Economics and

    Statistics, vol 40, 761-67.

Drobny. A. and S.C. Hall, 1987. "An Investigation of the Long Run Properties

    of Aggregate Non-Durable Consumers' Expenditure in the UK," mimeo, NIESR,

Engle, R.F. , and C.W.J. Granger, 1987. "Co-Integration and Error-Correction:

    Representation, Estimation and Testing," Economet.rLc.a 55, March, 2Sl
                                       36

   276.                -




Engle, R.F., and S. S. Yoo, 1987, "Forecasting and teating in Co-Integrated
    Systems," Journal of Econometrics 35.

Feldstein, M. S., 1973. '"Tax Incentives, Corporate Saving and Capital

   Accumulation in the United States," Journal of Public Economics 2(2),

    April, 159-71.

Flavin, MA. , 1981.   "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations

    about Future Income," Journal of o1itica1 Economy 89(5), October, 974.

    1009.

Goldfald, S. M. , and R.E. Quandt, 1973. "A Markov Model for Switching

    Regressions," Journal of Econometrica, 1, 2-16.

Grossman, S.J., and R.J. Shiller, May 1981. "The Determinants of the

    Variability of Stock Market Prices," American Economic Review 71, 222-

    227.

Hell, R. E. , 1978.   "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Inccee

    Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Politicel Economy 86(6),

    December, 971-987.

      ,    1988. "Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption," Journal oi

    Political Economy, 96, 339-357.

Hamilton, J.D. , 1987. "A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of

    Nonstationary Time Series and the Business Cycle," mimeographed,

    University of Virginia.

Hansen, L. ,   and K. Singleton, 1983. "Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion,

    and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns,'" Journal of Political Economy

    91, April, 249-65.

Hayashi, F., 1982. "The Permanent Income Hypothesis; Estimating and Testing by

     Instrumental Vsriablee," Journal of Political Economy 90, October, 895-
                                        37

    916.

          and C. Sims, 1983. "Nearly Efficient Estimation of Time Series Models

    with Predetermined, But Not Exogenous, Instruments,' Econoreetrica 51,

    783-798.

Hendershott, P. and J. Peck, 1987. "Private Saving in the U.S., 1950-1985,"

    Working Paper 2294, NBER.

Hoyt, S., 1988. Wealth Accumulation in the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finances,

    Doctoral Dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.

Jsffee, D.M., 1971. Credit Rationing and the CommexciaJ._I..oan Marker;, John

    Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Miller, H. , and F. Modiglisni, 1961. "Dividend Policy, Growth, and the

    Valuation of Shares," Journal of Buethass 34, 411-33.

Modiglieni, F. , and M. Miller, 1958. "The Cost of Capital, Corporation

    Finance and the Theory of Investment," American Economic Review 48, 261-

    97.

Neftci, SN., 1984. "Are Economic Time Series Asymmetric over the Businesa

    Cycle?,' Journal ofyolitical Economy, 92, 307-328.

Phillips, P.C.B. ,   1986. 'Understanding Spurious Regressions in Econoreetrics,"

    Journal of Econoiaettici, 33, 311-40.

Poterbs, J. M., 1987. 'Tax Policy and Corporate Savings,' Brookinas Papers on

    Economic Activity, 2.

Sargan, J.D. and A. Ehargava. 1983. 'testing Residuals from Least Squarea

    Regression for Being Generated by a Gaussian Random Walk,' Econometrics,

    51, 153-174.

Von Furstenburg, G.M., 1981. 'Saving," in Anon, H., and J. Pechjssn, eds. ,

    Taxee Affect Economic Behavior, Brookings, 327-90.
                                        Table 1
               Percent of Total Wealth Held By Different Income Classes
                   (taken from the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finances)


Income Class          0-10   10-25   25-50   50-75   75-90    90-95       95-100
(percentile)

%Corp.Wealth          .263   .385    2.511   4.396   7.919    6.866       77.661

%Other Wealth        2.108 4.309     10.185 16.192 16.056    10,428   40.722
                                      Table 2
                              Euler Equation Estimates
                           (t    statistics
                                          in parentheses)
                 dependent variable — log differenced consumption
                            (Quarterly 1947:1 - 1986:1)


equation     constant                  r        Adiv
                         Ayd                               Aytc      tsyl


(5)            .002         .431     - .002       .          .        .

              (3.01)     (3.56)      (.137)       .          .        .

 DW—2.34   R2.ll1 k2.093


(6)            .003         .378     - .010       .065       .        .

              (3.20)     (2.89)      (- .503)    (1.16)      .        .

 DW—2.39   R2-.121 p2_

(7)            .004          .       -.058        .056     - .085     .458

              (4.15)                 (-2.45)      (1.17)   (-1.09)   (3.67)

 DW—2.27   97—177 a2_ 145


Notes: All variables, except the real interest race, expressed as differences
      of the logs of population-deflated variables.
                                      Table 3
                             Euler Equation Estimates
                           (t statistics in parentheses)
                 dependent variable — bE differenced consumption
                                (Annual, 1947 - 1986)



equation     constant
                            yd           r       div

(5)            .005         .572   - .017           .       ,          .


              (2.39)     (5.42)     (-   .284)      .                  .


 0W=2.21      576 2..537


(6)            .008      .554       - .030        .022       .         .


              (2.414)   (4.888)    (-.453)       (.463)      .         .


 DW—2.28   R2—.586 2..527


(7)            .011          .      - .152         .025     .012      .492

              (2.229)        .     (-2.951)       (0.555)   (.169)   (4.832)

 DW-2.36   R2—.693 á2—631
                                      Table 4




                                                        '
             Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Switching Regimes Model
                 dependent variable is log change of consumption.
                          t  statisticsare in parentheses

                       rt      Ayt.l


State 1            .047        - .023         1.079      896
                  (.60)        (-.27)         (7.52)   (2.28)

State 2                082      .526           .510     .743
                  (1.18)       (6.07)         (3.87)   (2.04)

Log Likelihood—53.79
                                          .
                         Table 5
Conditional Probability of being in the Constrained State

Year         Probability   Credit Crisis   Average-Prime Rate

1949     •
                 .000                            .70
1950             .000                            .64
1951             .000                            .75
             •


1952             .039                            .50
1953             .235                            .53
1954             .000                            .54
                 .000                            .47
1955
                 .023                            .26
1956
1957             .011                            .10
1958             .270                            .72
1959             .000                            .54
1960             .041                            .38
                               .
1961             .245                            .50
1962             .097                            .50
 1963            .193                            .50
 1964             .000                           .50
 1965            .489                            .52
 1966            .739              *             .40
 1967            .637              *             .36
 1968            .574              *             .40
 1969            .646              *             .25
 1970            .668              *             .57
 1971            .257                            .60
 1972            .480                             .57
 1973            .618              *              .27
 1974            .000                             .47
                 .000                             .40
 1975
 1976             .008                            .75
                  .160                            .85
 1977
                  .314                            .50
 1978
 1979             .328                           - .33
 1980             .896             *            2.49
 1981             .980             *            1.12
 1982             .951             *            2.25
  1983            .749             *             - .48
  1984            .107                            .41
  1985            .000                           - .03
                                            Table 6
               Estimates   of Consumption from Wealth in Levels and Differences
                                  (tstatistics  in parentheses)
                           Dependent variable — Quarterly Conaumption


                   Constant      Human Wealth    NC-Wealth     Corp-Wealth        YD   Div


l)Quarterly levels;
                   014              .100              J09         - .016
                   (351)           (2L2)             (lR.3)       (-4,31)
DIJ=. 316   R2'—.99 d.f.—.2,75   a,d.f—-3,06


2)Quarterly levels;                              -
                  .286              .044              .067        -.001        .358     .307
                 (8.35)            (9.46)            (12.35)     (-.319)     (:3.65)   (.905)


DW—.646 R2—.99 d.f,—-4,56        a.df—-451

3 )Quarterly differences;
                  .019              .007              .027         .006        .243     1.56
                 (3.56)            (.302)            (1.91)       (1.24)      (6.57)   (2.90)


DW—1.62 R2—.49      error tort ection parameter—-.16l (-207)
                                         Table 7
             Estimates of Consumption from Wealth in Levels and Differences
                              (r statistics in parentheses)
                        dependent variable — Annual Consumption


                                         NC-Wealth     Corp-Wealth       'ID     Div
               Constant Human Wealth


1)Annual levels:
                   - .042     .105          .104         -.017
                   (.092)   (14.29)      (7.99)         (-2.03)

1111—954   R2—.99 d.f.—-2.44 a.d.f.—-2.73


2)Annual levels:                                          - .005         .412     .817
                  .286        .039          .054
                 (3.73)      (3.64)      (4.70)          (-   .698)     (6.67)   (1.891



DW=l,32    42499 d.f.—-3.43 a.d.f.—-4.DS


3) Annual differences:                                                             938
                              - .001       .039           .009           .412
                    .034
                             (-.260)      (1.89)         (1.25)         (5.94)   (J3i)
                   (1.46)


DW—l.929    1t2—.86 error correction parameter —-.813 (3.19)
