NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TYING, FORECLOSURE, AND EXCLUSION

Michael 0. Whinston

Working Paper No. 2995

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1989

Much of the work on this paper was done during the summers of 1986 and 1987.
I would like to thank the Federal Trade Commission and the Graduate School of
Business at Stanford University for their hospitality during that time. I
would also like to thank Patrick Bolton, Franklin Fisher, Louis Kaplow,
Richard Schmalensee, and Jean Tirole for their helpful comments. Financial
support from the National Science Foundation through grant SES-86l8775 is
also gratefully acknowledged. This paper is part of NBER's research program
in Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2995
June 1989

flING, FORECLOSURE, AND EXCLUSION

AESIPACT
Tied sales have a long history of scrutiny under the antitrust laws of

the United States. The primary basis for the condemnation of this practice

has been the court's belief in what has come to be known as the "leverage
theory" of tying: that is, that tying provides a mechanism whereby a firm

with monopoly power in one market can use the leverage provided by this
power to foreclose sales in, and thereby monopolize, a aecond market, In
recent years, however, the leverage theory has come under heavy attack. In

this paper, I reconsider the leverage hypothesis.

I argue that, in an

important sense, the models used by the critics of the leverage theory-

which all assume that the tied good market has a competitive, constant
returns-to-scale structure- are incapable of addressing the central concern

of the leverage theory, that tying can be profitably used to change the
market structure of the tied good market. I then demonstrate that when the
tied good market has an oligopolistic structure, tying can indeed serve as

a mechanism for leveraging market power through the foreclosure of tied
market rivals sales. The mechanism through which this foreclosure occurs,

its profitability for the monopolist, and its welfare implications are
discused in detail.

Michael D. Whinston
Department of Economics
Littauer 314
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

1. Introduction
A firm engages in tying when it makes the sale (or price) of one of
its products conditional upon the purchsser also buying some other product

from it. Tying has a long history of scrutiny under the antitrust laws of
the United States, and throughout this history it hss been harshly treated

by the courts,' A primary basis for this condemnation haa been the
courts belief in what has come to be known as the "leverage theory" of
tying: that is, that tying provides a mechanism whereby a firm with

monopoly power in one market can use the leverage provided by this power
to foreclose sales in, and thereby monopolize, a second market.
In recent years the leverage theory has come under heavy attack from

a number of authors (see, for example. Director snd Levi (1956], Bowman
(1957], Posner [1976], and Bork (1978]) whose arguments are traceable to
the University of Chicago oral tradition associated with Aaron Director.

A typical rendition of their criticism goes along the following lines:
Suppose thst a firm is a monopolist of some good A that a consumer values at

level VA and that costs cA to produce. The consumer also consumes some other
product B that she values at level 5, can he produced at a unit cost of

and is competitively supplied. Now, the monopolist jg require the consumer

1tying doctrine was originally developed in patent cases (Motion Picturiaa
243 U.S. 502 (1917)]. Since
Pstenta ç9,, y Universal flj, Manufac!:Mrjjig
then a long line of case law has deveoped both under section 1 of the Sherman
Act and Section 3 of the Clayton Act [See, for example, International is z..
332 U.S. 392 (1947) and Northern PacUk Railway Qg.,. y LL. 356 U.S. I
(1958)]. Similsr ideas have also been developed under Section 2 of the Sherman
Griffith, 334 U.S. 100 (1948) and Q.J 2...
Act (See, for exszsple ILL.
110 F. Supp. 295 (D. Mass 1953).]. Two cases
Machinery
United
involving less harsh treatment are Times-Picayune Publishing ct. i... ILL., 345
365 U.S. 567 (1961).
u.S. 594 (1953) and ILL. t. Jerrold Electronica

L.

I

to purchase good B from him if she wants good A, but what will he gain? The
consumer will only purchase such a bundle if its price is no larger than VA+CB
and so the monopolist can do no better than earning (vA.cA). the level it

earns selling good A independently. In short, there is only one monopoly
profit that can be extracted,
Similar arguments are given for the case of complementary products.
?osner [1976], for example, comments that:

[A fatal] weakness of the leverage theory is its inability
to explain jy a firm with a monopoly of one product would
want to monopolize complementary products as well.
It may
seem obvious..., but since the products are by hypothesis

, , it

used in conjunction with one another. .
is not obvious
at all. if the price of the tied product is higher thsn the

purchaser would have to pay on the open market, the
difference will represent an increase in the price of the
final product or service to him, and be will demand less of
it, and will therefore buy less of the tying product. To
illustrate, let a purchaser of data processing be willing to
pay up to $1 per unit of computation, requiring the use of 1

second of machine time and 10 punch cards, each of which
costs 10 cents to produce. The computer monopolist can rent
the computer for 90 cents a second and allow the user to buy

cards on the open market for I cent, or, if tying is
permitted, he can require the user to buy cards from him at
10 cents a card- but in that case he must reduce his machine
rental charge to nothing so what has he gained?

As this example suggests, in the absence of price
discrimination a monopolist will obtain no additional
profits from monopolizing a complementary product.

Thus, the critics contend, if a monopolist does employ tying his
motivation is not leverage but some other objective such as price
discrimination (Bowman [1957]). achieving economies of joint sales, protection
of goodwill, risk sharing, or cheating on a cartel price that has either

socially beneficial, or at worst, ambiguous consequences. This view has also
been reinforced by the more formal

economics literature on tying by

single

product monopolists because of that literatur&s exclusive focus on price
discrimination motivations for the practice (see, for exsmple, Burstein
[1960). Blair and Kaserman [l97B], and Scbmalensee [19821). Thus, Posner
2

[1976] goes on to note that 'the replacement of leverage by price
discrimination in the theory of tie-ins haa been part of the economic
literature for almost twenty years", while Bork [19781 sums up his discussion
of tying,

[the leverage] theory of tying arrangements is merely
another example of the discredited transfer of power
theory, and perhaps no other variety of that theory has
been so thoroughly and repeatedly demolished in the legal
and economic literature.
Though this conclusion may be worded a bit strongly, it is fair to say
that these criticisms have had a tremendous impact in both legal and economic
circles.

2

In an important sense, however, the existing literature does not really
sddress the central concern inherent in the leverage theory, namely, that
tying may be an effective (and profitable) means for a monopolist to affect
the market structure of the tied good market (i.e., 'monopolize" it) by making

continued operation unprofitable for tied good rivals. The reason lies in the
literature's pervasive (and sometimes implicit) assumption that the tied good

market has a competitive, constant returns-to-scale structure, With this
assumption, the use of leverage to affect the market structure of the tied

good market is actually imposeible. Thus, in contrast to a concern over the
effects of tying on market structure, the existing literature's focus is on a
demand-side notion of 'leverage': the idea that, taking the prices cherged by
tied good competitors as given, a firm might be able to extract greater

21n a recent antitrust textbook, for example, Blair and Kaserman [1985]
comment that "according to this view, somehow the seller expands or levers his
monopoly power from one market to another. This, of course, is not possible.
A seller cannot get two monopoly profits from one monopoly . . .Thus, the
leverage theory of tying is unsatisfactory." The 1985 Department of Justice
Vertical Restraints Guidelines state that "Tying arrangements often serve
procompetitive or competitively neutral purposes.... (They generally do not
have a significant anticompetitive potential." For a recent rebuttal to this
view in the legal literature, however, see Kaplow [1985].

3

profits from consumers by tying.3'4

In this paper, I reexamine the leverage hypothesis. In particular, I
examine several simple models which depart from the competitive, constant

returns-to-scale structure assumed in the existing literature. In contrast,
here I assume that scsle economies exist in the production process for the
tied good, and as a result, the structure of thst market is oligopolistic.

In these mcdels I address three basic questions. First, can tying
succeed in altering the market structure of the tied good market, and if so,

how? Second, is it a profitable strategy? Third, what are the welfare
consequences? As we shall see, tying can lead to a monopolization of the tied
good market. Most interestingly, the mechanism through which this exclusion
occurs is foreclosure: by tying, the monopolist reduces the sates of its tied
good market competitor, thereby lowering his profits below the level that
would justify continued operation.
Tying is frequently a profitable strategy for the monopolist in these
models, and is often so precisely because of its potential for altering the

market structure of the tied good market. The particular circumstances in
which tying is a desirable strategy for the monopolist, however, depend in

part on whether he is able to make a precommitment to tie. In many
circumstances this is indeed possible. One of the primary ways in which this

3lndeed, this is exactly the sense in which the existing literature can be
said to focus on price discrimination aspects of the practice; it analyzes
whether tying is a profitable strategy gjysn the prices of tied good
competitors (which can be thought of as creating an induced demand structure
for the monopolist). In contrast, here my focus is on the ability of tying to
change those prices, in particular, by making continued operation unprofitable
for competitors.
4Note that even in those existing models where the tying good is essential for
the use of the tied good (as in Bowman [19571), exit of the tied good
producers from that market is actually irrelevant as far as the monopolist is
concerned. For example, if a group of consumers exist who use the tied good
alone and rival tied good manufacturers continue to sell their product to
these consumers at the same competitive price, the monopolist's strategy is
equally effective (by way of contrast, see Section 4C below).

4

can be accomplished is through product design and the setting of production

processes, both of which may involve significant sunk costs. By bundling
components of its system together, or by making interfaces between the
separately sold components incompatible with their rivals' components, firms

can precommit to their marketing strategy. IBM, for example, was accused of
incorporating increased amounts of storage into its central processing units
in order to prevent sales by plug compatible memory manufacturers and also of
trying to achieve interface incompatibility for the same purpose (Fisher.

McGowan, and Greenwood (1983], p. 332-3). Kodak was accused of designing its
new film and camera in a format incompatible with rival manufacturers'

products [Berkey

QSQL'. Eastman jg4g)s ç, 603 F.2d 263 (2d Cir.,l979fl.

On the other hand, in a significant number of tying cases little more

than an easily changed marketing decision seems to be involved. For example.
LI.. [345 U.S. 594 (1953)] the publisher
in Titses-Picavune Publishina a.. s,,.
of the only morning newspaper in Mew Orleans only sold an advertisament in his
morning paper with an advertisement in that day's evening newspaper (which

faced competition from another evening newspaper). In

Ms Griffith [334

u.s. 100 (l948fl, a movie theatre chain refused to show films in its theatres
in towns in which it possessed a monopoly if the distributor did not give it

that film in towns where it faced competition. In United j

Ilachinerv

Qg,,,

Ms ILL. (110 F. Supp. 295 (D.Maas. 1953)], United Shoe bundled repair service
-

with its shoe machinery leases.

Finally,

when tying does lead to exclusion of rivals, the welfare effects

both for consumers and for aggregate efficiency are in general ambiguous. The
potential gain for consumers arises for the usual reasons associated with
price discrimination. The loss, of course, arises because when tied market
rivals exit prices may rise and the level of variety available in the market
necessarily falls. Indeed, in the models studied here, tying that leads to
the exit of the monopolist's tied market rival frequently leads to increases
5

in all prices, making consumers uniformly worse off. The effect on aggregate
welfare, on the other hand? is uncertain due to the usual inefficj.ences in the

number of firms entering sn industry in the presence of scale economies and
oligopolistic pricing.
Though most tying cases involve products that are complements
(particularly those where precommitment is involved), for expositional

purposes I begin below by considering the case of independent products. In
Section 2, 1 first analyze the simple case where all consumers have an
identical valuation of the monopolized product, so that the monopolist, if he
chooses to price his goods independently, can fully extract all of the surplus

from his monopolized good. I first show that, absent precommitment, tying is
not a useful strategy for the monopolist; any equilibrium outcome will be

equivalent to one where only independent pricing is allowed. Despite this
fact, however, a preconitment to tying can be a profitable strategy for the

monopolist due to its potential for excluding his tied market rival. This
exclusionary effect arises due to what I call "strategic foreclosure": tying
represents a commitment to foreclose sales in the tied good market, which can
drive its rival's profits below the point where remaining in the market is

profitable. This strategic incentive to foreclose sales in the tied good
market occurs because once the monopolist has committed to offering only tied
sales, it can only reap its profit from its monopolized product by making a

significant number of sales of the tied good. Thus, in this model, tying
necessarily lowers the profits of the monopolist's tied good rival. I then
discuss the implications of such a commitment to tying for the monopolist's
profits, for consumers, and for aggregate efficiency, and present a simple
• example to illustrate these points.

In Section 3, 1 investigate how the presence of heterogeneous preferences

among consumers for the monopolized good affects these results. Two basic
findings emerge. First, with heterogeneous preferences for the tying good,
6

tying no longer necessarily results in strategic foreclosure snd the lowering
of the monopolist's tied good rival's profits (though it still doea in many

circumstances)- If, for example, a significant number of consumers in the
tied market have Low valuations of the tying good, tying (not surprisingly)

will be not be a successful exclusionary device. In addition, a more subtle
effect may prevent a commitment to tying from lowering the tied good rival's

profita

This occurs when tying substantially decreases the responsiveness of

the monopolist's demand to price changes relative to the level previously
prevailing in the tied good market.
Second, with heterogeneous valuations, tying can now also be a profitable
strategy in the absence of precommitment. There are two senses in which this
is true. First, in a purely static sense, the monopolist may find tying to be

a profitable strategy given its rival's price. This motivation for tying is
analagous to that in the monopolistic bundling literature (e.g., Adams and
Yellen t1976]; McAfee, KcMillan, and Whinston (1987]), but here can have
important competitive effects: tied product market rivals can find their sales
foreclosed and continued operation unprofitable. Second, even when tying is
not profitable in this static sense, it may be in a dynamic sense when the

exclusion of rivals through predation is possible. In such cases, tying can
be a profitable strategy for the monopolist precisely because it forecloses
the sales of the monopolist's tied market rival.
In Section 4, I turn to the case of complementary products used in fixed

proportions. I first consider a model of fixed proportions that is
essentially an extension of the simple example quoted above from Posner (1976]
to the case where the tied good market involves scale economies and

oligopolistic behavior. Despite these differences, Poaner's central
contention continues to hold: a monopolist of one component never finds it
worthwhile to tie in order to reduce the level of competition in the market

for the other component. The reason lies in the fact that when the
7

monopolized product is essential for at]. uses of the products, the monopolist
can always benefit from more competition in. the market for other components

through sales of its monopolized product. Nevertheless, I then show that in
two natural extensions of this model where the monopolized product is no
longer essential for all uses of the non-monopolized components, tying once

again emerges as a profitable exclusionary strategy. In one case, the
presence of an inferior, competitively supplied alternative to the monopolized

component leads to results that parallel those for independent products. In
the other caae, the existence of a second use for ths non-monopolized product
(such as a replacement part market) can give the monopolist an incentive to
tie in order to reduce competition in this other market.
Finally. I conclude in Section 6 with a brief discussion of the
implicationa of these findings.

2. 1n&n

hi

Products

I begin by considering an extremely simple model with independent

products. There are two markets, which I label A and B. Market A is
monopolired by firm 1 (say, due to a patent). Market B, on the other hand,
is potentially served by two firms, firm 1 and firm 2. The products of
firms 1 and 2 in market B are differentiated. Production in market B
involves fixed costa of K plus an expenditure of c8i per unit for firm i.
Unit costs for good A era CA.

Consumers, who are indexed by d

[0,1]

with total measure I,

desire at most I unit of each good. All consumers have a reservation value

of y >

cA

for good A, while a consumer of type d has a valuation of vzi(d)

for a unit of firm i's product B. Reeale of products by consumers is

5For expositional. simplicity, 1 ignore the possibility that there are fixed
costs for product A.

a

assumed to be prohibitively costly. In the absence of tying by firm

1.

consumers simply respond to individual product prices (PAPBISPS2). Firm
i's sales of product Si are then given by some function xL(P51,232) S I
which I assume to be everywhere differentiable and satisfy (subscripts
denote partial derivatives);

0 if ji, >0 if 5i(.,.)

-(0,1)

—

' sO if j—i, <0 if x (-.)

(0,1);

that is, products 31 and 32 compete with one another for consumer purchases.
When bundling is not permitted (which I will refer to below as an

"independent pricing game0) it is easy to see that firm 1 will always set
— 1.

It is also useful for what follows to define each firm i's best

response correspondence in market S by P(P) which solves:

max (2c)
psi

I assume that this correspondence is single-valued continuous, and

*

6

differentiable with P3(P3J) C (0.1).
In the next two subsections I analyze the use of tying both for cases

where firm I can precommit to tie and where it cannot. For the case without
precommitment I analyze a simple two-stage game. In stage one, each firm
simultaneously decides whether to be active in market 5. If firm i decides to

be active, it incurs the cost K1. In stage 2. the firms pick prices
(simultaneously if both are active) -

If

fiçm 1 is active in market B, it can

offer three different items for sale; good A at a price of A' good SI. at a

6Thus products are strategic complements in the sense of Sulow,
Also, note that under this
Geanskoplos, and Klemperer t195J
assumption there is a unique static independent pricing equilibrium.

9

price of FEll and a bundle consisting of one unit of good A and one unit of
good El at a price of P. Throughout I assume that firm I. is unable to monitor
customer purchases; this assumption rules out the use of requirements
contracts (where a consumer agrees as a condition of buying good A not to buy

good E2) and also implies that a bundle will be purchased only if F ABlTo analyze the csse where precommitnient is possible, I extend this gsme

to three stages. In the (new) first stage of the game, firm 1 commits to
which subset of three possible products- good A, good El, and a bundle- it

will be able to produce. For example, firm I can commit itself to a
position where it will only be able to produce a bundle. The second and
third. stages are then identical to the no commitment game, but with firm 1

only able to offer for sale those items that it is able to produce.7 Thus1

as discussed in the introduction by setting its design and production
process, firm 1 is able to commit to a tying strategy.
Finally, at various points below I make comparisons between the
outcomes of these two games and those of a game where firm I only offers
goods A and El independently (more precisely, a game that is the sans as the
no precommitment game but where bundling is prohibited). I refer to this

game

A.

if

as the "independent pricing game."

Ixjng !kthcut Precommitnent
Consider first the no commitment game. In the sscond stage of this game,
firm 1

is active in market B it selects three (non-negative) prices:

(FAlPBlF].

It is said to tie whenever it

sets P < Agl' that is, whenever

it offers product A on more advantageous tens to a consumer who also
7Note that as long as firm I can produce both goods A and 31 separately it
can still offer a bundle for sale.

Thus taking firm 2's price as given, firm 1. picks these three prices
acting as a monopolist on its residual demand structure.

10

purchases product Si. As the following proposition makes clear, however,
tying is not a useful strategy in this game.

Proposition : Any subgame perfect equilibrium outcome of the no
commitment game is economically equivalent to a subgame perfect equilibrium
outcome in the independent pricing game.

g9.f: The proposition is established by arguing that in the subgames of
the no commitment game in which firm I is active in market B, any Nash
equilibrium in prices is equivalent to a Nash equilibrium in the corresponding

subgame of the independent pricing game. Then, given the equivalence of the
equilibria in the pricing aubgames, firma' .decisions about whether to be

active in market B must also be equivalent in the two games.

Consider the subgame where both firms are active in market B. The
equivalence of equilibria is demonstrated by arguing that for any set of

prices ((P,P1,F°); F2] that constitute a Nash equilibrium in the no
commitment game there is a set of independent prices 11A'1'Bl such that sales

and profits are the same for gft firms under prices ((PA.FBl); F52] as under
and are the same for firm 2 for

prices [(P,P1,P°); F52] when

B2 is a Nash equilibrium in the

P62.9 This implies that

independent pricing game (note that firm 1 now has fewer possible deviations).
The equivalence clearly holds if firm l's equilibrium strategy has

so suppose that P°F+F1. There are three cases to consider.
First, suppose that F>-?. If this is firm l's best response then it must be
that all consumers are buying firm l's bundle since otherwise firm I could do

better by setting

while leaving all of its other prices unchanged: this

9while the text discusses economic equivalence in terms of identical sales
and profits for the firms, it is in fact easy to see that all consumers also
have identical consumption and expenditures in the two games.

11

price would make profitable sales of product A to those consumers not buying
the bundle, while having no effect on firm l's sales of either good RI or the
bundle (since consumers are indifferent about buying good A at this price).10

In addition, since all consumers are purchasing the bundle (and therefore none

sre purchasing either A or Ri alone) it cannot be that P°< since, if it were,
firm I could do better by offering only the bundle at a price of '.

But

if

this is so then setting A' •81 •y] yields identical sales and profits to
both firms given

and identical profits to firm 2 for all B2' Second,

cannot arise in an equilibrium: since all consumers would be buying
firm l's bundle (all consumers would be willing to buy good A individually and
they can get good A cheaper by buying the bundle) firm 1 would increase its
profits by offering only the bundle at a price of 'y.

Finally, if

and

PP°J then each consumer buys either good A alone or the bundle from firm 1.

In this case, prices of 1A A'Bl A1 yield identical sales and profits
for both firms for all P52.

A similar argument establishes the equivalence for the subgsme where
only firm 1 is active,

0

The basic idea behind Proposition 1 is fairly straightforward. First, it is
always worthwhile for firm I to make sure that all consumers purchase product

A either alone or in the bundle. Given that all consumers are consuming good
A, however, if firm I engages in tying then consumers choose between buying

only good A or the bundle from firm 1. They do so by imputing an effective
price (of either

or P1 depending on the configuration of prices) to

the product 51 portion of the bundle, which makes tying effectively
lot

assume that all consumers will buy good A when 2A' This assumption

can be avoided through the use of limiting arguments, hut is made in order
to ease the exposition.

12

equivalent to an independent pricing strategy.

8 Commitment M!4 Straqggjç Foreclosure
The negative reault of Propoaition 1 changes dramatically if firm 1 is
able to precommit to tying through its choice of which goods it will be

able to produce. In the three stage game that I have described above, firm I
can choose to produce seven different sets of goods: both goods individually,
both goods individually and also a bundle, the bundle only, the bundle and

product A, the bundle and product El, A only, and El only. The argument in
Proposition I implies that the first two options both yield outcomes
equivalent to those in the independent pricing game and so they are strictly
better for firm I than the last two (which yield lower profits to firm 1 in
any subgame where it is active and at least as large profits to firm 2 when it

is active). In fact, the following two lemmas indicate that firm l's choice
is essentially between producing independent goods and producing only the
bundle.

L&mm

j:

Any subgame perfect equilibrium outcome in the subgame of

the commitment game where firm 1 can produce only the bundle and product A
is equivalent to a subgame perfect equilibrium outcome of the independent
pricing game.

ft:

The argument is similar to that used to prove Proposition 1.

Suppose that both firma are active. First, if P-y in an equilibrium,
then all consumers must be buying the bundle,

must be at least t. and

independent prices of rPA—r P31—P°-,1 yield identical sales and profits for

both firma given P2 and identical sales and profits for firm 2 for all z2'
Second, setting P°CPI7 again cannot occur in an equilibrium. Finally, if
yield identical sales and

and FSP°, then prices of

profits for the two firms for sll P2. The argument when only firm I is
13

active follows a similar line and the equivalence of the firms' decisions
regarding activity in market B then follows.

0

L&nwaa

Z Any

subgeme perfect equilibrium outcome in the subgame of

the commitment game where firm I can only produce the bundle and product
El is equivalent to a subgsme perfect equilibrium outcome that arises in
the subgame of the commitment game where firm 1 can only produce a bundle.

£rg.Qf: Regardless of whether firm 2 is active, consumers prefer the
bundle to buying only product El if and only if

Thus, setting

cannot be an optimal strategy for firm 1 if it results in e positive
firm 1 makes exactly the same number

level of sales since by setting

of sales of the bundle as it did of product El only (for any P62 if firm 2 is
active), but at a larger margin (since 1r>cA). Suppose first that firm 2 is

or

active. In any equilibrium, r(P;1,P°);P;,). either

and firm 1 makes no sales. If, instead, firm 1 sold only a bundle at a price

of Po in the former case and at a price of P1+ in the latter, then the
outcome for both firms is the same when P52—P2 and it is the same for firm 2
for all P62. A similar argument holds if firm 2 is not active. Therefore, any
perfect equilibrium outcome (including decisions regarding activity in market

6) ia equivalent to one that arises after firm 1 has committed to producing
only the bundle.

0

Given these results, firm 1 can restrict its attention to either

roducin3oodsAandB1separately. which yields an outcome equivalent to
11Again, for expositional reasons, I assume here that consumers buy the bundle
when they are indifferent.

14

that in the independent pricing game, or to committing to producing only a

bundle, I now turn to

an

investigation of. the competitive effects of this

tying strategy. As the following result makes clear, such a commitment

nay make it

unattractive

for firm 2 to be active in the market:

Prooaition 2: In the subgame of the commitment game where both fins
are active and fin I has committed itself to producing only the bundle,
firm 2 earns less than it does in the independent pricing game.

ftQf: In Appendix A.

One might at first think that bundling in this context would have no

effect at all: if fin 1 were charging independent prices of P--y and Pg11
would not change the demand

a switch to bundling at a total price of

for good Zl at all, The intuition for Proposition 2, however, -centers on

the way in which firm 1s pricing incentives change when it bundles. In an
independent pricing game, fin l's best response P81(P2) satisfies,

(I)

[Pl(PBZ).cBlI Xt(P:1(P32)P2) +

By contrast, when firm

I

$(P1(P2)P2)

—

bundles and sets price P the demand for its

bundle is given by x1(P—y,P32) and its best response to firm 2's price P2

by P(P2) such that.
—*
1—*
(2) [P (Pfl2)cAcBl] x1(P

+

x (P (P32)-,P32) —

0.

Note first that if 7_cAT then r(PB2)—P;l(P32)÷1. However, if 7>cAT then at
15

P P81(P82)+i the left hand side of (2) is strictly negative. Thus, it
must be that P (P82) C

P81(P32)

÷ 1 :

firm l's optimal effective price for

good 81 is lower under bundling than under independent good pricing. The
reason is straightforward: when firm I is bundling, in order to make
profitable sales of its monopolized product, good A, it must also make

sales of good 51. This leads it to cut price in an effort to take sales
away from firm 2, an effect I call 'atrategic foreclosure". The effect on
the equilibrium can be seen in Figure 1, where the equilibrium effective
price for 51 and actual price for 82 both fall as a result of firm l's

bundling, thereby lowering firm 2's profits. Thus, by committing to tie by
producing only a bundle, firm I may make continued operation unprofitable

for its tied good rivalJ2 This point emerges particularly clearly in the
following simple example, which is a limiting case of the above model.

Examole j: Suppose that all consumers view products 81 and 52 as
perfect substitutes with value v, that c51 > c32, that (c52-c51) > K2 > 0,
and that ic_013 Then the subgeae perfect equilibrium outcome of the
independent pricing game has firm 2 being active in market B, making all

12Jean Tirole baa pointed out a nice analogy to situAtions in
which firm's can invest in cost reduction. Here, by bundling, firm I

can incur an investment cost' of (7cA) (the lost good A sales] but
thereby lowers its effective marginal cost in market B by (7cA).
This lowering of marginal coat makes firm 2 more agrassive in market
8. As noted in Fudanberg and Tirole (1984] (see also Tirole [1988)),
with price competition (strategic complements) and entry deterrence/exit
inducement, firms overinveat in cost reduction relative to what they
would do absent thia atrategic effect (a "top dog' atrategy). a
comparison analogous to my commitment versus no commitment gamea.
l3 assume that K1—O in order to focua attention on firm 2's decision of

whether to be active in as simple a manner as posaible. Note, though, that in
situations of entry deterrence (where only firm I is currently active) it may
be quite natural to think that firm 1 haa already sunk its set-up costs, while
the potential entrant (firm 2) haa not.

16

1

P32

I'BZU'Bl)

'B1

sales in that market and earning profits of (cBlcBz)K2>O.14 By contrast, if

(cB2cBl)+(7cA)>O. then if firm I commits to bundling, fin 2 earns zero if
it is active, and ao the unique equilibrium outcome involves firm 2 being
inactive and firm 1 extracting all of the consumers' surplus.

U

Note that, if both firms are active, firm l's profits are also lower in

the bundling regime than under independent pricing. This is true because
bundling not only loses some profitable sales of good A, but also causes firm
2 to lower its price.15 Thus, in this model, firm I would never commit to
tying unless this would succeed in driving firm 2 out of the market.16

When tying would drive fins 2 out of the market, fins I may or may not

find it profitable to do so. The advantage of tying in such an instance is
the gain from converting market B from duopoly into a monopoly. The potential
loss, however1 comes from the fact that firm 1 will be a monopolist who can

only offer a bundle. Thus, the presence of a large number of consumers who

am ignoring subganie perfect equilibria in which a firm prices below cost
and makes no sales. These equilibria involve weakly dominated strategies and
tan be formally eliminated here through the use of Selten's (1975] notion of
trembling-hand perfect equilibria (formally one examines discrete
approximations to the game considered in the text where prices must be named
in some discrete unit of account).

t5Note that these lower profits can potentially force firm 1 to exit should it
bundle since bundling may make it unprofitable for firm 1. to be active if it
believes that firm 2 will be. If product A is very profitable, however, this
effect is unlikely to occur. In fact, in situations in which market B can
support only one firm under independent pricing, a commitment by firm 1 to
bundling may also serve the strategic purpose of committing firm I to be
active in market B.
160ne special feature of this model, however, is that firm 2 can "concede" to
firm I only by fully withdrawing from the market. In other models in which
concession can be partial, this need not he true. For example, if market
competition is of the form described in Kreps and Scheinlusan (1983] (product
production followed by output constrained price competition) then market
interaction will take a strategic substitutes form in which firm 2 will
respond to firm l's more aggressive behavior by reducing its production leveL

17

strongly dislike product 31 may make a commitment to bundling unprofitable

even when it leads to exclusion. It is worth stressing one point, however: if
product 32 were supplied by a competitive industry under constant
returns-to-scsle. so that the price of product 32 could not be affected, firm
I would never have sn incentive to commit to bundling here (as the proof of
Proposition I indicates).
At the same time, the welfare consequences of allowing tying in this
circumstance are unclear both for consumers and for aggregate efficiency.
First, consumers can lose both because of the price effects stemming from the

exclusion, and also because there is teas variety available in market 3. The
price effect, however, can potentially go either way. The reason is that the
same incentive to lower the effective price of good 31 that drives firm 2 from

the market is also present when firm I becomes a monopolist in market 3. In
general. though, one should expect that if the gains from monopoly in market B

are large the standard price movement should be upward, making consumers
uniformly worse off. The effect on aggregate efficiency is still less
certein. This is due to two different common welfare ambiguities. First, the

biases associated with the free entry process (e.g.. Spence (l976, Salop
[1979], Mankiw and Whinston [1986]) imply that exclusion of firms does not

necessarily reduce aggregate welfare. Second, it is known from the
monopolistic bundling literature (e.g., Adams and Yellem (1976]) that bundling
in a monopoly setting has ambiguous welfare consequences.

The following example illustrstes these points more concretely, and also
helps to set up the discussion in Section 3.

Exsaole j: Suppose that a consumer of type d has a valuation for good Bi

of v3 w -

i'

and that d is uniformly distributed on (0,11. Assuming that

we have all consumers purchasing from some firm and both firms making sales
(so that our earlier assumptions hold in the relevant range), it is

18

straightforward to show that equilibrium prices and profits (gross of fixed
costs) in an independent pricing game are given by:

C

—

—c

+ (l/3)j3a. +

a.)

-

+ (c31- c3i)]
a2) + (c32 -

[1— (y- cA) + [1J9(a +a2)][3a2-I- (a1

—

(l/9(a14-a2)][3a1-(a1

-

02)

-

(c32

-

c31)]2

c31)]

In contrast profits (gross of fixed costs) for firm 2 when firm I bundles are
given by,

0

—

i1/9(al2)]{3a1

(ala2) - (c82-c81)

-

2

(7_CA))

which is lower than in the independent pricing case. Note also that firm
2's profits fall as the surplus associated with good A, (y

- CA).

rises.

In order to illustrate the other points made above I consider three

special cases of this model in turn: alO ala2. and
Consider first the case where al_O. In this case, firm 1 always
increases its profits by excluding firm 2 (that is, monopoly profits with
bundling are greater than duopoly profits with independent good pricing).
This is because as a monopolist firm 1 suffers no loss from bundling.

Furthermore, ths monopoly bundle price of (w + i) necessarily represents
en increase in the effective price of good 81, and in fact, leaves all
consumers

with zero surplus. While all consumers are made worse off,

aggregate welfare may rise or fall: if

c3c31 aggregate

welfare must rise

since all consumsrs sre still served, and production costs fell. When
c31, the change in sggregate efficiency is given by 4W — K2 - a2(c31- 032)2.
For simplicity, assume now that c3 c3. When a1—a2a, the independent
pricing equilibrium has full coverage of market B whenever w > c8-s. (3/2)a.
For

simplicity,

I also assume that
19

(a/2) C (y -

CA).

which implies

that

the firm l will always sell its bundle to all consumers when it

ia

a

monopolist)'7 In that case firm Is price and profits are given by:

—o
F —i' + 'y

w +

-a
y -a

-

C,- c.

Comparison of theae expressions with those for the independent pricing game
(setting 01 —

a' reveals

that firm I always gains from exclusion, the

effective price of good BI (P--i), however, falls whenever (c3 +

(3/2)a]

vS [c3 + Zn], so that some consumers (e.g., those who were already buying
Bi) are made better off in these cases, Aggregate consumer surplus.
however, never rises here:

-c

—

-

(5/4)a

CSnd11hb0nbP — (a/2).
Finally, when 02_OP firm 1 profits in an independent goods pricing

duopoly are given by [I — (1

whenever w >

c+

'

CA)

+

(1/3)01

(an interior solution arises

(2/3)01). Then1 assuming again that (01/2) < (-V -

we have that firm l's profits rise from this exclusion if and only if w >

cB+

Notice

that exclusion is more likely to be profitable as the

value of monopolizing market B rises (increases in (w -

c3)

and decreases

in Cli and as the competitive constraint that fin 2 imposes when it
the market becomes more severe (decreases in a1).

.

17The qualitative results in the other case are similar.

20

is

in

3. Heterozeneous Consumer Preferences .L2s flQ4 A

The results of Section 2 provide two important lessons. First tying
can be profitably used as an exclusionary device. Second, there may be
important differences in the likelihood of its use depending on whether

a commitment to tying is possible. Indeed, in the model of that section:
(i) tying is only used when commitment is possible, (ii) a commitment to
tying always lowers the profitability of tied market rivals, and (iii)
tying is only used when it leads to exclusion.

An important feature of that model, however, was the strong
assumption that all consumers have the same valuation of the tying good.
In this section, I investigate the effects of relaxing that assumption.

two important points emerge. First, a commitment to tying need not always
result in foreclosure as it did in the model of Section 2. Second, when
consumer valuations for the tying good differ, tying can be a profitable
atrstegy for firm 1 even in the absence of an ability to commit, and when it

is, it may lower firm Vs profitability in a similar manner to that observed
earlier. In the following two subsections I consider first the case of
commitment and then that of no commitment.

A. Commitmant
Recall that in the model of Section 2, if firm 1 moved from its optimal

independent prices of r'
price of P — 1 +

Psc'mai(Psz)L

to offering only a bundle at a

then firm 2's sales and profits would be

unaffected; that is, tying had no direct foreclosure effect. Rather, firm l's
commitment to offering only a bundle lowered firm 2's sales because it created
en incentive for firm 1 to price more aggressively (strategic foreclosure).

When consumers have heterogeneous preferences, however, both direct and
strategic effects are generally present and a commitment to bundling by firm 1

21

need not lower firm 2's profits: The net impact can be determined by asking
whether, at the bundle price F' such that firm l's sales equal its independent
pricing level [i.e., F' such that x2(P''i,P82) —

x2(F1(F2).P32)i.

firm 1. has

an incentive to lower its price further.18 This will be true when

(3)

d Bundle Sales
—
(P'cA.cB)

+

dP

1 *

x

(FBl(PB2).FB2)

<

0.

With homogeneous preferences for good A, for example, the inequality in

condition (3) was satisfied because (FtcAcB) >

l('B2)41

and

(d Bundle Sales! dP)— Xt(P;l(FB2).PBI).

Condition (3) indicates that, with heterogeneous valuations for good A, a
commitment to only offering a bundle may fail to lower firm 2's profits for

two distinct reasons. First, enough consumers may find good A unattractive
(may have valuations below the coat of production) that firm 1 may have a

lower, rather than a higher, margin at a bundle price of P'. In such a case,
firm l's monopoly of good A is too weak for bundling to be an effective
exclusionary threat in market B; bundling would help rather than hurt

firm 2.

This effect, of course, is exactly what one should expect g priori.

The second reason is a bit more subtle. As I noted above, with
homogeneous valuations the derivative of demand at bundle price P'

is identical to that arising in market B with independent goods pricing. With

heterogeneous valuations however, this demand derivative can change when firm
1 bundles, potentially counteracting the price-cost margin effect. The
18Hers, unlike in Section 2, firm 1 may prefer to commit to producing the
bundle plus one of the two goods independently as part of an exclusionary
I focus on the case of a
strategy (i.e., Lacunas 1 end 2 do not hold here).
commitment to pure bundling here to provide a comparison with the result in
Section 2. These other strategies may also lower firm 2's equilibrium
profits. If they do so sufficiently to exclude firm 2 from the market, then
they will actually be preferred by firm 1 to pure bundling, since they
restrict its pricing to a lesser degree when firm 2 is out of the market.

22

clearest example of this occurs in the limiting case where products 31 and 82

are nearly homogeneousJ9 Then bundling essentially transforms the competitive
interaction from a nearly homogeneous market B into a setting with vertical
differentiation (since all consumers value the bundle more than 82, but they
differ in how large this valuation difference ia-- see, for example, Shaked
and Sutton [1982]) and can thereby raise firm 2's profits.
The following example, which is an extension of Example 2,
illustrates these points.

Examols : The model I consider here is identical to that in Example 2
except that I now allow there to be different possible levels of

consumer valuations for product A. I assume that the distribution of y in
the population is described by F(y) and that for all d, Prob(ysId) —

F(s)

(i.e., types are independently distributed across the two markets). In
the discussion that follows, I assume that w is large enough so that (in
the relevant range) all consumers purchase product B from one of the

fins.
Suppose that firm I commits to tying hy only producing a

bundle. To see how the distribution of tastes for good A can effect the
exclusionary effect of tying, it is useful to first assume that for any
level of 'y some consumers of that type are buying from each of the firms

("interior" equilibria). It is straightforward to show that, for interior
equilibrie, equilibrium profits for the two firms are given by,

fl —

[l/9(m1+m2)] °Z + (21

°2

-

+

(c62

-

c51)

÷ (Ey -

cA)l

19Note that this requires that the Ki's are close to zero if independent

pricing would result in a duopoly.

23

— [l/9(a14-n2)] Pa1 -

where E —

f

°l

°2 - (cg2

-

cti)

-

(Ei cA)]

2

s dF(s). Comparing firm 2's profits to its level under

independent goods pricing (derived in Section 2), we see that firm Vs

profits are lower in the bundling equilibrium as long ss E > cA.

Thus,

as one would expect, if there are enough consumers who dislike product A,
tying raises rather thsn lowers firm 2's profits.
Relating this finding to condition (3), we see that bundling has no

effect on the demand derivative, but that P is now given by P'— lB2 +

so that the inequality in (3) holds if and only if E7).CA. It is worth noting,
however, that the lack of any effect on the demand derivative term in (3) now

relies heavily on the linearity of the demand structure assumed here. With
this structure, the aversge of the demand derivatives across consumers with

various levels of y at the bundled sales levels is identical to the average of
the demand derivatives at the sales levels that occur with independent

pricing. If, instead, bundling were to lower this average derivative (in
absolute value) this would work against the incentive for more aggressive
pricing that arises in this linear model.
In fact, this is why interiority of the equilibrium is important for the

chsracterization above. Figure 2 depicts an example with two types of

valuations for good A, I17}J in which bundling causes all type 1H's to buy
from firm I (at the bundle price that keeps firm 2's sales unchanged). As is
cleat, this causes the derivative of firm l's demsnd function to fall, which
tends to make firm I less aggressive. Note that this effect intuitively seems
more likely to occur when the dispersion of valuations for good A increases,
and the differentiation between products 51 and 52 decreases.

In order to investigate this effect further, consider the special case

where

is uniformly distributed on the interval (i-fl,i+8] where fisy

24

Figure 2

CB1CB2O• and a1—ufo'O.20

In

this example, the issue addressed above, that

some consumers may value good A at less than its production cost, does not
arise (here E-PcA) .

Rather, the focus here is on the effects of the level of

valuation dispersion for good A and the level of product differentiation in

market B. Tedious calculations (an example of which is provided in Appendix
B) reveal that the effect of a commitment by firm 1 to offering only a bundle
on firm 2's profits can he summarized in the following way:

$

1

ifl°i

BUND

I

BUND

2
i

31$-al

<

2<
BliND

IND

n2

IND
<112

IND

ifand
flBUND ,< 1lND

only if:
[30-7)2

Ca

2

2

nfl

Examination of the condition in the lower left hand box (the only case where
firm 2's profits are not necessarily lowered by firm l's bundling) confirms
that high levels of dispersion of valuations for good A end low levels of
differentiation in market B are necessary for firm 2's profits to rise when
firm 1 bundles.

Interestingly,

though, even when n

is close

to zero, we need

not to be too large for this to occur (so that the incentive to make sales

20My investigation of this example is motivated in part by the example analyzed
in independent work by Carbajo, DeMeza, and Seidmann (1987]. They illustrate
the differentiation effect in an example with homogeneous goods in market B
and valuations for goods A and B that are perfectly correlated and uniformly
distributed across consumers. Earlier versions of this paper pointed out the
implications of noninteriority for the derivative of demand in the context of

a two-type (of 7) example.

25

of A does not outweigh the differentiation effect).21 Note also that firm l's
profits may now rise with bundling even if bundling does not drive firm 2 from

the market. In fact, in this example, whenever bundling causes firm 2's
profits to rise, firm l's profits rise as well and, further, firm l's rise in
some cases where firm 2's profits fall (this is shown in Appendix s

22

U

B.

Qitment
The presence of heterogeneous valuations of product A can also cause

tying to be firm l's optimal strategy even in the absence of an ability to
commit to this strategy

To see this more clearly, conaider first the no

commitment game analyzed in Section 2. In that game, when both firma are
active in msrket B, firm 1 selects its prices taking firm 2's price as given

and acting ae a monopolist on the residual demand structure. Given the
literature on bundling by multiproduct monopolists, which has found bundling
to be a profitable strategy quite generally, it should not be surprising that
firm I may now find some form of bundling to be its beat-response to firm 2's

reader may be puzzled by this point since it seems that when m—O firm 2's
profits would always rise with bundling. In fact, when m—O the upper left

box would have

and firm 1 making all sales when it bundles.

There he
is worth contrasting this result to that in Schmalensee [l982 .
shows that if market B has a constant returns to scale competitive structure
(and homogeneoua goods), then pure bundling must lower firm 1 profits. Here
firm l's profits may rise even though firm 2's price falls as a result of this
bundling. The reason is thet in Schmalensee's model when firm 1 bundles it
necesaarily sacrifices sales in market A where sales margins are positive
while any changes in sales in market B are worthless since margins sre zero
there (due to competition). here, however, the sales gained in market B are
valuable because price-coat margins are poaitive (as in the multiproduct
monopoly bundling literature).
26

price choice.23 What is interesting from our perspective, however, is that
this tying strategy by firm I may have detrimental effects on firm 2's profits
since, when firm 1 does decide to bundle, it may have an incentive to
foreclose sales in market B in a manner similar to that discussed in Section
2,

In Whinston [1987], for example, I considered the structure described in
Example 3 where there are two types of valuations for good A,

and

with

and Prob(-iH)A. For this case I showed that any equilibrium of the no
precommitment game is equivalent to an equilibrium of a game where firm 1 is
allowed to either sell A and Dl independently or to offer only the bundle

and product A at price PE(',7].

24
In addition, the equilibrium may involve

firm I pursuing the latter (bundling) strategy, though a necessary condition
for this is that

(see Whinston (1987] for details). When the

equilibrium does involve bundling and is interior" in the senee discussed
above, firm 2's profits are easily seen to be:25

11— (l/9(m1+a2))

(a1-m2)

-

(c52-c51)

-

Thus, when firm I does tie here it forecloses firm 2's sales in a similar

23The models of bundling by a multiproduct monopolist most relevant for the
model here are Adams and Yellen (1976] and McAfee, McMillan• and Whinston
[1987].

24That is. we can without loss of generality restrict firm l's pricing
strategy choices to one of these two forms. This equivalence actually holds
for any market S structure that satisfies the sssumptions made in Section 2 (a
proof of this fact is available from the author upon request). It is worth
noting that a bundling strategy of this sort, may not appear to be tying at all
since firm 1 does offer to sell product A at a price that some consumers are
willing to pay. For type L consumers, however, this offer is unattractive,
putting them in exactly the same situation as when firm 1 offers only a
bundle.

251n fact this follows for

given

level of

from requiring that tha prices of B2 and the bundle are best responses

27

manner to that observed earlier. Note, though, that firm 2's equilibrium
profits are larger here than when firm I commits to only offering a bundle.

The reason is that when firm I also offers product A independently it is
assured of making sales of product A to all type H consumers regardless of
whethet they buy product El: thus, here the incentive for foreclosure arises
only from the L types and firm 2's profits fall only if

> c. When this

condition holds, however, even without the ability to precommit, firm I may
find tying to be a profitable strategy, and by employing it may

exclude firm 2

from the market.

Though the effect of firm l's tying here may be exclusionary (firm

2,

anticipating that firm I will tie, may choose to be inactive), one might argue
that its motives are in some sense "innocent' since its

decision to tie is

never affected by the possibility that firm 2 might be excluded from the

market. Such dynamic considerations, however. may be important even when firm
1 cannot precommit to tying. For example, if firm 2 faces a financial
constraint that it must meet in order to remain active in the market (as in
the work of Benoit (1984] and Fudenbsrg and Tirole (1986]),

firm 1 may be led

to use tying in order to lower firm 2's profits and increase the likelihood
that firm 2 will be forced to exit the market, even when tying is not
profit-maximizing in a static sense.
To formalize this idea, consider a simple extension of the earlier
no commitment model in which there are two production periods.

If firm

2 decides to be active and incurs the set up cost K2 prior to period

1,

it may face a financial constraint that it must meet after period I in

order to be able to remain in the market in period 2. In particular,
suppose that with probability 1-8 firm 2 will not face a financial
constraint, while with probability 8f(fl) firm 2 will face a constraint that

prohibits continued participation if first period profits were less than TI and

assume that f'(U)O (there is a diminishing marginal return to predation).
28

In this setting, what is the effect of an increase in 9 on the

sttractiveness of tying for finn 1? It is not difficult to see that for the
two type example, if

(and outcomes are "interior") then increases in 9

make tying a relatively more attractive policy for firm I in period I for any

given level of P. The central (and very general) idea is that increases in
9 make firm I care more about foreclosure relative to current profits.
To see this more formally, let C denote the benefit to firm I if firm 2
does not meet its financial constraint and fix some initial level of 9 and
Suppose, first, that firm I pursues its best independent pricing policy

and that this results in a profit level for firm 2 of IT. Then, firm l's
price choices are equal to the level that it would choose in the simple one
period model if its marginal costs of production for BI. were
cEl

cE2) instead of CBl Likewise, if firm I pursues its optimal

bundling strategy and thereby gives firm 2 profits of

then its prices are

equal to those it would pick in the static game if its marginal cost xas

c31.9Cf(fl)(P82.c82). Then since we have seen that the optimal bundling
strategy in the one period no precommitment game results in lower profits for
firm 2 than does the optimal independent pricing policy for any given level of

the marginal cost of El (since 1L>cA) it must be that

(that is,

bundling leads to foreclosure). But the envelope theorem then implies that a
small increase in 9 raises the profits from the optimal bundling best response
by mote than it raises the profits from the optimal independent pricing
response (since the derivative of firm I profits with respect to
CF(112) ).

best

9 is

Thus, in this example, increases in 9 strictly increase the

likelihood that firm 1 will find bundling to be its best response (aince
26

L<'A
26Note that in many environments some form of bundling is always firm l's best
response in the one period no precommitment game (see McAfee, McMillan, and
Whinston (1987]). In such cases, one would have to examine how increases in 9

affected the degree of bundling.

29

4. Complementary Products
I now turn to the case of complementary products used in fixed
proportions.27 1 first consider a zodel of fixed proportions chat is
essentially an extension of the simple example quoted above from Posner (1976J
to the case where the tied good market involves differentiated products with
scale economies in production and an oligopolistic, rather than a competitive,

market structure. Despite chess differences, I show that Posner'a central
contention continues to hold: a monopolist of one component never finds it
worthwhile to tie in order to reduce the level of competition in the market

for the other component. The key point is that with complementary products
used in fixed proportions, the monopolist can actually derive greant profits
when its rival is in the market than when it is not because it can benefit
through sales of its monopolized product from the additional surplus that its
rival's presence generates (due to product differentiation).
Nevertheless, I then show that in two natural extensions of this model
in which the monopolized product is no longer essential for all uses of other
components, tying once again emerges as a profitable exclusionary strategy.
In one case, the presence of an inferior, competitively supplied alternative
to the "monopolized" component leads to results that parallel those of the

independent products case. In the other case, the existence of a second use
for the non-aonopolized product (such as a replacement part market) can give
the monopolist en incentive to tie in order to eliminate competition in this
other market.

The discussion in the text focuses on the case of precommitment. In
fact, for each of the models considered here, any no precommitment outcome is

27X'?hinaton t1987] provided a brief discussion of the case of variable
proportions where there is a required base product and an optional add-on

component.

30

equivalent to an equilibrium of the independent pricing game.28 Of course,

this is therefore also true when firm I produces A and 31 independently in the

commitment game. tn order to simplify the exposition, in Subsections 43
and 4C below I will use this fact and simply compare bundling outcomes to the
independent pricing game equilibria when investigating whether firm I would
find a commitment to bundling to be a profitable exclusionary device.

A. Th

Eais

Consider the following simple model. There are two components needed to
comprise a system, A and B: a system consists of one unit of each. As before,
firm I is a monopolist of component A, and two different versions of

component S could potentially be available, 31 and 32. The production
technology for these products is as before.

The set of consumers is also the same as before. Each consumer
demands at most one unit of the system. A consumer of type d's valuation
of a system with product Si is vA,Bi(d). When goods A, 51, and 82 are
independently priced, consumers' demand for an A/Si system is given by some

function xi(PAtPB1,PA+Psz), where x(',) 0 if i.j and is

0 if i—j with

strict inequalities whenever xi(,,.) G (0,1) and where (4(..)+x(.,'flS0
In the case of independent products we implicitly assumed that production
of a bundled unit did not interfere with the independent use of either of
the products.29 Though natural in the case of independent products, this

assumption is less so when products must be used together. For example, the

28The proofs of this fact for the three models presented in this section are
available from the author upon request. For the model of subsection 4C, the
result requires the use of Selten's [1975] notion of trembling-hand perfection
in order to eliminate the use of weakly dominated strategies. It should also
be noted that in Sections 48 and 4C this equivalence does not have to do with
product complementarity, but rather is a consequence of the homogeneity of
valuations assumed there (as in Section 2).
29The proof of Lemma 1, for example, used this fact.

31

bundling of a stereo tuner and a stereo amplifier into a stereo receiver may
not allow the buyer to use just the amplifier in conjunction with another

manufacturer's tuner. Thus, hers I assume that production of s bundled good
dccc not allow the user to use only part of the bundle.

In thia model, since component A is essential to any system, firm 1 is
trivially able to exclude firm 2 by committing to produce only a bundle.
Nevertheless, as the following proposition indicates, firm I never finds it
worthwhile to tie in order Co exclude firm 2.

àosition : If a commitment to tying causes firm 2 to be inactive,
firm 1 can do no worse- and possibly better- by committing to producing
only independent components.

Suppose that firm l's precommitment to tying (by not producing

one or both of the components individually) causes firm 2 to be inactive. In
this'case, since only firm l's bundle price is relevant once firm 2 is
inactive, firm l's profits given its optimal bundle price of i'

(P cAcBl) x (P

are:

,c).

Suppose that firm I instead commits to only producing components A and BI.
independently. Oxte pricing policy that it can always follow, regardless of

whether firs 2 is active, is to set individual component prices of

(where c>O) and PA..r-PBl If firm 2 is inactive, this pricing
scheme leads to exactly the same level of profits as did the bundling outcome.

/
firm 2 is active,, however, firm l's profits will be at least as large as

those in the bundling outcome since they are given by

(p*cA.cBl) [xl(P* AB2 + s2(P

32

;As2) + ' x2(PPA+P82)

when firm 2 names price

(since x1+x2 weakly increases when prices fall and

is non-negative).

C

Thus, as in the arguments of the leverage critics, when firm l's good is
essential and components are used in fixed proportions, firm 1 does not find

it profitable to use tying to reduce competition in market B. The basic idea
behind this result is fairly simple to see. If firm 2 did not exist, firm I
could do as well as it does through bundling by setting independent prices
that had component RI priced at or below cost and component A's price set at a
high level; it would simply earn all of its profits on ssles of component A
(consumers purchases depend only on the sum of the prices) -

But, if pricing

in this manner leads firm 2 to be active, this can only raise firm l's profits
since firm 1 would then sell mote component A's (on which it mskes profits)

and fewer component B's (on which it has a negative margin). Intuitively,
firm 1 is able to benefit through sales of its product A from ths increase in
surplus generated by firm 2's presence.
While firm I never gains from committing to tying here if this forces
firm 2 to be inactive, firm 1 may commit to tying in order to price

discriminate. For example, suppose that soms set of consumers get positive
benefits only out of an A/BI system, while the remainder get positive
benefits only out of an A/B2 system, and that the latter group's valuation of

its desired system is much higher. Then firm 1 will want to set a very high
price for good A in order to extract surplus from this latter group, and s
very low price for good Bl in order to get an optimal A/Bl system price

for

the former group. If this attempt hits the non-negativity constaint on
however, then firm I will find it worthwhile to tis by offering a bundle with

33

—

30,31

price P*A•
Firm l's Lack of desire to use tying as an

exclusionary

device can change

dramatically, however, when fins l's Donopolized component is not essential

for all uses of product E2. I now consider cwo natural extensions of the
above mddel in which tying can prove to be not only an effective exclusionary
device, but also a profitable one.

B.

Inferior. Gomoetitively Suyolie& Comoonent

Stretegj Foreclosure

Suppose that there exists an uniformly inferior, competitively
supplied alternative to firm l's product A, denoted as product A2 (henceforth,

firm l's product A will be denoted by Al). The cost of component A2 is also
tAP but compared with the valuations described above for Al/Bl and Al/52
systems, a consumer's valuation for a system that has product A2 in it rather
than Al is (y

- cA)

lower [i.e., vA2IBi(d) —

vAl,,Di(d)

-

(y

-

CA)]

where 7 >

cA.
Consider, first, the independent pricing game (which, as I noted above,

yields an outcome identical to that which occurs if firm 1 produces A and 81

only independently). In this game, firm I always sets PAlSY and makes all

component A sales. When firm 1 sets PAId in this equilibrium, the inferior
alternative (product AZ) is irrelevant for pricing and profits. In the case

where A1' however, the presence of the inferior product AZ constrains firm

30This point is analogous to the observation that an upstream monopolist may
wish to vertically integrate forward into one of the industries that uses its
product in order to achieve price discrimination across users (see, for
exampls, Tirole (1958, p. 141]). Note that precommitment is essential for
this purpose since otherwise the second set of consumers would buy the bundle
to get their component A when the bundle price is lower than the price of good
A alone (resulting in an outcome that is identical to that which would occur
with independent prices of P for component A end zero for component 51).
311n fact, offering a bundle plus good A individually is always an optimal
policy for firm 1. However, when the optimal bundle price exceeds the price
for good A alone, the same outcome is achievable by offering goods A and 81
independently.

34

l's equilibrium pricing and profits. This could mean that, contrary to
Proposition 3, firm 1 would prefer to have firm 2 out of the market (firm 1
can no longer necessarily benefit through its component Al sales from the
surplus created by the presence of firm 2).32 Example 4 illustrates this point
and shows how the presence of component A2 can make competitive interaction
here look very much like the independent products case considered earlier.

Examole : Suppose that vAl,B.(d) tv-ad, cA>OI and cg1—c•cg)O.
and that taza+cA+cB (to insure that all consumers buy a system; note the
Ignoring the constraint imposed by the

parallel to Example 2)

presence of product A2, the independent pricing equilibrium level of Al is
increasing in

When w >

-y+c6+(3/2)a, the unique equilibrium involves

prices of:

—
— cg +

and all consumers receiving positive surplus (see Figure 3). Profits (gross
of fixed costs) are given by:

—

(-c) +

—

(a/2).

(a/I)

Note that this equilibrium essentially replicates the independent goods

outcome from Ssction 2 (Example 2 with a1—a2 and cal_cBz). That La, the
presence of a couspetitive constraint from product Al servea to uxtcouple"

the

32The fact that the presence of an inferior competitively supplied product A
can potentially prevent firm A. from deriving maximal (two product monopoly)
profits has also been noted in Ordover, Sykes and Willig [1985)
33More precisely, though multiple equilibria exist in the game when component

A2 does not exist which correspond to a range of values for P1and P which
is independent of w, in any such equilibrium, the level of
w -

(l/2)[a+cg-3P;1].
35

is given by

I

t 2ew'-''t'' k1I.'!
-r C%r..-'t

,
d.c

dt

c-its

a.' aC'/-fl)

two component markets. As in the independent products case, if w is large,
firm is profits are increased by firm 2 being inactive (firm I then acts as a
systems monopolist setting an Al/SI system price of w)

U

Now consider the commitment game. When firm 1 would prefer firm 2 to be
out of the market, but under independent pricing firm 2 would want to be
active, can a commitment to tying by firm I force firm 2 out of the narket

(note that firm l's component Al is not essential). The answer is "yes", and
for the same basic reason as in Section 2; when it is only able to sell a
bundle, firm 1 can only gain its profits from component Al if it also sells
component B1; this causes fins I to foreclose sales in the component B market.

To see this formally, suppose thst firm 1 can only produce a bundle. When the
presence of product A2 constrains firm l's pricing (so that

in an

independent pricing game, firm l's price for component 31 given firm 2's price
P32 is given by P;1(P82) such that,

-

(3) {IP;1P32

+

(y

- cA)

c31] 4(-14-P1,i+P32) + Xl(l+P1,7+P32)}

I

*

•!2

*

¶x1(7+P31,1+P52)+X1(i+P31,7+P32)]0.

The first ten of this expression represents the effect on sales of
component 31 of marginally changing P1, while the second is the effect on
sales of component Al. Note that this second change is due solely to the

aSa1 change

in system sates. In contrsst, when firm I commits to

34Unlitce the independent products case, firm I suffers no loss from being
restricted to bundle when it is a monopolist. Rather, here the cost of
exclusion of firm 2 is that firm I is unable to capture any of the surplus
created by firm 2 (through firm l's sales of component Al).

36

bundling, its optimal bundle price given firm 2's price, B2' is given by

p*(p) such that,

l—*

—*

()

P (P2) CA
—

However, at p —

(5) {:

lB2

-

c31J

*

2BlE2

1(P

,+P32) +

this

+ -r

x

(P ,-y+P52) —

expression becomes,

c31] 4(÷P;1,i+P82) +

+ (-y

-

1

*

CA) x1(-y+P31,-y+P32)

Note that x(..') does not appear in the second term of (5). This
represents the fact that when firm 1 bundles, only by increasing sales of
Al/SI systems does firm 1 increase the sales of component Al: firm 1 is

therefore led to foreclose sales in market B. Indeed, comparing (3) and
(5), it must be that (5) is strictly negative (since i>cA and x(-,-) >

and therefore, P(?52) <

+ -y.

0)

As in the independent product case,

this lowering of firm l's effective price for component SI towers firm 2's
profits.35 Thus, by committing firm 1 to "strategic foreclosureTM, tying can
be an effective device for excluding firm 2 and thereby raising firm l's

35This incentive for foreclosure is similar to the effects studied in Matutes
and Regibeau [1986] - They study product compatibility in a symmetric duopoly
and identify a collusive incentive to have compatibility. This corresponds to
the "puppy dog" strategy in the Fudenberg and Tirole [1984] taxonomy for the
case of accomodation under price competition, in contrast to the "top dog"
strategy that I focus on here (see footnote 12)

37

profits.

36,37

Examole -

cont'd:

If firm I commits to only producing a bundle, firm

2's equilibrium profit when both firms are active is given by,
0

fl2

— max
'[0. (l/2n)(cs

which is lower than its profit under independent pricing. Note that if firm 1
bundles and forces firm 2 to be inactive, all consumers receive zero surplus
here (although, as usual, aggregate welfare may either fall or rise).

U

C.

An Alternative Qfl

for

Product : Direct Foreclosure

bZext, consider an alternative variation in the basic model. Suppose that
there exists an alternative use for component B that does not rely on the

simultaneous purchase of component A. One example of such a use is a
replacement parts market for existing owners of a system who need to replace

only component B. Because component A is not essential for the use of product
B in that market, firm lis not able to benefit from firm 2's presence in this
36The discussion in the text has only compared producing A and BI independently
with committing to produce only a bundle. One might wonder about other
alternatives. It turns out that as long as the sort of price discrimination
motivation discussed in the previous subsection is not present, any of the
other alternatives are either equivalent to independent pricing (Bundle and
Al; Bundle, Al, snd BI). equivalent to producing only a bundle (Bundle and
El), or clearly inferior to these options (Al only; Bi only).
37A longstanding issue in the legal treatment of tying is when to trest
the tying and tied products as distinct products. One argument
sometimes made is that the tied product must be one which consumers
might want to purchase separately, without also purchasing the tying
product (see, for example, Justice O'Connor's concurrence in Jefferson
parish ti2nttal District t1a. A y_ fly, 466 U.S. 2 (1984) where she
argues this position because "When the tied product has no use other
than in conjunction with the tying product, a seller of the tying
product can acquire no additional market power by selling the two
products together."). Note though, that in the model analyzed here, this
statement is incorrect unless one defines "other uses', contrary to
Justice O'Connor's meaning, to include use with other producers' component

38

market through sales of good A and the logic of Proposition 3 therefore breaks
down.38 Firm I may now find it worthwhile to exclude firm 2, if it can, in

order to monopolize this other market for product B. Furthermore, because
component A is still essential for certain uses of product B, firm 1 may have
the means to accomplish this end: by offering to sell component A only in a
bundle with component El. firm 1 directly forecloses firm 2's sales in the
joint use market (foreclosure of these sales is complete regardless of firm
l's bundle price), which may drive firm 2's profits below the level that

justifies its continued operation. The following simple example illustrates
these points.

Example : Suppose that there are two types of consumers. Type I consumers
desire a system. There are a continuum of type I consumers indexed by the

tO,l) with total measure I. Consumer d has

uniformly distributed variable d

valuations for the two possible systems of:

vA/Bl(d) w'd
vA/82(d) w•d +

'1'

Type II consumers, of which there are a total measure of 9. only desire
product B. Each type IT consumer has valuations for products 81 and 82 of:

D + '2.
The firms are unable to diecriminate across these consumers in their

pricing. The cost structure has cA).O. c51c82c8>O, 1(2>0. and

381n the replacement parts market example, component A is, in a sense,
essential for the use of these replacement parts as well. One may therefore
wonder why firm 1 cannot benefit from firm 2's presence through the initial
price of component A. While this is true for future purchasers of systems, it
is not true for those consumers already owning a system (which may have been
purchased before firm 2 even existed).

39

Finally, in what follows, I make two further assumptions: (A.l) (1+6)72>71>72
and (A.2) w>max{47271+c.s-c3. 7l+cA+CB).

Consider, first, the outcome of the independent pricing game. Under our
assumptions, the unique equilibrium outcome when both firms
involves prices of:

are

active

3940

C3

p82'

ft +

—

In

this equilibrium, all consumers buying a component B buy product 82 and

profits for the two firms are given by:
o
2
nl iw+(-rl--rz)-cA-cBl /4w
o

2 2" +

w+(7l7,)cAcB
2w

-

K2

Suppose, instead, that firm 1 commits to producing only a bundle and

product 81 alone. In this case the unique equilibrium prices when firm 2 is
active are given by:

PSI— CS

P52
P° —

C+
(w+cg-c3)/2

and profits are:

11_ (w-cçc3)2/4w

am ignoring equilibria here that involve firm I pricing its component
31 below cost and making no sales. As earlier, these equilibria involve the
use of a weakly dominated strategy by firm I and can be eliminated through the
use of. Selten's (19751 notion of trembling-hand perfection.

40Assumption (A.2) ensures that the optimal price for 32 is not less than

40

•

2 728 Thus, by committing to tie, firm 1 denies firm 2 its profitable sales to type
I consumers, lowering firm 2's profits, and possibly forcing firm 2 to

be

inactive. Furthermore if tying does force firm 2 to be inactive, firm l's

profit is [(wcAc3)2/4w1 i- 8(-c). which is larger than its independent
pricing profits if - the gain from monopolizing the type II market- is
large.41 Finally, if firm I does exclude firm 2 in this manner, all consumers
are made worse off here, although aggregate welfare may either fall or rise.

U

5. Conclusthn
The above results demonstrate, in my view, that the leverage

hypothesis can be formally modelled in a coherent and appeeling way. Once
one allows for scale economies and strategic interaction, tying-- by
leading to the foreclosure of tied good sales- -

can make continued operation

by a monopolist's tied market rival unprofitable. As the models above have
indicated, such a strategy can be a profitable one for a monopolist, often

41The reader may be wondering about other alternatives available to firm 1, A
commitment to producing A only, 51 only, or just a bundle is worse as an
exclusionary strategy for firm I than committing to produce the bundle and 31
since firm 2's profits are higher when it is active under these strategiesthan
when firm 1 coits to produce the bundle and 81, and firm l's profits are
lower under these options if firm 2 is inactive. They also are less
attractive as an accomodation strategy for firm 1 than independent production
of A and El. Producing A, 81, and a bundle yields an outcome equivslent to
the independent production outcome (restricting attention to trembling-hand
perfect equilibria). Finally, producing a bi,indle and A is less effective as
an exclusionary strategy than producing a bundle and 51 (it gives firm 2
higher profits if it is active and firm 1 lower profits when firm 2 is not
active): Also, when firm 2 is active, no pure strategy (trembling-hand
perfect) equilibrium can give firm 1 higher profits than when it produces A
and 31 independently. However, e pure strategy equilibrium may not exist
hare. A sufficient condition for a pure strategy equilibrium to exist is that
< (-c5). • Thus, when this condition holds, firm I can effectively limit
itself to the two options considered in the text.
41

precisely because of this exclusionary effect on market structure.

While

the

analysis vindicates the Leverage hypothesis on a positive

level, its normative implications are lees clear. Even in the simple models
considered here, which ignore a number of other possible motivations for the

practice, the impact of this exclusion on welfare is uncertain42 This fact,
combined with the difficulty of sorting out the leverage-based instances of
tying from other cases, makes the specification of a practical legal stsndard
extremely difficult.

Finslly, it should be noted that the leverage issue is not limited to

the practice of tying1 but rather is widespread in antitrust analysis. With
the practice of reciprocity, for example, a zeonopsonistic buyer of some

product refuses to buy from its suppliers unless they also buy a product from

him (in which he may face competition). Alternatively, when a vertically
integrated monopolistic input supplier can sell its input to both its own
downstream manufacturer and to a rival manufacturer, a refusal to supply this

rival manufacturer is similar to the tying of complementary goods. The models
analyzed above can frequently be reinterpreted to apply to these other
settings as well.3

421t should be noted that this is not a problem limited to tying, but is
pervasive in the area of anticompetitive exclusion (see, for example, Ordover
and Saloner (1987] and Schmalensee [1982b]). If one puts relatively more
weight on consumer welfare, however, these ambiguities become somewhat less
severe as exclusion typically does hurt consumers.

43The extent to which commitment is possible, however, may well vary by
practice. In addition, in some instances additional contracting possibilities
may be available. For instance, in the example of vertical integration
described above, the monopolist may be able to use more elaborate contracts
with the downstream rival than contracts that just specify a linear wholesale
price (which would yield results similar to those above).

42

Aependix

Provosition

Proof

2:

The argument is a simple comparative statics

firm

—

exercise. Letting

l's problem, given 'B2' can be

written:

max [( - cRi)

+ (-y

- cA)

The bundling equilibrium is then characterized by the following two
equations which have a unique solution (with positive sales by both
firms) under our assumptions.

I

**

1 ** **
x
,P32)

** **

(( -c51) + (1cA)] x1( •P32) +

2 ** **

**

B2 -

c32)

—

0

2 ** ** —
0.
.P82)

x2( 'B2 + x (#

**

-

Note that if 1_CA then

* *

**

'g2 — (P81,P32),

the independent pricing

equilibrium. Now define (omitting arguments of functions):
1

A a 2
B • 2

**

+ :

1
+ (7cA)] x11

CR1)

**
2
2
x2 + (P32-c32) x22
**
1
1

C —x2 + x12 [(* -c31) ÷ (.c)]
**
2
2
+
0 —
x21 (PB2cg2).
The assumption that Pi(Pgj)

(0,1) implies that (Ag) <C

(-C, -0)

<C

This then implies thst,

**

sign —

— sign

[-3x1) C 0

sign —

— sign

1
[Ox1) C 0.

so that both firms' profits fall relative to the independent pricing
equilibrium.

U
A-i

0.

Aopendj B

Here I work out the example for the cases where $?n. In this class of
cases, the division of consumers between the two firms

can be

represented

diagrammatically as follows:

Reservation
Values for
Good A

— (7-fl)

+

(P3+a)

Reservation Values for Good l Induced by Pg
Consider first equilibria that are in Region (i), i.e., that satisfy

p (7-$)+(P52+o). In this region, the first-order coditions for the two
firms are:

I

fl j:

lea$ -

(l/2)[P

-(i-fl)-

-

P

[1' -@r-$)-

—

can easily be shown that these are sufficient for a global maximum; at
any point where the first-order condition holds, the firms' profit
functions are concave.

A-2

fin 1:

[P

-a)]

- 22

—

From firm 2's first-order condition we see that we are in Region (i) if

and only if P2- Solving the two first-order conditions for P32 yields
the following expression:

8(P32)2 + 2[a-(-$)J P52 + 4o$

— 0.

This expression is strictly concave and is non-negative at P32—0. Hence,
if and only if the value of this expression is non-positive at

Substituting yields the requirement that i3($-a). Firm 2's

profits in this region under bundling are (l/2a$)(P32)3 compared with
its profits of (a/2) under independent goods pricing. Since P32a in this
region. firm 2's profits must fall.
Consider now bundling equilibria that fall in region (ii), i.e.!

where P E

+a),

-a)]. Straightforward analysis of the

firms' first-order conditions reveals that in equilibrium we must have

IF82 — 3$
2$-a

-

-y.

In

addition, to be in region (ii), P52 must satisfy

P82 a a, or substituting for PB2: 3($-a) a -y a 3(a-$). The first

of these inequalities is just the reverse of our region (i) condition,
while the second, which assures that we are not in region (iii) is always
satisfied since $aa (in fact, the bundling equilibrium can never be in
region (iii)). Fir's 2's profits under bundling in this region are given

by (l/2$)(P32)2 compared with (a/2) under independent goods pricing.
Substituting for 52 yields the condition in ths text. Firm l's profits
under bundling in this region are given by:

A-3

—?

(

I - (l/2$)

P$-'-1

[P

Ii +

l 3J12 6$
while

under the parameter values of this region its independent goods

pricing profits are given by (o/2) +

[1?]2

(1/2$). Bundling then yields

firm I larger profits than independent pricing (assuming that firm 2
remains active) if and only if:

But, the expression on the left side of this inequality is strictly larger

than {?7)2, which implies that whenever firm 2's profits are higher
under bundling so are firm l's. There is also clearly an area of the
parameter space where firm 1 is better off while firm 2 is worse off under
bundling compared to independent goods pricing.
The analysis of cases where m > fi

proceeds in a similar manner.

A-4

References

Adams,

WJ.

and J.L. Yellen tl976J "Commodity Bundling and the

Burden of Monopoly." Quarterly Journal p Economics (90), pp.
475-98.
Benoit, J.P. [1984], "Financially Constrained Entry in a Came with
Economics (15),
Incomplete Information", n4 Journal.
Winter, pp. 490-99.

Blair, RD. and D.L. Kaserman [19781 , "Vertical Integration,
Tying and Antitrust Policy," American Economic Review (68),
June, pp. 397-402.

__________________________ (1985], Antitrust Economics, Richard
D. Irwin, Inc. , Homewood, Illinois.

Bork, R.H. tl978 ,

ftj Antitrust Paradox, Basic Books, New York.

Bowman, W.S. [195?], "Tying Arrangements and the Leverage
Problem," Yale Law Review (67), November, pp. 19-36.
Bulow, J.I., J.D. Cesnskoplos, and P.O. Klemperer [1985], "Multimarket
Oligopoly; Strategic Substitutes and Complements," Journal
Political. Economy (93), June. pp. 488-511.

Burstein, ML. [1960], "The Economics of Tie-in Sales,"
Review mZ Economics and Statistics (42), February, pp. 68-73.

0. DeMeza, and D.J. Seidsiann [1987], "A Strategic
Motivation for Commodity Bundling," London School of
Economics, mimeo.

Carbajo, J. ,

Director, A. and E. Levi [1956], "Law and the Future: Trade
Regulation," Northwestern University Law Review (51), pp.
281-96.

Fisher, F.M., J.J. McGowan, and J.E. Greenwood, Folded. Spindled
y_ j, MIT Press,
MutilatedL Economic Analysis
Cambridge.
Fudenberg, D., and J. Tirole [19841, "The Fat-Cat Effect, the
Puppy-Dog Ploy, and the Lean and Hungry Look, American
Economic Review (74), May, pp. 361-66.

________________________ [1986], "A Signal-Jamming Theory
of Predation," gg Journal f Economics (17), Autumn, pp. 366-77.
Celman, JR. [1983], "Tie-ins Involving Bundles with Fixed Proportions
Demand," Federal Trade Commission Working Paper No. 97.
Kaplow, L. [1985], "Extension of Monopoly Power Through Leverage,"
Columbia LaM Review (85), April, pp. 515-54.
It-i

Krattenmaker, T.G. , and S. Salop [1986], "Anticompetitive

Exclusion: Raising Rivals' Costs to Achieve Power Over
Price," Xiii J Journal (96), December, pp. 209-93.

Kreps, O.K. and l.A. Scheinkman [1983], "Quantity Precoamitment
and Bertrand Competition Yield Cournot Outcomes,"
Journal at Economics (14), Autumn, pp. 326-37.
Mankiw, NC. and M.D. Whinston [1986], "Free Entry and Social
J4urnal of Economics (17), Spring,
Inefficiency,"
pp. 48-58.

Matutes, C., and P. Regibeau [1986], "Mix and Match: Product
Compatibility without Network Externalities, • mimeo.
McAfee, R.P., J. McMillan, and M.O. tJhinston [1987], "Multiproduct
Monopoly, Commodity Bundling, and Correlation of Values,"
forthcoming in flag Quarterly Journal at Economica.

Ordover, l.A., and C. Saloner [1987], "Predation, Monopolization.
and Antitrust," forthcoming in R. Schmalensee and R.D.
tJillig, eds., ma Handbcolk
Indssstrj,j Organization,
North Holland, Amsterdam.

___________ A.0. Sykes, and R.D. Willig [1985], "Nonprice
Anticompetitive Behavior by Dominant Firms toward the
Producers of Complementary Products," in F.M. Fisher, ed.

Antitrust an

Regulation:

Essays Jai Memory at

McGowan, KIT Press, Cambridge.
Posner, R.A. [1976], Antitrust
Economic Perspective,
University of chicago Press, Chicago.
Salop, S. [1979], "Monopolistic Competition with Outside Goods,"
Economica (10), Spring, pp. 141-56.
liii Journal

Schmalensee, R. [1982], "Coodity Bundling by Single-Product
Monopolies," Journal g. Ja and Economics (25), April,
pp. 67-71.

_____________ [198Th],
American Economic

Antitrust and the New Industrial Economics."
(72), May, pp. 24-28.

Re1sM

Selten, R. [1915], A Reexamination of the Perfectness Concept for
Equilibrium Points in Extensive Games," International Journal
Goac Theonr (4), pp. 25-55.
Shaked, A. and J. Sutton (1982], "Relaxing Price Competition Through
Product Oifferentiation," Review
Economic Studies (49), January
pp. 3-13.

Spence, A.M. [1976], "Product Selection, Fixed Costs, and
Economic Studies (43),
Monopolistic Competition;" Review
pp. 217-35.
R-2

[1988], The Theory of Industrial Oraanization,
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Tirole, .3.

U.S. Department of Justice (1985], "Vertical Restraints Guidelines,"
Trade Regulation Report, Bureau of National
Antitrqst
Affairs, Washington, DC.

Warret-Boulton. F.R. [19781, Vertical Control .f Markets: Busthess
and Labor
Ballinger, Cambridge.

Practice,

Whinston, M.D. [1987], "Tying, Foreclosure, and Exclusion,"
Harvard Institute of Economic Research Discussion Paper No.
1343.

R- 3

