                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 SELF-REPORTED VS. OBJECTIVE MEASURES OF
                       HEALTH IN RETIREMENT MODELS




                                John Bound




                          Working Paper No. 2997




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 June 1989




I am grateful to Robert Barsky, Charlie Brown, Zvi Griliches, Jerry Hausman,
                                                                        of
Gary Solon and participants at workshops at the NEER and The University
Michigan for helpful comments and to Patrick Halas for excellent research
assistance.  Data and computer programs used in this research are available
on request.  This paper is part of NBER's research program in Aging. Any
                                                                     Bureau
opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National
of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #2997
                                                   June 1989


                    SELF-REPORTED     VS. OBJECTIVE MEASURES OF HEALTH
                                     IN RETIREMENT MODELS


                                            ABSTRACT



Labor sopply estimates    are seositive to the measures of health used. When self reported measures
are osed  health seems to play a larger role and economic factors a smaller one than whsn more
objective nsoasures are used. While most authors have interpreted these results as an indication of
th" blase's inherent in using self-reported measures, there are reasons to be suspicious of estimates
based on more objective measures as well. In this paper I construct a statistical model incorporating
both self- reported and objective measures of health- I use the nsodei to show the potential biases
involved in using i'ither measure of health or in using one to instrument the other. When outside
information on the validity of self-reported measures of health are incorporated into the model
estimates suggest that the self-reportedmeasures of health perform better than many have believed,




                                                  John Bound
                                                  The Population Studies Center
                                                  The University of Michigan
                                                  1225 South University Ave.
                                                  Ann Arbor, MT 48104
                                                  (313)763-7149
1.   Introduction
     The majority of men aho retire before the age of 65 report health as the reason they do so.1
Though health is, no doubt, an important factor in determining the age at which men retire, there
are a variety of reasons not to take these self-reports at face value. It seems quite plausible that
men often rationalize retirement in terms of health even when it may occur primarily for other
reasons. Myers (1982, 1983) has gone so far as to argue that there is no useful information in
self-evaluated health. At the same time, for want of alternative measures, econometric analyses of
the labor supply decisions of older men have generally used respondents' self-assessmentof their
health.2 There remain important questions about the validity of self-reported measures of health
and therefore of the inferences that can be drawn from studies that use them. Kathryn Anderson
and Richard Burkhauser (1984) have called the question of the appropriateness of the use of self-
                           *
reported health measures the major unsettledissuein the empirical literatureon the labor supply
of older workers."3
    There are a number of reasons to be suspicious of any survey response to such questions
concerning self-evaluated health, First, respondents are being asked for subjective judgments and
there is no reason to expect that these judgments will be entirely comparable across respondents.
Second, responses may not be independent of the labor market outcomes we may wish to use them
to explain. Third, since health may represent one of the few 'legitimate' reasons for working aged
man to be out of work, men out of the labor force may mention health limitations to rationalize their
behavior. Lastly, since early retirement benefits are often available only for those deemed incapable
of work, men will have a financial incentive to identify themselves as disabled, an incentive that
will be particularly high for those for whom the relative rewards from continuing to work are low.

     Each of these problems has been noted before, but what does not seem to have been fully
realized is that each will lead to different kinds of biases. The lack of comparability across indi-
viduals represents measurement error that is likely to lead to our underestimating the impact of

         See Schwab (1974), Reno (1971), Sherman (1985).
     2   For example, Boskin and Hurd (1978), Quinn (1978), Gordon and Blinder (1981), Diamond and Hausman
         (1983), Hanoch and Honig (1983), Burkhauser and Quinn (1983), and Hogarth (1988) used responses to the
         question "Does health limit the amount of kind of work you can perform". Burtless and MoffIt (1983 1985),
         Burtless (1986) and Gustman and Steinmeier (1986) used responses to a question that asks respondentsto rate
         their health in comparisonto others their age.
         It should be noted that authors cited above were well aware of the potential problemswith using self-reported
         health measures,but used them because they were what was available.

                                                            1
health on labor force participation.while the endogeneity of self-reported health is likely to lead
to our exaggerating its impact. Biases in our estimation of health's impact on outcomes will also
induce biases on coefficients of any variables correlated with health. Finally the dependence of
self-reported health on the economic environment will induce a bias on estimates of the impact
of economic variables on participation, regardless of whether we correctly measure the impact of
health itself.4
     Most work on the labor supply of older men has relied on self-reported measures of health.
More recently a variety of authors have argued for the use of more objective indicators of health:
responses to questions about specific health conditions or limitations, doctors' reports or infor-
mation on mortality.5 While such proxies are, presumably, more objective than are self-reported
health measures, it is not clear that the use of such proxies will give us a more accurate indication
of the impact of health on labor market outcomes. As long as these health proxies are not perfectly
correlated with the aspects of health that impact on economic outcomes, they will suffer from er-
rors in variables problems. With self-reported health measures we have biases working in opposite
directions and there is some chance they may tend to cancel out. With objective measures there
is only one bias, and, as long as the correlation between the proxy and actual health isn't close to
perfect, the bias will be quite substantial.
    The issues here are important for our understanding not only of the importance of health,
but also of the impact of economic variables on early retirement. Both subjective and objective
health indicators are correlated with such things as education, race, pre-retirement earnings and
pre—retirement occupation. These factors are also importantindicators of early labor market with-
drawal. On one interpretation of these facts, it is the poor labor market prospects of these men
that induces them to leave the labor force. On another it is their health.
     The literaturethat has compared results using a variety of different health measures has tended
to find that health seems to play a smaller role and economicvariables a greater one when the more
objective proxies are used. Most authors have interpreted these results as an indication of the biases
inherent in using self-reported measures.6 These authors have typically either ignored the possible
biases inherent in the use of a proxy, or have assumed that these biases are small in comparison to
the ones introduced by the use of self-reported measures.
     Others have argued in favor of using self-reported information.7 These authors emphasize the


     These commentswill be made mor'e precise shortly.
     Parsons (1980a, 1980b, 1982), and Anderson and Bnrkhauser (1984, 1985) used subsequent mortality inforsna-
     tion, Barilet and Taubman (1979). Bound (1986) and Stern (1988) ssed informationon the presence of specific
     conditions, Chirikos and Nestel (1981, 1983) used informationon activity limitations.
     Parsons (5982), Anderson and Burlchauser (1984, 1985), Chirikos and Nestel (1981), Lambrinos (1981).

     See, for example, Sickles and Taubman (1987), Lee (1982.)

                                                       2
flaws inherent in most objective measures of health while pointing to the clinically oriented research
supporting the reliability of self-reported health measures.8 These authors ignore the fact that even
if self reported health is a reliable indicatorof actual health, this may not be enough to guarantee
that it will give sensible results when used as a proxy for health in retirement equations. At issue
is whether self-reported health measures are systematically biased, with those out of work being

substantially more Likely to report health problems than those working. Were thu the case, the use
of self-reported measures might give misleading information on the reasons why men retire early
 ven if theses measures were highly correlated with actual health,
      An alternative to using either self-reported or more objective measures of health is to use
 'he objective measures to instrument the subjective ones. Stern (1988) using this methodology
 has argued that, if anything, the use of self reported health leads to underestimates of the actual
 impact of health on labor force participation9 The limitation of Stern's technique is that it leaves
 unidentified the impact on retirement of any factors that also directly influence men's reports on
 their health, In particular this implies that in order to use this technique to identify the impact
 on retirement of financial incentives, one is forced to assume that men's reports on their health
 are insensitive to these incentives. If, on the other hand, self reports are, as many have thought,
 sensative to financial incentives, Stern's technique will understate the impact of these financial
incentives on participation.
     While there has now been a considerable literature comparing the results obtained with differ-
ent measures of health, there has been no consistent discussion of the statisticalmatters involved in
such comparisons. The purpose of this paper is to clarify the issues involved in these comparisons.
I construct a simple statistical model that incorporates most of the issues involved. In the model,
a self-reported measure of health is made endogenous, but is also measured with error. A second,
objective, health indicator containing information on subsequent mortality, is only imperfectly cor-
related with current health. It turns out that, without introducing further information, the model
is not identified. With only one objective measure of health, I am not able to simultaneously solve
the endogeneity and measurement error problems. What the model does do is to showquite clearly
the potentialbiases involved in any of the above strategies together with the assumptions that are
implicit in each. What is more, within the context of the model it turns out to be possible to
introduce information on the reliability of self-reported measures while allowing for the kinds of
simultaneity mentioned above.


     Studies by Nagi (1979), Maddox and Douglas (1973), LaRaeet xl. (1979),and Ferraro (1980) all find that self-
     reported health is highly correlated with medically determinedhealth status Research by Mossey and Shapiro
     (1982) even found that self-reported poor health was a slightly better predictor of subsequent mortality than
     objectively determined health status.
   ° Havemen, Wolfe and Huang (1989), develop a model of health as an unobservableusing a MIMIC framework
     that is essentially quite similar to Stern's and come to similar conclusions.

                                                        3
     Recent literature (Krasker and Pratt (1986), Kiepper and Learner (1984)) en the use of proxy
variables has emphasized the use of both implicit and explicit priors for bounding potential biases.
Simple versions of such results are well known. Still, perhaps because researchers have believed
that evidence on error variances is unobtainable, this approach has rarely been used in practice.
instead econometricians have generally sought exogenous inetruments to identify models. This
pap.er exposits an example for which evidence on error variances does in fact exist. What is nsore,
the obvious instrumental variable approach to the problem — using the objective measure of health
to instrument the subjective one - turns out not to be a solstion at all.
     The models developed here build on the muitipie indicator modeling used by Coldberger
(1972a,b), Joreskog arid Coidberger (1975), Criliches (1974), and Chamberlain and Criliches (1975.
19.77(,it Unlike the above cited literature, the health indicators I use are all descrete. MIMIC mod
cling has been extended to the descrete case by Mother, (1976, 1979, 1983), Lee (1981, 1982) and
Avery and Hots (1982:) among others.
      Toe rest of toss paper is organized as fobows: In. section 2, 1 outbne a simple statistical nsodel
that  wsil guide both nor discussion and cstim.ation, In section 2. for expositional convenience, I
1mm the fart that we observe only descrete indicators ol either retirement or healtb status and
work as sf we actually observed their iatent counterparts. In section 3. I discuss issues of estimation
ah.nvring how to. take explicit account of the discrete nature of the various indicators. Section 4
iiios.trates them issuer using data drawn from the Itetirement History Survey. A brief conclusion



2. A    Statistical Model
       Coosidcr a simn.nic model of tbo laborsonoi.y of nid.::r n,oo. 11w choice of whether to continue
             br
            individual I during tim.a period t de'oonda oo th.e relative rewards of doing an, us0,
':c.oP'iovo heaitb rtate.s b. and. oths:c randnmncnrononc-atr


                                            hit    '0y- + c1'n0 + 0n.
U,   the empirical a.pnoca.tmnn a ma-s,aoco of permanent income and demographic information vail
ho included s.e c.nrra ex.pianatory variables. A man continues to work so long am ILl passes some.
threshold. We exnect         to be positive. Sfr.ce 'On is unobserved, the sign nf A is arhitrary, hot
if' lasger ashes of m are associated with better health then we would expect that. 1'm should be
pcnltivo as well,
       Mc'   also have a second indicator of      ,,   med'   reported heaTh., Js7. /s1 dapends on nealth status
o, but also on the economic rewards for co.n.tinoing to work, up,, and, again on other random
  15 See     Aigser, Esiac, itapreya and Weasbeek(iCali for a review.

                                                              4
components      q,.. Dropping the ii subscript for notational convenience,

                                                      = 2W + A2i7 + €,

A man reports himself limited in his ability to work (or in poor health) if tails bellow some        k
threshold. We expect both and ,\ to be positive.
                        i
     I assume that is orthogonal to both and 2 but, as long as there are common unobserved
romponents that affect both         h
                                  and 1f. as there will be if the two are definitiona.lv related or if
health limitations act as a rationalization for retirement, e and e2 will be positiveiy correiated.
     As long an i and w are positively correlated, ignoring q in estimating eqeation       will iad
to overestimates of the importance of economic incentives in determining labor force participation.
The obvious alternative would we to use as a proxy for r but there are a variety of econometrtc
                                                                             c
problems with doing so. The correlation between ej and introduces a simultaneity bias while
               e
variance in introduces errors-in-variables biases on                    ).
                                                           Errors in estimates of .k, translate into
errors in estimates of j3, while the dependence of h on w introduces and additional bias on 3,.
In particular,treating 1f and h as if they were observable, letting r,,,,. represent the correlation
between q and w, and p the correlation between e and e2, and normalizing )t, to equal 1, 1 show
in appendix 1 that:


                                       puns   i
                                              -           —
                                                  = A,cr(1 —              + a1c,2p
                                                                      r,,,) +   a
                               plirn     = /3, +      (\   —   plim   A1)        —
                                                                                     plirn   A1j32



            p > 0, this correlation will impart an upward bias on                            ,,
                                                                                    will impart the

                                                                                                               p
As long as                                                                while
standarderrors-in-variables downward bias on A. Which one dominates depends on whether
                                                  i
is greater or less than )i, on whether or E2 has a greater 'impact' on 1f. The bias on /3 will
depend both on the bias on .Xs and on /32. Thus, it is perfectly possible that even were the errors-
in-variables and the simultaneity biases on As to cancel, we might still tend to under-estimate


    The above expressions make clear that the biases on A, and /3s may be quite substantial even
when h is a reliable measure of ij1 (even when                      o
                                                        is quite small). In fact, other things equal.
the more reliable is self-reported health (the smaller is                a),
                                                                the greater will be the bia.s'2 They

     By the reliability of a measure I will mean the degree to which the measure reflects the construct that it is
     meant to. In the testing literature the term would be "construct validity" rather than reliability. As a measure
     of the reliability of an indicator I will use the correlation between the indicator and the unobservedconstruct
     it is meant to measure.
  12 This   statement is obviously not true in the limit. In the limit    €2   wow p = 0 an pumA, =

                                                                5
also make clear that the magnitude and even the direction of the bias depends on multiple pieces
of information. It is not good enough to know that self-reported health is highly correlated with
actual health to know that estimates using it as a pruxy fur health will give reliable results. Nor,
on the other hand, is it enough that self-reported health may he used to justify retirement or that
men's reports on their health are responsive to the economic rewards to working to establish that
the use of self reports will exaggerate the role of health. Priors about the kind of bias involved
using self-reported health as a proxy for actual health implicitly involve simultaneous judgments
about all these factors.
     Now consider a somewhat more complete model where we have added an equation to make
                                                                                                date
explicit the correlation between to and q and have one more indicator of disability statns, the
               13
of death d*



                                               1f=A,q+sw+c,                                                        (1)
                                               h*=A2q+/32w+2                                                       (2)
                                                                                                                   (3)
                                                                                                                   (4)
                                                 rl= v+p

In this model health, q, has two components, one of which, u, influences both longevity and work
capacity (e.g., heart problems), while the other, p, influencesonly work capacity (e.g., arthritis)."
The C's are assumed to be uncorrelated with either the other right hand side variables or with
  or its components v and p. es is assnmed to be uncorrelated with either q, E or €4. These
assumptions imply that €4 is also unorrelated with either q or €3. Lastly, v and p are assumed to
be uncorrelated with each other.'5
                                 that /C is not: C does not depend on to nor is €3 correlated with
       d* is objective in two ways
c. Still, as long as the date of death is not perfectly correlated with a man's capacity to work,
using it as a proxy for health will not adequately control for health. In particular, normalizing A3
to equal 1, 1 show in appendix 1 that:

  13 Since,    in the empirical work, I obeerve the date of death only for those who die during the sample period, I
       will treat date of death aa lateot along with the other indicators of health status.
                                                                                   (
       The implicit assumption imbeddedin the various componentsformuiatioo = u + ji) is that up to factors of
       proportionality, f]. and .,   v and enter the labor force, health and compensation equations with identical
       coefficients. This assumption would seem a natural one if we are thiokiog of vj as capacity for work, and h'
       as a self-report on this capacity. What is more, as the reader will see, allowing for two kinds of health, r' and
       p pushes identificationas it is. Without more health indicators, relaxing the variance component formulation
       would destroy all hope of identification.
  15   This assumption is mostly definitional. p is the piece of q that is uncnrrelatedwith C.

                                                           6
                                                              o'2(1—r5     )
                                          plim Aj =
                                                            (1— r)+
                                                       A1




                                 purrs   i3 =      + (A1 — plim A)—- A1—--

As long a       there are disabling conditions that are not
                                                        life threatening (e.g., severe back problems,
mental illness) controlling for   will   d
                                       still leave a left-out-variable  bias on       while as long as
current capacity for work does not perfectly predict date of death there will be errors-in-variables
biases on both A1 and 3i.
     With two indicators of r we might be tempted to use one to instrument the other, but in this
 ase tins won't work. As long as          0 using d* to instrument             h
                                                                       will purge h of its dependence on
c  and so will correctly estimate A516 but will tend to underestimate l3 by 2A1. The instrumental
                                                                    d
variable procedure uses the projection of h onto is' and as a proxy for '1, What we need, instead,
is the projection of ij on w and         d.
                                         With         h
                                                   as the dependent variable, the estimated coefficient
on us will reflect not only  the errors  in       d
                                                but also w's direct effect on 1z, fl. This, in turn, will
induce the downward bias on         of/132A1. We could sort all this out if we were to have a consistent
estimate of      bat this requires either knowledge of the reliability of d as a proxy for or another       r
indicator of i.
     To summarize, simply using mortality information as a health proxy will tend to underesti-
mate the effects of health and overestimate the effects of economic variables on the labor force
participation decision. In contrast, using mortality information to instrument self-reported disabil-
ity status will tend to correctly estimate the impact of health but underestimate the impact of
economic variables on such decisions. Finally, simply using self-reported health status can either
over or underestimate the impact of either health or economic variables on such decisions.

    Without more information either in terms of variables (another indicator of q that does not
depend on either w or s) or prior restrictions on some parameters the model is unidentified. This
is most clearly seen if we exaxnine the variance-covariancematrix implied by the model:




          This result depends on the assumption that        has been normalized to equal one. What will always be
          consistently estimated is
    iS'   On the other hand, we cannot use      as an instrument for d since   h   is correlated with e1.

                                                            7
[A -I- ,3t.A4['c + '?°L +
[A, + /3,A4][A, + /3,A41c + Ø,I3sa, + pC,C,2            [A,  il,A4]'c + fic?, + o,
[A1 + j3,A4[A,c                                            +
                                                        [A2 Ø,A4[A,a                         Aga +   c
[A,                                                     [A,+,As[Asa+fi,c,                    A4A,a          Acg+c,

lf                                                                                           C              w




'3/ith four observables we have 10 independent variances and covariances, but' 13 independent
parameters to estimate (4 A's, 4 a's, 2         's4,
                                                  c, and p). Since sj is unobserved we are free to
 use one of these parameters as a normaliration to fix the scale of p. What is more, it is easy to see
 that most of the parameters of interest depend only on the magnitude of the cuvariance between p
and C, A,o, not on the components of this covariance. Thus, we can reparameterize the model
in terms of this covariance with little loss.'8 Still we are left with one too many parameters to
estimate.
    We can get somewhat further if we are willing to say something about the reliability of h as
a proxy for p. What we noted above was that in the presence of correlatedmeasurement error,
knowing the reliability of self reported health was not enough to allow us to identify the effect of
health on retirementbehavior. But within the 4-equation system we have explicitly accounted for
the interdependencies between self-reported health and retirement. Information on the reliability
of     of C, or even of the relative reliability of the two are now enough to identify the system.
      h,
The extra indicator of health, C, givee us the leverage we need to be able to use information on
the reliability nf   h.
3.    Issues of Estimation
     So far, moatly for expoaitional convenience, I have acted as if I had continuous measures of
each ofthe dependentvariables, but this is not the case. I have dichotomous indicators of whether
an individual is in the labor force or whether they report health limitations on their ability to
work and a polychotemoue indicator of mortality. Thus it is not literally possible to simply, for
example, use C as a proxy for p or as an instrument for h'. The common solotion to this problem
is to substitute the available dummy indicators for their continuous latent counterparts. Thus, for
example, a dummy variable indicatingthe presence of health limitations,/s, would be substituted
for fi* or dummy indicators for the date of death would be substituted for C.

       More precisely, parameterizing the model in terms of A5s implies that we canoes separately identify 033 hot
       otherwise leaves the model anchasged.

                                                         8
    Though this procedure may be convenient and appropriate for many purposes, it is not for our
                                                                                        s
own. Mea.surement error for indicator variables is more problematic than it for continuous ones.
The lid normal assumption no longer makes any sense, with multiple indicators (of, for example,
the date of death) we would have to account for the interdependence of these rrors, and implicit
no'-malizations will change as we move across specifications.
     As an alLernativ' we can model           h
                                             and d as explicitly endgnous. estimating rhree semi-
                                             h
reduced form specifications with 1f, and d as dependent variables, and recover the parameters
of interest from the estimated reduced form parameters. This strategy is in line with the recent
literatureon estimating simultaneous limited dependent variable models using two stage methods'9.
Take for example, the case where we want to use       as a proxy for mj. Estimating such an equation

by  OLS  is equivalent to first estimating reduced forms for 1f and h:



                                                    1f =mr,w + U1
                                                     h =ir,w + U5

OLS estimates   of A, and 3, can be obtained as:

                                                             ci
                                                    A,   =
                                                              cY,
                                                         =        —


Even  if we observe only descrete indicators of 1f or we can still, subject to two extra normal-
izations, estimate (1') and (2') and derive the OLS estimates of A, and /3, from the reduced form
estimates of ,r1,   2
                    and
    To estimate (1) using        dC   rather than   h as a proxy for q follows similar lines. We first estimate
a reduced form for d:

                                                         = r3w + u3

The OLS estimates       of /3,   and A, are then:

                                                    A,   =.
                                                         = *5     —


In a similar way,   to estimate (1) by using        h to proxy i, but then instrumenting h with d amounts
to using all three reduced from equations. Here we have:

    See Newey (19s7) for a review.

                                                              9
                                                         0142,143

                                                    =    r5   —


    For the general case it will he helpful to introduce a bit more notation. Write 1) as -yin + V
where y =       and v is orthogonal to in by construction, and write v as r-yw + e where                      r   4
and E is orthogonal to w by construction. The reduced form              r's
                                                                 can be rewritten in terms of the
      the   0's, 7 and r:
                                                     = A + fl
                                                     =   A2       +
                                                     = A3ry
while the reduced form errors,       the u's, can   be written in terms of the A's,    the L's,   V and   e

                                                 u5 =A1v   +q
                                                 3 A3V + €3
                                                 it3 211A3 + €3

and   a residual covariance matrix:

                            Ao + o
                            A1A2o +pa,,o,3               Aa +o
                            A5A3o                        A1A3c                Ao+o

c, equals o{l — 4J and c            equals ro[1 —
      This "reduced form" representation    of the model can be estimated even if we observe only
discrete indicators of If , and de. Assuming the u's are jointly normally distributed, the model
                            h
is a trivariateprobit. As is standard, we can estimate the ir's only up to a scale factor, but otherwise
everything else goes through- As long as the model in question is exactly identified one can then
solve for the structural parameters in terms of the reduced form estimates. Standard errors can
be obtained using the so-called delta method.2° The various estimation strategies outlined above

      For overidentified models, she structural parameters can be obtained from the reduced forms using minimum
      x2 procedures (see Ferguson, 1958). In particular let 9 be the vector of reduced form parameters and 5 be the
      vector of structural parameters. Estimation of the reduced from gives us estimates of both 9 and the variance
                                                                                            f
      covariance- matrix of 9, V(9). Then each of our models implies that f(S) = 9, where is a known function
      (that depends on the model). Mininsem x2 methodsestimate S by minimisiag the quadratic form:



                                                         10
correspond to different restrictions on the various parameters of the model. If h is used as a proxy
for q the parameters of interest are exactly identified within the first two equations by setting both
u   sod       a,
             to 0. If d is used as a proxy for q the parameters are exactly identified within the
first and third equation by setting          c
                                         to 0. When we use C as an instrument for         the model ish,
exactly identified only if we use all three equations. Here estimates are derived by setting .2 = 0.
     Alternatively, we can explicitly introduce outside information to identtfy the model, For ex
ample, we might introduce information on the reliabihty with which either C or C refloct the
capacity to work to fix either fl2 or r.\3. Alternatively, if we had some informat,on about the
relative rehability of 4 aod C we could also use this information.

4.     Implementation
          Data to ostimate the abose       model is drawn from the Retirement History Survey (RHS,i.                The
RIIS followeda nationally representative sample of 8131 men21 aged 58.ri3 in the base year for 10
years 19691979. Information was collected on. among oher things. respom.dents' work lives, their
pension eligibility and their health. Respondents were matched to their social security records and,
for those who died during the interview years, information is available on their date of death.22 As
of 1969, 14.5% of the men reported that they were fully retired while another 8.1% reported that
they were partially retired. 75% of those fully retired and 53% of those partially retired identified
health as the        reason for their retirement.
      I will focus my attention on the labor force participation decision as of the 1969 survey week
and will restrict my attention to those who were either currently working in or whose primary
affiliation had been the private sector.23 The RHS survey included two different questions asking
respondents to evaluate their overall health: "Does health limit the amount or kind of work you
can do?" and "Is your health better, worse, or the same as that of other people your age?". I report
results using each.24 For a more objective measure of health, I use the information on the date

          The varianre covaciance matrix fsr these estimates is just:

                                                        11'T   vy'i Prt
          With exactly identified models it may be simpler to just solve for 5 (6 = f''(°l) and the use the so called
          delta method to derive standard errors. In practice I used both methods, one as a check on the other.
     25   Unmarried women were also followed, but we will restrict attention to the men.
     22   The mortality information comes from the Social Security's records. Available evidence suggests that these
          records are highly reliable (see Sickles and Taubman for a discussion of this issue. The mortality data. was
          kindly provided by Kathryn Anderson and Richard Bnrkhauser.
     23   While I have information on men's social security earnings and can therefore calculate potential social security
          benefits, I do not have comparableinformation for those working in the public sector
     24   As long as one allows the two self-reported health measures to be freely correlated, the extra self-reported
          health measure does not ald in identification. The extra measureof health adds one reduced form a and three
          reduced from cross equation correlations, hot adds an equal number of parameters, a A, a /3, and two cross
          equation correlations.

                                                               11
of death. For economic variables I use the individuals' social security earning history to calculate
measures of permanent income together with measures of the total compensation from continuing
to work for another year. Following Burkhauser (1979, 1980) 1 calculate three components to
compensation: 1) annual earnings, 2) the change in the present discounted value of expected social
security benefits and 3) the change in the present discounted value of pension benefits. The detalls
of how I constructed both the lifetime income and total compensation variables are contained in
appendix 2. For demographic variables I used age as of 1969, marital status, race and educational
attainment.
     For estimation I restricted the sample to men who were or had been employed in the private
sector and who had complete data on items used in estimation. The final sample size was 6022.25
Sample statistics together with variable definitions are reported in Table 1. 82% of the sample were
in the labor force as of the survey, 35% reported health limitations on tlseir ability to work while
20% reported being in worse health than other men their age.
     As shown in Table 2, 27.7% of the sample had died by 1979. Of thoee who died within two
years of the survey, more than two-thirds report health limitations on their ability to work, while
more than half report being in poor health. Over 45% were out of the labor force, This contrasts
with those who were still alive at the end of the survey. Of these, roughly one quarter report health
limitations on their ability to work, 15% report being in poor health wbile 14% are out of the labor
force. There is a clear pattern of association between mortality and our other indicators of health
status, but the 'fit' is far from perfect.
     Table 3 reports estimates of the effects of compensation, lifetime income and the demographic
factors on the probability that a respondent will be in the labor force as of the 1969 survey week,
will report health limitations on his ability to work, will report himself in poor health or will die
during the sample period. Date of death (d) is polychotomous, with seven categories ordered so
that higher values are associated with a later death (e.g., 7 denotes alive in 1979, 6 died between
1974 and 1979, 5 died in 1973, etc.). Limit (1), health (h) and labor force participation (If) are
dichotomies, 0-1 variables with I's representing no health limitations, health as good or better than
average and participation respectively,while log(wage) and Iog(incosne) represent the natural log
of annual compensation and permanent income respectively. Other exogenous variables included in
the specification are the age of the respondent, his educational attainment, his race and his marital
status. The coefficients on Iog(wage) imply that those men who would be well compensated for
staying in the work force another year are more likely to do so but are also less likely to report
health limitations on their ability to work, are less likely to report being in poor health and more


  25
       Eliminatingthose not employed in the private sector eliminated 1655 men, insisting that a man's discounted
       lifetime earnings be above $100 and that his annual salary be above $iee eliminated 12 men, while 426 had
       bad data of some kind or another.

                                                       12
likelyto survive the sample period. Age lowers the probability that a man will be working while
raising the probability that he will suffer health limitations or will die during the sample period.
The other demographic variables have their expected effects. More educated and married men arc
more likely to work, but are less likely to report health limitations ur to die during the sample
period.
     Estimated correlations across the equations are also reported. All corr°lations are positive as
expected The correlation botween either self- reported nealth limitations or poor health aod labor
force withdrawal is very strong (.7ll7 and .717), with the correlation between date of death and the
other indicators being relatively weak. In particular, the relatively weak correlations between date
of death and either self reported health limitations or labor force status suggest that mortality itself
nsay not be that highly correlated with current disability status. Fhis should not he very surprising
The most common kinds of health conditions associated with self-reported disability are ncuscuio-
skeletal (e.g., arthritis) and these will, in general, not be life threatening. Moreover, the leading
causes of death amnng men in this age range, heart disease and cancer, often nsanifest themselves
only shortly before death. Lastly we note that, cuntsary to some researchers impressions, there
seems to be very little difference between the two self-reported health measures. Log(wuge) does
seem to have somewhat stronger impact on self-reported health limitations than on self-reported
poor health, suggesting that the endogeneity problem may be greater for the former variable, but
the differences are nut large and the cross equation correlation patterns are almost identical.
     The estimatesreported in Table 3 will be the basis for our estimation of the factor model, but
it may be worthwhlie to first consider some more standardestimates of the impact of health and the
replacement rate on labor force participation. Table 4 reports various such estimates. Column I
reports estimates with no controls for health status. The coefficient of .193 on annual compensation
corresponds to an elasticity of non-participation with respect to compensation (evaluated at the
sample proportion) of a substantial .28. The specifications reported in columns 2 and 3 include
measures of self-reported health. These two indicator variables both have a very strong negative
impact on participation, while the coefficient on log(wage) drops by between 42% and 61%. Column
4 replaces self-reported health with six indicators of the date of death. These pick up significant
coefficients but, judging by the values of the log-likelihood statistics for the various models, have
nothinglike the impact on participation that the self-reported measures do. The impact of including
the mortality indicators on the estimated effect compensation is negligible,
     There are two prpblems with the kinds of specifications reported in Table 4. First, since the
units in which the health proxies are measured change, it is hard to make comparisons across
specifications of the implied impact of health on participation. Furthermore each specification
implies something different about the measurement errors involved in the proxies. To compare the
impact of health acrnss specifications we would need to take this unmeasured component of health

                                                   13
into account. This is more easily done in the context of the explicit factor model outlined in the
preceding section.
     Table 5 reports six sets of estimates of the labor forre participation equation (1), but with the
estimates now based on the estimates reported in Table 3. We normalize             c.,
                                                                                  a?.., o.,, cr. and
to be 1. With these normalizations A1 and A2 can be interpreted as the correlation between sj and
the two dependent variables while A3r is can be interpreted as the correlation between s and d.
Choosing a normalization that remains constant across specifications facilitates the comparison of
the impact        of health on participation.26

     Column 1 reports the 'OLS' estimates of /3k: the effect of log(wage) on participation that
ignores  the effect of health. The estimate simply rescales to take account of the change in the
normalization (from        = 1 to °?f = 1.) the comparable one in table 4 and is reported as a
                           c,
baseline. Columns 2 through 4 report estimates that use d and then either 1 or 4* as proxies for
sj, while columns 5 and 6 report estimates where d is used to instrument             l
                                                                            or 4* Using d* as a
proxy for p lowers the estimate of /3s by just 15%. Using 1 or    as the proxy for p dramatically
lowers   the estimates of j3 to essentially 0, and more than doubles the estimates of A1. Whether 1
of fi* is used makes very little difference for the estimates of A5, but using 1 does produce somewhat
lower estimates of /lj. Again we see the suggestion that endogeneity is more of a problem with 1
than 45, but the differences aren't large. The estimates of A5 suggest that, among men this age,
the variation in health across individuals can explain 50% of the variation in labor force behavior.27
Finally, using d to instrument 1 or 4' lowers the estimates of            $
                                                                          and raises the estimates of A1
still further.
    The disparities in the three sets of estimates reported in Table 5 are enormous. The results
using the mortality information provide a lower bound on the impact of health on retirement while
providing an upper bound on the impact of compensation on retirement. On the other hand, using
the mortality information to instrument the self-reported measures gives us upper bounds on the
impact of health and lower bounds on the impact of compensation.
      In Tables 6, I take a different tack. Estimates for the full model are presented under various
 assumptions about the magnitude of A2. At one extreme we have the case where A3 = 1 which
 amounts to simply proxying health with mortality. At the other extreme we have the case where
/32 = 0 which amounts to instrumenting self reported health with the mortality information. When

 1 is used, estimateswith /2 = 0 imply estimates of Ps,.€2 that are outside the unit circle. Alternative

estimates with Pc,,ez set equal to -1 are also reported. Lowering A2 raises the estimates of /ls and

  26   It is
          worth noting that these normalizations are not the standa.rd ones. Using j*•      or C as proxies for ,
     would typically involve normalizing either A2 or A3 to equal one, while using C to instrumenteither1' or
     wouldtypically involve normalizing A2 to equal one.
                            interpreted as the correlation between s aod If'. Thus A? = R,11_. .712 = .511 and
  27 Recall that A1 can be
       .722    = .52.

                                                       14
2, while lowering the estimates of At and A3. Varying A3 would produce a similar pattern. Here,
lowering A3 would lower the estimates of $j and            $
                                                  while raising the estimatesof At and A2.

    To narrow the rangeof estimates we need to introduce more information. First, it wauid seem
pausihle 'hat 1 would oe at least as correlated with tj as d would be. After all, the primacy
objection to the 1 was not that it was poorly correlated with q, but that E was correlated with
q. lt would also 0cetn plausible that compensation should base a positive impact on partIcipation.
Imposing the testriction that A2     A3r and that 'it                 U   tightens the feasible range over the
parameter space to  the middle rectangles in Table 6.
      I'o get still forthcr we can explicitly''ntroduce information from some of the reliability studies
mentioned in the it.troduction. Most of the studies cited above were done on older individuals and
it ,e unclear how wei results generalize to a working aged 0opulation. Perhaps the 3tody that is the
most appropriate for our purpose is the one by Nagi (1979). Nagi, using a sample of older working
aged men, compared their reports of physical limitations to those of attending physicians. He
compared doctors' reports to self reports along a number of dimensions including the capacity for
work. The polychoric correlation between respondents' and doctors' reports implied by this stody
is .53 (.00)25 Thus, even if we took the doctors' reports of capacity to work as completely accurate,
the correlation between self-assessments and actual health would be .53. Should we assume that
the doctors are no more accurate than the individuals themselves, but that the errors in the iwo
reports are independent, we get a correlation of about ,y,29 Thus it is unclear how well the Nagi
results can be generalized to the RIIS sample. What is more, it is unclear whether our resalts can
be generalized either to other age groups or other time periods. The reliability with which with
self-reported health or mortality information indicates capacity for work could easily he a function
of both age and cohort.
     Given the normalization        a 1, A2 is equal to the correlation between and 1. Thus,    ,
estimatesof the correlation between 1 and 'T translate directly into estimates of A3 that can then
be imposed to resolve the identification issue. Table 6 shows that a correlation of .53 comes close
to reproducing the results where A2 = A3r. A correlationnear .7 implies an estimate of fit of .06
and an estimate of A9 of .6.
     It may he worthwhile to turn hack for a while to the issue of whether self-reported or objective
measures of health give more accurate estimates of the impact of either health of compensation

      Nagi had both doctors and the older men themselves rate their capacity to work on a six point scale and reports
 25
      the resnlting 5 by S table. To calculate the correlation between the two reports I assumed that the scales
      represented descrete indicators of underlying latent variables and estimated the implied correlation between
      these latent factors by maximum-likelihood. See Olsson (1979).
 25    A few cautions are probably in order. Nsgi's study was based not on a random sample of the population but
      so referrals from physicians and clinics. se% reported somekind of work limitations. While we would normally
      think that truncating on a variable should reduce the correlation between this variable and others, the fact
      that all the men in Nagi's sample had recently been involved with some clinic or rehabilitation serstce might
      have an impact on the accuracy with which these men reported on their capacity for work.

                                                         15
of retirement behavior, Whether we impose the restrictions that A2       A3r and that        0 or
take the Nagi results as some kind of indication about plausible magnitudes for A2 we come to the
conclusion that the use of the mortality information as a proxy for health exagerates the impact
of economic factors and underestimates the impact of health by substantial margins. We also see
pretty clear signs that the use of self reported health limitations exagerates the impact of health
on participation and biases the estimates of economic factors downward. This is the conclusion we
reach comparing estimates using health limits to those using bad health or by simply noting that
when health limits is used     is of the 'wrong' sign. The Nagi results suggest that self-reported
health measures lead to estimates that exaggerate the impact of health and underestimates the
impact of economic factors on retirement by substantial margins. What these results would seem
to do is to question any presumption in favor of either the objective or the self reported measures
of health. They also suggest that procedures that amount to instrumenting self-reported health
with objective measures are likely to give results that are even more misleading than the ones that
'naively' use the self-reported measures themselves.

Conclusion
    Various authors have used 'objective' rather than self-reported indicators of health status in
the estimation of labor force participation equations. Typically such proxies yield results that
suggest that health plays a smaller role and economic variables a larger one than estimates based
on self-reported measures would suggest. We have seen that there is another interpretation of
this pattern. Proxies commonly used, such as the date of subsequent mortality, are bound to be
imperfectly correlated with health status. Even a moderate amount of measurement error in such
proxies can easily lead to the conclusion that the self-reported measure will give a more accurate
picture of the impact of health and financial incentives on labor supply.
     The search for 'objective' or exogenous indicators of health status may have been a bit mis-
placed. For example, even if we were to have information from physical exams available, using
these alone in retirement or labor force equations would not eliminate the biases involved. We
could always imagine that there were conditions or circumstances not included in the examination
that would in some circumstances imply that an individual was unable to work. Perhaps more
importantly, results from physical exams would not control for the specific demands of a person's
job environment or the interaction between a person's skifis and his health limitations. Moreover,
the severity of certain medical conditions (e.g., pain) are impossible to measure through objective
tests.3° Part of the problem with 'objective' measures of health is that they measure health rather
than capacity for work. As a result, information on the reliability of these measures can ultimately
never be informative about the validity of these measures as proxies for work capacity.

                                            capacity available, we wouldn't see the kind of controversythat we
  30 Were reliable objective measures of work
     do surrounding the medicalscreening that individuals go through to qualify for disability benefits.

                                                     16
     On the other hand, self-reports of health limitations, while being direct measures of the capacity
to work, suffer from a host of other problems. Most importantly, if men rationalize retirement
decisions made for other reasons by identifying themselves as incapable of work or in poor health,
self reported measures of health are likely to exaggerate the importance of health in retirement
decisions. What is more, the significance attributable to health may mask the effect of economic
variables.
     While these issues have been widely recognized, most researchers have approached the issue by
                                                                                 measures of health
presuming that the errors-in-variables problems inherent in the use of obertivc
is small in comparison to the endogeneity problems inherent in   the use of self reported measures.
                                                                                         researchers
Yet, what informs this presumption is does not get spelled out. More recently, several
have combined information on self-reported and more objective measures of health by using the
                                                                                 would sem to have
objective measures to instroemnt the self-reported ones. While this procedure
much appeal, we have seen that it will tend to underestimate the impact     of economic  variables on
retirement. In fact, the empirical results reported in table 5 suggest that using objective measures
to instrument subjective ones may actually exacerbate the biases that occur -when self-reported
measures are used alone.
      In this
            paper I have constructed a simple statistical model that incorporates information from
both self-reported and objective measures of health. What this model makes clear is that even
with these multiple indicators of health status, the impact of health on labor force participation
is not identified. Without further information it is not possible to determine whether objective
or self reported measures of health give more accurate indications of the importance of health in
                                                                                     of introducing
determining retirement behavior. In the final section of the paper I suggest ways
outside information into the model to help resolve the identification problem. Results using this
                                                                                          the objec-
auxilory information suggests that both the errors-in-variables problem associated with
tive measures of health and the endogeneity problem  associated with the self-reported measures  are
substantial. What is more, combining information from both sources by instrumenting self-reported
measures of health with the objective measures can make things worse.
    At the pragmatic level, these results suggest that neither objective nor self-reported health
measures can be counted upon to provide reliableestimates of the impact of healthor other variables
on the labor force attachment of older men. On a more positive note, the results do suggest that
                                                                                                both
objective and self reported measures lead to biases in opposite directions. Thus, results using
can be used to bound nit the actual effect of health and other factors on labor force behavior.




                                                   17
    Appendix 1: Derivation of Potential Bias's Using Different Proxies for Health
    In this appendix I will derive the bias formulas asserted in section 2 of the text.
     Recall the equation system:



                                          Lf*=A?l+13+                                          (1)
                                             h=A2i7+32w+e2                                      (2)
                                             d=?3v+e3                                          (3)
                                             W   =   .A4'7 + C4

                                                 = v+p

I assume that both 17 and w are uncorrelated with the c's, that both and c4 are uncorrelated
                                                             c
with either Ej, c2 or each other, but allow and to be correlated with each other and denote
this correlation p. Finally, I assume that p and v are uncorrelated with each other and with the



w+E    and p as y,.w+(. y

   = ô(1 —        and       = o(1 —
                                   a.,   ,       -
    Before proceeding it will help to introduce some additional notation: Write t7 as -yw + v, v as
                                               and y,.
w. Note that the 0 correlation between v and p implies that =
                                                             while v, and (are all orthogonal to
                                                                         ,      o
                                                                          while = c(1 —


    Substitutingfor   '   and v:




                                     1f = [A11 + Iltlw + [)qv      c,j
                                         = 2tjW + tLj

                                     h   = [A2 + 1321w + fA2v + (2]
                                         = 1,2W + tL2

                                         = [A3-y,]w + [A3e + E3]
                                         = 1r3w + 153


    The various estimates of and A1 can be written in terms of the lr's and the covariances
between the u's. In particular, using h as a proxy for 17 gives:

                                                        18
                                                              =    1     —




Usiug (L      55 4. POXY   for rj gives:

                                                         •
                                                              =
                                                                   a
                                                         A1


                                                              =    1     —




Using    1s   as a proxy for i, but instrumenting with                   d gives:
                                                         —


                                                         A1   =    o•u1,u,
                                                                   LL2   US

                                                              =


      Writing out the probability limits of these estimates we have:

Using     h' as a proxy for q:

For A1:

                                                         -        pltin a.
                                               pulls A5 =
                                                                              a
                                                  -




                                                              —   ____________
                                                                       A3a+a
Normalizing A1      to equal 1 and substituting for                a     we get:

                                          -
                                      pltmA1= A1o(l
                                                                          rU) + cr55o2p
                                                              o(1            r)+a
For   /li:



                               pliin /5    —   pil SI:        —   IiII    57 plim     A1

                                           = /J (A            —
                                                                  puss: A1)7
                                                                                  —
                                                                                      plim   A1132

                                           = -L (A1           —
                                                                  pun: A1     )"       —
                                                                                           plirn   A132




                                                                    19
Using d as a proxy for 7/:
For A1:

                                                                p1/rn       U)
                                         plnn      A1       =
                                                                 p/tm 0/,
                                                            —     AA3a
                                                                A3ae+a2
NorrnaFzing A3 to eqoal 1 and substitoting for a? we get:


                                    plzrn   A1     =             a(—r3,)


For jli:

                            plim   1 = plirn 1          — p/sm 773     piim A1
                                     =   Pt                     p1/rn Ai)7 + Ayy.
                                     = Pt + (A1                 plim A1)E +




IV osing   d to instrument h*:
For A1:


                                                       a1   = p1zrn&
                                            p/tm
                                                              plsrn     c2,
                                                            —
                                                            —   AjA3a
                                                                A2A3cm
                                                                A1



Normalizing   A1   to equal one we have:


                                                   plirn        A1   = A1



For i/i:

                                    20
pliTn /3i      * plim 2 pliTn .i
            = plim    —




            =—/32
            =   —




                     21
                   Appendix      2   Specification of the Retirement Equaticn

      ts soccifying the ntirement equatIon in this pDer I fdllowd the e:'isring         I iwagne
                                                                                              lIterature
that a oar. nntinues to work so .cng as the compnsaticn fur doing so, 'c, is abocc a n's rvst-rn
war w al'o assame that th" iog of the reservation wage is a linear function of the .op of tlfetime
nrom p. realty 57. and denographcs, X This specification results in a very sImple :eu'-'cen5
o-   partitipationeqo't'on: a   roar, runt'anes to work if:


                                     10(a) > r' e) -i- X'd         n      c

     7,. en-cu ate tho pr'rcnted di'rrcrnd value of iiktime earnngs i incisde torso 'o:n'nen s:
     'h prr'ent discoucted value of pest earnings no of tin-c t: 2, the present discount •c valor- of
                                                                    :
s' cia :,scnri'y bensfi's ,v,rs the man to retire as of time and, 3) for those who irdi ated ,.st
'nuy were ullIghls alt s psi -'at nensten, the present doscounted value of this osnsicn as ". tn" I.
 Potal rompeorstion is nairuletud as tie change in the pr'scnt discounted vs',se of fe        °-

aer' the man to work one snore year.
      I focus on the participation derision in 1n59, eaicuIatingboth lifetime income and c '-npe'satlon
as if the man had continued workiogup until that point. For my measure of past earnings I used the
'ocisi security earrings history. For men who were not working as of 1969 I projected foreward their
earnings from the year before they reported having ceased working assuming that these earnings
would hove remained constant. For men still in the work force in 1969 1 used their 196t earnings.
The present disnounted value of earnings was then calculated using the earnings history beck to 1951
together with the prime interest rate for each year between 1951 and 1969. Social security earning'
are truncated at the taxable maximum, but the kITS contains information on which quarter the
maximum was attained. This allowed me to impute earnings for those above the maximum. For
men who were currently married their wives' earnings were included in the calcuiation.
    Social security benefits were calculated using the 1969 law and assuming the osan worked
through 1968. To calculate the present discounted value of benefits I assumed that benefits would
continue to grow with inflation (5%) and discounting assuming a nominal interest rate of 77
and model life tables. For married men, I included both dependent and survivor benefits in the
calculation. Thus, for married men the calculation is:


                   PDV59 = PTA69 x              Bt[1     +           —   (1   —
                                                                                  r,)(1   —




Where B represents     f4, and srt,h    and   srj,,,,   represent the probabilities that the man or his wife
survive up through time t.

                                                          22
     All respondents were asked if they would be eligible for pensions benefits from their present
or previous jobs. Those who identified themselvesas eligible for a pension were also asked at what
age they would be eligible for full retirement benefits.N o information was obtained on the kind
of pension plan that individuals were eligible for but tabulations from the BLSs Level of Benefits
Survey show  that over 80% of those eligible for pensions are subject to some kind of defined benefit
plan. Work  by Lazear  and Kotllkoff and Wise suggest that a salient feature of such plans are that
increments to pension wealth decrease at early and normal retirement ages. This feature of such
plans can be captured using the formula:


                                          F=     —   r n)b   e

                                                                  a
where e represents the final salary. s years of service, 8 benefits a fractiou of final salary pr year
of service, r the reductiou rate for early retirement. aod u the number of years prior to normal
retirement age that a man retires. e, a and n are derived from survey responses assuming that a
man worked through 1968. 8 and r were imputed using information on the industry of employment
and tables 4.5.31 and 4.8.9 In Kotllkoff and Smith (1983). The present discounted value of pension
benefits is then calculated assumIng that benefits would remalu constant in nominal terms from
the date of retirement using a 7% discount rate.
     To calculate total compensation for continuing to work, if a man were to continue working
through 1969 he would continue to earn what he did in 1968 For those in the work force as of
1969 this number represents their actual 1968 earnings. For men who were out of the labor force as
of 1969 this represents earnings during the last year for which they worked. Using the additional
year of earnings I redid the present value calculation. Compensation is the difference between the
present' discounted value of earnings, social security benefits arid pensions calculated assuming first
that the man works through 1968 and then through 1969.




                                                  23
                                              References


Aignor.   ft C. Hsiao, A. Eapteyn and T. Wansheeh,(1984, "Latent Varabl" Models in Fcnnomct-
    ri"'. ed.      Criilches and intriligatur, Handbook   of Econometrics, Amsterdam:   ('F 'Fh-i1uiiaic
    Puiising       Co.

Amcmta,      I.,
             (1976) "The Maxirnnm Liicelihood, the M.nimnm Chi-sqnare. and the              Non-bear
    Vrighed  Least  Squares Estimator in the Genera.. Qualitative Pr-sponse Model"          Jozmai of
    the Amer/cal Stnthstical Associotion 71. 347-351.

Amerr.'a. T.,      (1973) "The   Estimticn   Is   Simuiteneous Equation Generalized PrcLit '(oH-I.'
    Eronomrtrirc.         C. 1321.
Anderwn. Kathryn H.. and Rihard V. B srahauser. (1984) "The Impor' arcs of th H-e.,-;-"               ''
   Health in Empirical Estimates oft: c Labor Suppiy of Older Men," Ec"nomic Lcttrr..
    373-380

Andernr. Kathryn H , and Richard V. 1' 'Chauser. 1985) 'The Beth ement-Health Nex.               1   New
   Men,-,:" of an Old Puzzle[ Journal of Hi. non Resources, Summer, 20 'S 3t5-3J
Andr'sani, PeA .1., (1977i "Health Limitations and Labor Market Experience During tH' Pr'
    retirement Years," in Seymour L. Wolfhein ted.). H-/n in Their Err-retirement 0rors (pu
    9-38). Philadelphia: Temple University.

Avery, H. B., and V. 2. Hotz, (1981) "Estimation of Multiple indicator Multiple Cause 'MsMi(
    Models with Dichotomous indicators." Carnegie- Mellon University. Working Paprr No. 00-
    80-81.

Baker, Diane. et al. (1982) "Mortality and Early Retirement," SociolSecurity Bulletin, December.
     45(12). 3-10     -

Bartel. Ann and Paul Taubman. (1979) "Health and Labor Market Success: The RoN of Van'                 iS

    Diseases," Review of Economics and Statistics February, 61(1). 1-9.

Bazzoil, Gloria J., (1985) "The Early Retiremen' Dnci,'ion' New Empirical Evidence on         i- mu:
    ence of Health," Journal of Human Recount's, Spring, 20 (Hi, 214-234.
Berkowitz, Monroe, (1979) "The Search for a health Variable," in Proceedingsof the Workshop on
    Policy Analysis with Social Security Research Files. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Social Security
     Administration.

Berkowitz, Monroe, and William C. Johnson, (1974) "Health and Labor Force Participation,
    Journal of Human Resources. 9, 115-128.
Boskin, Michael J., (1977) "Social Security and Retirement Decisions," Economic Inguirp, January,
    15, 1-15.

Boaidn, Michael J., and M. D. Hurd, (1978) "The Effect of Social Security on Early R"tir"ment,"
    Journal of Public Economics, December, 10. 361-377.
Burkbauser, Richard V., (1979) "The Pension Acceptance Decision of Older Workers,' Journal of
    Human Resources, V/inter, 14. 63-75.

                                                    24
Burkhauser, Richard V., (1980) "The Early Acceptanceof Social Security: An Asset Maximization
    Approach," in Industrial and Labor Relations Review. Vol. 33, pp. 484-92.
Burkhauser, Richard V., and Joseph F. Quinn, (1983) "Is Mandatory Retirement Overrated? Evi.
    dence from the 1970's," Journal of Human Resources, Summer, 18(3).

Burtless, Gary, (1986) "Social Security, Unanticipated Benefit Increases, and the Timing of RE-
    tirement," in Review of Economic Studies, 53 (October), pp. 781-80.5.
Burtless, Gary, and Robert A. Moffitt. (1984) 'The Effect of Social Security Benefits on the Labor
    Supply of the Aged," in Henry J. Aaron and Gary Burtless (eds.). Retirement and Economic
    Behavior. Washington DC: Brookings Institution,
Burtless, Gary, and Robert A. Moffitt, (1985) The Joint Choice of Retirement Age and Post.
    retirement Hours of Work," Journal of Labor Econorriics, April, 3(2). 20 9-236.

Butler, J.S., Richard Burkhauser, Jean M. Mitchell and Theodore P. Pincus, (1987) "Measurement
    Error in Self-Reported Health Variables", Review of Economics and Statitics, 69:644-650.
Butler, Robert N., 1J83 i -Current Data Inconclusive about Ageds Hcaith and Work," lging and
     Work, 6(3).

Campbell, C. D., and H. G. Campbell, (1976) "Conflicting Views on the Effect of Old-age and
    Survivors Insurance on Retirement," Economic Inquirg, 17, 369- 388.

Chamberlin, Gary and Zvi Griliches (1975) "Unobservables with a Variance Components Struture:
   Ability, Schooling and the Economic Success of Brothers". International Economic Review.
    16:422-449.

Chamberlin, Gary and Zvi Griliches (1977) "More on Brothen,", Chp. 4 in Paul Taubnian, ed., Ki-
     rsometrics: the Determinants of Socio-Economic Success Within and Between Families, Ames-
     terdam: North Holland Publishing Co.
Chirikos, Thomas N., and Gilbert Nestel, (1981) "Impairment and Labor Market Outcomes: A
     Cross-sectionaland Longitudinal Analysis," in Herbert S. Parnes (ed), Work and Retirement:
     A Langitudinal Study of Men (pp. 93-131). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Chirikos, Thomas N., and Gilbert Nestel, (1982) "Sex and Race Differentials in the Economic
    Consequences of Poor Health." Research Report. Columbus: Center for Human Resource
    Research, Ohio State University.
Chirikos, Thomas N., and Gilbert Nestel, (1983) "Economic Aspects of Self-reported Work Dis-
    ability." Discussion paper. Columbus: Center for Human Resource Research, Ohio State
    University, January.
Daymont, T. N., and Paul J. Andrisani, (1983a) "The Health and Economic Status of Very Early
   Retirees," Aging and Work, 6(2), 117-135.
Diamond, P. A., and J. H. Hausman, (1984) "The Retirement and UnemploymentBehavior of Older
   Men," in H. Aaron and G. Burtless (eds.), Retirement and Economic Behavior. Washington.
   DC: Brookings Institution.
Ferguson, T.S., (1953) "A Method of Generating Best Asymptotically Normal Estimates with an
    Application to the Estimation of Bacterial Densities," Annals of Mathematical Statistics 29.

                                               25
    1046-1062.

Ferraro. Kenneth F., (198y 'Self-ratings of Health among the Old and Old-old," Journal of Health
     and Social Behavior December. 21, 377 383.
Fields, Gary S.. and Oiivia S. Mitchell 11984d, Retirement Pensions and Social Secunty. Carn
     bridge. MA: MIT Press.
Finneobauni, G. C.. and George Maddox, (1977) "Assesingthe Functional Status cC LOPS Par-
    rd  ants" Center for Study of Aging and Hun-an D"veionmont, Duke university, I"cknirsi
    Rcort No. 2 Seutember.
Fax, Alan (1976). Ai'er-uatirc Measures of Earnings Replacement fec Social Secunit-' Pcnedrc.
    from Reaching Retirement Age, Research Report no. 47, Office of Ran-arch and Statistic",
    Social Security AdnoinistraOon, Government Printing Office. (Appears Sc pact of Ap7eudix F
    Methodologyfor Chp 14.)
Garher, Steven and Stev"n Klepper. (1989) 'Extending the Classical Norma., Errors-in VHaL1e
    Model." Econometrica48(6). September 1541-1545

Garrad, 3., (1974) "Impairment and Disabibcy: Their Mcanuroment,Pr"vaience and F not .g,cal
    Cost." in Dennis Lees and Stelia Shaw (eds.). impeirreer." Dtsability, and Handicoo. London
    He neman.

Gerari. Vincent 3., f1976) "Identification -nf Szmuitaneour Eqcation Models with Meas,remnent
    Error," Journal of Econometrics, 4. 263-283.
Gordon. Roger H., and Allan S. Blinder, (198? ) "Market Wages, Reservation Wages, and Retire
    ment Decisiorn," Journal of Public Economics. October, 14.

Goidberger, A. (1972a), "Stroctoaral Equations Msthodc in the Social Sciencs", Econometriea.40,
    979-1001

GoIdberger, A. (1972b), "Maximum Likelihood of Regressions Containing Unobservable lnd"'oen-
    dent Variables". International Economic Review, 13:1-15. Econometrica,40, 979-1001.
Griliches. Zvi, (1974), "Errors in Variables and Other Unobservables," Econometrica. 42.

Gustman, Alan L., and Thomas Steinmeier, (1986) "A Structural Retirement Model," Econenirt-
    rica, May, 54(3).
Hanoch, Giora, and Marjorie Honig, (1983) "Retirement, Wages, and Labor Supply of the Elderly,"
   Journal of Labor Economics, April, 1, 131-151.
Hausman, Jerry A., and David A. Wise, (1985) "Social Security Health Status and Retirement," in
   D. Wise (ed.), Pensions, Labor and Individual Ghoice. Chicago: Universityof Chicago Press.

Haveman,Robert, Barbara Wolfe and Fung Mey Huang, (1989) "Disability Status as an Unobserv-
   able: Estimates From a Structural Model," NBER working paper # 2831.

Hogarth, Jeanne M.. (1988) "Accepting an Early Retirment Bonus: An Empirical Study," in jour-
   nal of Human Resources XXIII(1), pp.21-33.

Hurd, Michael D., and Michael J. Boskin, (1981) "The Effect of Social Security Retirement in   th
                                               26
    Early 1970's," in Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, pp. 767-790.
Johnson, William G., (1977) "The Effect of Disability on Labor Supply: Comment, Industrial
    Labor Relations Review, April, 30 , 380-381.
Joreskog, N., and A. Goldberger, (1975) "Estimation of a Model with Multiple Indicators and Multi-
    pie Causes of a Single Latent Variable Model," Journal of the Americal Statistical Association,
    56, 235-245.
Kapteyn, Arie and Tom Wansbeek,(1983) 1dentiflcation in the Linear Errors in Variables Model,
     Econometrica 51, 1847-1849.
                                                                                           in All
Klepper, Steven, and Edward E. Learner, (1984) "Consistent Sets for Regression with Errors
    Variables," Econometrica,52, 162-183.
                                                                                              Re-
Klepper, Steven, and David C. Stapleton, (1985) "Consistent Sets of Estimates for Restricted
             with Errors in All Variables," Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
    gression
Kotlikoff, L. 3., and D. E. Smith (1983) Pensions in the American Economy, Chicago, The Uni-
     versity of Chaicago Press.
                                                                                        Pension
Kotlikoff,L. J., and D. A. Wise, (1985) "Labor Compensationand the Structure of Private
    Plans: Evidence of Contractual versus Spot Labor Markets," in D. Wise (ed.), Pensions, Labor
    and Individual Choice. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Krasker, William S. and John W. Pratt, (1986) "Bounding the Effects of Proxy Variables on
    Regression Coefficients," Econornetrica,54(3), May, 641-655.
Lambrinos, James, (1981) "Health: A Source of Bias in Labor Supply Models," Review of Eco-
    nomics and Statistics, May, 20 6-212.
LaRue, Asenath, Lew Bank, Lissy Jarvic, and Monte Hewtland, (1979) "Health in Old Age: How
    Physicians' Ratings and Self-ratings Compare?," Journal of Gerontology, September, 34(5).
Lazear, E., (1985) "Pensions as Severance Pay", in Z. Bodie and J.B. Shoven (ed.), Financial
     Aspects of the United States Pension System. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lee, L. F., (1979) "Identificationand Estimation in Binary Choice Models with Limited (Censored)
     Dependent Variables," Econometrica, 47, 977-996.
Lee, L. F., (1982a) "Health and Wage: A Simultaneous Equation Model with Multiple Discrete
    Indicators," International Economic Review, 3(1), 199-221.
Lee, L. F., (1982b) "Simultaneous Equations Models with Discrete and Censored Variables," in
    C. Manski and D. McFadden (eds.), Structural Analysis of Discrete Data: With Econometric
     Applications. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Luft, Harold, (1975) "The Impact of Poor Health on Earnings," Review of Economicsand Statistics.
     February, 57(1), 43-57.
                                                                          an Intertemporal
MaCurdy, Thomas, (1985) "Interpreting Empirical Models of Labor Supply in
   Framework with Uncertainty", in J. Heckman and B. Singer, Longitudinal Analysis of Labor
   Market Data, Cmabridge U. Press.


                                                 27
McAdox, C , and H. Douglas. 1973,        Seif-assessment of Health: Lorig:tudiasi         °tcdv a' Elleriy
    Sob lects."   Journal of Health and Social S'houior,   14(1). 87-93.
Moesey, Jana M., and Evelyn SLapiro. 19021 eif-rated Health: A Predictor of hfortaiit:, among
    IL" Elderly." American Jcurnol ef P thOr Health August 72(8) 800-808.

Muthen. B., 1983, "Latent Variable S'octural Er nation Modeling with Categorical Data             JournaL
   of Econometric'. 2243 65.
Mushen, B.. (1979) "A Structural Prohit Model with La'ent Variaoles" Jnurnoi of rhc ,4roerical
   Statistical Association,74807-811.
Mo'ben, B., (1979) "Contributions to Factor Analysis of Dichotomous Variables". Psyrhomctrida.
    43:551-560.

Myers, Robert     J., (1982) "Why Do    People Retire from Work Early?," Aging and Work, 5(2
    83 91.

Myers, Robert J.. (1983) M'urther about Controversy on Early Retirement Study."                 lgmg and
    Work, 6(2). 10 5-10 9

Nagr. Sand H.. (1969a) "Congruency in Medical and Self-assessment           of Disability,"     Industrial
     Medicine, 27-36.

Newey, Whitney K., (1987), "Efficient Estimation of Linsited Dependent Models with Endogenous
    Explanatory Variables", Journal of Econometrics,36:231-250, November.
Olsson, UN, (1979), "Maximum Likelihhod Estimation of the PolychoricCorrelation Coefficient".
    Psychometrika, Vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 443-460, December.
Parsons. Donald 0., (1977) "Health, Earthly Structure, and Labor Supply," American Economic
    Review, September. 67, 70 3-712.

Parsons, Donald 0., (1980a) "The Decline of Male Labor Force Participation," Journal of Political
    Economp,February, 88, 117-134.
Parsons, Donald 0., (198Gb) "Racial Trends in Male Labor Forms Participation," American Eco-
    nomic Review, December, 70, 911-920
Parsons. Donald 0., (1982a) "The Male Labor Force Participation Decision: Health, Reported
    Health, and Economic Incentives," Economica, February, 49, 81-91.
Parsons, Donald 0., (1984a) "DisabilityInsurance and Male Labor Force Participation: A Response
    to Haveman and Wolfe," Journal of Political Economy, June. 92(3), 542-549.

Pearson, K., and Pearson    H.   S., (1922) "On Polychoric Coefficients of Correlation", Biometrika.
    14:17-156.

Quinn, Joseph F., (1977) "Microeconomic Determinants of Early Retirement: A Cross-sectional
    View of White Married Men," Journal of Human Resources, Summer, 12(3), 329-346.

Reno, Virginia, (1971) "Why Men Stop Working           at or before Age   Sixty- five,"    Social Security
    Bulletin, June, 34, 3-16.
Sammartino, Frank J., (1982) "The Timing of Social Security Acceptanceby Older Men: Examining

                                                  28
    the Financial Incentives." U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the
    Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, Technical Analysis Paper No. 24. January.
Schwab, Karen, (1974) "Early Labor Force Withdrawal of Men: Participants and Non-participants
    Aged 58-63," Social Security Bulletin, August, 37, 24-38.
Sherman, Sally H., (1985) "Reported Reasons Retired Workers Left Their Last Job: Findings from
    the New BeneficiarySurvey," Social Security Bulletin, March, 48(3), 22-30 -

Sickles, Robin C. and Paul Taubman, (1986) "An Analysis of the l{ealth and Retirement Status of
     the Elderly", Econometrica.54: 1339-1356.

Stern, Stephen,(1988) "Measuringthe Effect of Disability on Labor Force Participation' Manuscriptj
     the University of Virginia.
U.S. Department    of Health and Human Services, Social Security Administration, (192) Social
     Security Bulletin, Annual Statistical Supplement.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Social Security Administration, (1984) Vital and
     Health Statistics: Current Estimates from the National Health Interview Survey, United States.




                                                29
                          Table 1: Descriptive Statistics


            variable                    mean        mm        max        std
            Ln(wage)                     8.80        4.63     11.59        .78
            Ln(income)                  12.03        8.79     13.76        .77

            Age                         60.40      58.00      63.00       1.71
            Education                    9.78       0.0       18.00       3.57
            Nonwhite                      .09
            Married                       £8
            Pension                       .42
            Good health                   .35
            Poor health                   .20
            Health limits work            .35
            Labor force participant   .82
                                Variable Definitions

in(wage)                   log of the total compensation for working an extra year
                           (see the text for details)
ln(inc)                    log of discounted lifetime earnings
                           (see the text for details)
age                        age as of 1969
education                  educational attainment in 1969
married                    1 if married spouse present in 1969, 0 otherwise
nonwhite                   I if nonwhite, 0 otherwise
pension                    1 if eligible for a pension in 1969; 0 otherwise
health limits work         1 if respondent,as of 1969, reports that health limits
                           his ability to work, 0 otherwise.
good health                 1 if respondent,as of 1969, reports that his health is better
                            than that of other men his age, 0 otherwise.
poor health                 1 if respondent, as of 1969, reports that his health is worse

                            than that of other men his age, 0 otherwise.
labor force participant     1 if respondent was in the labor force as of 1969, 0 othewise.




                                            1
             Table 2; Percent with Health Limitations in 1969 and
            Percent out of the Labor Force in 1969 by Year of Death

                                 % with   heaith   % in poor      % out of the
  Date of          percent of
  Death           the sample     limitations '69   health '69    labor force 69
   1969                1.2            81.9           58.3             52.8
   1970                1.9            70.4           53.0             46.1

   1971                1.7            68.3           46.5             45.5
    1972               2.9            52.6           37.1             33.1
    1973               2.9            51.7           27.3             27.3
    1974               3.2            46.4           30.4             28.9
    1975               2.9            51.7           33.7             26.2
    1976               3.1            49.5           33.0             25.0
    1977               3.2             48.4          32.3             26.0
    1978               3.5             37.9          26.1             19.0
     1979              1.1             40.0          26.2             20.0
                      72.3             28.7           15.4            14.1
alive in 1979
   total             100.0             32.6           20.7            18.4




                                           2
                        Table 3: Reduced Forms


                                           Equation
Explanatory     Labor                Health            Poor    Date of
Variable        Force                Limits           Health   Death


Log of Wage       193                   .294           .235        .101
                (.038)               (.031)           (.036)   (.032)
Log of Income   —.061                 .073             .043    —.039

                (.038)               (.033)           (.037)   (.032)
Age             —.154                —.063            —.015    —.062

                (.012)               (.010)           (.011)   (.010)
Education        .047                 .043             .051        .018
                (.006 )              (.005)           (.005)   (   005)
Non white       —.034                 .169            —.013        .009
                (.069)               (.064)           (.066)   (.062)
Married          .447                 .038             .049        .172
                (.055)               (.054)           (.058)   (.053)




                        Cross Equation Correlations


Labor Force      1.00
Health Limits     .707                  1.00
Poor Health       .717                   .870         1.00
Date of Death     .297                   .337          .354     1.00
                Labor                Health           Poor     Date of
                Force                Limits           Health   Death




                                    3
              Table 4: Labor Force Non-Participation

expianatory                             labor force
variabv                                participation
                      1             2                 .3              4


Log     of Wage      .193          .075              112              184

                    (M37)          041)     1    (041)              337
Log Inrome         —.061         —.134      f
                                                —ItS                —233     f
                    (.038)         042)          (:o21              133
 A
tLb..              —.154          -157          —137                 .1,6
                    (.012)        (.013)         1
                                                     0j
Edt.                  011          03]                                 :1
                                  3107)                    7        .2u
                   —3134         —OW            —3124                        :



                                                     3170;
                    447            ,54)
                                                 (.00:         I
                    (.0561        (.06i                             .35.
ilcoich Lirrots              j   —1.363                                      ,

                                                               I
POOL    ifraith                                 —1449
                                                 (''71
Mort:_ity                                                      i
 j;; -1979
                                                                             '
   j 13                                                             —.307

                                                                    (.138)
   1372                                                            —.520     1



                                                                    (.la)    j
   157:                                                            —024
                                                                    'l3)
   370                                                              54       I
                                                                    (131)
    L969                                                           —1 017    1




Log Lik:           -2654.0       2153.4          2147.9
                                                           —   —r---(.155,
                                                                   -253/31
                                                                           H
N. obs               6022         6022           6022                5042




                                   4
                  Table 5: Parameter Estimates Based on Reduced Forms

                                                                                           T1iealth
[
    ——
    Controifm
     Health
    Pasneter
                None

                A1n0
                         -
                              Date of
                              Death
                              A1
                                    550
                                                   aithBad
                                                 Limits Health
                                                     2n0A2=0
                                                                                     Instrumented
                                                                                                 n0
                                                                                                    I instrumented




-n1    th        .192
                (.037)
                                  .163
                               (.036)
                                                 —.014
                                                 (.033)
                                                                     .025
                                                                    (.033)
                                                                                        — .065

                                                                                        (.040)
                                                                                                          .004
                                                                                                         (.036)


 —__                 -                                                                   .876             .762
                                                                                                         (.l
       A                          .296            .711               .719
                               22)         16)(.016)
                Table 6: Estimates Based on Various Assumptions about A5

                                           Heallh Limits

                A2           i3                            Aj            A3
                .334         .163         .257            .296         1.000               .675
                .4           .150         .242            .354          .835               .659
                .5        .125            .215            .443          .669                .624
                .579         .103         .190            .513           .579               .584
                .6           .096         .182            .532           .559               .571
                .7           .062         .144             .620          .481               .486
                .8           .023         .099            .709           .422               .330
                .852         .000         .024            .755           .397               .187
                .9        -.022           .049                           .377              -.033
                .953      -.029           .128            .810           .371             -1.000
                .989      -.065           .000            .876           .344    —         -1.786



                                             Bad HroW

                 Az
                  .352        .163
                                            s
                                           .198
                                                             A1
                                                            .296
                                                                              A3r
                                                                             1.000
                                                                                             pI
                                                                                            .685
                  .4          .154         .188             .336              .881          .675
                  .5          .132         .162              .420             .706          .645
                  .595        .108          .132            .499              .595          .602
                  .6          .106         .131             .503              .590          .600
                  .7          .075          .094            .587              .507          .529
                  .8          .040          .052            .671              .445          .407
                  .9          .000          .004            .755              .397          .140
                  .908       -.004          .000            .762              .393          .103


                                                    5
