                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 POLICY UNCERTAINTY AND PRIVATE INVESTMENT
                          IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES




                                Dani Rodrik




                           Working Paper No. 2999




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 June 1989




This paper was started at the World Bank, and has benefitted from the
reactions and comments of numerous colleagues there. I owe special thanks to
Ataman Aksoy, Patrick Conway, Riccardo Faini, Gerry Helleiner, Don Keesing,
Ramon Lopez, Kazi Matin, Jaime de Melo, John Nash, Gary Pursell, and Vinod
Thomas. The views expressed here are my own and should not be attributed to
the World Bank or its affiliated organizations. This paper is part of NBER's
program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #2999
                                       June 1989


                 POLICY UNCERTAINTY AND PRIVATE INVESTMENT
                          IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES


                                 ABSTRACT

    A resurgence in private investment is a necessary ingredient of a

austainable recovery in heavily-indebted developing countries. Policy reforms

in these countries involve a serious dilemma, especially when they include

structural and microeconomic features. On the one hand, entrepreneurs,

workers, and farmera must respond to the signals generated by the reform for

the new policies to be successful. Dn the other hand, rational behavior by

the private sector calls for withholding investment until much of the residual

uncertainty regarding the eventual success of the reform is eliminated. This

paper shows that even moderate amounts of policy uncertainty can act as a

hefty tax on investment, and that otherwise sensible reforms may prove

damaging if they induce doubts as to their permanence. A simple model is

developed to link policy uncertainty to the private investment response.




                                     Dani Rodrik
                                     John F. Kennedy School of Govermment
                                     Harvard University
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
I. INTRODUCTION

     Investment has been a clear casualty of the debt crisis in the heavily-

indebted developing countries. In view of the investment collapse, how can

these countries start to grow again? Public investment can hardly acquire a

leading role anytime soon, given the fiscal crisis in most of the affected

countries. And while improvements in productivity and capacity utilization

can help, they are unlikely to be sufficient for self-sustaining growth.

Clearly, then, a resurgence in private investment will be a necessary

ingredient of any sustainable recovery.

     Spurred by necessity more often than by desire, a large number of

countries have undertaken comprehensive economic measures- -both macroeconomic

and structural- -in recent years.1 While data are patchy, the private

investment response to these reforms has so far been disappointing. As the

continued predominance of capital flight demonstrates, few of these countries

have managed to establish what a businessman might call an "acceptable

investment climate". One important reason is the high degree of uncertainty

regarding future policy. High-inflation countries like Argentina or Brazil

have by now gone through a large number of failed stabilization programs.

Even in countries like Turkey (since 1980) and Mexico (since 1983) which have

maintained a basically conaiatent policy stance, there have been aharp,

unpredicted changea in certain areas of policy- -fiscal stance end trade policy

in the former, trade and exchange-rate policiea in the latter.

     The prevalence of uncertainty of this sort creates an important dilemma.




1. For an overview of the reforms, as well as of the dismal investment
consequences, see World Bank (1988).
                                     -2-

For policy reform to be successful, entrepreneurs, workers, and farmers have

to respond to the signals generated by the reform. For example, outward-

oriented exchange-rate and trade policies can serve their purpose only if the

desired export response materializes. On the other hand, because physical

investment is partly irreversible, rational behavior by the private sector

calls for withholding investment until much of the residual uncertainty

regarding the success of the reforms is eliminated. Without investment,

reforms are less likely to prove sustainable; but investment will not be

forthcoming in the presence of uncertainty as to future policies.

     Hence the discomforting conclusion that the success of policies may

depend in no small part on the psychology of private-sector expectations. A

reform can end up being reversed for no other reason than a shared expectation

that it will not last. Even if the initial expectation is not based on

underlying fundamentals, it can prove self-fulfilling.

     My purpose in this paper is not to discuss possible ways out of this

dilemma,2 but to explore it with the help of a simple analytical model. By

borrowing techniques from the new literature on hysteresis, I will show how

uncertainty regarding the lasting power of reforms can act as a tax on

investment, even when entrepreneurs are risk neutral.3 The model yields a

simple formula that relates the size of the implicit tax to the subjective

probability that the reforms will collapse and to the magnitude of the

irreversibilities in the investment process. I stress here that the trade-off




2. This is done in Rodrik (1989a, b).

3. Two related papers deserve mention. Van Wijnbergen (1985) shows how leaa
than perfectly credible reforms generate an option value for capital flight.
Dornbusch (1988) stresses that a large premium will be required to convince
the private sector to repatriate assets following a macroeconomic
stabilization.
                                          -3-


between stability and reform, under reasonable conditions, may be quite steep,

in the sense that even a small subjective probability of collapse may render

harmful an otherwise sensible reform.4 To complete the model, I also discuss

various ways in which the probability of reform collapse can be determined

endosenously, in part aa a function of the amount of investment that is coaxed

out of the private sector. This leads to the possibility of multiple

equilibria, wherein pessimistic expectations can be entirely self-fulfilling.

Finally, I discuss some exiating empirical work which is suggestive of the

linka between policy uncertainty and investment.



II. THE INVESTMENT DECISION WITH POLICY UNCERTAINTY

     I will consider an economy where a policy reform has just been

introduced. We conceptualize the situation prevailing before the reform as

one where the entrepreneurs' yield from capital had been artificially

depressed to r -   to,   where r stands for the marginal product of capital and

to for the policy-induced distortion. We can think of to as an explicit tax,

or as the ultimate effect on profitability of an entire complex of

distortions, such as import-substitution policies. The effect of the reform

is to reduce to to t, with t < to. (The possibility of a subsidy can be taken

into account by allowing t to be negative.) We denote the return to capital

in its alternative employment by r*. It is natural to suppose that the pre-

reform policies have kept r -     to   at a level no higher than r*, that ia r -   to
  *5
Sr.


4.   This is related to Calvo (1986).

5. With no capital irreveraibilities, equilibrium would of course require
equality between the two aides. But, aa we shall see, a gap between the
respective returns in the two activities is possible once hysteresis is
allowed for.
                                        -4-

    The underlying model of the economy is left deliberately vague so that we

can interpret the results broadly. In particular, we can think of the reform

in question as being either macroeconomic or microeconomic in nature. In the

case of gçQeconomic reform, r -      t can    be thought of as the domestic economy-

wide return to capital (while the reform lasts) and r* as the yield on foreign

assets. With joeconomic reform, r -           t   can be seen as the return in the

activities promoted by reform (say, export-oriented sectors), with r* the

return in other sectors of the economy. In both cases, the objective of the

reform is to get capital to move in the desired direction: repatriation of

flight capital in the first instance, and reallocation of capital from import-

substituting activities to export-oriented ones in the latter. The two

interpretations will be developed simultaneously, as the analysis is relevant

to both applications. Note further that our discussion will focus on the gap

between r and r*, so we need not pin down each separately.

     Policy uncertainty will be modeled in the form of a probability w that

the reform will be reversed. Treated as a constant by individual

entrepreneurs,   if   measures the likelihood (per unit of time) of policy

reversal. If and when the change occurs, we presume that t will revert to to,

its level prior to the reform. In this section, we will take ir as given.

Section IV will discuss how it may be jointly determined with aggregate

private investment.

     Capital investment is partially irreversible in that there are sunk costs

of entry and exit when physicel capital is committed or moved from one sector

to another. This aspect of the model, together with uncertainty, places it

within the new literature on hysteresis.6 The general message of this




6. See in particular McDonald and Siegel (1986), Dixit (1987a, b, c), Krugman
                                        -5-

literature is twofold: (i) with costly resource reallocation uncertainty can

have large effects on behavior (even without risk aversion); and (ii) large

enough changes in the environment can produce lasting effects on resource

allocation even when the initial changes are eventually fully reversed.

       Let us now consider the investment decision of an individual (risk-

neutral) entrepreneur at the time that the reform is put in place. For

simplicity, suppose he owns a single unit of capital. His choice is between

leaving his capital where it earns r* and moving it to where it would esrn

r -   t.   The former option of capital flight (or of no re-allocation of

capital) yields flow benefits of r* per unit of time, with no uncertainty.

Denoting the investor's discount factor by p we can express the vslue of

this first option as


(1) V0 —     r*/p,

where the subscript 0 refers to the case where the investor does not change

behavior in response to the reform. Note that the investor who does not

reallocate his capital when the reform is announced will certainly not do so

if there is a reversal. Therefore, we do not have to be concerned separately

with post-reversal returns in this case.

       The value of having capital in the other activity can be determined as

follows.7 Let V1 denote the maximized value of holding a unit of capital in

this latter sector at the moment that the reform is put in place. The

magnitude of V1 will depend on the possibility of reversal and the costs

incurred if the reversal occurs. Similarly, let V denote the maximized




(1988), and Pindyck (1988).

7. I am here following the discussion in Dixit (l987a), especially pp.19-21.
                                                              -6-


value of having capital there                              the reform is reversed. [V1 -        V]    is the

capital loss that accrues in case of reversal to those that have responded to

the reform. Now V1 has two components: one is the steady flow benefits of

r -   t,    and the other is the expected capital loss. Since the probability of

reversal is ir,            the expected capital loss per unit of time is given by
        -
            V]   .    In    present discounted value terms, then, the value of being in

this sector is:


       111= ((r -           t)    -
                                      ir[V1
                                              -




which       yields:


(2) V1 = (p + ,r)1 [(r -                      t)   + irvj.


        What remains is to determine 4.                         Suppose for simplicity that once

there is a reversal policies do not change, and that the flow return in this

sector remains (r-t0) forever. Let exit costs (per unit of capital) be 9.

Then, it will pay to relocate capital after the reversal if the returns to

staying put fall short of the returns to moving back, net of exit costs. That

is, there will be a move back if:


        r -          < r* - PB,
               to

where p8 is the flow equivalent of the exit costs. Capital will stay put if

the inequality is reversed. The decision clearly depends on how large the

reversal is, i.e. on the magnitude of t0. 4                                in   turn depends on the

 direction of this inequality:



                           (r -    t0)/p,          if to     (r -   r*)   + p9      (small reversal);

                           (r*/p) - 9,
 (3) 4=
                      ,.
                                                   otherwise                        (large reversal).
                                                     -7-

V1 can then be written as follows:


(4) V1 — (p + w) [(r -                  t)   + ir max t(r -   t0)/p,   (r*/p) -   9)]

     The question that we pose now is what it will take to get the

entrepreneur to relocate his capital in response to the reform. Capital will

move only if the net benefits of doing so are positive. Letting                         stand for

entry costs (per unit of capital), the "trigger" level of parameter

combinations which will make it worthwhile for capital to relocate is defined

implicitly by:


(5) V1     V0 + €.


Assuming that the potential reversal is "large", and substituting from (1) and

(4), this requires


    (r -   t)   -   r*    ir(€ + 9) + €p.




(6) t S (r -        r*)   -
                              ep   -   ,r(€ + 9).


This is the central equation which links the entrepreneur's response to the

magnitude of the reform, the ex-ante probability of sustainability, and the

magnitude of capital irreversibilities (entry and exit costs). It shows how

attractive domestic investment has to become before capital will react to the

reform. The three terms on the right-hand side capture different

requirements. First, t must be low enough to make the after-tax return to

domestic investment comparable to the yield on the alternative investment. In

the absence of entry and exit costs, this would be the only requirement.

Second, the reform must be sizable enough to compensate for the one-time cost

of capital re-allocation (whose flow equivalent is €p). Third, and this is
                                       -8-

the key, the reform must also compensate for the likelihood of policy reversal

(whose cost is given by lr[E + 9]).

     Therefore, unless the reform is sufficiently large (i.e., t is

sufficiently small), the desired investment response will not materialize. In

fact, even a total elimination of the tax on investment (setting t = 0) need

not he sufficient when ir, €,   and 9 are large. Investors need to be

compensated for entry costs and against the probability of reversal.

     Equation (6) shows that potential unsustainability acts here just as s

tax on investment. To see the magnitude of this tax, let us ask the question:

what is the size of the investment subsidy we would have to institute just to

neutralize the discouraging effects of unsustainability? The answer obviously

depends on entry and exit costs. Suppose      + 9 —   0.   which corresponds to

the case in which the sunk costs of entry and exit add up to three-quarters of

the cost of installed capital. This does not seem a wildly unrealistic

number, given the highly industry-specific nature of machinery, the costs of

installation, bankruptcy, hiring and firing labor, and so on. Then even a 10

percent probability of reversal requires an investment subsidy of 7.5

percentage points to offset its adverse effects on investment. This is a

sizable number, as it is two-to-three times what reasonable (real) interest

rates look like, and is probably of the same order of magnitude as the

distortions imposed on returns to capital by pre-existing interventionist

policies. A 20 percent probability of collapse would call for a subsidy of 15

percentage points. Moreover, the trade-off would look much worse were we to

allow for risk-aversion.

     We can conclude that even small amounts of uncertainty regarding the

staying power of reforms can have aubatantial depressing effects on

 investment. Another way of saying the same thing is that domestic real

 interest rates must carry substantial premia over foreign rates in the
                                         -9-

presence of policy uncertainty.

     The above discussion applies to the case where the reversal, were it to

occur, would be large enough to make it profitable for investors to move their

capital out. For small reversals, the analogue of expression (6) is:


(6') t   (r -   r*)   -   - [w/(p   + ir)]t0.



Now the magnitude of the reversal (t0) appears explicitly as it determines

post-reversal profitability directly. Notice that for discount rates that are

small relative to the reversal probability, ir/(p + it)       will   be close to unity.

Hence, this expression makes clear that investors will demand almost full

compensation for the reversal, even though the probability of the reversal

itself may be small. Suppose for example that it —         0.10 and p = 0.025.    Then,

investors will require a premium over r* which is 80 percent (0.1/0.125) of

the size of to, even though the probability of reversal is only 10 percent.

The disproportionate response is due to the assumption that a collapsed reform

will never revive- -at least not in the same form or anytime soon. Once again,

a large investment subsidy may be needed to offset the effect of uncertainty.

     This discussion highlights an important disadvantage of the gradualist

approach to policy reform. The problem with gradualism is that when capital

exhibits hysteresis small changes in policy will be insufficient to make any

difference to resource allocation. But there is another side to the coin:

Policy reverssls need not take the economy back to square one, provided

sufficient investment can be cosxed out of the private sector in the meantime:

in the small reversal case above (t0       (r -   r*)   + p0) capital that responds to

the reform will remain in place even when the reform is aborted. In other

words, reforms that are initially successful can create a momentum that

outlives their eventual collapse.

     This framework also sheds light on an important trade-off between reform
                                               -10-

and stability. When a policy reform is introduced, it is almost inevitable

that the private sector will view it as less than one hundred percent

sustainable. The reasons are many. At one level, there will be the

expectation that the political economy configuration that supported the

earlier policies may resurface. At another, since new policies take the

economy into uncharted terrain, there will be the legitimate fear that

unexpected consequences will lead to reversal. In view of the model presented

here, the danger is that the uncertainty thereby created may well outweigh the

beneficial effects of the reform.

     To see this, suppose we start out with a distorted, but entirely

sustainable policy configuration (with ir — 0 initially). The government then

introduces a reform, as before, which reduces the distortion from to to t.

But the new policy comes at the expense of a subjective probability, perhaps

quite small, that the reform will not last: ir now turns positive. The

question we pose is: how small must ir be for the policy reform to remain a

good idea?

     Take first the larse reversal case. The direct benefit to the potential

investor rises by to -          t,   thanks to the reform, while the opportunity cost of

investment increases by s(e + 9), thanks to the induced uncertainty [see (6)].

Clearly, then, the reform will increase the                incentive to invest only if


         to -   t   > w(€ + 9).


Or if:


           C (t0 -     t)   / (e + 9).


This is in fact a stringent requirement. Suppose, for instance, that the

reform increases the investor's direct return from capital by 10 percentage

points (t0 -        t — 0.1),   which is quite large by any standard. Let (€ + 9)
                                      -Il-

equal 0.75 as before. Then, the subjective probability that the reform will

collapse must be less than 13.3 percent for a net investment incentive to

exisc. And even when the subjective probability is lower than this threshold,

the net investment incentive will be much smaller than the direct effect aa

long as the reform comes with a positive it.

     Much the same holds for the small reversal case. Now, the opportunity

coat rises by [ir/(p + ir)]t0, so that the analogous condition can be written


     to -    t > [ir/(p ÷


     icc    p((t0   -
                        t)/t].
Notice that this condition will always hold for t —      0, as the right-hand aide

of the inequality then goes to infinity. A comolete elimination of the policy

distortion therefore necessarily increases net investment incentivea when the

feared reversal ia "small". But half-hearted reforms may backfire, as before.

Suppose, for instance, that p    0.10, to =    0.10,   and t =   0.05,   so that the

reform increases the direct return to capital by 5 percentage pointa. Then it

must be less than 10 percent for the induced policy uncertainty not to

outweigh this direct effect.

     The above examples are somewhat contrived in the sense that the role of

policy uncertainty prior to reform has been ignored. This is particularly

misleading when the reform in question involves macroeconomic stabilization.

Near the end of the typical populist cycle (see Sachs, 1989, and Dornbuach and

Edwards, 1989), the exchange rate becomes vastly overvalued, foreign reserves

run out, and inflation starts to climb. The economic environment becomes ripe

with uncertainty. We would then expect a well-designed macroeconomic reform

program to reduce uncertainty (i.e., reduce it),   not   increase it.
                                      -12-

      But, many microeconomic programs, and economic liberalization measures in

parcicular, may replace what are in effect distorted but sustainable incentive

regimes with less sustainable policies.8 Frequently such reforms are the

price paid for assistance from the multilateral organizations, and are

implemented with little regard to their consistency with the underlying

political economy,9 or, as also happens occasionally, with macroeconomic

stability.10 It is in such contexts that the framework analyzed here comes

into its own. As the discussion above makes clear, even a small amount of

uncertainty as to its survival may be too high a price to pay for an otherwise

sensible reform.



III. AGGREGATE INVESTMENT

      So far, we have looked at the investment decision of an individual

entrepreneur. It is a short step now to determine the aggretate investment

response as a function of ir, t, and other parameters. Let us assume that

there are N investors, each with a single unit of capital at their disposal.




 8. Thre is nothing inherently unsustainable in a regime riddled with price
 distortions. A hesvy dose of, say, trade protection can be sustained for a
 long time (cf. Indonesia, India), provided the overall macroeconomic framework
 is well managed (see Rodrik, 1988b). Small fiscal deficits and realistic
 exchange rates are key aspects of the requisite macro management.

 9.  Incentive systems are hard to change because they reflect the general
 equilibrium of various political and distributional forces at work. Since the
 underlying distribution of political power is unlikely to change very rapidly,
 any radical price reform must, as a rule, face the risk of failure. For an
 overview of the political obstacles, see Nelson (1984), Haggard and Kaufman
 (1988), and Lindenberg (1988).


 10. Two important examples come to mind. Trade liberalization frequently
 leads to a reduction in government revenues, aggravating macroeconomic
 instability. Financial liberalization also typically leads to instability in
 the banking sector, and may increase the inflation rate by decreasing demand
 for base money. See Rodrik (l989a) for further discussion and examples.
                                                       -13-

If all investors were alike, then total investment would be either 0 or N,

depending on which direction the inequality in (6) goes. More realistically,

we can envisage investors aligned on a continuum indexed by some relevant

parameter. For purposes of illustration, let investors differ by their entry

costs,            [0, ).     Let      be distributed according to the probability

distribution function f(€). Further, in general equilibrium the differential

in the marginal products of capital will be a decreasing function of the

amount of capital that is reallocated. So we can write,


       r -   r*   —   (I),     ' <0,            '' <   0,



where I stands for the investment response to the reform.

       Now define            as the cut-off point at which expression (6) holds as an

equality: 11



(7)          — (p + ,r) [(I) -          t   -




Since all investors with entry costs below                       will choose to invest, the

aggregate investment function can be written as follows:


                      16*
 (3.8)     I — N         f(6)d€.
                      Jo


It    can be checked easily that aggregate investment is decreasing in ,r,


         dI/d,r —     Nf(E*)dE*/dlr
                  —   - Nf(E*)(E*   + 8) /       [(p   + ,r) -


                  <   0.




 11. I sin here assuming the large-reversal case. The analysis of the other
 case is similar.
                                           -14-




This defines a downward sloping investment schedule (denoted by II in Figure

1). A reduction in t will ahift this curve to the right, i.e. more inveatment

will be forthcoming for any given probability of policy reversal.



IV. ENDOGENIZING THE PROBABILITY OF REVERSAL

       The story above treated it,   the   subjective ex-ante probability of

reversal, as a constant. As discussed earlier, in reality the magnitude of it

will   depend in no small part on how successful the reform is in altering

private-sector behavior. In the present framework, this is tantamount to

incorporating a reverse linkage that goes from private investment to it.12             To

illustrate che implications, we can extend the model to include this

possibility.

       There are several reasons why higher levels of investmenc (I) would lead

to a lower probability of future reversal of reform (iv).       We   briefly discuss

three particularly likely candidates.

       (a) Political economy and creating entrenched incerests. The greater the

investment response, the more likely that entrenched interests will be created

in favor of the continuation of the reform. Once entrepreneurs move into

export sectors, they can be expected to constituce a lobby in favor of

outward-oriented policies such as trade liberalization and realistic exchange

rates. Labor unions whose membership is located predominantly in exportables




12. Of course, there are other reasons why invescors may fear a reversal, and
therefore alternative ways of endogenizing iv. The possible time-inconsistency
of policy is one such reason, on which see Barro and Gordon (1983), Staiger
and Tabellini (1987), and Faini (1989), among others. Doubts about the true
objectives of the government are another (Persson and van Wijnbergen, 1987,
Rodrik, 1988a).
                                              -15-

are less likely to militate in favor of large real wage adjustments than those

sheltered behind trade barriers. Similarly, flight capital that is

repatriated and invested in domestic physical assets gives up the "exit"

option, and must therefore rely on "voice" (Hirschman, 1970). For these

reasons, we would expect a reform to receive greater political support when

the desired reallocation of capital and other resources is accomplished. We

can then express the probahility of reversal as a decreasing function of the

investment response: ti      — ir(I),   with r'(.) < 0.

     (b) Effects on external balance and reserves. A different line of

argument has to do with the adverse consequences of reform on external balance

and foreign reserves when the desired response does not materialize.

Typically, reforming countries have precarious balance-of-payments positions

to begin with. Reforms which do not bring about the desired response may

increase the pressures. A trade liberalization, for example, will tend to

woraen the current account. A macro stabilization may do the same to the

extent that it relies on targeting the exchange rate on inflation rather than

the external balance. Countries may then have no choice but to abort the

reform when reserves fall below a certain threshold (see Froot, 1988, and

Dornbusch, 1988). In turn, a reduction in capital flight or a vigorous export

expansion would make it less likely that the external balance would

deteriorate to that extent. Once again, the probability of reversal will be a

negative function of the level of the investment response, allowing us to

write it   — ic(I),   with ir'(.)   < 0.
      (c) Effects on fiscal balance. Higher investment would be associated

with a growing economy, and pressures to reverse course may then become less

strong. Aside from the obvious political reasons for that, there is also a

fiscal reason. When economic activity is buoyant, the government can raise

resources more easily, and the fiscal deficit becomes more tractable without
                                                  -16-

recourse to emergency measures. Let us spend a moment on how this linkage

could be formalized.

      Let us associate the collapse of the reform with a fiscal deficit getting

so large that the government is forced to resort to policies which conflict

with the prevailing reforms. Then we can interpret it as the probability that

the deficit (5) grows beyond a certain point (8). Since the government's tax

revenues are positively related to the level of economic activity, this

provides us with the reverse linkage between I and it.              Letting   r stand for the

average tax rate on national income, y atand for CDP, and p stand for other

(net) public expenditures with some random component to them, we can write the

deficit as follows:


      & =      p    -
                        ry,

and


      it   — prob (p             S +    ry)
           —   G(8 +      ry),

where      G(.) is the density function, and C' < 0.          To complete the framework, we

link CDF with investment vis the economy's incremental cspital-output ratio, k

— aI/Ay.           Then it    becomes a decreasing function of I,


      dit/dI —          C'r/k    < 0,


since increased investment increases the tax base by expanding capacity.



        In real economies, all of these reasons are likely to be operating

simultaneously, reinforcing the negatively-sloped dependence of it on I.                Let

itit denote the locus of points which captures this relationship. Note that it

and I are now both decreasing functions of each other. Figure 1 displays some
                                        -17-

of the consequences.

     In what could be considered to be the "normal" case, with II sloped more

steeply than wit,   a larger reform (i.e., a lower t) would yield in equilibrium

a higher level of aggregate investment and a lower probability of polity

reversal (Fig. 1(s)). But notice also the perverse possibility that a larger

reform would increase it and reduce I (Fig, 1(b)). The latter case is possible

when investment is highly sensitive to it,     and   it   in   turn is very sensitive to

investment. Finally, note that the negative slope of the two curves leads to

a fundamental indeterminacy in outcomes. Multiple equilibria are possible,

with some combining high rates of investment with low collapse rates, and

others exhibiting low investment and a high probability of collapse (Fig.

1(c)). With uncoordinated decision-making amongst multitudes of

entrepreneurs, pessimistic expectations about the survivability of reform can

prove self-fulfilling, even though they may not have been well-grounded in the

government's intentions.



V. AN OVERVIEW OF THE EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE

     The idea that policy instability can be detrimental to private investment

is easy to accept, and conforms well with the way busineesmen see their world.

As one businessman puts it, "[y]ou can make money under any policy situation

as long as it doesn't change every fifteen minutes."13 However, it is hard to

deploy serious econometrics in support of the proposition. For one thing,

there are conceptual and measurement problems: what is the relevant variable

whose uncertainty is at issue, and how does one measure instability? In

principle, the answers are supposed to come from a full-fledged model of




13. Quoted in The Washineton Post, October 30, 1988, Business Section.
                                         -18-

investment behavior, but even the simplest models of investment with
irreversibilites are difficult to implement empirically. Moreover, there is

the thorny issue of the possible endogeneity of instability, ss the previous

section discussed. Even if these problems were solved, cross-sectional

analysis would be seriously hampered by the absence of dats on orivate

investment levels in many developing countries.

 -
     - If   one is willing to relax one's econometric standards somewhat, the

universe of admissible evidence broadens considerably. There is a fairly

large literature that measures the impact of variability in the economic

environment on some selected indicators of performance. While it is difficult

to avoid the conclusion that much specification search goes into this

literature, the bottom line appears to be that uncertainty (or instability,

which typically serves as it proxy) is indeed harmful.

      Among the most relevant of these studies are the ones that document the

implications for saving and investment. In the Latin American context, Leff

and Sato (1987) draw attention to the negative relationship between saving

performance snd instability in import supply. Stewart and Venieris (1985)

find a similar negative relationship between saving and measures of socio-

political instability. In an analysis of forty-seven countries, Kormendi and

Meguire (1985) discover that monetary instability has a strong retarding

effect on growth, which works partly by reducing the investment effort and

partly by lowering the return to capital.

      Many other studies concentrate on economic growth directly. In a study

of twenty-five African countries,. Wheeler (1984) finds average growth rates to

be significantly and negatively affected by political instability. Also in

Africa, Helleiner (1986) provides evidence of a negative relationship between

 import instability and economic growth. Devarajan and de Melo (1987) find

 that the currency stability provided by membership in the Franc zone in Africa
                                       -19-

has increased growth rates on average by 0.4 percentage points relative to

other sub-Saharan countries. The adverse effect of export instability on

growth has been the subject of numerous empirical papers (see in particular

Glezakos, 1973, Voivodas, 1974, and Ozler and Harrigan, 1988). Related to

these are numerous other studies which demonstrate the negative effect of

exchange-rate instability on export supply in LDCs (e.g. ,   Caballero   and Corbo,

1988, and Celasun and Rodrik, 1989).

     Particularly relevant to the present discussion is a paper by Lopez

(1989) that investigates the effects on growth and investment of trade

policies as well as of instability in the real exchange rate. The sample

includes observations for 25 or 35 LDCs   over   the two sub-periods of 1975-80

and 1981-85. Using trade policy indicators developed by Halevi (1988), Lopez

is able to assess the cross-sectional effects of import and export

restrictions separately. His chief findings are: (i) instability in the real

exchange rate (measured by its coefficient of variation) has a strong and

statistically significant negative effect on both investment and real income

growth; (ii) the trade policy dummies are statistically insignificant in the

investment regression; and (iii) export restrictions have some explanatory

power in the growth regression, but import restrictions remain statistically

insignificant. The negative relationship between real exchange rate

variability, on the one hand, and investment and growth, on the other, is

further confirmed by regressions reported by Edwards (1989). These results

are indicative of the quantitative importance of policy stability. Getting

prices right, through trade liberalization, plays a largely secondary role in

determining investment levels. At worst, it may prove harmful if it

aggravates instability.

     Finally, a paper by Conway (1988) is noteworthy in that it focuses on

private investment, rather than aggregate investment as in the previous
                                     -20-

studies. Conway applies a standard investment function to annual Turkish data

for 1962-86. His regressions are augmented by adding a proxy for instability:

the standard deviation of the real interest rate (but other variables would do

as well since instability is highly correlated across key relative prices)

This proxy comes out with a negative and highly significant coefficient, and,

when it is included, the       of the real interest rate turns statistically

insignificant. Disaggregating private investment, Conway finds that

uncertainty has a uniformly depressing effect on manufacturing, transport, and

housing sectors (with the effect on agriculture falling short of statistical

significance at the 95 percent level). The strongest effect by far is

observed in manufacturing investment. This is consistent with prior

expectations, as the potential of policy reversals to do harm and the

magnitude of irreversibilities are both presumably larger in manufacturing

than elsewhere.



VT. CONCLUDTNG REMARKS

     The main message of this paper is that policy reforms that appear

desirable on standard economic grounds will backfire when they induce doubts

as to their likely survival. The danger is relatively small with well-

designed macroeconomic stabilization measures, as these aim to reverse

unsustainable trends in inflation and deficits to begin with. Tt is much

greater with structural reforms and liberalization measures. Hence the more

positive message is that reform packages which emphasize policy stability and

sustainability are likely to bring greeter payoffs in terms of investment and

growth than those which focus on economic liberalization and getting prices

right.
                                     -21-



REFERENCES

Barro Robert, and David Gordon, 1983, "A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in
  a Natural Rate Model," Journal of Political Economy 91(4), August, 589-610.

Caballero, Ricardo J., and Vittorio Corbo, 1988, "Real Exchange Rate
  Uncertainty and Exports: Multi-Country Empirical Evidence," World Bank,
  November.

Calvo, Cuillermo, 1986, "Incredible Reforms," University of Pennsylvania,
  September.

Celasun, Merih, and Dani Rodrik, 1989, "Debt, Adjustment, and Growth: Turkey,"
  in Jeffrey Sachs (ed.), Developing Country Debt and Economic Performance:
  Country Studies, Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press,
  forthcoming.

Conway, Patrick, 1988, "The Impact of Uncertainty on Private Investment in
  Turkey," Department of Economics, University of North Carolina, December.

Dixit, Avinash, l987a, "Entry and Exit Decisions of Firms with Fluctuating
  Real Exchange Rates," Princeton University, October.

______________ 1987b, "Hysteresis, Import Penetration, and Exchange Rate
  Pass-Through," Princeton University, November.

______________ 1987c, "Intersectoral Capital Reallocation Under Price
  Uncertainty," Princeton University, November.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1988, "Notes on Credibility and Stabilization,"
  unpublished paper, MIT, November.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Sebastian Edwards, 1989, "Economic Crises and the
  Macroeconomics of Populism in Latin America: Lessons from Chile and Peru,"
  unpublished paper, May.

Edwards, Sebastian, 1989, "Real Exchange Rates in the Developing Countries:
  Concepts and Measurement," NBER Working Paper No. 2950, April.

Faini, Riccardo, 1989, "Credibility, Investment, and the Real Exchange Rate,"
  unpublished paper, Johns Hopkins University, Bologna, February.

Froot, Kenneth, 1988, "Credibility, Real Interest Rates, and the Optimal Speed
  of Trade Liberalization," Journal of International Economics.

Glezakos, C., 1973, "Export Instability and Economic Growth: A Statistical
  Verification," Economic Develooment and Cultural Change 21, 670-78.

Haggard, Stephan, and Robert Kaufman, 1988, "The Politics of Stabilization and
  Structural Adjustment," typescript.

Halevi, Nadav, 1988, "Trade Liberalization in Adjustment Lending," Trade
  Policy Division, The World Bank.
                                          -22-

Helleiner, Gerry K. , 1986, "Outward Orientation, Import Instability, and
  African Economic Growth: An Empirical Investigation," in S. Lall and F.
  Stewart (eds.), Theory and Reality in Development: Essays in Honour of Paul
  Streeten, New York, St. Martin's Press.

Hirschman, A.O. ,     1970, Exit, Voice, and Loyalty, Gambridge, Harvard University
  Press.

Kormendi, Roger G. , and Philip G. Meguire, 1985, "Macroeconomic Determinants
  of Growth: Gross-Country Evidence, Journal of Monetary Economics, 1985.

Krugman, Paul, 1988, "Deindustrialization, Reindustrialization, and the Real
  Exchange Rate," NBER Working Paper No. 2586.

Leff, Nathaniel H., and Kazuo Sato, 1987, "The Prospects for Higher Domestic
  Savings Rates in Latin America," Journal of Policy Modeling 9(4).

Lindenberg, Marc, 1988, "Making Economic Adjustment Work: The Politics of
  Policy Implementation," John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard
  University.

McDonald, Robert, and Daniel R. Siegel, 1986, "The Value of Waiting to
  Invest," quarterly Journal of Economics 101, November.

Nelson, Joan, 1984, "The Political Economy of Stabilization," World
  Development   12.

Ozler, Sule, and James Harrigan, 1988, "Export Instability and Growth,"
  Working Paper No. 486, Department of Economics, UCLA, June.

Persson, Torsten, and Sweder van Wijnbergen, 1987, "Signaling, Wage Controls,
  and Monetary Disinflation Policy," The World Bank.

Pindyck, Robert S., 1988, "Irreversible Investment, Capacity Choice, and the
  Value of the Firm," American Economic Review 78(5), December.

Rodrik, Dani, 1989a, "How Should Structural Adjustment Programs Be Designed?,"
  unpublished paper, John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University.

___________    1989b, "Credibility in Trade Reform: A Policymaker's Guide,"
   The World Economy, March (forthcoming).

____________ 1988a "Promises, Promises: Credible Policy Reform via
  Signaling," NBER Working Paper No. 2600. (Forthcoming, Economic Journal,
  September 1989.)

____________ l988b, "Closing the Technology Gap: Does Trade Liberalization
  Really Help?" NBER Working Paper No. 2654.    (Forthcoming in Gerry Helleiner,
  ed. , New Trade Theory and Industrialization in Developing Countries, Oxford
  University Press.)

Sachs, Jeffrey, 1989, "Social Conflict and Populist Policies in Latin
  America," NBER Working Paper No. 289?, March.

Staiger, Robert W., and Guido Tabellini, "Discretionary Trade Policy and
                                     -23-

  Excessive Protection," American Economic Review 77(5), December, 823-837.

Stewart, Douglas B., and Yiannis P. Venieris, 1985, "Sociopolitical
  Instability and the Behavior of Savings in Less Developed Countries," Review
  of Economics and Statistics, November.

van Wijnbergen, Sweder, 1985, "Trade Reform, Aggregate Investment and Capital
  Flight: On Credibility and the Value of Information," Economics Letters 19,
  369-72.

Voivodas, C.J., 1974, "The Effect of Foreign Exchange Instability on Growth,"
  Review of Economics and Statistics 56, 410-12.

Wheeler, David, 1984, "Sources of Stagnation on sub-Saharan Africa,"
  Development, vol. 12, no. 1.

World Bank, 1988, Adjustment Lendina, PPR Policy & Research Series, No. 1,
  Washington, DC.
                                       -24-




It      I
                \


                                                                           I
                               I
     (a) reduction in t   increases              (b) reduction in t    reduces
        I, reduces it                                I, increases it




                                                      I

                           (c) multiple equilibria


                                      Figure 1
