NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE OPTIMAL PROBABILITY AND MAGNITUDE OF FINES FOR
ACTS THAT ARE DEFINITELY UNDESIRABLE

Louis

Kaplow

Working Paper No. 3008

//

.

c/p/u /

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1989

Harvard Law School and the National Bureau of Economic Research. I am
grateful for comments by Lucian Bebchuk, Richard Craswell, A. Mitchell
Polinsky, and Steven Shavell. This paper is part of NBER's program in
Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those of
National Bureau of Economic Research.

the

NBER Working Paper #3008
June 1989

THE OPTIMAL PRORABILITY AND MAGNITUDE OF FINES FOR
ACTS THAT ARE DEFINITELY UNDESIRABLE

ABSTRACT
Even when society would wish to deter all acts of some type, such as tax
evasion and many common crimes, the benefits from deterrence often will be
insufficient t-

justify

the expenditures on enforcement that would be required

to deter everyone. If some individuals are not deterred, however, they will
bear risk when fines are employed as a sanction. As a result, it may be
optimal to reduce total risk-bearing costs by reducing the number of

individuals who bear any risk. This can be accomplished by increasing
enforcement above the level that would be justified considering only the

benefits of deterrence and the direct costs of enforcement. Another
possibility is that it may be optimal reduce the risk borne by those who act,

by employing fines below the maximum feasible level. This latter result
constitutes an instance in which the well-known implication of Becker's
analysis that it is optimal to employ extreme sanctions for all offenses is
invalid.

Louis Kaplow
Harvard Law School
Griswold Hall-Room 402
Cambridge, MA 02138

Society wishes to deter all individuals from committing some types of

acts, such as tax evasion and many common crimes, for which the harm done
exceeds any legitimate private benefits. Because enforcement is costly,
however, complete deterrence often will not be desirable, at least on

deterrence grounds alone. Individuals who are not deterred will bear the risk
of sanctions --

here fines. If individuals are risk-averse, risk-bearing

costs are incurred and must be taken into account in determining optimal
enforcement policy.
One strategy would be to. reduce the risk borne by those who are not

deterred. Thus, it may be optimal to employ fines below the maximum feasible
level, perhaps at the same time spending more on enforcement to maintain

deterrence. This latter prescription is contrary to the well-known
suggestion, with roots in Becker's (1968) analysis, that optimal enforcement
involves achieving the appropriate expected sanction through a fine that is as

high as possible (equal to a person's entire wealth) and a probability of
detection that is correspondingly low, so as to economize on enforcement

costs.1 This motivation for less-than-extreme sanctions supplements the
previously developed argument of Polinsky and Shavell (1979) addressed to the
case in which some individuals ideally are not deterred, such as those who
efficiently breach contracts or who are subject to strict liability for their

acts. Their argument and that developed here each offer reasons why, even
when enforcement is optimal, individuals will commit acts and thus bear risk.
Another strategy to reduce total risk-bearing costs would be to reduce the

number of individuals who bear any risk. This may be accomplished by
increasing enforcement beyond the level that would be justified based upon a

consideration of only the benefits of deterrence and direct costs of

enforcement. In some cases, complete deterrence may be optimal in light of
the benefits of eliminating all risk-bearing costs.

Section 1 presents the model, which is analyzed in section 2. Section 3
comments on the significance of the results.

1. The Model
Individuals decide whether to commit a harmful act based on whether it

will maximize their expected utility. Individuals' benefits from committing
the act differ, and are not observable by the social authority. Acts are
subject to fines, which are imposed with some probability.2 Fines cannot
exceed individuals' available wealth. Enforcement is financed by fine
revenues and a lump-sum tax. The following notation is employed:

h

total harm caused by each act, borne evenly by all individuals.3

b —

benefit

to an individual from committing the act.'

f(.) —

distribution

F(.) —

cumulative

distribution function for f(S).

—

utility of

wealth.

U

y —

initial

(continuous or discrete) of b on [O,hl.

wealth.

2 It is assumed that individuals cannot insure against the fine. If they
could insure at an actuarially fair rate, individuals intending to act would
purchase complete coverage, making the analysis as in the risk-neutral case.
This may increase achievable welfare by eliminating risk-bearing costs. (In
example 1, below, although the optimum involves no risk-bearing costs when
individuals were risk-averse, greater enforcement costs were incurred to deter
acts that produced no net social harm.) In addition, the availability of
insurance may reduce achievable welfare, because risk-aversion allows a given
level of deterrence to be achieved at a lower probability of detection. (In
example 1, below, if one assumes instead that a — .3, full deterrence could be
achieved at a probability below .0075, implying an enforcement cost less than
that required to deter only the low-harm types when individuals are riskneutral.)

One can imagine an externality with such a property or that the harm is
borne with equal probability by all individuals, with individuals purchasing
actuarially fair insurance.
'

The analysis, for the most part, assumes that both b and h are monetizable

that is, they are to be taken into account in computing the maximum
feasible fine. All the results hold if either or both factors are
nonmonetizable.
--

-2-

— fine.
p —
c(p) —

probability
cost

that an individual who commits the act is fined.

of enforcement; c' > 0, c" > 0.

t — lump-sum tax.

Begin by considering an individual's maximization problem. For those who
do not act, wealth is given by

(1) x — y

-

t

-

(1

-

F(b*))h,

which is initial wealth minus the tax owed minus the harm caused. The portion
who are deterred is F(b*), where b* refers to the type of individual who is
just indifferent between acting and not acting -

(2) (l-p)U(x + b) + pU(x + b -

it)

- that

is, the type for whom

U(x).

Given b*, the expected utility if one acts (the left side of (2)) is
increasing in b and the utility if one does not act (the right side) is
independent of b, so all individuals for whom b > b* will act and all for whom
b < b* will not act.5

The social authority, which does not observe individuals' types,6 chooses
p and it

to

maximize social welfare, defined as the sum of individuals'

expected utilities,7

There need not exist or be a unique b* that solves (2).
(Existence is the
lesser complication as, for b* — 0, the right side of (2) is greater the left,
and conversely for b* it, so there will exist a b* with the properties
described in text even if (2) does not hold for such a b*.) For the riskneutral case and the constant absolute risk aversion utility function used to
prove the results, however, there exists a unique b*.

6 lt is obvious that, when it would be ideal for some individuals to engage
in an activity, it would be optimal to excuse them from sanctions whenever
sanctions are costly - - and imposing risk is a relevant cost. The results
here imply that, for the same reason, if individuals' types could be observed,
it would tend to be optimal to excuse even those who, ideally, should not act,
if their benefits are high enough that they are not deterred at the optimum.
In addition to avoiding the risk-bearing costs at a given p and it, one could
raise it and lower p, thus achieving more cost-effective deterrence.
For the discrete case, substitute the summation

-3-

for

the integral.

h

b*

(3) W —

5 U(x)f(b)db

+ 5

[(l-p)U(x

+ b) + pU(x + b -

r)]f(b)db,

b*

0

subject to the constraints that the lump-sum tax finances the required
enforcement expenditures net of the fine revenue collected,

(4) t — c(p)

-

(1

-

F(b*))pir,

and that the fine not exceed individuals' available wealth. The maximum

feasible fine, , can be expressed as
(5)

ir —

y

-

c(p)

+

(l-F(b*))p,r

-

(l-F(b*))h

+

b*,

where b* refers to the type of individual who is just indifferent at p,
This simply is initial wealth minus the tax and harm imposed, plus the benefit

of the marginal individual.8 This formulation assumes that the harm and
benefit are both monetizable.9
Before proceeding, it is helpful to consider briefly the (admittedly
unrealistic) case in which there is no limit on the maximum feasible fine.
For any given fine and probability of detection, one can reduce enforcement
costs while achieving the same degree of deterrence by reducing the
probability of detection and increasing the fine by an appropriate amount.
Thus, it will be optimal to deter everyone at negligible cost with a

vanishingly small probability and a correspondingly high fine)0 Because all
individuals are deterred at the optimum, no risk is borne. This result
contrasts with that of Polinsky and Shavell (1979) because they examined acts

8 See Kaplow (198gb, note 26) with regard to the statement of the maximum
feasible fine as being the same for all types of individuals.
This may be appropriate for instances such as tax evasion, where the harm
may derive from higher payments required from some other tax and the benefits
may be saved taxes net of resources expended in evasion. All the results hold
if either or both are not monetizable.
10 To demonstrate this, note first that, for any p > 0, the optimal fine is
any that is sufficiently high to deter everyone: A lower fine would result in
some net harm, in which case aggregate expected income would be lower and it
would not be distributed equally (whereas, when all are deterred, all have
equal income); thus, with concave utility, welfare must be lower. Given that
all are deterred, from (3) one has, for p > 0, dW/dp — -c'U' < 0.
Finally,
for p sufficiently small (but positive), welfare must exceed that at p — 0 so
long as all the population (except a group of measure zero) is not of type

-4-

for which some individuals benefited by more than the harm caused; in that
case, the optimum in the risk-neutral case involved a sanction sufficient to

deter only those whose act caused more harm than benefit. When individuals
are risk-averse, the risk-neutral solution -benefits continue to act -

- entails

in which

individuals with high

such individuals bearing risk. Taking

this cost into account can produce qualitatively different results. It might
have appeared that the existence of "desirable illegal acts" was necessary for

this issue to arise. In fact, however, a constraint on the maximum feasible
sanction (which in practice will always exist) is sufficient to yield
fundamentally different results.

2. Analysis
This section begins by stating the results and discussing the intuition
for each. Then the propositions are demonstrated by constructing two discrete

examples having the required properties." The case when individuals are
risk-neutral is examined briefly because the solution of that case isolates

the benefits of deterrence and costs of enforcement. Differences in the
optimum when individuals are risk-averse can thus to attributed to risk
aversion rather than to other considerations.

A. Results
(1) When individuals are risk-averse, a probability of detection
sufficient to deter all individuals may be optimal even when full deterrence

would not be optimal if individuals were risk-neutral. In such a case, the
optimal probability will be the lowest for which full deterrence is feasible
and the optimal fine will be the maximum feasible fine (equal to total

wealth). (See example 1.)

When individuals

are risk-neutral, it is not

optimal to deter those with benefits sufficiently close to the level of harm,
because the benefits of deterrence become arbitrarily small while the marginal

"

The continuous case, examined in Kaplow (l989b), is substantially more
complex, but in ways that do not affect the basic results; thus, it is not
examined here.

-5-

cost of deterrence does not. When individuals are risk-averse, however,
increased deterrence reduces the number of individuals who bear risk and thus
may justify expenditures that are not justified on deterrence grounds alone.
In particular, deterring all individuals may be optimal because, at the

margin, the savings in risk-bearing costs are positive, and thus may exceed
the positive marginal enforcement costs.'2 And, if it is optimal to deter all
individuals, the most efficient way to accomplish this will involve employing
the lowest probability for which this is feasible and the maximum feasible

fine. This extreme sanction will impose no risk-bearing costs because no one
ever bears the sanction.

(2) When individuals are risk-averse, it may be optimal to deter some but

not all individuals. When this is the case, it may be optimal to impose a

fine lower than the maximum feasible fine. (See example 2.) Because
expenditures on enforcement are subject to diminishing returns, it may be that
the harm of an act is sufficiently great to justify some expenditures on
enforcement (despite the imposition of risk-bearing costs) while the costs of
complete deterrence are sufficiently high that the result in (1) will not

hold. Thus, partial deterrence may be optimal. In such instances, undeterred
individuals bear risk, so it may be efficient to spend additional resources to

reduce risk-bearing costs. For a given level of deterrence, risk-bearing
costs may be reduced by decreasing the fine and correspondingly increasing the

probability of detection, the latter entailing enforcement costs. Whether a
fine below the maximum feasible level will be optimal depends on whether the
marginal savings in risk-bearing costs exceed the required marginal increase
in enforcement resources.

(3) When individuals are risk-averse, optimal enforcement may involve a
higher or lower probability of detection, a higher or lower fine, and a higher

12
This analysis implies that, even if some individuals' benefits exceed
harm, but not by a significant amount, it may be optimal to deter them:
marginal deterrence benefits would be negative, rather than zero as in the
case in text, and marginal enforcement costs would be positive, but the sum of
these effects could still be less than the marginal savings in risk-bearing
costs. This result and that in text is analogous to the suggestion in
Polinsky and Shavell (1984) that when imprisonment (which is socially costly
to impose) is the sanction, overdeterrence may be optimal because it decreases
sanctioning costs.

-6-

or lower level of deterrence than when individuals are risk-neutral. A higher
probability of detection may be optimal than when individuals are risk-neutral
either because of the benefits from reducing risk-bearing costs when only some
are to be deterred, as described in the discussion of (2),' or in order to
deter more individuals to reduce the portion of the population subject to

risk-bearing costs, as noted in the discussion of (1). A lower probability
may be optimal because one can achieve equivalent or greater deterrence at

lower probabilities when individuals are risk-averse. (See example 2.)
A lower fine may be optimal when individuals are risk-averse in order to

reduce risk-bearing costs, as discussed with result (2). A higher fine may be
optimal despite the fact that the risk-neutral case involves imposition of the
maximum feasible fine, because the maximum feasible fine when individuals are

risk-averse may be greater. (See example 1.14)
Greater deterrence may be optimal when individuals are risk-averse
because, as described in result (1), a lower fraction of the population is

subject to risk-bearing costs. Because all are deterred when result (1)
applies, there does not exist the countervailing effect that those not

deterred would incur greater risk-bearing costs. This latter effect suggests
that lower deterrence also may be optimal when individuals are risk-averse.'5

B. Examples
For each, choose parameters and functions as follows:

h

1.

bE (.1, 1).
f is discrete; f(.l)

.9, f(l) =

.1.

' In example 2, a higher probability than when individuals are risk-neutral
is not required to accomplish this because of the strength of the
countervailing effect noted in the text to follow. For different parameter
values, a higher probability may be necessary for this reason. See Kaplow
(1989b).

14 Because more harm is prevented and the type just indifferent is higher
when deterrence is higher, the maximum feasible fine is higher despite greater
enforcement costs and lower fine revenue.
15 That lower deterrence may be optimal is the only result not illustrated by
either example. For a demonstration of this possibility, see Kaplow (1989b).

-7-

w if individuals are risk-neutral,

U(w) —

a — .1, if individuals are risk-averse (constant
absolute risk aversion utility function).

y — 12.

Example 1: c(p) —

Individuals
familiar

that

are risk-neutral: When individuals are risk-neutral, it is

the maximum feasible fine is optimal, for otherwise one could

increase the fine and reduce the probability of detection, keeping pir

constant, which would reduce enforcement costs without changing behavior.
Thus, all that remains is to determine the optimal level of enforcement.
Clearly, it is not optimal to deter individuals for whom b — 1, for their

benefit equals the harm caused, and additional resources must be expended to

deter them. Thus, the optimum entails b* — .1 or b* — 0.
result is p

12.01. At this p, c

.0083,

For the former, the

.000000004, which is less than

the net benefit of .81 from deterring individuals for whom b —

the optimum. (The net harm caused by each is h - b —

1 -

.1,

so this is

.1 — .9 and they

constitute .9 of the population.)

Individuals are risk-averse: For the stated utility function, using (2),
the marginal type can be expressed as

(6) e* —

1

-

p +

pe.

If all are to be deterred, the maximum feasible fine is optimal for the same

reason as when individuals are risk-neutral. (Since all are deterred, the

high fine does not result in any risk-bearing costs.) For the parameters
given, one has p = .0394,

13. Enforcement costs are approximately

.0000024. Because the net harm avoided, as when individuals are risk-neutral,

is .81, this option is superior to deterring no one. (Aggregate expected
income is greater and it is distributed equally.) The other possibility is to
deter only individuals for whom b* —

.1.

If that is optimal, one should

select a probability and fine so that, in (6), one just has b* —

.1,

for if b*

were greater one could reduce r and impose less risk. For b* — . 1 to be
superior to b* — 1, the savings in enforcement costs would have to exceed the

resulting risk-bearing costs. At b* —

.1,

-8-

however, total risk-bearing costs

must exceed .001 if any enforcement costs are to be saved, so this is not
possible.'6 Thus, it is optimal to deter all individuals -type that causes no net harm -.

to

including

the

avoid risk-bearing costs.

Example 2: c(p) — (25p)4
Individuals are risk-neutral: As before, the possible optima are b* — 0
and b* —

.1.

For the latter, one has p

.00833,

12.01, incurring

enforcement costs under .002. Net harm averted is .81, so again the optimum
involves deterring the lr'w-benefit types.

Individuals are risk-averse: To deter everyone requires a probability in
excess of .0394, which costs more than .94. As the total (not net) harm
averted is 1, the net gain is under .06, which is less than the forgone

benefits of both types from acting. Thus, deterring no one is pareto superior

to deterring everyone. At b*
p

.006, r

.1, one can compute that the optimal policy is

9.84. Because this involves costs of approximately .0005, and

saves harm of .9, both groups are better off than if no one is deterred.
(Type .1 saves harm of .9 and loses a benefit of .1 and pays a tax less than

the cost of .0005. Type 1 saves harm of .9, pays a tax less than .0005, and
is subject to a fine with a money-equivalent cost of .1 with this utility

function.'7) Interestingly, the optimal fine of 9.84 is less than the maximum
feasible fine at this probability, which is approximately 11.9. The reason is
that reducing ir while increasing p in a manner that maintains the same

deterrence reduces risk-bearing costs. The optimal fine is not even lower

than 9.84 because increasing p also raises enforcement costs. The

16 For a given b*, risk-bearing costs are reduced as p is increased and ir is
correspondingly reduced. If p exceeds .0394, however, there is no savings in
enforcement costs, so deterring everyone (which entails no risk-bearing costs)
would be superior. At p — .04, the necessary fine to deter type .1 is
approximately 2.24. The certain reduction in income for type 1 individuals
making them indifferent to pir is, with this utility function, simply b*. The
difference between that reduction (.1 in this instance) and the transfer
(pir — .04 x 2.24 — .0896) of .0104 is the risk-bearing cost incurred by .1 of
the population, so total risk-bearing costs exceed .00104.
(Note that
deterring only the type with b — . 1 also entails an unequal distribution of
income which, with concave utility, reduces welfare further.)
17

See note 16.

-9-

intermediate result (fine below maximum feasible fine, probability less than
one) reflects the optimal trade-off of these factors.

3. Concluding Remarks
(a) For many crimes, tax evasion, and some other acts, it would be ideal

(or, at least, approximately so) for no individuals to commit the acts. It is
often the case, however, that a probability sufficient to deter all

individuals would be extremely expensive. If partial deterrence is thus
employed, undeterred individuals bear risk. Optimal enforcement policy will
take this cost into account. One strategy involves reducing the number of
individuals who bear risk by increasing enforcement above the level that would
be warranted based on considerations of deterrence and enforcement costs

alone. As in one of the examples presented, it even may be optimal on these
grounds to expend resources to deter individuals whose acts produce benefits
equal to their social costs.

Another strategy involves reducing the risk borne by individuals who are

not deterred. Thus, it may be optimal to employ fines below the maximum
feasible level, possibly with corresponding increases in enforcement

expenditures. This result is similar to that in Polinsky and Shavell (1979),
where the reason some individuals optimally were not deterred was that
socially beneficial acts as well as harmful ones were subject to sanctions (as

in the case of breach of contract and acts subject to strict liability). For
most offenses, one indeed observes fines far less than most violators' wealth.
While consistent with the results presented here and in Polinsky and Shavell,
these practices are unlikely to be justified by the concern for avoiding riskbearing costs in contexts in which the fine is so low that the marginal riskbearing costs from a slightly higher fine would be trivial.
(b) In light of this analysis, it seems inappropriate when analyzing
optimal enforcement policy simply to assume, as is commonly done, that the
fine is fixed at some stated level -

- whether

an absolute amount or some rate

to be multiplied by a measure of the severity of the infraction.'8 The

-

10

-

optimal fine will be a function of the other instruments
entire character of the optimum with regard to other

under study, and the

instruments (here, the

probability of detection) may differ when the fine is set optimally rather
than stipulated.
(c) Many explanations have been offered for the commonly observed practice
of using fines far below individuals' wealth. Most prominent is the notion

that fines must in some sense be proportional to the harm caused by an

activity. See Stern (1978). Usually, little normative defense is offered for
such claims and the appropriate proportion is unstated.
Actual practice
varies widely in this respect. For example, a $10 fine for failing to put l0
in a parking meter is a fine of 10,000%; civil tax fraud (not mere mistake or
negligence) - -

which

most would consider a worse offense -

- has

a fine, in

addition to repayment, of under 100%. Double parking may be subject to a fine
of $30, an infinite percent of the actual harm caused in many instances. If a
serious accident results and one is successfully sued for negligence, one
might have to pay $1,000,000 -- which is no penalty beyond actual harm caused
but a penalty of, perhaps, more than 3,000,000% of the expected harm. Thus,
it is extremely difficult to infer from actual practice the content of this

proportionality concept. Nonetheless, it seems that such beliefs are
widespread.

A less frequent, but quite plausible explanation for moderate penalties is
that some offenses are committed by mistake.'9 One
may forget to put money in
a parking meter or not understand the income tax rule one violated in

filing a

tax return. In such instances, high fines may have little additional
18

It is not obvious that a wealth constraint would justify a constant
penalty rate. Moreover, when there is no limit to the severity of the
infraction, or the only limit (as with tax evasion) is one's wealth, a
constant penalty rate is infeasible.

19 See Kaplow (l989a) on this case. Another reason sometimes offered for
moderate fines is that marginal deterrence must be preserved. This is at best
a weak argument even against fines approaching total wealth, as imprisonment
remains available. In addition, for fines well less than total wealth but far
above currently observed fines, it is difficult to understand the marginal
deterrence problem. Since the fine is only imposed when individuals are
detected, and in many instances apprehension and collection could follow
almost immediately and automatically, one does not confront the problems that
arise in such cases as the kidnapper who, faced with
punishment for
the offense, may be left with little incentive not to capital
kill the victim.
-

11

-

deterrent effect but impose great risk on violators. If there is a

- or,

significant group who make such mistakes -

alternatively, who act

intentionally but mistakenly underestimate the fine or probability of
detection -- a very high fine could produce substantial risk-bearing costs.

The more efficient policy may be to expend more resources on detection and
impose lower penalties, even to such a degree that some intentional and

informed violators will remain undeterred. Note that this explanation has
much in common with that explored in the model here. One could, in principle,
expend enough resources ;o educate the entire population so that few made

mistakes.2° But this often would be quite costly. The uninformed group is
much like those individuals in the model here that had high private benefits
and thus remain undeterred at the optimum, even though they were assumed to be
fully aware of the consequences.

20 Hiher penalties might induce individuals to be more careful or to learn
more about applicable rules, but such responses are themselves costly and may
be incomplete.
-

12

-

REFERENCES

Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach, Journal of
Political Economy 76, March/April 1968, 169-217.

Becker, Gary S. ,

Kaplow, Louis, Optimal Enforcement When Some Individuals Are Uninformed about
the Law, 1989a.
__________ The Optimal Pcobability and Magnitude of Fines for Acts That Are
Definitely Undesirable, Harvard Program in Law and Economics Discussion
Paper No. 55, 1989b.
Polinsky, A. Mitchell and Shavell, Steven, The Optimal Tradeoff Between the
Probability and Magnitude of Fines, American Economic Review 69, 1979,
880-891.

_________ and __________ , The Optimal Use of Fines and Imprisonment, Journal
of Public Economics 24, 1984, 89-99.

Stern, N., On the Economic Theory of Policy Towards Crime, in Heineke, J.M.
ed. , Economic Models of Criminal Behavior, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1978,
123-152.

-

13

-

