NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE LENDER OF LAST RESORT: SOME HISTORICAL INSIGHTS

Michael D. Bordo

Working Paper No. 3011

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1989

This paper is part of NBER's research program in Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3011
June 1989

THE LENDER OF LAST RESORT: SOME HISTORICAL INSIGHTS

ABSTRACT

This paper discusses the role for a lender of last resort (LLR) in
preventing banking panics (section I) ,

then briefly considers classical and more

recent concepts of the LLR (section II).

Section III examines historical

evidence for the U.S. and other countries on the incidence of
banking panics and
LLR actions, and the record of alternative LLR arrangements in the U.S., Scotland
and Canada, as well as the historical record on bailouts.
Section IV offers some
lessons from history.

Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ 08903
(201)932-7363

I.

Introduction

The ongoing savings and loan crisis in the U.S. and the bailouts of a
number of large banks in recent years in this country and similar rescues abroad

have prompted renewed interest in the topic of the lender of last resort.
The need for a lender of last resort arises in a fractional reserve

banking

system when a banking panic, defined as a massive scramble for high powered
money, threatens the money stock, and hence the level of economic activity. The

lender of last resort can allay an incipient panic by timely assurance that it

will provide whatever high powered money is required to satisfy the demand,
either by offering liberal access to the discount window at a penalty rate

or

by open market purchases.
Henry Thornton (1802) and Walter agehot (1873) developed the key elements

of the doctrine of the lender of last resort (LLR) in England. They contended

that monetary authorities in the face of panic should lend freely but at a
penalty rate to illiquid but solvent banks. Monetarist writers in recent years

have reiterated and extended the classical notion of the LL?.

In contrast,

Charles Goodhart and others have recently posited an alternative view broadening

the power of LLR to include aid to insolvent financial institutions.

This paper discusses the role for an LLR in preventing banking panics
(section I), then briefly considers classical and more recent concepts of the
LLR (section II).

Section III examines historical evidence for the U.S. and

other countries on the incidence of banking panics and LLR actions, and the
record of alternative LLR arrangements in the U.S. Scotland and Canada, as well

as the historical record on bailouts.
history.

Section IV offers some lessons from

3

II. Bankina Panics and the Lender of Last Resort
The need for a monetary authority to act as LLR arises in the case of a
banking panic -

-a

widespread attempt by the public to convert deposits into

currency and, in response, an attempt by commercial banks to raise their desired

reserve deposit ratio. Banking panics can occur in a fractional reserve banking

system when a bank failure or series of bank failures produces bank runs which
in turn become contagious, threatening the solvency of otherwise sound banks.

Two sets of factors, internal and external, can lead to bank failures.

Internal factors which affect both financial and non financial enterprises
include poor management, poor judgment and dishonesty. External factors include

changes in relative prices and in the overall price level.

Changes in relative prices can drastically alter the value of a bank's
portfolio and force it into insolvency.

Banking structure can mitigate the effects of relative price change. A
nationwide branch banking system that permits portfolio diversification across

regions enables a bank to absorb the effects of relative price change. A unit
banking system, even with correspondents, is considerably less effective. The
nearly 6000 bank failures that occurred during the decade of the 1920's in the
U.S. were small unit banks in agricultural regions. By contrast in Canada, with

nationwide branch banking, many bank branches in those regions closed but no
banks failed (with the exception of one, in 1923, due to fraud).
A second external factor that can lead to bank failures is changes in the
overall price level (Schwartz, 1988). Price level instability (in a non-indexed

system) -- sharp changes from rising to falling prices or from inflation to
disinflation -

- caused either by gold movements under the pre-1914 gold standard,

or more recently, by the discretionary actions of monetary authorities, can

4

produce unexpected changes in banks' net worth and convert ex ante sound
investments into ex post mistakes.
Given that bank liabilities are convertible on demand, bank runs represent

a rational response by depositors concerned over their ability to convert
deposits into currency in the event of a bank insolvency.

Sank runs in normal

circumstances serve as a form of market discipline, reallocating funds from weak

to strong banks and constraining bank managers from adopting risky portfolio
strategies (Kaufman, 1988). Bank runs can also lead to a 'flight to quality'

(Benston and Kaufman et al, 1986). Depositors may not shift funds from weak
banks to those they regard to be sound, they may instead convert their deposits

into high quality securities.

The seller of the securities ultimately will

deposit his receipts at other banks with no loss of bank reserves.

However on occasion, in the face of an external shock to the banking
system, incomplete and costly information may make it difficult for depositors

to distinguish sound from unsound banks. In that case runs on insolvent banks
can produce contagious runs on solvent banks leading to panic. A banking panic,
in turn, will lead to massive bank failures, as sound banks are being forced into

insolvency by a fall in the value of their assets when a scramble for liquidity
induces a fire sale of assets.

By intervening at the point when the liquidity of solvent banks is
threatened - --

supplying

whatever funds are needed to meet the demand for cash

the monetary authority can allay the panic.
Private arrangements can also reduce the likelihood of panics.

Branch

banking allows funds to be transferred from branches with surplus funds to those

in need of cash. Commercial bank clearing houses by pooling the resources of

its members can provide emergency reserves to meet the heightened liquidity

5

demand. A clearing house moreover represents a signal to the public that in
time of panic help will be available to member banks.
Neither branch banking nor clearing houses, however, can stem a nationwide

demand for currency occasioned by a major aggregate shock such as a world war.

Only the monetary authority -

- the

ultimate supplier of high powered-money - -

can be successful.
Government deposit insurance can prevent panics by removing the reason for

the public to run to currency.1 Ultimately, however, a monetary authority is
required to back up an insurance scheme.

6

III. Alternative Views on the LLR Function
i.

The Classical Position

Both Henry Thornton (1802) in An InQuiry into the Effects of the Parer

Credit of Great Britain and Walter Bagehot (1873) in Lombard Street were
concerned with the role of the Bank of England in stemming periodic

banking

panics. In Thornton's time, the Bank of England -- a private institution which
served as the government's bank -

- had

a monopoly of the note issue within a 26-

mile radius of London and Bank of England notes served as high

powered money

for the English banking system.2 For Thornton the Bank's responsibility, though
not a formal central bank, in time of panic was to serve as LLR.

It should then

provide liquidity to the market, discounting freely the paper of all but
insolvent banks, no matter how large or important [Humphrey. 1975).

Bagehot, accepted and broadened Thornton's view. Writing at a time when
the Bank had considerably enhanced its power in the British financial

system,

he stated four principles for the Bank to observe as lender of last resort to
the monetary system.

First, it should lend freely but at a penalty rate.3
"Very large loans at very high rates are the best remedy
for the worst malady of the money market when a foreign

drain is added to a domestic drain" (Bagehot, (1873)
p.56)

Second, the Bank should make clear in advance its readiness to lend freely.
Third the Bank should accommodate anyone with good collateral (valued at normal

pre panic prices). Fourth, it should prevent illiquid but solvent banks from
failing."5

7

ii.

Recent Extensions of the Classical Position

Recent monetartst economists have restated the classical position.
Friedman and Schwartz (1963), in A Monetary History, devote considerable
attention to the role of banking panics in producing monetary instability in the

United States (also see Cagan 1965). According to them, the peculiarities of
the US banking system as it developed in the nineteenth century, with its unit

fractional reserve banking system and reserves pyramided in New York, made it

highly susceptible to banking panics.

Federal deposit insurance in 193L.

provided a remedy to this vulnerability. It served to assure the public that
it could always convert deposits into currency.

Friedman and Schwartz highlight the importance in the pre-FDIC system of
timely judgment by strong and responsible leadership in intervening to allay the

public's fear. Before the advent of the Fed, the New York Clearing House issued

clearing house certificates and suspended convertibility and, on occasion, the
Treasury conducted open market operations. In two episodes, these interventions

were successful, in three others they were not effective in preventing severe
monetary contraction.

The Federal Reserve System, established in part to provide such
leadership, failed dismally in the 1929-33 contraction. According to Friedman
arid Schwartz, had the Fed conducted open market operations in 1930 and 1931 to

provide the reserves needed by the banking system, the series of bank failures

that produced the unprecedented decline in the money stock could have been
prevented.

Schwartz (1986) argues that "a real financial crisis occurs only when
institutions do not exist, when authorities are unschooled in the practices that

preclude such a development, and when the private sector has reason to doubt

8

the dependability of preventative arrangements" (p. 12). According to her all
the real financial crises in the United Kingdom and the United States occurred

when the monetary authorities failed to demonstrate readiness at the beginning

of a disturbance to meet all demands of sound debtors for loans and of
depositors for cash. Finally, she views deposit insurance as not necessary to
prevent banking panics.

It was successful after 1934 in the U.S. because the

lender of last resort was undependable.

Had the Fed acted on Bagehot's

principles, federal deposit insurance would not have been necessary, as the
record of other countries with stable banking systems but no federal deposit
insurance attests.

Meltzer (1986) argues that a central bank should allow insolvent banks to

fail, for not to do so would encourage financial institutions to take greater
risks.

Following such an approach would 'separate the risk of individual

financial failures from aggregate risk by establishing principles that prevent
banks liquidity problems from generating an epidemic of insolvencies" (p. 85).
The worst cases of financial panics, according to Meltzer, "arose because
the central bank did not follow Bagehotian principles."6
Goodfriend and King (1988) make a strong case for the exercise of the LLR

function

solely by the use of monetary policy, which they define as -

- open

market operations, to change the stock of high-powered money.7 Because it need

not involve a change in high-powered money, discount window lending (DWL) to
particular banks, which they refer to as banking policy, is unnecessary. The
reason they regard banking policy as redundant is that central bank discount
window lending is similar to private provision of line-of-credit services. Both
require monitoring and supervision. The authors argue that it is not clear that
the Fed is more efficient than the private sector in such activities. According

9

to Goodfriend (1989) the only reason the Fed currently has an advantage

in

providing a line of credit is that it can make fully collateralized loans
whereas commercial banks under current regulations cannot do so.

There is

nothing to prevent the Fed from succumbing to political pressure to extend
credit to insolvent banks, although under current arrangements, discount-window
lending temporarily aids only illiquid banks. Moreover, discount-window lending
can delay a declaration of insolvency by a bank that pledges its best collateral

and uses the loan to pay off uninsured depositors before it is closed thus
shifting the loss from uninsured depositors to the FDIC.

It also ex ante

reduces monitoring by depositors and enhances risk taking by the banks.8

Coodfriend and King regard government-provided deposit insurance as
basically a substitute for the portfolio diversification of a nationwide branch
banking system.

By itself, without LLR support of high-powered money by the

monetary authorities, deposit insurance is insufficient to protect the banking
system as a whole from an aggregate shock.

iii. The Case for Central Bank Bailouts

Charles Coodhart (1985, 1987) advocates central bank assistance to
insolvent banks.

He argues that the distinction between illiquidity and

insolvency is a myth, since banks requiring LLR support because of "illiquidity
will in most cases already be under suspicion about . .

. solvency."

Furthermore

'[bJecause of the difficulty of valuing its assets, a Central Bank will usually

have to take a decision on last resort support to meet an immediate liquidity
problem when it knows that there is a doubt about solvency, but does not know
just how bad the latter position actually is" (Goodhart, 1985, p. 35).

He also argues that, when depositors run from an insolvent bank in a
flight to quality, the valuable relationship between banker and borrower (based

10

both on trust and agent-specific information) is severed. However this would

add to the cost of flight, making it less likely to occur. Replacing such a
connection requires costly search, a process which imposes losses (and possible

bankruptcy) on the borrowers. To protect borrowers Goodhart would have the
central bank recycle funds back to the troubled bank.

However, as Schwartz

(1988) points out, borrowers need not require this arrangement, rather, they can

protect themselves from such a likelihood by simultaneously borrowing and
holding deposits with a number of financial institutions.

Solow (1982) also is sympathetic to bailouts. According to him, the Fed

is responsible for the stability of the whole financial system.

Any bank

failure, especially a large one, reduces confidence in the whole system.

To

prevent a loss of confidence from a major bank failure from spreading to the
rest of the banking system, the central bank should bail out insolvent banks.
However, such a policy creates a moral hazard, as banks in response engage in
greater risk taking and the public loses its incentive to monitor them.

Kindleberger (1978) includes under the rubric of financial crises,
deflations and disinflations, the financial distress of large nonfinancial firms

and of financial industries, abrupt declines in the prices of particular
commodities or assets, and speculative attacks on fixed exchange rate regimes.

Extension of LLR responsibility to all these situations ultimately makes the
central bank responsible for preventing any major losses in wealth -

-a

far cry

from the original conception of the LLR as providing a temporary source of
liquidity to the money market.
iv.

Free Banking: The Case against any Public LLR

Proponents of free banking have denied the need for any government
authority to serve as lender of last resort. They argue that the only reason
for banking panics is legal restrictions on the banking system. Absent, such

11

restrictions, the free market would produce a panic proof banking system.

According to Selgin (1988, 1989) two of the most important restrictions
are the prohibition of nationwide branch banking in the US and the prohibition
everywhere of free currency issue by the commercial banking system.

Nationwide

branch banking would allow sufficient portfolio diversification to prevent
relative price shocks from causing banks to fail. Free note issue would allow
banks to supply whatever currency individuals may demand.9
Contagious runs because of incomplete information would not occur because

secondary markets in bank notes (note brokers, note detectors)

would provide

adequate information to note holders about the condition of all banks.

Such

markets do not arise for demand deposits because of the agent-specific
information involved in the demand deposit contract -

- it

whether the depositor has funds backing his check.

However, clearing house

is hard to verify

associations can offset the information asymmetry involved in deposit banking.

According to Corton (1984), and Gorton and Mullineaux (1987), clearing
houses in the nineteenth century by quickly organizing all member banks into one

firm, established a coinsurance scheme that made it difficult to focus on the

weakness of an individual member bank. The clearing house could also allay a

panic by issuing loan certificates which served as a close substitute for
specie. Finally a restriction of convertibility of deposits into currency could

end a panic. Dowd (1984) regards restrictions as a form of option clause.'0 In
an alternative option (used in Scotland pre-1765) banks had the legal right to

defer redemption till a later date, with interest paid to compensate for the
delay.

For Selgin and Dowd the public LLR evolved because of a monopoly in the
issue of currency.

The Bank of England's currency monopoly within a 26-mile

radius of London until 1826 and its extension to the whole country in 1844 made

12

it more difficult than otherwise for depositors to satisfy their demand for

currency in times of stress, in turn creating a need for the Bank. as sole
provider of high powered money, to serve as LLR." In the U.S., bond-collateral

restrictions on state banks before 1863 and on the national banks thereafter
were responsible for the well known problem of currency inelasticity.

These writers do not discuss the case of a major aggregate shock that
produces a widespread demand for high-powered money. In that situation only the

monetary authority will suffice.

In sum, the two views briefly discussed have considerably different
implications for the role of an LLR. The classical prescription is for an LL.R

to

provide temporary emergency assistance to illiquid but solvent banks in a

banking panic.

The Goodhart prescription is for bailouts of insolvent

institutions; and the free banking view argues against any role for an LLR.
With these views serving as a backdrop, I now examine evidence on banking panics

and their resolution in the past.

13

The Historical Record

In this section I present historical evidence
on the incidence of banking panics,

in their resolution.

for a number of countries

their likely causes, and the role of an LLR

I then consider alternative institutional arrangements

that served as surrogate LLR's in diverse

I compare the historical experience with

countries at different times. Finally

the more recent bailouts in the US,

Great Britain and Canada.
i.

Banking Panics and their Resolution

The record for the past 200 years for at least 17 countries shows a large

number of bank failures; fewer, but a still

considerable number of bank runs;

and a relatively small number of banking panics.
compiled by Anna Schwartz (1988), in the U.S.

According to a chronology

between 1790 and 1930 in 14 years

bank panics occurred; Great Britain was next with 8 years between 1790 and 1866

in which panics occurred, followed by France and Italy

with 4 each.

An alternative chronology that I prepared (Rordo,

1986, Table 1) for 6

countries (the U.S. Great Britain, France, Germany, Sweden

and Canada) over the

period 1870-1933 lists 16 banking crises (defined as bank runs and/or failures),

and 4 banking panics (runs, failures, and suspensions

occurred in the U.S.)

of payments), all of which

It also lists, based on Kindleberger's definition of

financial crises (as comprising manias, panics and crashes)

30 such crises and

based on Morgenstern's (1959) definition lists 71 stock market crises.
The evidence of a large number of bank failures in all countries, similar

to failures of nonfinancial firms, reflects in large
operation of market forces.

measure the normal

In addition to internal factors, the

factors of relative price changes; banking structure; and changes

external

in the overall

price level were important. The relatively few instances of banking panics in

14

the past two centuries attests to the fact that monetary authorities in time

developed the procedures and expertise to supply the funds needed to meet
depositors' demands for cash.

Concurrently, the public developed confidence

that the authorities would respond in appropriate fashion.
A comparison of the performances of Great Britain and the U.S. in the past

century serves to illustrate the importance of the lender of last resort
function in preventing banking panics.

In the first half of the nineteenth century. Great Britain experienced

banking panics when the insolvency of an important financial institution
precipitated runs on other banks and a scramble for high-powered money ensued.
In a number of instances, the reaction of the Bank of England to protect its own

gold reserves worsened the panic.

Eventually the Bank supplied funds to the

market but too late to prevent many unnecessary bank failures. The last such
panic followed the failure of the Overend Gurney Company in 1866. Thereafter,

the Bank accepted its responsibility as lender of last resort, observing
Bagehot's Rule "to lend freely but at a penalty rate." It prevented incipient
financial crises in 1878, 1.890, and 1914 from developing into full blown panics

by timely announcements and action.
The United States in the antebellum period experienced 11 banking panics
(according to Schwartz's chronology) of which the panics of 1837, 1839 and 1857

were most notable.'2 The First and Second Banks of the United States had some

central banking powers in part of the period, some states developed early
deposit insurance schemes (see Benston 1983, Calomiris 1989), and the New York

Clearing House Association began issuing clearing house loan certificates in
1857, but none of these arrangements sufficed to prevent the panics.

In the national banking era, the U.S. experienced three serious banking

15

panics -- 1873, 1893 and 1907-08.

In these episodes, although the Clearing

Houses of New York, Chicago and other central reserve cities issued clearing
house loan certificates, based on the collateral of member banks' assets, as an

emergency reserve currency and even issued small denomination hand-to-hand
currency, lender of last resort actions were ineffective.

In contrast to

successful interventions in 1884 and 1890, the issue of emergency currency was
too little and too late to prevent panic from spreading.

The panics ended upon

the suspension of convertibility of deposits into currency. During suspension,
both currency and deposits circulated freely at flexible exchange rates, thereby

relieving the pressure on bank reserves. The panics of 1893 and especially 1907

precipitated a movement to establish an agency to satisfy

the public's demand

for currency in times of distrust of deposit convertibility.

The interim

Aldrich Vreeland Act was successful in preventing a panic in 1914.

The Federal Reserve System was created in 1914 to serve as a lender of
last resort. The U.S. did not experience banking panic until

1930 but, during

the ensuing three years, a succession of nationwide banking panics, as Friedman
and Schwartz point out, accounted for the destruction of one third of the money

stock and the permanent closing of 40% of the nation's banks. Only

with the

establishment of federal deposit insurance in 1934, did the threat of banking
panics recede.

To continue the comparison between the U.S. and Great gritain,

tables 1

and 2 present, for each country some detailed evidence on factors commonly
believed to be related to banking panics, as well as a chronology of banking
panics and banking crises for severe NEER business cycle

recessions (peak to

trough) in the period l870-l933.' The variables isolated include: deviations

from trend of the average annual growth rate of real output; the absolute

16

difference of the average annual rate of change in the price level during the

preceding trough to peak and the current peak to trough as a measure of the

effect of changes in the overall price level; deviations from trend of the
average annual rate of monetary growth; and the percentage change in the money

stock due to changes in the deposit currency ratio.'
The tables reveal some striking similarities in the behavior of variables

often related to panics but a remarkable difference between the two countries

in the incidence of panics.

Virtually all six business cycle downturns

designated by the NBER as severe were marked in both countries by significant

declines in output, large price level reversals, and large declines in money
growth.

In addition, in both countries the deposit-currency ratio produced

declines in the money stock in the three most severe downturns: 1893-94 (U.S.)
1890-1894 (G.B.); 1907-08; and 1929-32.
However, the difference in the incidence of panics is striking --

had four, while Britain had none.

the

U.S.

Both countries experienced frequent stock

market crashes (see Bordo, 1986, Table 6.1).

They were buffeted by the same

international financial crises. Although Britain faced threats to the banking
system in 1878, 1890 and 1914, the key difference between the two countries (see

the last two columns of table 2) was successful LLR action by the British
authorities in defusing incipient crises.
Similar evidence over the 1870-1933 period for two other major countries:

(France and Germany) and two minor countries (Sweden and Canada), is available
in Bordo (1986) .

In

severe recessions in all four countries the quantitative

variables move similarly to those displayed here for the U.S. and Great Britain.

Yet there were no banking panics. In France appropriate actions by the Bank of
France in 1882, 1889 and 1930 prevented incipient banking crises from developing

17

into panics.

Similar behavior occurred in Germany in 1901 and 1931 and in

Canada in 1907 and 1914.

One other key difference was nationwide branch banking in all five
countries whereas the U.S. had unit banking. That difference likely goes

a long

way to explain the larger number of bank failures in the U.S.. However, the

incidence of incipient crises which did not become panics

in most of these

countries suggests the primary importance of LLR action.
ii.

Alternative LLR Arrangements

In the traditional view the LLR role is synonymous with that of a central

bank. Goodhart's explanation for the evolution of central banking in England
as well as other European countries is that the first central banks evolved from
commercial banks which had the special privilege of being the government's bank.

Because of their sound reputation, position as holder of the nation's gold
reserve, ability to obtain economies of pooling reserves through a correspondent

banking system, and ability to provide extra cash by rediscounting, such banks

evolved into bankers' banks and lenders of last resort in a liquidity

crisis.

Once such banks began to perform the role of lender of last resort, "moral
hazard" on the part of member banks (following a more risky strategy) provided

a rationale for some form of supervision or legislation.

Further, Goodhart

argues that the conflict between the public functions of such an institution and

satisfying the shareholders made the transition from a competitive bank to a
central bank lengthy and painful.
Though Goodhart (1985) Annex B demonstrates that a number of central banks

evolved in this fashion, the experience of other countries suggests that
alternative arrangements are possible. In the U.S. before the advent of the Fed

a variety of institutional arrangements served on occasion to allay banking

18

panics: deposit insurance schemes in a number of states which were relatively
successful before the Civil War (Benston 1983, Calomiris 1989); others at the

beginning of the twentieth century which were not (White, 1981); the issue of
clearing house loan certificates (Timberlake, 1984, Corton, 1984); restriction
of convertibility of deposits into currency by the clearing house associations

in the national banking era; various operations by the U.S. Treasury in the
period 1890 to 1907 (Timberlake, 1978); and the Aldrich Vreeland Act of 1908.
Two countries which managed successfully for long periods without central
banks were Scotland and Canada. Scotland had a system of free banking from 1727

to 1844. The key features of this system were a) free entry into banking and
free issue of bank notes, b) bank notes that were fully convertible into fullbodied coin, and c) unlimited liability of bank shareholders.

Scotland's record under such a system was one of remarkable monetary
stability.

That country experienced very few bank failures and very few

financial crises.

One reason, according to White (1984), was the unlimited

liability of bank stockholders and strict bankruptcy laws that instilled a sense

of confidence in noteholders.'5 Indeed the Scottish banks would take over at par

the issue of failed banks (e.g. the Ayr bank, 1772) to increase their own
business. A second reason was the absence of restrictions on bank capital and

of other impediments to the development of extensive branching systems that
allowed banks to diversify risk and withstand shocks.'6

Faced with a nationwide scramble for liquidity such as 1792-93, 1797 and

1830, however, Scottish banks were able to turn to the Bank of England as a
lender of last resort (Cowen and Kroszner 1989)

Although Canada had a competitive fractional reserve banking system
throughout the nineteenth century, no central bank evolved (Bordo and Redish,

19

1987).

virtually all the elements of traditional central banking

undertaken

either by private institutions or directly by the government had emerged by the

beginning of the twentieth century.
The chartered banks had, by 1890, with the compliance of the Government,
established an effective self policing agency, the Canadian Bankers Association.
Acting in locus parentis, it succeeded in insulating the Canadian banks from the

deleterious effects of the U.S. banking panics of 1893 and 1907, by quickly
arranging mergers between sound and failing banks, by encouraging co-operation

between strong and weaker banks in times of stringency, and by establishing

a

reserve fund to be used to compensate note holders in the event of failure.
In addition, the nationwide branch system overcame the problem of seasonal

liquidity crises that characterized the United States after the Civil War, thus

lessening the need for a lender of last resort. However, the Bank of Montreal

(founded in 1817) very early became the government's bank performing many
central bank functions.

Because, Canadian banks kept most of their reserves on "call" in the New

York money market, they were able on occasion in this way to satisfy the
public's demand for liquidity, again precluding the need for a

central bank.

On two occasions, 1907 and 1914, however, these reserves proved inadequate to

prevent a liquidity crisis and the Government of Canada had to step in to
supplement the reserves.

The Finance Act, passed in 1914 to facilitate wartime finance, provided

the chartered banks with a liberal rediscounting facility.

By pledging

appropriate collateral (this was broadly defined) banks could borrow

Dominion

notes from the Treasury Board. The Finance Act clause, which was extended after

the wartime emergency by the Amendment of 1923, provided a discount
window/lender of last resort for the Canadian banking system.

20

In sum though Canada, Scotland and several other countries did not have

formal central banks serving as LLR, they all had access to a governmental
authority which could provide high-powered money in the event of such a crisis.
iii.

LLR assistance and bailouts

The classic prescription for LLR action is to lend freely but at a penalty

rate to illiquid but solvent banks. Both Thornton and Bagehot advised strongly

against bailouts --

assistance to insolvent financial institutions.

They

opposed then because they would encourage future risk taking and would not
invalidate the threat to other sound financial institutions.

Bagehot also advocated lending at a penalty rate, to discourage all but
those truly in need from applying, and to limit the expansion in liquidity to
just that necessary to end the panic.

European countries from 1870 to 1970 in general observed the classical

strictures. In the Baring Crisis of 1890, the Bank of England successfully
prevented panic. It arranged (with the Bank of France and the leading Clearing

Banks) to advance the necessary sums to meet the Barings' immediate maturing

liability with guarantee of any loss sustained by the Bank in the process
(Schwartz, 1986, p. 19).

The German Reichsbank in 1901 prevented panic by

purchasing prime bills on the open market and expanding its excess note

issue

but it did not intervene to prevent the failure of the Leipziger and other banks

(Goodhart 1985, p. 96). The Bank of France also followed classic precepts

in

crises in 1882 and 1889.

The Austrian National Bank, however, ignored the classical advice during

the Credit Anstalt crisis of 1931. After the Austrian National Bank provided
liberal assistance to the Credit Anstalt at low interest rates (Schubert, 1987)

a run on the Credit Anstalt and other Viennese banks in May 1931 followed upon
disclosure of the Credit Anstalt's insolvency and a government financial cescue

21

package. The run degenerated into a speculative attack on the fixed price of
gold of the Austrian Schilling.

The U.S. record over the same period is less favorable. In particular,
the Fed has never lent at a penalty rate.

By contrast to events before 1970, when LLR action if unsuccessful erred
on the side of deficiency, in the past two decades it has erred on the side of
excess.

In the U.S. the monetary authorities (FDIC and the Fed), on three

notable occasions, have provided liberal assistance to major insolvent banks:
Franklin National in 1974, First Pennsylvania in 1980, and Continental Illinois

in 1984. In each case the authorities guaranteed both insured and uninsured
deposits. Moreover they advanced loans at subsidized rates (Garcia and Plautz,

Apparently the Federal Reserve has switched to a policy of bailout

1988).

reflecting a concern over the potential effects on the financial system and on
the reputation of the authorities of allowing a major bank to fail.

The Bank of England followed similar policies in the 1974 Fringe Bank
rescue and the 1984 Johnson Matthey affair.

In 1985, the Bank of Canada

arranged for the purchase by the major chartered banks of the assets of two
small insolvent Alberta banks and compensation in full of all depositors.

By contrast to the Anglo-Saxon experience, the German Bundesbank allowed

the Herstatt bank to be liquidated in 1974 but provided LLR assistance to the
market.

Thus, although the classical doctrine has been long understood and
successfully applied, the recent experience of a number of major countries
suggests its basic message is no longer adhered to.

22

V. Conclusion: Some Lessons from History
We can draw a number of conclusions from the historical record.

First, banking panics are rare events. They occurred more often in the
U.S. than in other countries. They usually occurred during serious recessions
associated with declines in the money supply and sharp price level reversals.

The likelihood of their occurrence is greatly diminished in diversified
nationwide branch banking system.
Second, panics have been prevented on numerous occasions by successful LL.R

actions. When they were not, either the requisite institutions did not exist
or, if they did, the authorities did not understand the proper actions to take.
Most countries developed an effective LLR mechanism by the last one third of the

nineteenth century. The US, was a principal exception.
Third, some public authority must provide the lender of last resort. The
incidence of periodic major international financial crises in 1837, 1857, 1873,
1890-93, 1907, 1914, 1930-33 suggests that in such episodes aggregate shocks can

set in train a series of events leading to a nationwide scramble for high'
powered money. Such a demand can only he satisfied by the ultimate provider of
high-powered money.

Fourth, such an authority does not have to be a central bank.

This is

evident from the experience of Canada and other countries including the Aldrich

Vreeland Act in 1914 in the US.
Fifth, the advent of FDIC in 1934 solved the problem of banking panics

the U.S., but absence of government deposit insurance before the 1960's

in

and

1970's in other countries suggests that it is not required to prevent banking
panics since they were panic free.

23

Sixth, and finally, assistance to insolvent banks (bailouts) were the
exception rather than the rule until the 1970's.17 The monetary authorities in

earlier times erred on the side of deficiency rather than excess. Coodhart's

bailout view is certainly not a description of past practice.

The recent

experience with bailouts flies in the face of the classical prescription.

The

prescription for excessive risk taking fostered by liberal assistance to
insolvent banks, combined with deposit insurance which is not priced according
to risk, creates the conditions for an even greater bailout in the future.

24

FOOTNOTES

*For helpful comments on an earlier draft I would like to thank George
Paulino Texeira provided valuable
Benston, Allan Meltzer and Anna Schwartz.
research assistance.
'In theory private deposit insurance could also be used. In practice, to
succeed in the U.S. such arrangements would require the private authority to
have the power which the FDIC currently has to monitor, supervise and declare
insolvent its members. Also the capacity of the private insurance industry is
too limited to underwrite the stock of government insured deposits. (Benston et
al 1986, ch. 3). Alternatives to deposit insurance include requiring banks to
hold safe assets (treasury bills), charging fees for service and one hundred
percent reserves.

2Bank of England notes served as currency and reserves for the London
banks. Country banks issued bank notes but kept correspondent balances in the
London banks. From 1797 to 1821 Bank of England notes were inconvertible into
gold.

3Bagehot distinguished between actions to follow in the face of an
external drain -- a decline in the Bank's gold reserve induced by a balance of
payment deficit - - raise Bank rate; and the action to follow when threatened by
an internal drain - - lend freely.
4Bagehot has been criticized for not clearly stating when the Central bank

should intervene (Rockoff, 1986), for not giving specific guidelines to
distinguish between sound and unsound banks (Humphrey, 1975), and for not
realizing that provision of the LLR facility to individual banks would encourage
them to take greater risks than otherwise (Hirsch, 1977).

(2)
(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)
(7)

(8)

5According to Humphrey, the Classical position can be stated as:
"S.. The lender of last resort's responsibility is to the entire financial
system and not to specific institutions.
The lender of last resort exists not to prevent the occurrence
but rather to neutralize the impact of financial shocks.
The lender's duty is a two fold one consisting first, of lending
without stint during actual panics and second, of acknowledging
beforehand its duty to lend freely in all future panics.
The lender should be willing to advance indiscriminately to any
and all sound borrowing on all sound assets no matter what the type.
In no case should the central bank accommodate unsound borrowers.
The lender's duty lay in preventing panics from spreading to the
sound institutions, and not in rescuing unsound ones.
All accommodations would occur at a penalty rate, i.e., the central bank
should rely on price rather than non price mechanisms to ration use of its
last resort lending facility.
The overriding objective of the lender of last resort was to prevent panic
induced declines in the money stock. .
(Humphrey, 1975 p.9)

25

"1.
2.

6Meltzer (1986) succinctly restates Bagehot's four principles.
The central bank is the only lender of last resort in a monetary system
such as ours.
To prevent illiquid banks from closing, the central bank should lend on
any collateral that is marketable in the ordinary course of business when
there is a panic

3.

Central bank loans, or advances, should be made in large amounts, on

4.

demand, at a rate of interest above the market rate.
The above three principles of central bank behavior should be stated in
advance and followed in a crisis" (Meltzer, 1986. p. 83)"

7Friedxnan (1960) earlier argued against the use of the discount window as
an unnecessary form of discretion which "involves special government assistance
to a particular group of financial institutions" (p. 38). Also see Hirsch (1977)
and Goodhart (1988) for the case that Bagehot's rule was really designed for a
closely knit/cartelized banking system such as the London clearing banks.

8Cagan (1988) in his comment on Goodfriend and King makes the case for
retention of discount window lending in the case of 'a flight to quality'. In
that case OWL can be used to provide support to particular sectors of the economy
which have temporarily had banking services curtailed.
9According to the law of reflux, free banks issuing notes on the basis of
real bills can never overissue because the loans backing the notes would be self-

liquidating. See White (1984)
10However a restriction of convertibility itself could exacerbate a panic
because the public, in anticipating it, demands currency sooner.

"Selgin (1988) argues that the Bank Charter Act of 1844 exacerbated the
problem of panics because it imposed tight constraints on the issue of bank notes

However the Banking department surely could have
by the Issue department.
discounted commercial paper from correspondent banks without requiring further
note issue. That is one of Bagehot's main points in Lombard Street.
'2selgin (1988) based on evidence by Rolnick and Weber (1986) argues that
the episodes designated as panics in the ante-bellum Free Banking era are not
comparable to these in the National Banking era because they did not involve
contagion effects. Evidence to the contrary however is presented by Hasan and
Dwyer (1988).
'3For similar evidence for the remaining cyclical downturns in this period
see Bordo (1986, Table 6 lA).

'4Holding constant the influence of the other two proximate determinants
of the money supply: the deposit reserve ratio and the stock of high powered
It is calculated using the formula developed in Friedman and Schwartz
money.
(1963), Appendix B.

'5Sweden from 1930 to 1902 had a system of competitive note issue and
unlimited liability. According to Jonung (1985), there is evidence neither of
overissue nor of bank runs.

26

'6Switzerland also had a successful experience with free banks 1826-1850
(Weber, 1988) but like Scotland she depended on the Bank of France as lender of
last resort (Goodhart, 1985).
'7Although in the U.S. the policy of purchase and assumption carried out
by the FDIC and FSLIC before that date incorporated elements of a public subsidy.

27
REFERENCES

Bagehot, W. (1873). Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market. London,

H.S.

King.

Benston, G. J. (1983). "Deposit Insurance and Bank Failures,"
Bank of Atlanta, Economic Review (March). pp. 4-17.

Federal Reserve

Benston, C. J. et al (1986). Persoectives on Safe and Sound Banking:
Present, and Future. Cambridge. MIT Press.

Past,

Some Lessons for Today'
Bordo, M. D. (1981). "The Classical Gold Standard:
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 63, May 1981.
"Financial Crises, Banking Crises, Stock Market Crashes
Bordo, M. D. (1986).
and the Money Supply: Some International Evidence, 1870-1933" in F. Capie
and C. E. Wood (eds) Financial Crises and the World Banking System London.
MacMillan.
Bordo, M. D. and A. Redish (1987). "Why Did the Bank of Canada Emerge in 1935?"
Journal, of Economic History, Vol. XLVII, No. 2. (June) pp. 401-417.

Cagan, P. (1965). Determinants and Effects of Changes in the Stock of Money,
1875-1960. New York. Columbia University Press.

"Commentary" in W. S. Haraf and R. M. Kushmeider, (eds)
Cagan, P. (1988).
Restructuring Banking and Financial Services in America. Washington D.C.
American Enterprise Institute.
Calomiris, C. (1989). "Deposit Insurance: Lessons from the Record." Economic
Persoectives. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, May-June.

Cowen, T. and R. Kroszner (1989). "Scottish Banking Before 1845: A Model for
Laissez-Faire." Journal of Money. Credit and Banking, Vol. 21, No. 2.
Dowd, K. (1988). Private Money: The Path to Monetary Stability. Institute of
Economic Affairs Hobart Paver 112. London.

Friedman, M. (1960).

A Program for Monetary Stability New York. Fordham

University Press.

Friedman, M. and A. J. Schwartz (1963). A Monetary History of the United
States. Princeton. Princeton University Press.
Garcia, C. and E. Plautz (1988). The Federal Reserve: Lender of l,.ast Resort.
Cambridge. Ballinger Publishing Company.

Coodfriend, H. (1989). "Money, Credit, Banking, and Payments System Policy,"
in D. B. Humphrey (ed). The U.S. Payments System: Efficiency. Risk and
the Role of the Federal Reserve. Boston. Kluwer Academic Publishers.

28

Goodfriend, M. and R. A. King, (1988). "Financial Deregulation, Monetary Policy,

and Central Banking" in W. S. Haraf and R. M. Kushmeider (eds).
Restructuring Bankinz and Financial Services in America. Washington D.C.
American Enterprise Institute.

Goodhart, C. A. E. (1985). The Evolution of Central Banks. London School of
Economics.

Coodhart, C. A. E. (1987).
39. 75-89.
Papers.

'Why Do Banks Need a Central Bank?" Oxford Economic

'Clearing houses and the Origins of Central Banking in the
Corton, C. (1984).
U.S." Journal of Economic History, XLV, 277-284.
"The Joint Production of Confidence:
Corton, G. and D. J. Mullineaux (1987).
Endogenous Regulation and 19th Century Commercial Bank Clearinghouses."
Journal of Money. Credit and Bankinz, 19(4) November. 457-68.

Jr. (1988). "Contagious Bank Runs in the Free Banking
Period." (mimeo). Cliometrics Conference, Oxford Ohio.

Hasan, I. and C. P. Dwyer,

Hirsch, F. (1977). "The Bagehot Problem." Manchester School of Economics and
Social Studies. Vol. 45, No. 3. (September). pp. 241-257.
"The Classical Concept of the Lender of Last Resort."
Humphrey, T. (1975).
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review. Vol 61, (Jan. - Feb.)
pp. 2-9.
Jonung, L. (1985). "The Economics of Private Money: the Experience
Notes in Sweden, 1831-1902" (cnimeo) Lund University.
Kaufman, C. C. (1988). "The Truth about Bank Runs"
(eds). The Financial Services Revolution.
Publishers.

of Private

inC. England and T. Huertas
Boston.

Kindleberger, C. (1978). Manias. Panics and Crashes. London.

Kluwer Academic

MacMillan.

in C. C.
"Financial Failures and Financial Policies."
Meltzer, A. (1986).
Kaufman and R. C. Kormnendi. eds. Dereulatinz Financial Services: Public
Policy in Flux. Cambridge. Ballinger Publishing Company.

International Financial Transactions and Business
Morgernstern, 0. (1959).
Cycles. Princeton. Princeton University Press.
Rockoff, H. (1986). "Walter Bagehot and the Theory of Central Banking" in F.
Capie and C. E. Wood (eds) Financial Crises and the World BankinE System.
London. MacMillan.
Rolnick A. and Weber. W. (1985). "Inherent Instability in Banking:
Banking Experience." Cato Journal: May.

The Free

29

"The Creditanstdt Crisis of 1931 -- A Financial Crisis
Schubert, A. (1987).
Revisited." Journal of Economic History. Vol. XLVII, No. 2 (June).

Schwartz, A. J. (1988). "Financial Stability and the Federal Safety Act" in W.
S. Haraf and R. M. Kushmeider (eds) Restructuring Bankth2 and Financial
Services in America. Washington D. C. American Enterprise Institute.
"Real and Pseudo -- Financial Crises" in F. Capie and
Schwartz, A. J. (1986).
C. E. Wood (eds) Financial Crises and the World Bankinz System. London,
MacMillan.

Selgin, G. A. (1988).

The Theory of Free Bankin:

Money Sup1y Under

Competitive Note Issue. Totowa. N. J., Rowman and Littlefield.
"On the Lender of Last Resort" in C. P. Kindleberger and
Solow, R. H. (1982).
Financial Crises: Theory. History and Policy.
J. P. Laffargue (eds).
Cambridge. Cambridge University Press.
Thornton, H. (1802). An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit
of Great Britain. Edited by F. A. Hayek. Fairfield Augustus H. Kelley.
Timberlake, R. ,

Jr.

(1984).

"The Central Banking Role of Clearing House

Associations." Journal of Money. Credit and Bankinz, XVI, 1-15.
Timberlake, R. ,

Jr.

(1978). The Orjins of Central. Bankinz in the United States.

Cambridge. Harvard University Press.
Weber, E. J. (1988). "Currency Competition in Switzerland, 1826-1850." Kyklos,
Vol. 41.4 Fasc. 3, pp. 459-478.
White, E. N. (1981). "State Sponsored Insurance of Bank Deposits in the United
States, 1907-20." Journal. of Economic History, Vol. XIII, No. 1. (March),
pp. 33-42.

White, L. H. (1984). Free Banking in Britain: Theory, Experience, and Debate
1800-1945. Cambridge. Cambridge University Press.

30

Banking Panics:

Reference Cycle
(peak to trough)

Peak

1873

from
Absolute
Difference
Deviations
Trend of Average
of Average Annual
Race of Price Level
Annual Real
Change (trough to
Output Crowth
(peak to trough) peak minus peak In
trough)

1879

Deviations
from
Trend of Average
Annual Monetary

Qrowthb
(Specific cycle
peak to trough)

Percentage Change
in N due to
Change in Deposit
Currency Ratio
(specific cycle
peak to trough).

Banking
CrisisC

Banking
Panted

Resolution

Agency

Percent

Trough

(1)

Table 1
factors related to, the incidence of, and their resolution:
United States 1870 - 1933

(2)

(3)

0.5

-7.1

(4)

(5)

-4.1

2.7

1882

1885

-3.2

-12.2

2.6

5.2

1893

1894

-9.5

-9.0

-9.3

-4.3

1907

1908

-14.7

-6.1

(6)

(7)

8/13

5/84

1/93

(8)

Restriction
ot Payments

10/07

-2.1

Clear

i

n5

Houses!
Treasury

Successful
LLR

Clearing
Houses/

Restriction

Clearing
Houses/
Treasury

of Payments

-1.7

(9)

Restriction

Clearing

of Payments

ftouses/
Treasury

1920

192].

1929

1932

-7.6

-56.7

-2.5

2.8

-16.7

-12.5

-11.7

.27.4

1930.
1931,

1933

Unsuccessful

LU

Federal
Reserve

1932

Data sources:
Notes:

a)
b)
c)

For all columns except (3) see Data Appendix in Bordo (1986),

for column (3) see Data Appendia in Bordo (1981)

1961.
It WaS calculated
as the difference between the
the trend growth rate in real output was 3,22 percent over the period 1810
natural logs of real output between initial and terminal year divided by the number ut years.
It was calculate,1 as in a) above
the trend monetary growth rate was 5.60 percent over the period 1870 - 1941.
runs and/or failures. Source Bordo (1986).
Banking crisis

31

Banking

Reference Cycle
(peak to trough)

Peak

Panics:

Absolute Difference
Deviations from
Trend of Average of Average Annual
Annual Real
Rate of Price LeveL
Change (trough to
Output Growth
to
(peak to trough) peak inus peak
trough)

Deviations froa
Trend of Average
Annual Monetary
Crowthb
(Specific cycle
peak to trough)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

1879

0.9

.7.1

-3.1

5.2

1883

1886

-1.2

-5.4

-2.8

2.3

1890

1894

-0.2

-4,4

-2.5

-2.2

1907

1908

-4.7

-13.6

-1.6

-1.0

1920

1921

-6.9

-68.0

1929

1932

-3.7

-7.9

Notes:

a)
b)
c)
d)

their resolution:

Percentage Change
in H due to
Change In Deposit
Currency Ratio
(specific cycle
peak to trough).

1873

Data sources:

arid

Banking
Panicd

Resolution

crisis'

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Successful

Bank of
England

banking

Percent

Trough
(1)

Table 2
factors related to, the incidence of,
Crest britain 1870 - 1933

Same as in Table

becinb
Crisis
11/90

Agency

4.5
-4.3

-1.3

1.

- 1939 was 1.48
it was calculated
as described
percent.
the trend growth rate in real output over the period 1870
- 1939 was 2.71.
It was calculated as described in a) above.
the trend monetary growth rate over the period 1870
Same cc in Table 1.
Same as in Table 1.

in Table

1.

