                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     MARKET WORK, WAGES, AND MEN'S HEALTH




                                Robert Haveman

                                  Mark Stone

                                Barbara Wolfe




                            Working Paper No. 3020




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   June 1989




John Bascom Professor of Economics and Director of the Robert M. LaFollette
Institute of Public Affairs; Graduate Student of Economics; and Professor of
Preventive Medicine and Economics, respectively, University of Wisconsin-
Madison.  Professors Haveman and Wolfe are Research Affiliates of the Institute
for Research on Poverty and acknowledge the partial financial support of the
Assistant Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services for Planning
and Evaluation through a grant to the Institute.   We thank participants at a
workshop of the Institute of Research on Poverty and a session of the Health
Economics Research Organization at the Allied Social Science Meetings, 1988,
for their helpful comments.  This paper is part of NER's research program in
Health Economics and Labor Studies.   Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                      NBER Working Paper #3020
                                      June 1989


                    MARKET WORK, WAGES, AND MEN'S HEALTH


                                   ABSTRPI

     In   this paper, we investigate the complex interrelationships

among worktime, wages and health identified in the Grossman model

of the demand for health.       We specify a 3-equation simultaneous

model designed to capture the tune dependent character of              these
interrelationships, and estimate the model using 8 years of panel

data on 882 males aged 22 to 71.       The model is estimated using

Hansen's generalized methods of moments imposing a weak set of

conditions on the error tenn covariance structure.          Using our

data, we estimate simpler models with more restrictive
assumptions commonly found in the literature, and find
substantial differences between these estimates and those              from

the simultaneous model.        For example, the positive relationship

between worktimne and health found in other studies disappears

when the relevant simultaneities are accounted for.              Our

simultaneous estimates also suggest that worktime spent in
environmentally adverse conditions are inversely related to

health status, while job related physical exercise retards health

deterioration.


     Robert Haveman
     Mark Stone
     Barbara Wolfe
     University of Wisconsin
     Department of Economics
     7432 Social Science
     Madison, WI 53706
I.   INTRODUCTION


     The past two decades have witnessed important and puzzling changes

in the reported health status of males.   While age adjusted mortality

rates have fallen, self-reports of poor health and disability have

increased.

     Numerous speculations, drawn from various disciplines, have sought

to explain the determinants of health status and changes in it.      In the

economics literature, the limited empirical analysis derives from the

theoretical work of Grossman (1972a; 1972b), and focuses on the

relationships among wages, worktime, and health.   In this model, health

is viewed as an endogenously determined capital stock, and changes in it

as depending on: 1) the exogenous effects of health depreciation related

to age (and intensity of use of health stock, see Muuririen 1982), 2)

individual investments in health improvement (e.g.. preventive medical

care), and 3) individual decisions regarding time allocations (e.g.,

worktime, leisure, exercise).   The benefits of health capital are
                                       2


increased time available for productive activities and direct increases

in utility from less pain and suffering.     Work to date has analyzed each

of these gains independent from its alternative.     The investment or

productive benefit has received the most attention.

    Wages play an important role in the investment version of the

Grossman model.   Higher wages lead to a proportional increase in the

marginal return to health, and at the same time increase the cost of

ow-ri-time health investments.   However, because the production of health

involves both time and market work, the marginal return to health

investments rises with wages, as does the optimal quantity of health.1

Simultaneously, better health increases the time available for work and,

hence, labor supply.

    While worktime is dependent on both wages and health, it may have

its ow-ri effect on these variables.   Worktime beyond the norm may carry

with it stress factors that increase the health deterioration factor.

Particular conditions at the workplace, such as a hazardous work

erivirorunent, may also influence health deterioration.   Conversely,

regular attachment to the work place and the psychological support that

it provides are often viewed as retarding health deterioration.

Worktime, likewise, embodies experience and on-the-job training, and is

associated with higher wages.

    In this paper, we attempt to advance understanding of the structure

of the complex interrelationships between economic phenomena- -worktime

and wages- -and health.   While we build on extant empirical work on this

issue, we carry the analysis forward in a number of dimensions.     First,

we specify a 3-equation simultaneous model, designed to capture the
                                      3


interrelationships among these phenomena.       Second, we estimate this

model using individual longitudinal micro-data on 882 men observed for 8

consecutive years, yielding over 7000 observations.      Third, utilizing

the longitudinal nature of the data, we are able to capture the time

dependent character of the relationships among the variables.       Finally,

we estimate the model using Hansen's generalized method of moments

technique, hence imposing a weak set of conditions on the error term

structure of the system and allowing simultaneous estimation of the

three structural equations.

     Section 2. of the paper briefly reviews previous attempts to

measure the relationships among economic variables and health,

emphasizing the shortcomings of these studies.      Section 3. presents our

model, and describes the estimation technique that we employ.      In

section 4., our data and the variables used in the estimation are

described.   The results of our estimation are presented and interpreted

in section 5.   Because of the complexity of the relationships among the

three variables of interest, we indicate the differences in results

between our simultaneous model and alternative research studies which

fail to capture the full interdependence and impose unrealistic

restrictions on the estimation.    This is done in section 6.    Finally,

section 7. concludes.



2.   WORK, WAGES AND HEALTH:   A BPIEF REVIEW


     Following the 1972 study by Grossman, several investigators have

attempted to measure the interdependent relationships at issue.         Luft
                                    4


(1972), Grossman and Benham (1974), and Bartel and Taubman (1979) all

focussed on the relationship of labor force participation and health.

This work suggests that poor health in period t-l reduces both labor

supply and wages in period t, with larger effects found if health in

t-l, which is self-reported, is treated as endogenous.     These findings

indicate the need to distinguish carefully the effect of prior health on

work time and wages and the independent effect of worktime, wages, and

health in an earlier period on health in a later period.     The Grossman-

Benham paper, in particular, emphasized the need for a model which views

'observed wage rates, hours of work and health [as reflecting] a set of

interrelated decisions made by the household."

    A few studies have analyzed the determinants of health, focussing

on the role of education.   Taubman and Rosen (1982) modeled changes in

the subjectively-reported health of white men, exploiting the

longitudinal nature of the Retirement History Survey.     Education was

found to be positively related to health, and was robust, even when a

variety of other variables expected to be related to health are

controlled for.   While this result is consistent with the indication in

Auster, Leveson and Sarachek (1969) and Kemna (1987) that schooling has

an important impact on health, even after controlling for income, and

occupation (Kemna), it is likely to be partly attributable to the

absence of a full simultaneous equations estimation framework accounting

for the interdependence of work, wages, and health.     Both Grossman

(1976) and Lee (1982) have shown that when health and wages are

estimated simultaneously, the independent impact of education on health

is substantially reduced.
                                        S


    Lee (1982) and Wagstaff (1986) have pursued the worktime-.wages-

health interaction most extensively in the context of the theoretical

framework of health capital developed by Grossman.      The former of these

studies estimated the simultaneous effects of health and wages in a

structural equations framework, and accounted for the unobservable

nature of health capital and the discrete nature of health indicators.

Using a sample of older male workers, Lee concluded that wages and

health capital are strongly jointly dependent- -that wages exert a

positive and significant influence on the demand for health, and that

good health increases wages.      In both cases, the relationships are

significant.

    Wagstaff emphasizes the different implications of both the

investment and consumption variants of Grossman's model.      In Wagstaff's

estimations, wages are not part of a simultaneous model, but are

estimated using an auxiliary equation.      Ill-health is found to

negatively influence wages. In both the investment and the consumption

structural models, health is treated as an unobservable; wages are found

to have a positive association with health, while job characteristics

(e.g., temperature, mentally and physically demanding work) have

negative associations with health, except (surprisingly) for hazardous

              2
substances

    These studies, then, have established preliminary estimates of some

of the relevant relationships implicit in the Grossman model of health

as capital.       They have also emphasized the interdependence of decisions

regarding health capital and those pertaining to a variety of other

economic choices, especially work effort and individual productivity
                                        6



(wages).   However, this work is limited in a number of dimensions:        in

but few cases are the multi-equation systems estimated simultaneously;

when simultaneous estimation has been attempted, severe restrictions

have had to be placed on the functional form and the related structure

of error terms (in the face of a complicated joint covariance matrix

related to unobservable components of the process), and in no case has a

full simultaneous equation estimation been adopted for the work, wages,

health interaction.       The few analyaes based on longitudinal data have

used panels of short time duration, and of a limited age span.       Our

research reported below extends this previous work.       While our estimates

are based on a simultaneous model, reflect the imposition of a weak set

of conditions on the system's error term structure, and exploit

longitudinal data, they continue to be limited by the relatively

imprecise and self-reported measure of health and potential problems of

selectivity.



3.   A SIMULTANEOUS MODEL OF WORK. WAGES AND HEALTH


     To capture the interdependent relationship of work, wages and

health, we posit the following 3-equation structural model, utilizing

time-indexed individual panel data:


     (1)   H1 =       +         + P2PHI + P3OHI +


                                    + a3PW. + a4OW +
               = a0 + a1Hft1 + a2W1

           w1 =       +           +         +        + vit
                                          7



      H — health

      W — hours worked
         — wages

       PH,PW,Pw — personal characteisjj5 that determine health,

 worked and wages

       O}i,OW —      occupational charctrisjjcs that determine health

tours worked

        e ,u,V   —          terms cpiurjng measurement error of the
                     disturbance

-ident -variables and omitted variabT:L5
Several aspects of this model pre iude applicatior-t of commonly-used
ometric techniques. Since we are lterested in estimating the
ficiettts of all three equation, 1struental least squares, or
.ted information        maxilflUfll   likelihood    cannot be used.     Assuming that

model    is fully specified thre-sage least squares (3SLS) or full
Drmatton maximum likelihood (FIML)                 estimation could be appropriate.
ever, 3SLS estimation entails              that e,u,    and v are homoscedastic    and

autocorre1ated, while joint nornIality and knowledge of the structure
the system disturbance term co'v'ariance matrix (which is of dimension
  are required for
                   efficient FIML estimates Moreover, most
)
nultatLeous equatiofl techniques, sUch as 3SLS, entaiL construction of
  strtictural equation parameters from reduced-form estimates.
  The generalized method of moments estimation (CMM) developed by
tsen (1982) allows direct estimation of the structural equations,
    le imposing a weak set of conditions on the COvariance matrix of
    em error terms. CMM estimation rests on the assumption that a set
     nstrUxnents orthogonal to the disturbance terms of each equation are
                                                8



available.   These   0jhog0Tl city       conditions     are used to identify
structura). parameters arid               consistent estimates under an
stationary 0nspheri1                       structure. While knowledge          of

true covariance structure WOt'l yield more efficient estimates, o
complicated               paCel data model, the large sample size
the availability of appr0P instruments suggests that the les.
restriet1 GM assUmPtions re preferred.
     The economlet.c techn-a' Lt5d in other empirical analyses                 0:

                        ne-15   [         OLS, LISREL, ao.d
                                                    multiple equati
maximwfl likelihood used by Cir1I<os and Nescel (1985), Wagstaff (1
and Lee (1982), respectuhlelYJ ar based on the assumption that the
terms have a known _usuallY c,xnocedastic -covariance structure.
argue that the assulflPtl.0t   ctflfllofl disturbance term variance fo:

individuals may riot be apPr0P          For example, older iridividuaU
likely to exhibtt a high h.l.th variance, and the              second moment    c


important omitted variab5        as productivity or 'constitution"
differ between subjects. In thesC cases, OLS estimates of coeffici
standard errors will be    inc0
4.   DATA AND ESTIMATION


       data that we use are al:iriua.l observations from 1976-1983 on
     The

males with a history of signufit labor force attachment from the
Michigan Panel Study on income      Dynamics.       The sample includes males
were heads of househo1d from 19741983, who were at least 21 years               o

age in 1976, and who worked an average of 450 hours per year or more
                                        9

 from 1976 to 1983.    The variables used in the study and relevant summary

 statistics on each are found in Appendix A. The age range of men in the

 sample is 22 to 71; the range of annual hours worked is 0 Co 5496.

     The variable used to measure individual health is a self-reported

 measure based on two survey questions:       "Do you have a physical or

 nervous condition that limits the type of work or the amount of work you

 can do?"   Then if the respondent answers yes, he is asked:
                                                                   "Does it
 [the condition} limit your work a lot, somewhat, or just a little."
                                                                              As

 the responses range from 0 (no condition) to 3 (condition limits "a

 lot"), the health variable reflects the intensity of health limitations.

We note that the loss of estimator efficiency resulting from the

categorical health measure is at least partially offset by the panel

nature of the data set, and by the large sample size. It is assumed that

this indicator is an objective measure of health capital, and hence is
                                                                       a

determinant of economic productivity.       Although self-reported responses

have been asserted to reflect ambition or labor market success, the

literature suggests that such measures are reliable indicators of health

capital [see Kemna (1987); Leigh (1983); Grossman (1972); and Taubman

and Rosen (1982)1.

    The specification of the three equations in our simultaneous

system- -the health equation, the worktime equation, and the wage

equation--is as follows:


HEALTH STATUS = p0 +         WORKTIME + fl2SELF-EMPLOYED +
                     fi3DIVORCED OR SEPARATED + fi4AGE +

                     P5STRENGTH REQUIRED ON JOB +        fl6JOB   HAZARDS +
                     fi7EDUCATION +
                                     10

WORKTIME =        + 21WAGES + cZ2LAGGED HEALTH STATUS + a3SELF

               EMPLOYED + a4NIThIEER OF CHILDREN IN FAMILY +

                                                               +
WAGES =       + Ir1LAGGED WORKTIME + ,r2LAGGED HEALTH

            ir3EDUCATION +

                                    variable anong      the right hand side
    Worktime is the only endogenous
                                                Self-employed status and
varIables   in the HEALTH STATUS equation.3
                                   marital status are included to reflect
change to divorced or separated
                                                            The strength and
stress on the job and in personal life, respectively.
                             workplace conditions expected to affect
hazards variables reflect
                                                              Both are
health, the first positively and the second negatively.
                                                           effect of job
weighted by the nonths worked on the current job since the
                                                         of exposure.4
 characteristics on health is likely to vary with length
                                                  emphasized by Grossman,
 Age reflects the health depreciation function so
                                            efficiency with which
 and education is taken as a measure of the

 individuals combine market goods and time to produce health.
                                                          status
     The WOHXTIME equation includes both wages and health
                                              The health variable is lagged by
 (lagged) as right-hand side variables.
                                               supply on prior health.
 one period to reflect the dependence of labor
                                                                     work
 Self-employed status is commonly associated with freely determined
                                                     The number of children in
 hours, and often hours in excess of the norm.
                                                    is expected to be
 the family is a proxy for income needs and, hence,

 positively associated with worktime.
                                                          worktime and,
     WAGES are taken to depend on prior health and lagged

  consistent with the human capital model, schooling.
                                          11

         SectiOn 2 above
                           discussed some of the large number
                                                              of variables
    that were found to be significant'
                                         determinants of health by previous
   studies--almost all of which are based
                                          on single-equation models.
                                                                           Our
   approach estimates a comparatively large
                                            number of parameters,
   controlling for the
                       simultaneous interaction of the three
                                                              endogenous
   variables, dictating that the impact
                                         of only the
                                                     most important of these
   variables on health will be identified.
                                             Hence, the relatively
   parsimonious specification of our health
                                               equation compared to that of
  other studies is a consequence of the
                                            simultaneous equation framework.
       The PSID data set includes several
                                             variables which covary with the
   explanatory variables and, because in
                                            many cases they are determined
   prior to the sample
                        interval, are not likely to be
                                                          correlated with the
   model disturbances.
                         Consequently estimation will be enhanced
                                                                     by the set
   of available
                measures which meet the
                                          criteria for CNN instruments.
                                                                           The
  education of the head's mother is used
                                            as an instrument for all three
  equations. The health equation
                                    estimates are also
                                                         identified by the
  wife's age, a dummy
                       variable which equals 1 if the head's
                                                                parents were
 poor, the age of the
                        youngest child, dummy
                                                variables for residence in
 the northeast, north central, and
                                      south regions, a dummy variable which
 equals I if the head is married,
                                    and the squares of wife's
                                                                 age, wife's
 education, and father's age.
                                 Instruments for the worktinie equation
 include the level and square of
                                   father's education, the poor parent
dummy variable, the age and
                              age squared of the
                                                   youngest child, the
square of the head's
                       mother's education and the county
                                                            unemployment rate
squared. Wife's age, her
                            education, dummy variables
                                                         for residence in
                                      12

                                                     unemployment rate are
                                    and the county
the northeast and south regions,
                       for the wage equation.
used as instruments



5.   ESTIMATION RESULTS

                                                   estimation of the
                                  for simultaneous
    We have emphasized the need
                                                                       our
                                  The first column of Table 1 presents
health-worktinie-wages process.
                           three-equation model,
                                                 jointly estimated by the
baseline results for the

                      technique.
 method of moments
                                                                      by the
                                            equation. As predicted
      Consider first the health status
                                                     deterioration process, is
                          a  proxy for the natural
 Grossman model, age,
                                         limitations, and the relationship is
                            with health
 associated positively
                                                  separation or a divorce is
                  The  occurrence   of a marital
 significant.
                                         related to health limitations.
  also positively and significantly
                                                                              The
                                        better health, is not significant.
  Education, while    associated   with
                                                                  are of special
                           market work and its characteristics
  variables related to
                                                                 associated with
                                worktime does not appear to be
  interest.   The   amount   of
                                                   however, is associated with
                            Being self-employed,
  health limitations.
                                          of 1.49.   The nature of the work done
   good health and has a t-statistic
                                     working on a job designated as having
   does matter.    The time spent
                                                                  with health
                                       significantly associated
                 characteristics is
   "hazardous'
                                                         strength (and proxying
                          the time on a job ràquiring
   limitations, while
                                                                               with
                                                     associated significantly
                   exercise while on the job) is
    for physical

     good health.
                                            in the worktinie
                                                               equation are
         All of the independent variables
                                      signs.     Health limitations in prior
     significant and of the predicted
                                         13

   periods are negatively
                             associated with worktime, as expected.
                                                                  Also as
   expected, the economic variables of wage and
                                                self-employed status are
  positively associated with worktime, as is the
                                                 number of children in the
  family unit.

       In the wage equation, both the log of
                                             education and the number of
  hours worked in previous periods are positively
                                                  associated with wages.
  The presence of health limitations in prior periods
                                                      is negatively
  associated with wages and has a t-statistic of
                                                 1.64.
      In terms of the
                        health-worktime-wages relationships,    then, we
  conclude that:   1) worktime per se is not a significant
                                                               contributor to
  the health deterioration
                             function as defined by Grossman, but 2)

 continued exposure to job characteristics such
                                                as hazards and strength
 do contribute to observed health status, 3) prior
                                                   health limitations
 negatively affect worktime, while wages have
                                              a positive effect, 4) prior
 health limitations have a negative and significant
                                                    effect on wages, 5)
 prior worktime is a significant determinant of
                                                wages, and 6) while
 education contributes positively to wages, and
                                                hence worktime, its
 direct contribution to health, though positive,
                                                 is not significant.
     The consequences of not controlling for the
                                                 joint determination of
health, worktime and wages can be seen by comparing
                                                     the results in
column 1 with those in column 2.
                                   The estimates in column 2 are for the
same three-equation model, but estimated in single
                                                   equation form, using
a "just identified"
                    specification and generalized method of moments

estimation procedures.5   These coefficient estimates are identical
                                                                    to
OLS estimates, but the GMM   standard errors are adjusted for the
nonspherical covariance matrix.
                                     14

                           simultaneously (column 1) changes only the
    Estimating the model
                                   variable in the health equation of
sign on the insignificant worktine
                        significance levela and the atory that the
column 2.  However, the
                                          For example, simultaneous
estimation tells change dramatically.6
                                              worktime-health causality
estimation changes the nature of the observed
                                                   suggests that worktirne is
link; assuming independence (non-simultaneity)
                           associated with better health, while the
strongly and positively
                          indicate that worktine does not significantly
simultaneous estimates
                    Endogenizing hours worked appears to obviate the
influence health.
                             link observed by other researchers.7
worktime-health causality
                                        significance, the magnitude of
     In addition to changes in sign and
                                        between the simultaneous (column
 the coefficients changes substantially
                        (column 2) estimations.   In the full model, all
 1) and single equation
                                                                 have much
                    variables (save hours worked and education)
 of the independent
                                          the single equation estimates.
 larger effects on health status than in
                                      health and being self-employed have
 In the worktime equation, lagged ill
                                         in the full model than in the
 a substantially larger estimated effect
                            Note that the lagged health status
 single equation estimate.
                             equation is larger in absolute value by a
 coefficient in the worktime
                                      framework.     The single equation
  factor of three in the simultaneous
                                                  the estimated effects of
  estimates appear to substantially bias downward

  prior health and education on wages.
                                                      positive, strong
      Finally, while the column 2 estimates suggest a
                                               between education and good
  and statistically significant relationship
                             estimates in column 1 indicate a weak and
  health, the simultaneous
                                  This change in the estimated direct
  insignificant relationship.
                                        15

  influence of education on health is consistent
                                                  with that estimated by
  both Grossman and Lee in moving from a single
                                                 equation reduced form
  estimate to a simultaneous estimate.8

      The consequences of relaxing the widely used
                                                   restrictions on the
  error term covariance matrix can be seen by
                                              comparing the column 2 t-
  statistics in parenthesis with those from simple individual
                                                               equation
  linear (OLS) regression estimates of the model,
                                                  shown in brackets.   The
  regression standard errors are somewhat different
                                                    from their GMM
  counterparts,9 especially for the wage equation,
                                                     suggesting that
  estimating the impact of health on wages using linear
                                                        regression
  techniques may lead to unduly strong conclusions regarding
                                                             the
 reliability of parameter estimates.

     Column 3 of Table 1 shows the results of
                                              a simultaneously estimated
 two-equation model of endogenously
                                       determined ill health and worktime.
 Comparison of these estimates with the three equation
                                                       results indicates
 that endogenizing wages does not alter substantially
                                                      the health equation
 results.  This suggests that while prior health appears
                                                         to be an
 important determinant of wages, wages do not appear
                                                     to be endogenous to
 the determination of health.10

     Two-equation ill health- -wage results are displayed
                                                          in column 4 of
Table 1.   They are presented primarily
                                         to permit comparison with Lee's
results.  Both the health and wage equation estimates
                                                      are little changed
(although they are quite different from the single
                                                   equation results).
    Grossman and Benham used a nonsimultaneous equation
                                                         framework to
estimate the impact of education on health.
                                             In their model this linkage
operates directly and indirectly via the impact of
                                                   education on wages
                                      16

                            because wages were found to impact ill health
and wages on ill health.
                                                effect of education on
positively, they found that the negative direct

                  partially offset by a positive indirect education-ill
 ill health was
                                                                      on
                         The direct and indirect impacts of education
health relationship.
                                         by decomposing the coefficient
 ill health in our model can be examined
                      variable in the reduced form version of the ill
 of the log-education

 health equation:


                             (1 —              a81ir3
   d(ill health)                           +                — —.207 + .016 = —.191
___________________ ___________
                                                        .




                       (1 + )                  (1 +
  d(1o of education)

                                    the direct effect of education in the
      The first ratio represents
                                                education to wage to
 health equation, while the second captures the
                                           associated with good health,
 worktime impact.
                   Education is positively

                                                significant.   Since in
 although the relationship is not statistically
                                                      has a small impact on ill
                     equation framework worktime
  our simultaneous
                                                  health tends to operate
  health, the overall effect of education on
                                              schooling-wage relationship.
  directly rather than indirectly through the
                                                                         is
                       primary impact of education on health is direct,
  Our result, that the

   consistent with that of Grossman and Benham.
                                                        GMM model
       Finally, in column S of Table 1 we show the full
                                               nonwhite observations.         In
   estimates on the sample that eliminates all
                                                nonwhites, work more hours, and
   the data, whites have better health than
                        suggesting the possibility of quite different
   have higher wages,
                                                            of estimates in column
                            While the general pattern
   interaction patterns.
                                                  exceptions are noteworthy.
   5 is similar to that in column 1, several
                                      17

                                                                     the
First, in the sample of whites only, the coefficient on education in

health equation is about 20 percent of that for the entire sample bu is

strongly statistically significant.        Second, in the   whites-only   sample,


the effect of wages on worktime is somewhat larger than when the model

was fit over the entire sample.    Third, lagged ill health is not

statistically significant in the worktime equation in contrast to he

           significance in the equation for the entire group.        Finally,
marginal
the significance of both annual hours worked and lagged ill health in

the wage equation is substantially reduced in the white-only equation.

The overall fit is improved.



6.   A COMPARISON OF SIMULTANEOUS AND CONSTRAINED ESTIMATES


     Civen the significance differences in estimated relationships

between simultaneous and constrained specifications revealed in section
                                                                 the
 5., we reexamine the results of a recent and prominent study of

health-worktirne-wages nexus, using the unrestricted covariance matrix-

 simultaneous equation framework which we prefer.

     Wagstaff (1986) estimated two empirical versions of the Crossman

 model, one for the investment model which more closely resembles the

 work here and one for the pure consumption version of that framework.

 In addition to its close resemblance to our own       estimates,   we use the

 investment model because it is directed to the role of health in

 workhours and because (as Wagstaff notes) the high degree of

 multicollinearity in the consumption estimates "prevent one from
                                                            226).1
 obtaining precise estimates of the model's parameters' (p.
                                     18

     The measure of health capital used by Wagstaff was estimated as a

 latent variable in a LISREL framework, and cross section data were

 employed.   His health capital equation was estimated using a single

 equation maximum likelihood framework.   The results from his estimation

 are shown in the first column of Table 2.12   The unobserved health

 variable employed in the Wagstaff estimate is increasing in good health.

 His results indicate that years of education is positively related to

health, a result consistent with our results and nearly all other

 estimates of the determinants of health status.   Recent education and

experience in a health care job early in ones career (a proxy for

medical education) are also positively associated with health.          Spouse

education is similarly positively associated with health status, but the

relationship is not significant.   Age is negacively related to health,

and is the most significant of the Wagstaff variables.      The number of

family members by age group are not significantly related to health.

Being married or cohabiting is positively associated with good health,

but is not significant.   Living in an urbanized area is inversely

related to health status and is significant.   Job tenure is positively

related to good health although the coefficient is small.     Of the work

conditions on the job that are significant--physical and mental demands

and temperature extremes- -all show a negative relationship with health

status.   Finally, the economic variable--log of wages--is positively

associated with good health and is significant.

    Our estimation of a health equation which is as similar to that of

Wagstaff as our data permit is shown in column 2 of Table    2.   The

parameter estimaces shown there are similar to Wagstaff's with but few
                                      19


exceptions.     (Note that while Wagstaff's health variable is increasing

in good health, ours is decreasing.)        Age, job tenure and marital status

have similar relationships in both our and Wagstaff's models, though our
                                                                While Wagstaff
marital status variable is significant while his is not.

finds essentially no effect of wage or number of family members on

health, we find a negative relationship between number of children and

good health and a positive relationship between age of youngest child

and good health; both are significant.        Our job hazards and temperature

variables, like Wagstaff's, suggest an inverse relationship to health

status, although we find that jobs that require strength contribute to

the absence of health limitations.         Finally, like Wagstaff, we find

                              significantly associated with good health.
wages to be positively and

     We conclude that our linear regression, single equation estimatea

of the Wagstaff model using our data (which are equivalent to maximum

 likelihood estimates under a normally distributed disturbance) are
                                                              The question then
 generally consistent with those reported by Wagstaff.

becomes:      "How robust are these estimated relationships to a less

 restricted set of assumptions?"

     To answer this question, we estimated our three equation,

 simultaneous 0MM model, but with Wagstaff's specification for the health
                                                                        2.13    A
 status equation.     These estimates are shown in column 3 of Table

                                                                     the
 comparison of columns 2 and 3 indicates major changes from adopting

                                     Numerous sign changes occur, and only
 less restrictive specification.
                                                                 equation
 the age of youngest child variable is significant in the health
                                               While education is negatively
 estimated in a simultaneous framework.

 related to the presence of health limitations and is strongly
                                          20

 significant (t-statistic —    11.6) in   che linear regression estimate,      it

 falls co insignificance in the simulcaneous model.        Changes of a similar

 magnitude are observed for other variables.        We conclude that failing to

 adopt a simultaneous equation framework which admits nonspherical error

 term covariance scruccures almost certainly results in biased estimates

 of the demand for health function, and substantially alcers       empirical

 conclusions regarding the health-worktime-wage nexus.



 7.   CONCLUSION


      We have addressed the question of the demand for health in the

contexc of Grossman's theoretic model.         As in his framework, worktime

and wages are viewed as interdependent with health status.         Recognizing
this interdependence, we have developed a simultaneous model with an

error term covariance structure with few rescrictions, designed        to

capture the relationships involved,        This model was estimated using a

rich data set involving 8 years of panel data on each of 882 men.

Hence, we are able to capture the time dependent nature of the

relationship among these variables.

      Our baseline model (column 1, Table 1) reveals the complexity of

these interrelationships.     While some of the relationships found in

other studies (e.g., the positive and significant relationship between

health limitations and both age and divorce or marital separation, and a

negative relationship between education and health limitations) are

verified, others (e.g., a positive and significant relationship between

worktime and health limitations) are found to be nonexistent.        Still
                                      21

other relationships (e.g. ,   between conditions on the job and health

status) are revealed for the first time in a simultaneous framework.          We

judge that the implicit demand for health function shown in Table 1      is


the only available estimate that accounts for the interrelationships

among health, worictime, and wages that are so emphasized in the Grossman

model.

    In addition to the estimated relationships    themselves, we have

demonstrated the necessity of a simultaneous estimation framework in

order to obtain reliable estimates of the relationships of interest

within the healthworktime-wages nexus.      The substantial differences in

the estimated coefficients and their significance between our

simultaneous 0MM model and its restrictive single equation counterpart

indicates the need for such estimation.     Further verification of this

proposition comes from our replication of the results of a recently

published health demand function, and our estimation of this same

function in a simultaneous model.

    The numerous sign and significance level changes associated with

the move from a restrictive to a simultaneous 0MM estimation indicates

the fragility and potential bias Lncorporated in estimates    that neglect

the mutual interdependence of health, worktirne and wages.
                                   22

                                  Notes


     11n the consumption version of the Grossman models or in a mixed

consumption-investment model, the impact of wages on health is

ambiguous.


     2wagstaff notes that "the results [indicating that the coefficients

are not reliable estimates) might stem from a failure to estimate a

system of structural demand equations for health inputs" (emphasis his,

p. 226), and "One might also question the accuracy of the structural

parameter estimates on the grounds that the error terms have not been

allowed to covary." (p.228)


     3A model that included wages in the health equation was also

estimated and their results are described below.     The overall fit of

this model is weaker than our preferred estimates.

     4The rationale for this is the so-called healthy worker effect. It

is hypothesized that workers who are ill value health more highly and so

avoid hazardous work and that those most affected by hazards leave the

job earlier than those least affected.    This argues for a non-linear

relationship between duration of exposure to work hazards and health.

Kemna estimates an increasing negative effect of hazards on health

through five years in an occupation and then a decrease, so that the

effect at 10 years is the same as the initial level (p.199).

    5The parameter estimates of each of the just-identified equations

set k (the number of parameters per equation) linear combinations of the

r (the number of orthogonality conditions) equal to zero.    Consider the
                                            23


simultaneous equation framework where r —         ri   ÷ r2 ÷ r3 and K —    ki   + k2 +


k3.     If there are more instruments for each equation than parameter

estimates, (ri >   ki   for i —   1,2,3),    then there will be r   -   k linearly

independent combinations of the orthogonality conditions which equal

zero oniyin the limit.       These overidentification restrictions imply the

sample inner products of instruments and residuals from one equation

interact with those of other equations in helping to determine all

parameter estimates and standard errors.          Under the null hypothesis that

the overidentification restrictions are true, the minimized value of the

CMM objective function (times the number of observations)               is distributed

chi-squared with r-k degrees of freedom.          The p-value for this statistic

is reported in the last row of Table I.

        61n the GMM framework, multiple-equation estimates will differ from

their    single-equation counterparts because of the non-zero sample

products of instruments from one equation with disturbances from

another.     Suppose the disturbance terms of both the health and worktime

equations include the omitted variable "constitution            implying that the

health equation worktime parameter estimate reported in column 2 of

Table 1 is inconsistent due to covariance between the explanatory

variable and error term.      Controlling for the impact of health on

worktinie addresses this source of single-equation estimation bias

resulting from cross-equation error term covariance.

        7A possible explanation of the estimated positive relationship

between worktime and health in the single equation model may be that

healthier persons work more.        In a single equation estimate, this
                                    24

relationship would lead to estimation of a positive worktime-health

relationship. The underlying structure would not be that more worktirne

leads to better health, but simply that those in better health are able

to work more than those in poorer health. Including in the estimation

the latter relationship- -which is at the heart of the investment

component of Grossman's model--requires a simultaneous model of worktirne

and health.   In such a model, the observed positive association is

obviated.


     8Lee's model, however, did not include worktime, was restricted to

men 45-59, and used cross-sectional data (for 1966).

     9The just-identified CMI'! coefficient estimates will be identical to

the linear regression estimates, but calculation of standard errors of

the former include weighting matrices that account for the nonspherical

covariance matrix.

     101n addition, in unreported estimates, wages were included in the

full model health equation.   Higher wages were associated with better

health, but the relationship was small and insignificant.   Moreover, the

standard errors of the age and workplace environment variables increased

substantially and the overall fit of model was poorer.   This result is

probably caused by a higher correlation of the instrument-residual inner

products from the health and wage equations with the inclusion of wages

in the health equation.

     11Wagstaff estimated both an investment model and a consumption

model to compare the estimates under the two specifications.   The

consumption model is not used for comparison with the model estimated in
                                     25


this paper for it includes expected lifetime hourly wage, estimated from

an auxiliary equation, and initial assets, also estimated from an

auxiliary equation, neither of which are available with our data set.

Furthermore, comparison of his two sets of results shows that including

initial assets and lifetime wage alters the estimated impact of

education from a positive association with health to an unexpected

negative association.    Wagstaff discusses the resulting problems with

multicollinearity on p. 223 of his paper--including that the iterations

in the computer program did not converge with the inclusion of initial

assets and lifetime wage.

     12Wagscaff's empirical model is based on a simultaneous equation

framework which includes demand for medical care equations.     Wagstaff

notes that his results might be altered by joint estimation of his extca

equations.     While the underlying Grossman model includes worktime and

wages, worktime is not endogenous to the Wagscaff model because

household production is homogenous of degree one, and wages are assumed

exogenous.

      13The explanatory and instrumental variables for the workhours and

wage equations are identical to those of the model reported in column 1

 of Table 1.    In addition to the 12 instruments used in the Table 1

 three-equation model, the health equation instruments used for these

 estimates include the square of the air pollution measure, and the cubes

 of wife's age, father's education, and wife's education.
                                               26

                                        References


Auster, R., I. Leveson, and D. Sarachek.                 1969.   "The Production of

    Health:     An Exploratory Study."              Journal of Human Resources.       4,


    411-36.

Bartel A. and P. Taubman.        1979.        "Health and Labor Market Success:             The

    Role of Various Diseases."            Review of Economics and Statistics.

    56, 2-8.

Chirikos, T. and Nestel, G.           1985.     "Further Evidence on the Economic

    Effects of Poor Health."           Review of Economics and Statistics.             67

    (February), 61-69.

Crocker, T.     Undated.     "Procedures Followed in Building Air Quality Data

    Set."     University of Wyoming.

Grossman M.     1972a.     The Demand for Health:          A Theoretical and Empirical

    Investigation.        New York:     Columbia University Press.

________      1972b.     "On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for

    Health."     Journal of Political Economy.              80, 223-255.

________      1976.    "The Correlation between Health and Schooling" in

    Household Production and Consumption.                ed. by N. Terleckyj.     New

    York:     Columbia University Press.             147-223.

Grossman M. and L. Zenham.        1973.       "Health, Hours and Wages" in Thg

    Economics of Health and Medical Care.                ed. by M. Penman.      New

    York:     Wiley.

Hansen, L.    1982.      "Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of

    Moments Estimators."        Econometrica.          50, 1029-1054.
                                            27


Kemna, Harrie J.M.I.        1987.    "Working Conditions and the Relationship

    between Schooling and Health."           Journal of Health Economics.       6,


    189-210.

Lee, L.F.   1982.    "Health and Wage:           A Simultaneous Equation Model with

                                             International Economic Review.          23,
    Multiple Discrete Indicators."

    199-221.

Leigh, J. Paul.     1983.     "Direct and Indirect Effects of Education on

    Health."    Social Science and Medicine.            17, 227-234.

            1975.   "The Impact of Poor Health on Earnings."             Review of
Luft, H.

    Economics and Statistics.           57, 43-57.

Muurinen, J.    1982.   'Demand for Health:           A Generalized Grossman Model.'

    Journal of Health Economics.            1, 5-28.

Taubman, P. and S. Rosen.           1982.   "Healthiness, Education and Marital

     Status" in Economic Aspects of Health.             ed. by V. Fuchs.    Chicago:


    University of Chicago Press.

Wagstaff, A.    1986.   "The Demand for Health:           Some New Empirical

     Evidence" in Journal of Health Economics.             5, 195-234.
                                           28

                                      Data Appendix


The data are from the Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics.     The 882
subjects used in the study meet the following criteria:a

    1.   were heads of households from 1974 to 1983
    2.   were at least 21 years of age in 1976
    3.   worked an average of 449 hours or more per year from 1976 to
         1983
    4.   lived in a county in which an EPA air quality reporting stadon
         was located

Ill Health        -    Head, whether work limited by health (0 if healthy,
                       1,   2,   3)
Annual work hrs   -    Head, annual hours work in thousands
Log of wages      -    Head, log of real wages
Divorced or
  separated       -    Head, 1 if divorced or separated
Married           -    Head, 1 if married
Age               -    Head,
                          age
Months on job     -    Head,
                          months at current job
Job - strength   -     Head,
                          job DOT strength measure
Job hazards      -     Head,
                          job DOT hazard measure
Self-employed    -  Head, 1 if work for someone else, 2 if work for both
                    someone else and self, 3 if self-employed
Number children - Family unit, number of children
Log of education - Head, log of years of education
Father's
  education      -  Head's father's years of education (0 elementary
                    S graduate school)
Mother's
  education       - Head's mother's years of education (0 elementary,...,
                    8 graduate school)
Parent poor       - Head, 1 if parent's socio-economic status is reported
                    to be poor
Age youngest     -  Family unit, age of youngest child
Wife education   -  Wife, years education
Wife age         -  Wife, age
Northeast         - Family unit, 1 if live in Northeast
South            -  Family unit, 1 if live in South
North Central    -  Family unit, 1 if live in North Central
Unemployment rate- County unemployment rate
Average level of
  sulfur dioxide - Level of sulfur dioxide in head's county
                                     29

                                                                 Standard
Variable                            Mean    Maximum    Minimum   Deviation

Ill health                         0,2126     3.0000    0.0000     0.6763
Annual work hours                  2.0523     5.4960    0.0000     0.7898
Log wages                          3.5009     4.5152   -4.0000     1.7637
Divorced or separated              0.0333     1.0000    0.0000     0.1794
Age                               42.4422    71.0000   22.0000    11.4993
Months on job                     78.1899   540.0000    0.0000    89.6078
Job - strength                     2.1770     4.0000    0.0000     1.0591
Job hazards                       18.2357   100.0000    0.0000    25.4805
Self-employed                      1.1451     3.0000    0.0000     0.7288
Number children                    1.3454    10.0000    0.0000     1.4107
Log of education                   0.3900     1.0000    0.0000     0.4878
Father's education                 3.1043     8.0000    0.0000     1.8167
Mother's education                 3.1746     8.0000    0.0000     1.5934
Parent poor                        2.5261     5.0000    1.0000     1.5409
Age youngest child                 4.6443    17.0000    0.0000     5.4630
Wife education                    10.7245    17.0000    0.0000     4.6534
Wife age,   83                    36.0509    73.0000    0.0000    15.8329
Northeast                          0.2058     1.0000    0.0000     0.4043
South                              0.3284     1.0000    0.0000     0.4697
North Central                      0.2553     1.0000    0.0000     0.4325
County unemployment rate           5.5132    60.0000    1.0000     2.9823
Average level of sulfur dioxide    3.6744   108.0000    0.0000     9.5469
Marital status                     0.8766     1.0000    0.0000     0.3292



aThe PSID Wave 16 for 1976 to 1983 included 2489 males who were heads of
household from 1974 to 1983.   The subset of 882 subjects used in this
study consisted of those individuals that were 21 to 63 years of age in
1976, worked an average of 449 or more hours from 1975 to 1982, and
lived in a county monitored by an EPA air quality station.   Air quality
reporting stations were located in 118 representative counties (Crocker,
undated) .  This procedure was followed in order to include environmental
factors in the model.   In no specification were the air pollution
variables statistically significant, and they often entered with an
unexpected sign.   Hence, the final specification of our simultaneous
model (Table 1) does not include an environmental variable except as an
instrument.
                                                 chi-squared. distributed is         statistic this       holds, condition overidentification the that hypothesis null the 2linder

                                                                                                                                                                                    identical.
     are estimates       015 end    GMM    case, single-equation        just-identified,    the In        respectively.   brackets and   parentheses in are   t-statistics        OIS and
                                                                                                                                                                                             '6MM



             0.320                    0.051                      0.041                                                         0.097                                    over-identification
                                                                                                                                                        of           test chi-squared
                                                                                                                                                              sttistic
                                                                                                                                                           for significance of level
                10.4                      12.5                     14.6                                                          14.8        Function Nxobjective of value Minimized

                4904                      7056                    7056                                     7056                 7056
(1.30)       2.080        (1.29)     .719                                   (1.551       (1.01)           .156      (1.34)     .791                                        education of log
(-1.13)      -.796        (-1.40)     -.731                                 (-7.851      (-475)           -.234     (-1.64) -.830                                        lagged    health,    ill
(1.83)       .508         (4.21)      .763                                  (32.591      (17.53)          .802      (3.21)     .633                           lagged hours, work Annual
(0.16)        .315        (1.49)      1.310                                 (15.241      (9.30)           1.760     (1.63)     1.520                                           Constant

                                                                                                                                                                                  Wages   of log

(1.75)       .033                                  (4.00)       .047        (6.941       (6.74)            .373     (3.93)     .047                                      children of Ntjther
(4.95)       .663                                  (5.50)        .629       (34.581      (24.11)          .367      (4.98)     .618                                             Self-employed
(-0.98)      .247    -                             (-1.75)       -.380      (-10.731     (-10.84)         -.123     (-1.66) -.362                                        lagged health,       Ill
(3.14)        .284                                 (2.83)        .195       (38.781      (36.83)          .172      (2.89)     .200                                            wages of log
(0.74)        .295                                 (2.26)        .661       (46.741      (48.71)          1.010     (2.11)     .650                                                Constant

                                                                                                                                                         Hours) Work (Annual Worktime

(-2.34)    -.057          (-.64)      -.296        (-.64)        .300   -   (-8.391      (-4.90)          -.342     .62) (- -.258                                       education of log
(1.08)  .00007            (1.99)     .0001         (1.98)       .0001       (4.081       (3.74)       .00001        (2.00) .0001                                    job on Hazardmonths
(-4.03)    -.002          (-2.87)     -.002        (-2.85)       .002 -     (-6.181      (-5.56)          -.0003    (-2.86) -.002                                 job on Strength*months
(3.94)     .019           (3.12)      .017         (3.11)        .017       (12.681      (11.00)          .009      (3.13)  .017                                                              Age
(2.89)     .978           (2.37)      .941         (2.37)        .940       (2.291       (1.85)           .149      (2.35)   .933                                  separated or Divorced
(-0.45)    -.070          (-1.48)     -.361        (-1.47)       -.358      (-5.281      (-5.63)          -.061     (-1.49) -.364                                          Self-employed
(.88)      .172           (.46)       .107         (.45)         .106       (-17.071     (-12.50)         -.185     (.48)    .111                                      hours work Annual
(.28)      .127           (.21)       .145         (.21)         .154       (10.921      (7.47)           .670      (.19)    .132                                                Constant

                                                                                                                                                              Health)    (Ill   Status Health

     (Whites)             6MM   Weighted              6MM   Weighted                      015 and                   6MM   Weighted
  G#IM   Weighted         Equation Iwo               Equation Iwo                      NN Weighted                  Sinitteneous
  SiITUltaneOUS                                                                      Identified Just
                                                                                     Equation Single

                                                                              parentheses) in (t-statistics
                                                              Wages and Worktime,    Status, Health of Model Siritiltaneous
                                                                            Equation Three Results, Estimation

                                                                                             1    Table
                                                  Table 2

                   A Comparison of Single Equation and Sins.jltaneous Estimates of
                                           Health Capital




                                                                                       SimuLtaneous, 6MM,
                                                            Linear Regressign,       3   Equation Weighted6
                                                                                         -



                                   Wagstaff Estimatesa       Wagstaff Model          Wagstaff Health Model



Constant                            .11            (.66)     .83           (12.33)           .267            (0.24)
Education in years                  .04           (4.56)    -.03          (-11.60)           .003            (0.09)
In school 1976=1                    .13           (2.44)             --                               --
Medical education=1                 .23            (2.17)            --                               --
Spouse education in years           .01            (1.35)   -.00           (-2.07)           .006          (-3.96)
Spouse medical education=1          .02            (0.14)            --                               --
MaLel                               .17            (2.68)            HA                               NA
Age in years                       -.03           (-8.97)    .01           (10.08)           .013            (0.96)


Family members < 6                 -.05           (-.90)             --                               --
Family members 6-15                -.02           (-.65)             --                               --
Family meeters    15                .01            (.98)             --                               --
Age youngest                                                -.01           (-3.49)       -.022             (-2.01)
Nuiter children                                              .02            (2.68)           .214           (1.51)
Married or cohabiting=1             .05             (.53)            --                               --
Married=1                                                   -.07           (-2.33)       -.235             (-1.12)
Urbanization index                 - .02          (-2.59)            --                               --
Job tenure in years                 .01            (3.28)
Years on present job                                        - .00          (-5.88)           .001            (0.49)
Physically demanding JObc          -.05           (-3.10)            --                               --

Mentally demanding JObc            -.12           (-7.73)            --                               -.
Hazardous substances on jobc        .02            (1.43)            --                               --
Temperature extremes on jObc       -.91           (-6.00)            --                               --
Strength                                                    -.07           (-6.59)       -.116             (-0.45)
Job hazards                                                  .00            (2.01)           .015           (0.87)
Temperature                                                  .00             (.75)       -.026             (-0.44)
 log of hourly wage                 .01            (3.21)   -.08           (16.92)       -.174             (-1.25)
N                                          2243                     7056                            7056
                                           .26                       .14                             --
R2
Minimized value of Nt
  objective function                        --,                      --                             38.2
Level of significance for
  chi-squared test statistic                                                                         0.000



aoependent variable is en index derived frmn a LISREL estimation and is increasing in good health.
bbependent variable is Ill Health, and hence is decreasing in good health.
cEactor loadings from principal coeçonents analysis.
dSee Footnote 2 of Table 2.
