                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE EFFECTS OF LEVERAGED BUYOUTS ON PRODUCTIVITY
                    AND RELATED ASPECTS OF FIRM BEHAVIOR




                            Frank R.   Lichtenberg

                                Donald Siegel




                           Working Paper No. 3022




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   June 1989




This study was supported by the Securities Industry Association. The research,
conducted at the Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Bureau of the Census, was
based on earlier work supported by the National Science Foundation under
Interagency agreement SRS-8801O36, "Industrial R&D and Productivity: Using an
expanded NSF/Census Data Linkage File." This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Securities Industry
Association, the U.S. Bureau of the Census, or the National Science
Foundation.
                                       NBER Working Paper #3022
                                       June 1989


         THE EFFECTS OF LEVERAGED BUYOUTS ON PRODUCTIVITY AND RELATED
                           ASPECTS OF FIRM BEHAVIOR



                                   ABSTRACT

     We investigate the economic effects of leveraged buyouts (LBOs) using
large longitudinal establishment and firm-level Census Bureau data sets linked
to a list of LBOs compiled from public data sources. About 5 percent, or 1100,
of the manufacturing plants in the sample were involved in LBOs during 1981-86.
We find that plants involved in LEOs had significantly higher rates of total-
factor productivity (TFP) growth than other plants in the same industry. The
productivity impact of LBOs is much larger than our previous estimates of the
productivity impact of ownership changes in general. Management buyouts appear
to have a particularly strong positive effect on TFP.
     Labor and capital employed tend to decline (relative to the industry
average) after the buyout, but at a slower rate than they did before the
buyout. The ratio of nonproduction to production labor cost declines sharply,
and production worker wage rates increase, following LBOs. LBOs are
production-labor-using, nonproduction-labor-saving, organizational innova-
tions. Plants involved in management buyouts (but not in other LBOs) are less
likely to subsequently close than other plants. The average R&D-intensity of
firms involved in LEOs increased at least as much from 1978 to 1986 as did the
average R&D-intensity of all firms responding to the NSF/Census survey of
industrial R&D.




    Frank R. Lichtenberg               Donald Siegel
    National Bureau of Economic        National Bureau of Economic Research
    Research and                       1050 Massachusetts Avenue
    Columbia University                Cambridge, MA 02138
    726 Uris Hall
    New York, NY 10027
I.   Introduction

      In a previous study (Lichtenberg and Siegel (1987)), we examined the

relationship between productivity and changes in ownership (coninonly

referred to as "mergers and acquisitions") of U.S. manufacturing plants

during the 1970s. We found that the least productive plants in an

industry are most likely to subsequently change owners, and that follow-

ing ownership change, these plants tend to experience above-average

improvements in productivity. A more recent paper (Lichtenberg and

Siegel (1989a)) indicated that changes in ownership are associated with

substantial reductions in administrative overhead -- measured by the

ratio of "central—office" (auxiliary-establishment) employees to plant

employees -- and that this is a major source of takeover-related produc-

tivity gains.

      The purpose of this paper is to investigate the effects of a specif-

ic, and increasingly important, type of ownership change --    the leveraged

buyout (LBO) -- on total-factor productivity and related aspects of firm

behavior.   In an LBO, a group of investors (which sometimes includes

 incumbent management) takes a company (or a division of a company)

private by purchasing all of the outstanding equity of the company,

mainly using borrowed funds. The enterprise is much more highly lever-

 aged (it has a higher debt/equity ratio) after the LBO than before. The

 financing of LBOs often involves the sale of high-yield (or "junk")

 bonds. The debt incurred to buy out the company is expected to be

 serviced by a combination of operating income and asset sales.

      Although the LBO transaction has been in existence for at least 20

 years, only in the 1980s has it become a quantitatively significant

 component of overall merger and acquisition (M&A) activity.    The share of
                                                                         2




LBOs in the aggregate value of M&A transactions increased from almost

zero in the 1970s to 27 percent in 1986. This increase is probably

attributable to an important extent to the invention and diffusion of

junk bond financing beginning in the late 1970s. Because the extent of

LBO activity was negligible prior to about 1981, our analysis will focus

primarily on the period 1981-86. 1986 is the latest year for which

Census data were available; this is unfortunate because most of the LBOs

during this period occurred in the last three years. This limits our

ability to measure behavior in the years following the LBO. Neverthe-

less, our sample is large enough that we can obtain reasonably precise

estimates for at least two years following the buyout.

     One major advantage of the Census Bureau data sets is that they,

unlike publicly available data sources, include observations on privately

as well as publicly owned firms and establishments. As noted above,

firms that have undergone an LBO are (at least initially)1 privately

held. Privately-held companies are generally not required by the Securi-

ties and Exchange Commission (SEC) to issue financial data, which clearly

poses a problem for assessing post-buyout performance.2




 1   A number of firms involved in LBOs subsequently underwent "reverse
     LBOs," i.e. they became (or were acquired by) publicly-held compa-
     nies, especially after 1986. See Forbes, March 20, 1989, pp.
     210-211.
 2   Under special circumstances, such data may be available. Smith
     (1989) obtained data on post-buyout corporate performance for only
     58 out of 215 management buyouts from the following sources:
     prospectuses issued by 17 companies with a subsequent offering of
     common stock; other SEC filings of 32 companies with public debt or
     preferred stock outstanding after the MBO; and financial statements
     released confidentially by 9 companies. As Smith acknowledges,
     there is a strong possibility that the 58 companies for which data
     are available are not a random sample of all 215 companies, and
     therefore that the findings based on this subset are biased, al-
     though she makes a fairly convincing case that her results are not
                                                                                3




     A second important advantage of the establishment-level Census data

is that they enable us to analyze partial-firm (subsidiary) LBOs. 46

percent of the LBOs in our sample were of divisions of firms rather than

entire firms. Because data at the divisional or lower level are not

generally publicly available -- even for publicly-held firms --      previous
studies (e.g. Kaplan (1988), Smith (1989)) have had to confine their

attention to buyouts of entire firms. Moreover, LBOs are frequently

followed by divestiture of some of the firm's plants or lines of busi-

ness, further limiting the usefulness of company-level data.

     Our primary objective is to analyze the relationship between LBOs

and total factor productivity --     output   per unit of total input --

although   we will also consider the effects of LBOs on other, related,

aspects of firm behavior such as output, employment, capital stock,

wages, plant closings, and R&D investment. TFP is perhaps the single

best measure of technical efficiency, and in his pioneering studies in

the 1950s Robert Solow (1957) established that most of the long-run

increases in economic welfare (output per capita) experienced by the U.S.

and other industrialized countries have been due to increases in TFP.

     Acquisition of a firm via leveraged buyout might be expected to

result in an increase in its relative TFP because compensation (of senior

managers and perhaps of other employees as well) -- and indeed the very

survival of the firm --   is   much more strongly related to performance




     seriously affected by sample-selection bias. Nevertheless, it is
     clearly preferable to conduct the analysis using a data set not
     subject to this kind of censoring.
     As we discuss below the extract of the Census Longitudinal Research
     Database (LRD) we use is also subject to censoring, albeit of a
     different, presumably less important, kind.
                                                                          4




after the buyout than before. Jensen (1989, P. 5) states that the

average CEO in a sample of LBOs receives at least $64 per $1000 change in

shareholder wealth from his typical 6.4% equity interest, whereas the

average CEO in the Forbes 1000 firms experiences total wealth change of

about $2 per $1000 change in stockholder value. If the firm's earnings

are insufficient to cover the interest payment on the debt incurred to

finance the buyout, the managers also face the risk of losing control of

the firm to the bondholders. This increases the rewards for strong

performance (and increases the penalty for poor performance).   Jensen has

also argued that large fixed interest obligations, by reducing the amount

of "free cash flow," reduce the likelihood and extent of investment in

"unproductive" projects. Thus changes in both the incentives and oppor-

tunities facing managers are hypothesized to lead to improvements in

productivity.3

     The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next

section we document the growth in LEO activity in greater detail and

describe the construction of our data base. The development and analysis

of the TFP measure is presented in Section III. The decomposition of TFP

changes into output and input changes is reported in Section IV. Rela-

tive rates of plant closings among LEO and non-LBO plants, and their

possible implications, are discussed in Section V. Section VI is devoted




 3   While the LEO organizational form may generate higher average
     economic "returns" (productivity) than the prototypical public
     corporation, it is also subject to greater (financial) rx. One
     view of the rise of LBOs is that the higher potential returns to
     this organizational form were more than sufficient to compensate
     investors for their higher risk. Our empirical work is aimed at
     determining the difference in mean returns (productivity), but not
      the difference in risk, between LEO and non-LEO firms or plants.
                                                                          S




to an analysis of the effects of LBOs on R&D investment. A summary and

concluding remarks are given in the last section.


II. Linking Census data to the external list of LBOS

     Table 1 presents annual data published by Mergers and Acquisitions

magazine on the aggregate value and number of LBOs for the years 1981-86.

(Prior to 1981, the extent of LBO activity was apparently very limited.

There were only 3 LBOs of at least $35 million in value in both 1979 and

1980, and in both years the aggregate value was under $1 billion.) Also

included in Table 1 as a benchmark are data published by W.T. Grimm and

Co. on all merger and acquisition (M&A) transactions. Both the number

and total value (but not the average value) of LBOs increased in every

year. The largest jumps in value occurred in 1984 and 1986, and probably

reflect a few very large transactions. Between 1981 and 1986, the number

of LBOs more than tripled, and their total value increased more than

fifteen-fold. The number and value of M&As also tended to increase

during this period (following a period of steady decline since 1969), but

at a much lower rate. The number of M&As increased 39 percent, and their

nominal value less than tripled. Between 1981 and 1986, the LBO share of

the number of deals increased from 4.1 percent to 10.0 percent, and the

LBO share of the total value increased from 3.7 percent to 26.9 percent.

In the first three years the average size of LBO transactions tended to

be somewhat smaller than that of all M&A transactions, but in the last

three years have tended to be considerably larger.

     Unfortunately, we had access to data on individual LBOs only for

LBOs whose value was at least $35 million (henceforth referred to as
                                                                          6



"major LBOs"). The bottom panel of Table 1 presents data for this subset

of deals.4 In principle, of course, the total value of major LBOs cannot

exceed the total value of all LBOs, but the data for the two groups come

from different sources which in some cases assign different values to a

given deal, so this inequality is sometimes violated in practice. Never-

theless, comparison of the top and bottom panels of the table provides a

rough guide to the effect of the $35 million threshhold. For the period

as a whole, major LBOs account for 19 percent of the deals but for 96

percent of the total value. Because the same nominal threshhold was in

effect in every year, the fraction of deals exceeding the threshhold

(hence observed by us) tended to be larger towards the end of the period.

     In order to assess the effect of LBOs on the performance and conduct

of the firms involved, we linked the data contained in the list of major

LBOs to an extract we prepared of data on individual manufacturing

establishments contained in the Census Bureau's LED.5




4    Data on these individual LBOs were provided to us by Morgan Stanley
     and Co., which compiles its own exhaustive database of all major
     mergers and acquisitions, of which LBOs are a subset. The primary
     sources from which the database is compiled are reports in the
     New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, Dow Jones Tapes, and news
     releases. Transactions are identified as LBOs in the Morgan Stanley
     database if they are reported as such in the primary sources.    We
     did not have access to data on individual M&As; we present data on
     M&As of at least $35 million only for purposes of comparison.
5    The LRD is a large micro database of establishment-level data
     constructed by pooling information from the quinquennial Census of
     Manufactures and from the Annual Survey of Manufactures. See
     McGuckin and Pascoe (1988) for a detailed discussion of the LED.
     Data for between 310 and 350 thousand establishments are included
      for each of five Census years (1963, 1967, 1972, 1977, and 1982),
      and for between 52 and 74 thousand establishments in non-Census
     years from 1973 to 1986. In our 1987 paper we analyzed data for the
      years 1972 through 1981 -- the latest year for which data were
      available at the time. We restricted our sample to include only
      those establishments that were observed in every one of the tea
      years 1972-81. Thus plants that opened or closed and plants that
                                                                           7




     Roach (1989, p. 24) estimates that 63 percent of the total value of

the major LBOs during the period 1978-88 involved companies or divisions

whose primary industry is manufacturing. Since only manufacturing

establishments (and not, for example, retail and service establishments)

are included in the LRD, if the sizes of LBOs in manufacturing and other

sectors are similar one would expect to identify establishments in it

corresponding to no more than about 60 percent of the (number or value

of) LBOs. As Table 2 reveals, we were able to observe one or more

establishments of companies involved in 57 percent (by value) of the

major LBOs. Thus within the constraints of the deal-size threshhold and

the industry (manufacturing only) limitation, the "coverage" provided by

the LRD appears to be quite good.

     The establishment records in the LRD indicate both a code identify-

ing the establishment's parent company and the (4-digit SIC) industry in

which the establishment (primarily) operates. To determine whether an

establishment had been involved in an LBO in a particular year, we

adopted the following procedure (See Chart 1). We looked to see whether




     were admitted or deleted from the ASH sample during the period were
     excluded from our sample, which as a result contained data for
     20,493 establishments. To perform the present study we extended the
     data for these 20,493 establishments through 1986 using the newly
     available data for the years 1982-86. We did not include data for
     plants that were not already present in our earlier file, i.e. we
     did not include data for plants that opened or were admitted into
     the ASH sample after 1981. However, to remain in our sample we did
     not insist that an establishment be observed (operating and in the
     ASH sample) in each of the years 1982-86. Thus, our panel of
     establishments is "unbalanced" after 1981, and by 1986 the number of
     plants has fallen to about 14,300.
     In retrospect, the above procedure for constructing our database was
     probably not an optimal one, although we doubt that our findings
     have been strongly influenced by this procedure. We hope in future
     work to re-examine some of these issues using a more representative
     database.
                                                                          8




the parent COpany'S name appeared on the list of companies acquired via

LBOs in tb.at year. If riot, we assigned the code LBOO (not involved in

an LBO in that year). If so, we determined whether the LBO was of the

entire company or only of a part of the company.6 If the LBO was of the

entire firm, the establishment was assigned the code LBOl (involved in

an LBO in that year). If the LBO was of only part of the company, we

developed a list of SIC codes of the acquired unit based on a "business

description" of the unit contained in the Morgan Stanley database.

Additional information about the industrial activities of divisions or

companies was obtained from Standard and Poor's Registry of Corporations

and the Directory of Corporate Affiliations. If the establishment's SIC

code was included in this list, we assigned the code LBO1; othervise we

assigned the code LBO=O.

     Our procedure for assigning values to the LBO code is undoubtedly

subject to error, particularly in the case of partial-firm LEOs. For

example, if two subsidiaries of a firm both have plants in the same

 industry, and only one of the subsidiaries is involved in an LBO, then we

would erroneously assign the value LBO = 1 to both subsidiaries'

 establishments.7 If, however, such measurement errors are random (which

 we expect to be the case), then their effect will be to reduce the

 magnitude and significance of the estimated differences in behavior

 between LBO and non-LBO establishments.




 6    As Table 3 shows, "partial" LBOs account for 39 percent of all LBOs
      captured in the LRD file.
 7    This may not be a serious problem, however, since McGuckin and
      Andrews (1988) found that firms rarely divest only some of their
      plants in a given 4-digit industry.
                                                                          9




     Several previous empirical studies (Kaplan (1988) and Smith (1989))

have been concerned with so-called management buyouts (MBOs), the subset

of LBOs in which the acquiror includes the incumbent managers of the

acquired unit. Since the description of the acquiror indicates whether

or not management participated in the acquisition, we can distinguish

(albeit perhaps imperfectly) between 1BOs and other LBOs. As Table 3

reveals, NBOs accounted for 45 percent of the value of all major LBOs

during the period 1981_86.8 Among major LBOs captured in our extract of

the LED, however, ?lBOs accounted for only 27 percent of total value,

perhaps because management is less likely to participate in LBOs in

manufacturing than in other sectors.

     Our extract from the LED contained data on 20,493 manufacturing

establishments for the year 1981. 1108 (5.4 percent) of these estab-

lishments were involved in at least one major LBO   during   the period

1981-86. The distribution of establishments involved in major LBOs

(henceforth   "LBO establishments"), by type of LBO, is presented in Table

4. 35 percent of the LBO establishments were involved in MBOs, and 30

percent were involved in partial-firm LBOs. These two attributes are

correlated: MBOs account for 47 percent of partial-firm LBOs but only 30

percent of full-firm LBOs.

     The establishment records in the LED also include a "coverage code"

which indicates, among other things, whether or not the owner of the

establishment (i.e., the ultimate parent corporation) had changed since

the previous year9. This coverage code was used to distinguish between




8    The share of MBOs increased fairly steadily over time.
9    We also used the coverage code to Identify incidents of plant
     closing. This issue will be discussed in Section V.
                                                                            10




establishments changing and not changing owners in our two previous
studies (1987, 1989a) of ownership change. Since LBOs constitute a

special case of the general phenomenon of ownership change, one might

expect that virtually all the establishments that we identified as being

involved in LBOs (via the procedure outlined above) would have Census

coverage codes indicating a change in ownership in the year of the LBO.

We discovered, however, that the measured rate of ownership change duriig

1981-86 among LBO plants was substantially less than 100 percent --    it
was 37 percent --   although it was about double the rate among non-LBO
plants. Moreover, the higher six-year rate of ownership change among LBO

plants was to an important extent accounted for by higher frequency of

ownership change in years following the LBO.

      Although these findings appear to be anomalous, they may to some

extent simply reflect two features of the Census Bureau's procedure for

recording ownership change in the plant files. First, the Bureau gener-

ally records ownership change only when there is a true merger in the

sense that operating units are combined under common ownership or one

 firm is split into two or more operating units. One would therefore

 expect there to be a higher measured rate of ownership change among

 plants   involved in partial than in full-firm LBOs, which is in fact the

 case.'° Second, the Bureau obtains ownership information from an

 independent, firm—level "Report of Organization" and processes it into

 the plant files with a 1 - 2 year lag. Some ownership changes (particu-

 larly those involving small firms) are therefore reported as occurring in




 10    Plants involved in partial LBOs were about twice as likely to be
       coded as ownership—change plants as plants involved in full-firm
       LBOs: the respective ownership change rates were 56 and 29 percent.
                                                                          11




years following the actual ownership change. Also, many of the LBOs

occurred in 1985 and 1986, and the ownership information for these years

may not have been entered (even with a lag) into the files we analyzed.


III. Comparisons of productivity of buyout and non-buyout plants

      In this section we describe and analyze differences in total-factor

productivity (TEl') behavior between plants involved in LBOs (or MBOs) and

other plants. Our measure of TFP is a (raw or studentized) residual from

a production function of the following form, estimated separately by

4-digit SIC industry and year:


£n        =
              Ojt   +
                        Ljt   Lii   +
                                        Kjt   £zi
                                                    K3t
                                    +
                                        Njt ijt           +
                                                              u13
                                                                       (1)



where VQ denotes the value of production (the value of shipments adjusted

for changes in finished-goods and work-in-process inventories); L denotes

labor input ("production-workerequiValeflt" manhours); K denotes capital

input (the "perpetual inventory" estimate of the net stock of plant and

equipment); V!1 denotes the value of materials consumed (materials pur-

 chased adjusted for changes in raw-materials inventories); u is a distur-

bance term; and the subscript ijt refers to establishment i in 4-digit

 SIC industry j in year t.11 Output and materials are measured in nominal




 11   This (generalized) Cobb-Douglas production function may be regarded
      as a local first-order logarithmic approximation to any arbitrary
      production function. ?laddala (1979, p. 309) has shown that, at
      least within a "limited class of functions ... (viz. Cobb—Douglas,
      generalized Leontief, homogeneous translog, and homogeneous quadrat-
      ic) differences in the functional form produce negligible differ-
      ences in measures of multi-factor productivity." This is because
      these different functional forms differ in their elasticities of
      substitution (which depends on the second derivatives of the produc
                                                                         12




terms because the LRD does not include establishment-specific deflators.
It is conventional to assume that output and materials prices do not vary

across establishments within an industry, which would imply that the

nominal measures are proportional to their real counterparts, although

there is evidence inconsistent with this hypothesis (see Abbott (1988)).

Thus the computed residual may be capturing price differences as well as

productivity differences. Because eq. (1) was estimated separately by

industry and year, the residual for a given observation measures the

percentage deviation of that establishment's TFP from the mean TFP of all

establishments in the same industry and year. By construction, of

course, the residuals have a mean value of zero.

     Although the production function (1) is estimated separately by

industry and year, we will pool the estimated residuals across industries

(and sometimes also across years). The estimated residual variance
             1
     =              e2. varied over j and t, so a given value of a

raw residual e.. represented a larger relative departure from mean

productivity in some industries and years (those with "low"        than in

others. In addition to examining the raw residuals, we therefore also

examined the "studentized" residuals e.. /. , which are the raw resi-
                                      ijt    jt
duals    scaled by the corresponding estimated standard error of the regres

sion (1). An observation whose studentized residual is say, 0.5, has

productivity half a standard deviation above average.

        Our first approach to assessing the impact of LBOs on productivity

is to estimate the difference in the growth in TFP during 1981-86 between




        tion function) whereas productivity depends primarily on the first
        derivatives.
                                                                              13




plants involved in LBOs during that period and other plants, conditional

on the level of productivity in 1981. The coefficient        from the

following regression is an estimate of this difference in growth rates:


                     —    +                       +                     (2)
                              'l ij8l86 + 2ij8l       ij86

where Y denotes either the raw residual or the studentized residual, and

X denotes either an LBO dummy ( 1 if the establishment was involved in

an LBO during 1981-86, = 0 otherwise) or an MBO dummy (defined

similarly).12 The coefficient on 1981 productivity is specified as a

free parameter rather than constrained to equal unity to allow for the

possibility that productivity growth depends on the initial productivity

level (i.e., productivity is not a random walk), and for a correlation

between X and initial productivity. Estimates of the parameter ' from

eq. (2) are reported in Table 13 Each of the coefficients reported in

Table 5 comes from a separate regression. The first line displays

estimates based on the raw residual as the productivity measure. It




12    Because Y..81 is a residual estimated from the first-stage eq. (1)
      rather than the true but unobserved productivity disturbance, as
      Murphy and Topel (1985) show the OLS standard errors (t-statistics)
      are probably biased downward (upward). (The fact that the dependent
      variable Y..86 is also estimated apparently doesn't result in any
      such bias.) We plan in the future to calculate corrected standard
      errors using their formula for the asymptotic covariance matrix.
      However one of their empirical illustrations (see p. 313 of their
      article) suggests that, because the variable X1381_86 was excluded
      from the first-stage eq., the bias in the OLS standard error of yj,
      if any, is small. In their example, it was on the order of
      3 percent.


 13   Estimates of Y2 and their corresponding standard errors (in paren-
      theses) are .879 (.022) and .342 (.009) for the raw and studentized
      residuals, respectively. The results are the same in the case of
      the LBO and MBO specifications.
                                                                          14




indicates   that the (cumulative) productivity growth during 1981-86 of

plants involved in LBOs was 2.8 percentage points higher than that of

plants not involved in LBOs; the difference in growth rates is highly

statistically significaflt.14 The difference in growth rates was even

higher -- 3.9 percentage points --   in   the case of establishments involved

in management buyouts.'5 The estimates based on the studentized

residuals are qualitatively similar to those based on the raw residuals:

they are highly (indeed slightly more) significant, and the relative

magnitudes of the LBO and tIBO coefficients are similar. Because the

results based on the raw residuals are more easily compared to other

productivity data, henceforth we will confine our attention to these.'6




14    About 9.5 percent of LBO plants, and 10.2 percent of non-LBO plants,
      were not in the same 4-digit industry in 1986 as they were in 1981.
      For plants switching industries, the "reference group" for calculat-
      ing relative productivity changed. We tried to examine whether
      switching of industries affected our estimates of y by also includ-
      ing in eq. (2) a duny variable equal to one if a plant switched
      industries, and otherwise equal to zero. The coefficient
      (t-statistic) on this duniny in the raw residual specification was
      -.011(1.3) -- negative but only marginally significant -- and the
      estimate of y was virtually unchanged.
 15   We also estimated a version of eq. (2) including two buyout duixiny
      variables, one for management buyouts and one for "other LBOs"
       (non-management buyouts). The coefficients on "other LBOs" from the
      raw and studentized residual regressions were respectively
       .016(1.30) and .064(1.55). Thus they were only marginally signifi-
       cantly different from zero, but we could not reject the hypothesis
       that the coefficients on ?lBOs and other LBOs were identical.
 16   OLS estimation using studentized residuals is similar to weighted
       least-squares (WLS) estimation using raw residuals, with weights
      S.1 that are identical for all plants in the same industry in the
      same year. One might argue that     it would be preferable to use
      weights that vary across plants     within industries and years, in
      particular to use as the weight     the reciprocal of the square root of
      the estimated standard error of     the residual

                   jt2c1 -
      where       is the design matrix from eq. (1) for industry j in year t
                                                                                          15




      Data published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) on TFP growth

in the manufacturing sector as a whole provide a convenient, although

possibly biased, benchmark against which to measure the LBO-related

productivity growth differential cited above.17 According to the BLS

(1988, p. 12) TFP in the manufacturing sector increased 19.9 percent from

1981 to 1986. This figure may be considered a weighted average of the

productivity growth rates of LBO and non-LBO plants, with weights roughly

equal to the fraction of employees in plants in each group:


                     it   = So         iIJ + (1        -
                                                           SLEO)       NON-LBO
                          =                 +                      -



        '
                              TtNON   LBO       SLEO       LBO         NON-LB&

where                 and     ltNONLBO denote the productivity growth rates of all
plants, LBO        plants,     and non-LEO plants, respectively, and 5LBO denotes
the   fraction of all workers employed in plants that are involved in LBOs,
                                                18
estimated to be 5.25 percent.                        The data reported above imply that




        and X. .     is   the 1th row of this matrix (i.e., the row corresponding
        to the I   plant). See Neter et al (1985, p. 402) for a derivation
        of this formula. We have taken this approach in estimating other
        equations with the same dependent variable as eq. (2) (but different
        independent variables), and found that relative to OLS estimation
        using raw residuals, it increased the magnitude of the parameter
        estimates and R2 by 14 to 28 percent and reduced the standard errors
        by 7 to 15 percent. We therefore plan in the future to apply this
        procedure to the estimation of eq. (2).
 17     We lack output and materials deflators at the 4-digit industry level
        for the last few years of our sample period. Otherwise, of course,
        we could compute separate productivity growth rates for both LEO and
        non-LBO plants, not merely the difference between these growth
        rates. Since our original (1972-81) sample of plants accounted for
        67 percent of aggregate manufacturing shipments (see p. 651 of our
         1987 paper), we believe that the BLS number provides a reasonable
        approximation of average productivity growth in our sample.
 18     Equation (2) was estimated using data only for the 14281 plants that
         had nonmissing data in each of the years 1981-86. 933 (6.5 percent)
         of these plants were involved in LBOs during that interval. LBO
                                                                                  16




                                 -     = .028, from which we may infer that
it   = .199   and that        "NoN-LBo
              = .198 and LBO = .226. The productivity growth rate of LBO
7tNON_LBO
plants was therefore about 14 percent higher than that of other plants.

The productivity growth rate of MBO plants was about 20 percent higher

than that of plants not involved in MBOs.

        In a previous (1987) paper we estimated the difference in produc-

tivity growth rates during 1974-80 between plants involved in ownership

changes of all kinds (as measured in the LRD file) and plants not in-

volved in ownership change. The estimated difference (n - ItN0N0c),

although highly significantly different from zero, was considerably

 smaller than our estimate of LBo - itNON_LBO).            it was approximately

 .005. However, the overall rate of manufacturing productivity growth

 during 1974-80 was much lower than it was during 1981-86: productivity

 increased only 5.6 percent from 1974 to 1980. Since approximately 15

 percent of plants changed owners during the period 1974-80, our previous
                                                                           = .060.
 estimates implied that during that period 7tNON oc = .055 and

 Thus the productivity growth rate of plants changing owners was about 9

 percent higher than that of plants not changing owners. The percentage

 difference            -                      is about two-thirds as large as the
                           1tNoN_oc)/NoN_oC
 percentage difference (7t           -
         Our estimates of (n0         - 7toNL),     like our original estimates of

         -                 are based on data only for operating manufacturing
             NON—OC'
  establishments. Due to the unavailability of data, so-called "auxiliary

  establishments," which include central administrative offices and other




         of these plants was 5.5 percent in 1981 and 5.0 percent in 1986, the
         mean of which is 5.25 percent.
                                                                            17




nonproduction facilities, were excluded from the econometric analysis in

our first paper and in this one. In 1982, auxiliary establishments

accounted for about 7 percent of employment and 10 percent of payroll in

manufacturing. Unfortunately, data for these establishments are collect-

ed only every five years, and the latest year for which they are current-

ly available is 198219 Auxiliary establishments do not produce any

marketable output; rather, they provide services (such as administration,

R&D, and data processing) to the firm's production establishments. If

the effect of ownership change (or LBO) on employment, for example, in

auxiliary establishments is different from its effect in manufacturing

establishments, then estimates of the difference         - ILN0N0c)   (or

LBO - NoN-LBo         based only on manufacturing establishment data will be

biased. In the sequel to our original paper, we showed that ownership

change tends to be accompanied by significant (approximately 11 percent)

reductions in the ratio of auxiliary-establishment to production-

establishment employment. Failure to account for this reduction in

administrative overhead led to substantial underestimation in our origi-

nal paper of the effect of ownership change on productivity growth

     -               Accounting for this increased our estimate of
         NoN-o&
     -              by .0034, from .0046 to .0080. While we don't have
         "NON-OC)
estimates of the effect of LBOs on the ratio R of auxiliary-establishment

to production-establishement employment, it is quite plausible that it is

as least as negative as the effect of ownership change on R. Indeed,

statements by Jensen (1989, p. 3) imply that the effect may be much

greater in magnitude:




19   The 1987 data will probably become available in 1990.
                                                                           18




         LEO associations . . . are run by partnerships instead of
         the headquarters office in the typical large multi-
         business diversified corporation. These partnerships
         perform the monitoring and peak coordination function with
         a staff numbering in the tens of people, and replace the
         typical corporate headquarters staff of thousands.

If we assume that the effect of LBOs on R is (merely) equal to the effect

of ownership change on R, we would raise our estimate of         -
                                                           LBO       7tN0NLBo)
from .0280 (in Table 5) to .0314; if the actual effect on R is larger,

even this adjusted figure would understate the true productivity growth

differential.

     So far we have analyzed the link between LBOs and productivity

change by computing the difference in growth rates of TFP over a six year

period (1981-86) between plants involved and not involved in LBOs at any

time during the period. An alternative approach, which we pursue next,

is to compute differences in the mean (level of the) productivity residu-

al in year t+k (k-13,-l2,. .. ,—1,0,1,2) between plants involved and not

involved in LEOs in year t. This approach has both an advantage and a

disadvantage relative to the first approach. The advantage is that it

provides evidence concerning the precise timing of productivity movements

relative to the date of the LEO. (It is possible, for example, that the

higher five-year productivity growth rate of LEO plants is due primarily

or entirely to higher growth before the LEO.)20 The disadvantage is that

differences in annual productivity changes are estimated less precisely

than differences in five-year growth rates. This is partly due to the




20   Further analysis along the lines of Table 5 cast doubt on this
     possibility, however. When we replaced the single (1981-86) LEO
     dummy by two LEO dummies -— "early" (1981-83) and "late" (1984-86)
     -- their respective coefficients were .033 and .021, i.e. "early"
     LEOs were associated with higher productivity increases, although
     the difference in coefficients was not significant.
                                                                         19




fact that the fraction of plants involved in an LBO during a single year

is smaller than the fraction (ever) involved during a six-year period.

Our estimates of LBO vs. non-LBO mean productivity differences are

obtained by regressing the residual on an LBO dummy variable; the latter

may be viewed as a binomially distributed random variable, equal to 1 (if

and only if an LBO occurs) with probability 0, and equal to 0 with

probability 1-0. The variance of the LBO dummy is N0(1-0), which is an

increasing function of 0 (provided that 0 < .5, which is true in our

data). Since the variance of the coefficient on the LBO dummy is in-

versely related to the variance of the LBO dummy, hence inversely related

to e, the coefficient on the five-year LBO dummy is estimated more

precisely than the coefficients on annual LBO dunies.

      ?lean productivity differences (eLBO   eNON_LBO) and MBO - eNON_FIBO),
by year relative to the year of the LBO or MBO, are reported in Table 6

and plotted in Charts 2 and 3. We don't report differences beyond two

years after the deal since very few plants are observed for more than two

years after the deal (0 declines sharply as k increases).21 The results

in the first column indicate that plants involved in LBOs in year t

tended to have above-average productivity in every year from t-13 to t+2.

But the relative productivity of LBO plants appears to have declined in

the years prior to the LBO, and then increased sharply beginning at the

time of the LBO. The average value of the difference in three periods is

as follows:




 21   Recall that plants are observed only through 1986, and the LBOs all
      occurred during 1981-86, most of them in the last 3 years.
                                                                         20




                                                Average value of
                   Period                       (eL eNoN_L)
     I     (t—13) to Ct—i)                          2.0
     II    (t—6) to (t—1)                           1.2
     III     t.    to   (t+2)                       2.7


In year t-i-1, the productivity difference is larger (and more significant)

than it was in any previous year, although it declines (and is only

marginally significant) in year t+2. The average productivity difference

increases from 1.2 in the 2 years before the LBO to 2.9 in the 2 years

after the LEO.

     In many respects, the pattern of productivity differences for MBOs

is similar (although more pronounced) to the pattern for LBOs: the

average value of            -       is   2.3 in period I, 1.2 in period II,

and 5.9 in period III. Relative productivity of ?IBO plants was as high

as 3.6 in t-11 but fell to essentially zero 6 to 4 years before the IIBO.

But the relative productivity of MBO plants apparently began to increase

about three years before the MBO, and reached a record (until that point)

high of 4.9 in year t-1. Despite this, the average productivity residual

increased from 3.6 in the two years before to 7.5 in the two years after

the MEO. The difference between the productivity increases associated

with ?fBOs and LEOs using annual measures is even greater than that

suggested by the five-year growth-rate results.

     While the data clearly indicate buyouts tend to be followed by

substantial increases in productivity, the causal interpretation of this

correlation is open to question. In particular, one could argue (1) that

there is exogenous variation in plants' expected increase in relative

productivity; (2) that plants with large expected productivity increases

 (about which management may have private information) are most likely to
                                                                             21




be acquired via an LBO; and (3) that actual productivity growth is a

noisy indicator of expected productivity growth. Smith (1989) considered

arguments of this sort, and although she could not rule them out entirely,

she presented evidence which suggested that they could not account for

the post-buyout improvement in performance. First, no improvement in

performance was found following 24 unsuccessful MBO proposals. Second,

the improvement in performance following nondefensive HBOs and/or MBOs

initiated by current management --   the most likely context for potential
gains from trading on inside information via an MBO -- tended to be no

greater than the improvement following other ?lBOs.

     In our 1987 paper we estimated differences in mean productivity

between plants involved in ownership changes (of all types) and plants

not so involved, which we denote by         - eNONOC).   Those differences

(calculated from t-7 to t+7) also exhibited a U-shaped time-path (whose

turning point approximately coincided with the date of ownership change),

but the position of the path was "shifted down": the productivity

differences were negative in every year. As noted earlier, due to data

limitations we can't really identify the LBO and MBO productivity trajec-

tories past year t+2, but if we assumed them to be similar in shape to

the (e -   eNON..0C)
                       trajectory for the years after t+2 (as they are for

the years before and including t+2), we could infer that they continue to

rise (or at least do not fall) after t+2.


IV. Decomposition of productivity changes into output and input changes

     The preceding evidence is quite consistent with the hypothesis that

plants involved in LBOs -- and especially in HEOs --     experience higher
rates of productivity growth than other plants in the same industry, and

that the relative productivity increases occur at or near the time of the
                                                                            22




buyout. By definition, differences in productivity growth rates are due

to differences fl   output   growth rates, differences in input (capital,

labor, and materials) growth rates, or both. In this section we provide

a decomposition of the productivity changes into output and input

changes.

     The first column of Table 7 indicates that LBO (and particularly

MBO) plants had higher growth rates of output during 1981-86 than non-LBO

plants, but the differences aren't statistically significant.       We can't

reject the hypothesis that buyout plants had a constant market share

during this period. In light of our productivity findings, this implies

that buyout plants had lower growth rates of total input. The last three

columns of the table indicate that the growth rates of labor, and partic-

ularly of capital (but not of materials), were significantly lower in the

case of all LBOs. Among the subset of MBO plants, these differences in

growth rates were also negative, but smaller and not significant.

     As discussed earlier, the problem with interpreting the 5-year

growth rate differences is that they don't reveal the precise timing of

movements relative to the date of the buyout. To shed light on this

question, we present in Table 8 differences in annual growth rates of

output and inputs in year t+k (k =     -2,1,0,1,2)   between plants involved

and not involved in LBOs in year t. As noted above, due to the relative-

 ly small number of LBOs in any given year the standard errors on the

 differences are fairly large. The differences in capital and labor

 growth are negative in every year, these differences are significant only

 in the years before the LBO (years t-2, t-1, and t). In the case of all

 three inputs, the average difference in growth rates is lower (more

 negative) in the 3 years before the LBO than it is in the 2 years after.
                                                                         23




Thus, although the relative (to industry mean) amount of inputs utilized

in LBO plants is lower several years after the buyout than it was several

years before, input use was declining prior to the buyout, and at a

faster rate than it was after the buyout.

     The Census establishment data enable us to examine the behavior of

labor-related variables other than total labor input. Table 9 reports

differences between LBO plants and non-LBO plants in the growth rates of

the wage bill B (total labor income generated), employment E, and the

annual wage rate WA B/E, separately for nonproduction and production

workers, by year relative to the year of the LBO. Nonproduction workers

account for about 30 percent of total employment in manufacturing estab-

lishments. It also reports differences in growth rates of the hourly

wage rate WH and of annual hours of work per employee H for production

workers only (hours of nonproduction workers are not reported in the

survey). These growth rates are interrelated since (using dot super-

scripts to denote growth rates):



                                         A
                                   = E + WH   +   ii

The first column of the table reveals that in the three years before the

LBO, the wage bill of nonproduction workers is growing at about the same

rate in 1.30 and non-LBO plants, but in the two years after the LBO, this

wage bill is growing much more slowly in LBO plants: the average annual

rate of relative decline is 5.3 percent. The decline is particularly

pronounced (7.2 percent) in year +2. In contrast, the wage bill of

production workers is slightly increasing in relative terms after the

 LBO, so there is a sharp drop in the growth of the ratio of the
                                                                         24



nonproductiOn to production wage bill. Consequently, LBOs might be

interpreted as non-neutral or biased organizational innovations that are

relatively production-labor using and nonproductionlabor saving.

      The post-LBO decline in the nonproduction wage bill is almost

equally due to reductions in nonproduction employment and annual wages

(2.7 and 2.6 percent, respectively). Both the employment and especially

the annual wage of nonproduction relative to production workers declines

following LBOs. This suggests that LBOs reduce the demand for

nonproduction workers relative to the demand for production workers.

Because the annual wage of nonproduction employees tends to be substan-

tially (about 53 percent) higher than that of production employees, the

decline in their relative wage would appear to reduce inequality of wages

within LBO plants.

      The growth in the annual wage rate of production workers is signifi-

cantly higher in LBO plants than in other plants in the same industry in

the two years following the LBO. About two-thirds of this difference is

attributable to hourly wage rates, and one-third to annual hours. After

an LBO, production-worker employment declines (in relative terms) at an

 average annual rate of 0.9 percent, but total hours of production workers

 (K   H) decline more slowly than they did during the three years before

 the LBO.

       To sunuarize the preceding observations:

       1) Total hours worked by production workers decline more slowly
          after the LBO than before the LEO.

       2) Hourly and (especially) annual wage rates of production workers
          increase after a buyout.

       3) Both employment and annual wages of nonproduction workers decline
          sharply after a buyout.
                                                                          25



It is interesting to consider the increase in production-worker wages and

the decrease in relative employment of nonproduction workers in post-LBO

plants from the perspective of "efficiency wage" theory.22 A premise of

that theory is that the firm has two alternative means of inducing

(production) workers to expend effort (which it is costly for the firm to

monitor): the "carrot" of high wages (paying a wage premium) and the

"stick" of intensive supervision (a high ratio of nonproduction to

production workers). Our evidence is consistent with the view that in

the course of the pre- to post-LBO transition management increases the

use of the carrot and reduces the use of the stick.


V. Plant closings

     The differences between buyout and non-buyout plants in productivi-

ty, output and inputs reported in Tables 5 through 9 were all based on

the subset of "surviving" plants, i.e. plants present in the LRD in 1981

that had not closed by some subsequent year. Calculations for any

particular year during the period 1981-86 were based on all plants ever

in the sample that had not closed prior to that year. Because the plants

that close are likely to be a nonrandom sample (in terms of their produc-

tivity, for example) of all plants, estimates based on the "censored"

sample of surviving establishments may be biased. Unfortunately, non-

random censoring of observations in a longitudinal context poses extreme-

ly difficult methodological problems;23 our objective here is simply to




22   See Bartel and Lichtenberg (1988) for a recent discussion of
     efficiency-wage theory.
23   See Pakes and Ericson (1989) for a recent, very sophisticated
     attempt to address some of these problems.
                                                                              26




document the extent of plant failure (closing) and to try   to   assess the

direction of bias in our comparisons of buyout and nonbuyout plants.

     First, we provide some evidence concerning the relationship between

productivity and plant closing. Table 10 shows differences in the mean

productivity residual in each of the years 1972-81 between plants that

closed and didn't close in 1981. The productivity of plants closing in

1981 was significantly lower than that of other plants in each of the ten

years prior to closing, and the productivity gap was widening as the

closing date approached. In addition to having negative and declining

levels of relative productivity, columns 2 and 3 of the table show that

plants destined to close in the future have negative and generally

declining relative rates of output and employment growth.

     Since Table 10 shows that the probability of (future) plant closing

is inversely related to productivity, and Table 6 revealed that LBO (and

especially MBO) plants exhibit above-average productivity around the date

of (especially after) the buyout, one would expect there to be a lower

incidence of plant closings among LBO (and especially MBO) plants than

among non-buyout plants.

     Table 11 presents rates of plant closing in each of the years

 1981-86 for six cohorts of LBO and NBO plants and for all plants in our

 extract of the LRD. These are conditional rates of closing, i.e. rela-

 tive frequencies of closing in year t among plants that have not closed

 prior to year t. The top panel of the table shows closing rates among

 plants involved in all LBOs (both MBOs and other LBOs). There are a

 total of 21 year-specific closing rates for the 6 LBO cohorts, and 11 of

 these are smaller, and 10 are larger, than the rates for all sample

 plants in the corresponding year. These data therefore give the
                                                                          27




impression that plants previously involved in LBOs are neither more nor

less likely to close than other plants.24 The apparent lack of a

difference may be partly due to the fact that, although LBO plants are

more productive, they are also somewhat smaller (mean employment 17 to 25

percent lower) than non-LBO plants, and Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson

(1987) have shown that large plants are less likely to close. In con-

trast, only S of the 21 MBO plant closing rates, shown in the bottom half

of the table equal or exceed the closing rates for all sample plants in

the corresponding year. The preponderance of zeroes for the 1981 and

1982 MBO cohorts may partly be an artifact of the small number of MBO

plants in those cohorts (16 or less in each), but even among the last 4

cohorts (whose minimum initial size was 57), only 3 out of 10 equal or

exceed their corresponding year's rate for all sample plants. Thus MBO

plants appear to be appreciably less likely to close than plants not

involved in LBOs. Our finding a difference for these plants but not for

LBO plants in general may be due not only to the markedly higher produc-

tivity of these plants, but also to their greater size --   they   are only 1

to 13 percen.. smaller, on average, than plants not involved in buyouts.

      The lower rates of plant closing among plants involved in management

buyouts suggest that estimates of differences between MBO and non-NBO

plants based on the censored sample may be downward biased. Tables 5 and

 6 may underestimate the productivity increase associated with management

buyouts, and the estimated differences in output and input growth of NBO

 plants reported in Table 7 may be too negative.




 24   This impression is confirmed by a comparison of the "survival rates"
      -- the cumulative products of one minus the previous closing rates
      -- of the two groups of plants.
                                                                          28




VI. R & D investment

      We examined above the relationship between LBOs and the growth of

the capital stock, which is closely related to the rate of net investment

in plant and equipment. In this section we investigate the relationship

between LBOs and investment in research and development. There is

considerable evidence that R&D investment has a significant positive

impact on long-run productivity growth.25 Due to data limitations, we

were able above to analyze only the short-run (within two-year) "effect"

of buyouts on TFP. Analysis of the link between buyouts and R&D invest-

ment may provide at least indirect evidence concerning the implications

of buyouts for long-run productivity growth.26

      The LRD does not contain any information about investment in R&D in

manufacturing establishments. Even if it did, such information would not

be very meaningful. Lichtenberg and Siegel (1989a, p. 8) reported that

47 percent of personnel engaged in R&D are employed in "auxiliary estab-

lishments" (including central administrative offices and R&D laborato-

ries) rather than in manufacturing establishments. R&D is a relatively

centralized function within companies, and since the output of R&D is a

relatively "public good" (easily diffused across the company's estab-

lishments), it. is the amount of R&D conducted in the entire company,

 rather than in specific establishments, that determines their productivi-

ty. This is presumably the reason why the government's official survey




 25    See Lichtenberg and Siegel (1989b) for an econometric analysis of
       this impact based on Census microdata.
 26    From another perspective, by examining the effects of LBOs on R&D as
       well as on (short-run) TIP, we are assessing their impact on dynamic
       as well as static (technical) efficiency.
                                                                                       29




of industrial R&D activity --     the   NSF/Census RD-i   survey   --   is   a firm-

level    survey.

        We   used data from the RD-i survey to assess the impact of LBOs on

R&D investment. Our strategy is to compare the change in average R&D

intensity (one measure of which is the ratio of R&D investment to sales)

of firms involved in LBOs ("LBO firms") to that of all firms. We have

two reasons for choosing R&D-intensity (rather than, for example, real

R&D expenditure) as the measure to be examined. First, a reduced-form

relationship between TFP      growth   and R&D-intensity can be formally derived

from a production function which includes as an argument the stock of

"knowledge capital," and such a relationship has been estimated in

numerous studies.27 Second, LBOs are frequently followed by the

divestiture of divisions of the acquired company; such divestitures would

tend to artificially depress the change in real R&D, but not the change

in R&D-intensity (unless the most R&D-intensive divisions were most

likely to be divested.)

        Because the RD-i data are at the firm level, we will include only

LBOs of entire firms, and not of divisions of firms, in our set of "LBO

firms." Recall from Table 3 that there were 80 major LEOs of entire

firms involving companies observed in the Census data and that these

accounted for about 70 percent of the aggregate value of LBOs. 43 out of

these 80 companies were included in the sample of RD-i survey firms in

each of the years i978-86. These 43 companies comprise our set of "LBO

 firms."




 27      See, e.g., Lichtenberg and Siegel (198gb).
                                                                            30




      Sample mean values of R&D-intensity in the years 1978-86 for both

the 43 LBO firms and for all R&D performers are presented in Table 12.

Two alternative measures of R&D-intensity are used: the ratio of R&D

expenditure to sales (RDINT1), and the ratio of the number of full-time—

equivalent R&D scientists and engineers to total company employment

(RDINT2). The mean values for LBO firms of both these measures tended to

increase over this 9—year period, and were never higher than they were in

the last year, by which all the buyouts were completed. The mean values

of RDINT1 and RDINT2 for LBO firms were respectively 50 percent and 21

percent greater in 1986 than they had been in 1978. The average R&D

intensity of all R&D-performers in the RD—i sample was also increasing
                                   28
significantly during the period.        The relative R&D intensity of LBO

firms (shown in the last column) therefore increased less than the

absolute R&D intensity, but it increased nevertheless, particularly in

the last 3 years, during which most of the LBOs occurred.

      The data in Table 12 cast doubt on the hypothesis that LBOs are

associated with reductions in the propensity to perform R&D. Another way

of examining the data, which accounts more closely for the timing of the

LBOs, also yields results inconsistent with the hypothesis. For each of

the years 1981-86, we identified the set of firms that were involved in

an LBO either in that year or in a previous year. For both these firms

and for all firms we then calculated the proportion of firms which had

 increased their R&D-intensity since the previous year. The results are




 28    To an important extent, this increase -- even in the
       "company-financed" component -- may be attributable to the large
       U.S. military buildup during the period. See Lichtenberg (1988) for
       discussion of this point.
                                                                            31




presented in Table 13. The proportion for firms involved in current or

past LBOs is never lower than the proportion for all firms, and is equal

in only one year.

     There have been at least two large-scale studies of the effect of

changes in ownership (mergers and acquisitions) in general on R&D invest-

ment: Hall (1988) and Lichtenberg-Siegel (1989a). Both found essen-

tially no difference in the growth of R&D between firms involved and not

involved in ownership change. We are aware of only one very limited

attempt to assess the effects of LBOs in particular on R&D; it is de-

scribed in a Feb. 1, 1989 memorandum by the National Science Foundation

(NSF) prepared in response to a request from the Subcounittee on Telecom-

munications and Finance of the House Coittee on Energy and Comerce.

NSF identified 8 companies among the top 200 R&D performers involved in

"LBOs or other restructurings," and determined that these companies

reduced their R&D expenditure by 12.8 percent from 1986 to 1987. In

contrast, other top-200 companies not involved in mergers, LBOs or other

restructurings increased their R&D spending by 5.4 percent.

     NSF granted to us access to their list of 8 companies involved in

"Ls or other restructurings"; only one of these companies appeared on

our presumably comprehensive list of major LBOs. The rest of the compa-

nies were evidently involved in "other restructurings" such as stock

repurchases. There are at least 3 reasons, therefore, why the figures

calculated by NSF might be regarded as very unreliable estimates of the

effects of LBOs per se on R&D investment:   (1) only one of the eight

companies was actually involved in an LBO; (2) NSF calculated the change
                                                                   in the
 in R&D in only a single year; and (3) they evaluated the change

 level of R&D, rather than in R&D intensity, which is misleading if the
                                                                         32




companies are divesting divisions -- a frequent concomitant of

restructuring.


VII. Summary and conclusions

     In this paper we have investigated the effects of leveraged buyouts

on productivity and related aspects of firm behavior using large longitu-

dinal establishinent and firm-level Census Bureau data sets linked to a

list of LBOs compiled from public data sources. About 5 percent, or

1100, of the roughly 20,000 relatively large manufacturing establishments

represented in our extract from the LRD file were involved in an LBO

during the period 1981-86. This is about one-fourth the fraction in-

volved in all types of mergers and acquisitions.

     We found that plants involved in LBOs during 1981-86 had signifi-

cantly (about 14 percent) higher rates of productivity growth over that

five-year span than other plants in the same industry. The productivity

impact of LBOs is much larger than previous estimates of the productivity

 impact of all mergers and acquisitions. Among IlBOs --   the subset of LBOs

 in which the acquiror includes the managers of the acquired unit --   the

productivity growth differential was even larger -- about 20 percent.

      Two factors which may contribute to the relative productivity

 increase among LBO plants are: (1) increased intensity of effort by

 labor, and more generally, increased utilization of all employed inputs,

 due to increased sensitivity of their financial rewards (and penalties)

 to their performance; and (2) reduction in the proportion of resources

 misallocated to inefficient activities, due to curtailment of "free cash

 flow" and to more intensive monitoring of managers by investors.

      Our previous research suggests that a significant fraction of the

 productivity gains associated with changes in corporate control are due
                                                                         33




to reductions in central-office overhead. Since data on central offices

were unfortunately not available for this investigation, the estimated

productivity gains may substantially understate the true gains.

     The estimates suggest that plants involved in LBOs had above-average

levels of productivity 10 to 12 years prior to the buyout, but experi-

enced gradual declines in subsequent years until they were just above

average on the eve of the buyout. In the year of or following the

buyout, the relative productivity of these plants increases sharply to a

level higher than that ever previously observed. The productivity of

plants involved in MBOs appears to increase several years before the

buyout, although their productivity advantage widens considerably after

the buyout. Plants involved in "garden-varietyt' ownership changes have

productivity significantly below average inmediately prior to the trans-

action; plants involved in LBOs are no worse than average, and those

involved in MBOs are better than average.

     The difference in 1981-86 productivity growth rates between LBO

plants and non-LEO plants is mostly due to lower input growth, rather

 than higher output growth, of the former. Plants involved in LEOs during

 1981-86 tended to employ less capital and labor, relative to the industry

 average, in 1986 than they did in 1981. But the relative quantities of

 capital and labor employed in LEO plants were declining for several years

 before the buyout as well as for several years after, and the rate of

 decline was smaller (and less significant) after. LBOs are thus associ-

 ated with a reduction in the rate of (relative) downsizing.

      LBOs tend to be preceded or followed by significant and differential

 changes in the wages, hours, and employment of production and

 nonproduction employees. Total hours worked by production workers
                                                                           34




decline   more slowly after than before the LBO. Their hourly and (espe-

cially) annual wage rates increase after the buyout.   In stark contrast,

both the employment and wages of nonproduction workers decline sharply

following an LBO. These findings suggest that LBOs are associated with

reductions in intraplant wage dispersion and also with increased reliance

on wage incentives, and reduced reliance on monitoring by supervisors, to

elicit effort on the part of production workers. LBOs appear to be

productionlabOrusiflg, nonproductioxrlaborSaviflg, organizational

innovations.

     The results summarized above are based on the censored sample of

surviving establishments, i.e. plants that close are excluded from the

productivity, output and input growth calculations. (About 12 percent of

the plants present in 1981 are known to have closed within the next five

years.) Plants involved in management buyouts (but not in LBOs general-

ly) were less likely to subsequently close than other plants, as one

would expect given their relative productivity and the inverse relation-

 ship between productivity and the likelihood of plant closing.   Conse-

 quently, censoring of failing establishments may result in downwardly

 biased estimates of differences between MBO and non-NBO plants in produc-

 tivity, output and input growth.

      The final issue we investigated empirically was the effect of LBOs

 on R&D-intensity, which has previously been shown to be a significant

 determinant of the long-run rate of productivity growth. Because R&D is

 generally a firm- as opposed to establishment-level function, analysis of

 this issue was based on a distinct set of data, the RD-i survey panel.

 We found that the average R&D-intensity of a subset of 43 firms involved

 in (complete-firm) LBOs increased substantially during the period
                                                                         35




1978-86. The R&D-intensity of all firms was also generally rising during

this period, but at a rate no faster than that of the R&D-intensity of

LBO firms. These findings are not at all consistent with the hypothesis

that LBOs are associated with reductions in the propensity of firms to

invest in R&D.
                                                                        36




                               REFERENCE S

Abbott III, Thomas A. (1988), "Price Dispersion in U.S. Manufacturing,"
     Center for Economic Studies Working Paper, U.S. Bureau of the
     Census.

Bartel, Ann, and Lichtenberg, Frank (1988), "Technical Chance, Learning,
     and Wages," NBER Working Paper No. 2732, October.

Dunne, Timothy, Roberts, Mark, and Samuelson, Larry (1987), "The Impact
     of Plant Failure on Employment Growth in the U.S. Manufacturing
     Sector," mimeo, Pennsylvania State University.

Hall, Bronwyn (1988), "The Effect of Takeover Activity on Corporate
     Research and Development," in Corporate Takeovers: Causes and
     Consequences, Alan Auerbach (ed.) (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago
     Press), 9-25.

Jensen, Michael (1986), "The Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow: Corporate
     Finance and Takeovers," American Economic Review 76, May.

_________ (1989), "The Effect of LBOs and Corporate Debt on the
     Economy,".

Kaplan, Steven (1988), "Sources of Value in Management Buyouts," unpub.
     doctoral thesis, Harvard Business School, October.

Lichtenberg, Frank (1988), "The Private R&D Investment Response to
     Federal Design and Technical Competitions," American Economic Revie
     78, June, 550-559.

__________ and Siegel, Donald (1987), "Productivity and Changes in
     Ownership of Manufacturing Plants," Brookings Papers on Economic
     Activity, 643-673.

_________ (1989a), "The Effect of Takeovers on the Employment and Wages
     of Central-Office and Other Personnel," NBER Working Paper No. 2895.
     March.

_________ (1989b), "Using Linked Census R&D-LRD
                                                Data to Analyze the
     Effect of R&D Investment on Total Factor Productivity Growth,"
     Bureau of the Census, Center for Economic Studies Discussion Paper
     CES 89-2, January.

Maddala, C.S. (1979), "A Note on the Form of the Production Function and
     Productivity," in National Research Council, Measurement and
     Interpretation of Productivity (Washington: National Academy of
     Sciences), 309-317.

McGuckin, Robert H., and Andrews, Stephen H. (1988), "The Performance of
     Lines of Business Purchased in Conglomerate Acquisitions," presente
     at the American Economic Association meetings in Chicago,
     Dec. 25-30, 1987.
                                                                         37




McGuckin, Robert H., and Pascoe, George A. (1988), "The Longitudinal
     Research Database: Status and Research Possibilities," Survey of
     Current Business, November, 30-37.

Murphy, Kevin M., and Topel, Robert H. (1985), "Estimation and Inference
     in Two-Step Econometric Models," Journal of Business and Economic
     Statistics 3, October, 370-379.

Neter, John, Wasserman, William, and Kutner, Michael H. (1985), Applied
     Linear Statistical Models 2nd. ed. (Homewood: Irwin)

Pakes, Ariel, and Ericson, Richard (1989), "Empirical Implications of
     Alternative Models of Firm Dynamics," NBER Working Paper No. 2893,
     March.

Roach, Stephen S. (1989), "Living With Corporate Debt," Journal of
     Applied Corporate Finance 2, Spring, 19-29.

Smith, Abbie (1989), "Corporate Ownership Structure and Performance: The
     Case of Management Buyouts," unpub. paper, Univ. of Chicago,
     January.

Solow, Robert H. (1957), "Technical Change and the Aggregate Production
     Function," Review of Economics and Statistics 39, August, 214-231.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (1988), "Multifactor Productivity Mea-
     sures, 1987," USDL 88-478, Sept. 30.

U.S. National Science Foundation (1989), "An Assessment of the Impact of
     Recent Leveraged Buyouts and Other Restructurings on Industrial
     Research and Development Expenditures," February 1.

Forbes (1989), "Born-Again Stocks," March 20, 210-211.

Mergers and Acquisitions, various issues.
                                                                              38




                                    Table 1

                       Aggregate Value and Number of
              Leveraged Buyouts and Mergers and Acquisitions,
                                    198 1—1986



           Leveraged   Buyouts                   Me rgers and Acquisitions
           Total       Number   Average          Total       Number   Average
Year       Value       of deals
                       ________ Value            Value       of deals Value

                               Deals of all sizes

1981       $3093         99       $31.2             $82600    2395    $34.5
1982        3452        164        21.0              53700    2346     22.9
1983        4520        231.       19.6              73000    2533     28.8
1984       18810        253        74.3             122300    2543     48.1
1985       18030        254        71.0             179700    3001     59.9
1986       46620        333       140.0             173100    3336     51.9

                         Deals of value > $35 million

1981        3136         17       184.5              71128     235    302.7
1982        3422         21       162.9              47836     246    194.5
1983        3853         30       128.4              63532     306    207.6
1984       18805         53       354.8             121274     403    300.9
1985       13036         44       296.3             186009     505    368.3
1986       43850          79      555.1             198190     768    258.1

       Sources: Deals of all sizes:
                      LBOs: Mergers and Acquisitions
                      M&As: W.T. Grim & Co.
                 Deals of value > $35 million:
                 Securities Industry Association data base.
                 Value figures are in millions of dollar.
                                                                                              39




                                             Table 2

                        Value and Number of Leveraged Buyouts
                 Involving Companies Observed in Census LRD Extract


         Leveraged Buyouts of        I

         value > $35 m. involvingI
         companies observed in    I All leveraged buyouts                 I


         Census LRD extract       I of value > $35 m.                     I




         (1)         (2)     (3)     )       (4)        (5)      (6)               % of    % of
         Total              Average I Total                     Average            Value   deals
         Value     Number    Value    Value            Number    Value            (1)1(4) (2)/(5)

1981     2545.4      13      195.8       I 3136.4       17        184.5 I         81.2      76.5

         2437.4      14      174.1       I 3421.5       21        162.9           71.2      66.7
1982

1983     2195.2      16      137.2       I 3852.7       30        128.4           57.0      53.3

1984     10767.6     27      398.8 118804.9             53        354.8 I         57.3      50.9

1985      6033.6     24      251.4 113035.6             44        296.3 I         46.3      54.5

         24956.5     37      674.5 143849.9             79        555.1 I         56.9      46.8
1986

total    48935.9 131         373.6 186101.0            244        352.9 I         56.8      53.7
                                                                              I
period                                   I
                           Chart 1


     Procedure for Determining Whether or Not
    an LRD establishment was involved in an LBO
             During a Particular year




     company name
     on list of fi
                                     -   No        Not involved
                                                    in LBO
     acquired via                                  (LBO = 0)
     LBO during ••••••1j
    _______     year?




           Yes
I   LBO was o
                                         Yes       Involved
    the   entIi1                                    in LBO
                                                   (LBO    1)



             No


     SIC codes of
     division(s) involved                Yes       Involved
     in LBO include SIC                        >    in LBO
     code of this                                  (LBO = 1)
     establishment?


                                                   Not involved
                                                    in LBO
                                                   (LBO = 0)
                                                .-.. _:*____-—_


                                                                                     41   I
                                      Table 3

                Cumulative Value and Number of Leveraged Suyouts
                     During 1981-86, by Selected Attributes
                                                     LBOs of value > $35 m.
                                                     involving companies observed
                Al]. LBOs of Value ' $35 m.          in Census LRD Extract
                                                      Total                 Average
                 Total               Average                                 Value
                                     Value            Value       Number
                 Value     Number
AcquirOr
 included                                             $13220         48     $275.4
                $38982    116        $336.1
 management

AcquirOr
 excluded                                              35715         83      430.3
                 47118     128        368.1
 management

LBO of entire                                          35949         80      449.4
                  60853    133        457.5
 firm

LBO of part                                             12992        51      254.7
                  25248    111        227.5
 of firm
                                                        48941        131      373.6
                  86101    244         352.9
 All LBOs
                                                                         42



                                  Table    4


    Distribution of LRD   establishments involved in major LROs during
                           1981-86, by type of LBO


                                                    Other
                                HBO                  LBO




FULL-FIRII LBO                  239                  553           791
(percent)                      21.1                 48.9
(row percent)                  30.2                 69.8
(column percent)               59.9                 75.4


PARTIAL-FIRM LEO                160                  180           340
(percent)                      14.1                 15.9
(row percent)                  47.1                 52.9
(column   percent)             40.1                 24.6




                                399                  733

 Note: sums do not exactly match because several plants were involved
        in more than one type of transaction.
                                                                  43




                              Table 5


         Estimates of Parameter    in Equation (2):
       Effects of LBOs and MBOs on Productivity Growth


                                           Independent variable
                                             LBO         tBO
Productivity measure                       duy           dummy

                                            .028         .039
Raw residual
                                            (2.7)        (2.3)


                                            .100         .134
Studentized residual
                                            (2.9)        (2.4)



Note: t -   statistics   in parentheses.
                                                                 44

                               Table 6
       Differences Between Buyout Plants and Non-Buyout Plants
         in Mean Productivity Residual, by Year Relative to
                           Year of Buyout
                    (t-statistics in parentheses)

Year              e
                      LBO
                            -e
                              NON-LBO       MBO
                                                  - NON-PIBO

 -13                        1.6                   1.2
                            (1.3)                 (0.6)

 -12                        2.9                   3.2
                            (2.6)                 (1.8)

 -11                        2.6                   3.6
                            (3.0)                 (2.3)

 -10                         1.9                  2.2
                            (2.4)                 (1.7)

 -9                          1.8                   2.0
                            (2.4)                 (1.6)

 -8                          1.4                   1.3
                            (2.1)                 (1.1)

 -7                          2.0                   2.3
                            (2.9)                 (1.9)

 -6                          1.2                  -0.1
                            (1.6)                 (0.1)

 -5                          1.1                   0.7
                            (2.1)                 (0.8)

 -4                          1.2                  -0.0
                            (1.9)                 (0.1)

 —3                          1.3                   1.9
                            (2.2)                 (1.6)

 -2                          1.3                   2.2
                            (1.7)                 (2.0)

 —1                          1.1                   4.9
                            (1.4)                 (3.1)

 0                           2.2                   2.7
                            (2.5)                 (1.7)

 1                           3.5                   7.2
                            (3.1)                 (3.2)

 2                           2.3                   7.7
                            (1.7)                 (3.0)
                                                                      CHART 2

                                                 R[LATIVE PRODUCTIVITY OF LBO PLANIS OVER TIME


                                                                                                                                00000
      I
                                                                                                                                00000
      I                                                                                                                         *00*0
      I
3.3   +
                                                                                                                                00000

3.0 I                 *0*00                                                                                                     *0*00
      I               *0*0*                                                                                                     00000
      I               0*0*0                                                                                                     00000
2   7 +                                                                                                                         00*0*
      I               *0*0*   0*00*                                                                                             *0*00
      $
                      *0*0*   *0*0*                                                                                             *0*0*
     I                *0*0*   *00*0                                                                                             00000
2.14 +                0*0*0   *000*                                                                                             0*000   *00*0
     I                *0*0*   00*0*                                                                                             ••,•
     I
                      *0*0*   *0*0*                                                                                     *0*0*   •0000   0*00*
     I                *0*0*   00*0*                                                                                     *0*0*   00*0*   0*0*0
2.1   +               *0*0*   0*0*0                                                                                     00000   0000*   *00*0
                      *0*0*   *0*0*                           0*0*0                                                     *0*0*   0*000   0*0*0
                      *0*0*   0*00*                           *00*0                                                                     0000*
      I                       *0*0*   0*00*                   *0*0*                                                     *00*0   *0*0*
      I               0*0*0                                                                                             *00*0   0*000   0*0*0
1.8   +               0*00*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*           *0*0*                                                     0*00*   *0*00   *0*00
                      0*0*0   *0*0*   *0*0*   0*00*           *00*0                                                             0*00*   00*00
      I                       *0*0*   0*0*0   *0*0*           *0*0*                                                     *0*00
      I               0*0*0                                                                                             *0000   0*0*0   *0*0*
      I       *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *00*0           *0*0*                                                     0*00*   00000   00*0*
•5    +       *0*0*   *0*0*   0*00*   *0*0*   *0*0*           *0*0*                                                     00000   0*00*   000*0
              0*0*0   *0*0*   *0*0*   *00*0   *0*0*   0*0*0   *0*0*                                                             *000*   *0*00
                              *0*0*   *000*   00*0*   0*00*   *0*00                                                     *0000
              0*00*   *0*0*                                                                     *0*0*   *0*0*           *00*0   00*0*   *0*00
              *00*0   0*0*0   00*0*   0*00*   *0*0*   *0*0*   0*0*0
      $
      +       *0*0*   0*00*   *00*0           *0*0*   *oooo   *0*0*    *0*0*            *0*0*           0*00*           ...     ...•.
                                                                                                                                0*000
                                                                                                                                      •....
                                                                                                                                        *0*00
1.2                           *0*0*
                                      .e
                                      0*00*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*    *0*0*    *0*0*   0*0*0   0*0*0   00*0*   *000*   000*0
      $
              *0*0*   *0*0*                                            *0*0*    0*00*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *00*0   *0*0*   *0*0*   0*00*
              *0*0*   *0*0*   0*0*0   *0*0*   00*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*                                                     *0*0*   *0*00   *0*0*
              *00*0   *0*00   *0*0*   *0*00   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*    *0*0*    *0*0*   *0*0*   00*0*   *00*0   0*00*
          $                                                                                     0*00*   *0000   *00*0   *0*0*   0*0*0   0*0*0
      +       *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *00*0    *0*0*    *0*0*   *0*0*                                   0000*   0*00*
0.9                   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*00    *0*0*    *000*   *0*0*   0*000   *00*0   *0*00   *0*0*
          $
              *0*0*                                   *0*0*   *0*0*    0*00*    *0*0*   0*00*   *0*0*   *0*00   00*00   *00*0   0*00*   *0*0*
          I   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *000*                                                             *0*0*   *0000   *0000   *0*0*
              0*00*   000*0   *00*0   *0*0*   0*00*   *0*0*   *0*0*    *00*0    *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*                           *00*0
          $                                                                             *0*0*   *0*0*   0*0*0   *0*0*   00*0*   00000
      +       0*0*0   *000*   *0*0*   0*0*0   *0*0*   *0*0*   0*00*    *00*0    0*00*                                                   *0*0*
0.6                                           *0*0*   0*0*0   *0*0*    *0*0*    *0*0*   *0*00   *00*0   *0*0*   *0*00   00*0*   0*0*0
          $
              *0*0*   0*00*   0*00*   *0*0*                                                     0*000   0*00*   00*0*   *00*0   00*00   00*0*
              *00*0   *0*0*   0*0*0   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*    *0*0*    0*00*   0*0*0
          I                                   0*00*   *0*0*   *0*0*    0*0*0    *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   •o*0o   **0**   00000
          $
              0*00*   *0*0*   0*0*0   *0*0*                                                                             0*00*   *0*0*   00*0*
                      *0*0*   *0*0*   *00*0   00*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*    *00*0    *0*0*   *00*0   0*0*0   *0*0*   *00*0
0.3   +     *0*0*                                                                       *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *00*0   *00*0   00*0*   *00*0
            *0*0*     00*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*   *0*0*    *00*0    *0*0*                                           *0*0*   *000*
          I                   *0*0*   *0*0*   0*0*0   *0*00   0*0*0    0*0*0    0*0*0   0*00*   0*00*   00*0*   0*00*   *0*0*
                      *000*                                                                     *0*0*   0*0*0   *0*0*   *0*0*   0*0*0   ****U
          I *0*0*     *0*00   *0*0*   *0*0*   0*0*0   *0*0*   *0*0*    *0*00    *0*0*   *0*0*
          I
                                                                                                                  -1     0        I       2
               —13     -12     -11     -10      -9      -8      -7       -6      -5       -4      -3      -2

                                                                      YEAR
                                                                             CHART 3

                                                        RELATIVE PRODUCTIVITY OF MBO PLANTS OVER TIME


                                                                                                                                             *00**
     I
                                                                                                                                             0**
     I
                                                                                                                                     00*     0****
     I                                                                                                                               .....
7 +                                                                                                                                  a....   *0*0.
     I                                                                                                                               *0***   *0*0*
     I                                                                                                                               .*..*   00*0*
                                                                                                                                     *0*0*   0*0*0
     I                                                                                                                               a....   .....
6 +                                                                                                                                  a....   0*0*0
     I                                                                                                                               0e*.    0000*
     I                                                                                                                               *0*0*   *0.0*
     I                                                                                                                               a....
     I                                                                                                                               ...*a   a....
5    +                                                                                                                               a....   *0*0*
     I                                                                                                                               .a..*   .0*..
     I                                                                                                               *0000           a....
     I                                                                                                                               *****   00*0*
     I                                                                                                               000**           a....   *000*
ze   +                                                                                                               a.a.*           *0.0*   *00*0
  I                                                                                                                  *0***           0**00
  I
                                0*000                                                                                .a...           a....   .000*
  I
                                a....                                                                                0**a*           0***.
  I
                                a....                                                                                .....           a....   a....
3 +                     *****   *****                                                                                *0***           *00.0
                        a*a**   *aa*a                                                                                a.... .000*     0*0   *0*0*
         I
                                *0**.                                                                                a.... 00*0*     **.** 00•**
         I
                                *0***                              a....                                     a....   *0.0* ***0      ****  *0•*U
         I                      a.... *****     ***II*             0*II**                                    ***0*   *00*0 •a000     *00*0 *000*
2 +                             **** ***U
                                0****   0*0*.   0****              a....                           .o...     o*..a   a.... *0*0*     ****  a....
         I                              •****   a....              a....                           a....     aU*.•   •0** 0*0*0      *0*0*
         I
                                *0***                                                              00***     ****.
                                                                                                               ..... a.... ***a .....
                       a.... Oa**0      a****   ****a              .a*.a                           a....     o*o*a
                                                                                                               ,.... ..... s.... a....
                 ****  ***** a.... *a***       •.a.*               *...a                           0**0* aaa* ..e.o ...aa ..... .....
         I                               0.*** a..**
                                   0*** .****                      *0***
 I       +       **aa **a** ****0              **a**               a....                000*,      0**. 00*    *00*0 •*0** *0*0
                 aO*0. *o*a.             .a000 *a*aa
                             .0... ***. a....                      a....                .....      a.... ....  a.... .....
             i   a.... .e*a* a.... 0*0.. ***** ***** aa**                               a....      .a... a.... a.... a.... a.... a....
                 a**** eaa* *0*0*                                                       •****      ***a*     •a*     ...*e   a....   .**.e   a....
             I
                             a*a** a.a.. a.... aaeaa a....
 0 +
                                                                                                        -3    -2      -1      0        1      2
                         -12     -11     -10        9        -       -7            -6      5
                  -13
                                                                            YEAR
                                                                             4i


                                    Table    7

         Differences Between Buyout and Non-Buyout Plants in Mean
           Cumulative 1981-86 Growth Rates of Output and Inputs
                       Ct-statistics in parentheses)


                       Output      Capital       Labor    Materials

LBO plants               0.7        -6.4         -3.2        0.2
                        (0.4)       (3.9)        (1.8)      (0.1)



MBO   plants             2.5        -2.9         -1.4       -0.5
                        (0.7)       (1.1)        (0.5)      (0.1)


               NOTE:      Each of the estimates reported above is an
                          estimate of the coefficient a in a regression
                          of the form.

                          n Z86. = a 0 + a 1 B08186. + a2 £n Z81.1 +  + V.
                                i                  i.                 j
                          where Z86 and 281 denote output, capital, labor,
                          or materials in 1986 and 1981, respectively;
                          B08186 equals 1 if the plant was even involved
                          in an LBO (or tIBO) during 1981-86, and otherwise
                          equals zero; y. represents a complete set of
                          industry dummies; and the subscript i is the plant
                          index.
                                                                              48



                                    Table    8

             Differences Betwen LBO plants and Non-LBO Plants in
            Mean Growth Rates (in percent) of Output and Inputs,
                       by year relative to year of LBO


Year            Output             Capital               Labor          Materials


 -2               0.5                —0.9                -1.9                1.2
                 (0.4)               (2.4)               (1.1)              (0.6)



 -l               0.3                -0.4                -2.9               -0.8
                 (0.2)               (1.0)               (2.4)              (0.4)



 O               -0.0                _0.8*               -0.9               -1.3
                 (0.0)               (1.8)               (0.8)              (0.7)



 1               —0.7                —0.1                —1.3                2.5
                 (0.5)               (0.3)               (0.9)              (1.0)



 2               -0.2                -0.9                -1.0               -0.5
                 (0.1)               (1.4)               (0.6)              (0.2)



Averages

                  0.3                —0.7                -1.9               -0.3
—2,—1,0
 (Before)

                  —0.5               —0.5                -1.2                1.0
 1,2
 (After)
                    t-statistics in parentheses
                   *  significantly different from zero at .05 level
                    (one-tailed test)

                    AA   significantly   different from zero at .01 level
                    (one-tailed test)

                    Year 0 is the year in which the LBO occurs (is
                    completed). The growth rates refer to changes from
                                                                      -2 is
                    the previous year, e.g., the growth rate for year
                    the change from year -3 to year -2.
                                                                                        49




                                           TabLe 9

                      Differences Between LBO Plants and Non-LBO Plants
                    in Mean Growth Rates (in percent) of Labor Variables,
                               By Year Relative to Year of LB0
                                (t—statistics in parentheses)


                                                             Annual           Hourly    Annual
                Wage bill              Employment          wage rate        wage rate   hours
Year          N     P       NP       N     P    N-P      N     P     N-P        P         p



 -2          3.5 -0.6       4.1     1.3 -0.0    1.3     2.2 -0.6    2.8       -0.0       -1.6
             (2.5) (0.7) (3.0)     (1.2) (0.0) (1.2)   (2.1) (1.2) (2.3)      (0.0)      (1.4)
 -1        -2.6 -0.3 -2.3          -2.7   0.1 -2.8      0.1 -0.4 0.5           0.6       -2.7
             (2.3) (0.3) (2.4)     (2.4) (0.1) (2.7)   (0.8) (0.5) (0.4)      (0.8)      (2.2)
  0          -3.1 -0.4 -2.7        -3.1 —0.3 -2.8      -0.0 -0.1     0.1       0.0       -0.8
             (3.1) (0.3) (2.1)     (2.7) (0.4) (2.2)   (0.0) (0.2) (0.1)      (0.1)      (0.7)
  1          -3.4 0.8 -4.2         -3.3 -1.4 -1.9      -0.1    2.2 -2.3        1.7       -1.7
             (2.3) (0.5) (2.7)     (2.4) (1.3) (1.3)   (0.1) (2.7) (1.5)      (1.9)      (1.1)
  2          -7.2     1.2 -8.4     -2.1 -0.3 -1.8      -5.1    1.5 -6.6        0.6            1.2
             (4.4) (0.8) (4.8)     (1.3) (0.3) (1.2)    (3.6) (1.8) (3.8)     (0.6)          (0.7)

Averages
Before       -0.7 -0.4 -0.3        -1.5 -0.1 -1.4        0.8 -0.4    1.2       0.2           -1.7
(—2,—i ,0)

After        -5.3     1.0 -6.3     —2.7 -0.9 -1.8       —2.6   1.9 -4.5        1.2           -0.3
(1,2)
After-       -4.6     1.4 -6.0     -1.2 -0.8 -0.4       -3.4   2.3 -5.7        1.0            1.4
  Before

              Note: N denotes nonproduction workers
                    P denotes production workers
                                                                                 50




                                Table 10

                        Plants Closing in 1981:
           Mean Deviation From Respective Industry Means of
  Productivity Levels, Output Growth, and Employment Growth, 1972-81
                   (standard errors in parentheses)


                            Productivity       Output          Employment
                                Level          Growth            Growth


                                 — .027
1972
                                 (.013)

                                 — .030          — .009            - .016
1973
                                 (.011)          (.018)            (.016)

1974
                                 — .041          -   .058          -   .021
                                 (.012)          (.017)            (.012)

                                 - .042          - .000            - .026
1975
                                  (.013)         (.018)            (.011)

                                  - .048         - .015            - .016
1976
                                  (.013)         (.018)            (.012)

                                  -              - .029            - .031
1977                                  .049
                                  (.010)         (.015)            (.012)

                                                 -                 - .037
1978
                                  — .066              .071
                                  (.012)             (.015)        (.011)

                                  - .074         - .078            - .066
1979
                                  (.013)             (.020)            (.013)

                                  - .086             - . 136           - . 132
 1980
                                  (.013)             (.023)            (.015)

                                                     — .839            — .759
 1981                             —.184
                                      (.023)         (.043)            (.038)



 Note:     482 plants closed in 1981
         18768 plants remained open in 1981
                                                                                51




                                   Table 11

                Conditional Rates of Plant Closing (in percent)
                       for LBO or ?IBO plants, by Cohort,
                      and for all sample Plants, 1981-86


       All sample     1981 LBO   1982 LBO    1983 LBO    1984 LBO   1985 LBO   1986 LBO
Year     Plants        Plants     Plants      Plants      Plants     Plants     Plants

1981      2.3           1.2
1982      2.9           7.0        2.5
1983      2.6           4.7        0.8         1.9
1984      1.6           2.3        0.8         0.6         1.9
1985      2.0           0.0        1.7         1.3         3.0        1.9
1986      1.9           3.5        3.4                     3.0        4.3        1.2



       All sample     1981 NBC   1982 ?tBO   1983 ?IBO   1984 MBO   1985 NBO   1986 MBO
         Plants        Plants     Plants      Plants      Plants     Plants     Plants

1981      2.3           0.0
1982      2.9          16.7        0.0
1983      2.6           0.0        0.0         2.6
1984      1.6           0.0        0.0         0.9         0.0
1985      2.0           0.0        0.0         1.8         5.0        1.8
1986      1.9           0.0        6.3         2.6         1.7        1.8        1.4
                                                                                   52



                                   Table 12

         Mean R&D   Intensity:    LBO firms vs. All R&D        Performers,
                                    1978-1986


                                    (1)                  (2)
                                 Mean R&D            Mean R&D
                              Intensity      of Intensity of All
               Year              LBO Firms       R&D   Performers       (1)+(2)


A. R&D Expenditure + Sales
               1978                 1.2%                 2.9%                .41
                1979                1.2                  2.9                 .41
                1980                1.4                  3.0                 .47
                1981                1.4                  3.4                 .41
                1982                1.6                  3.5                 .46
                1983                1.7                  3.7                 .46
                1984                1.5                  3.6                 .42
                1985                1.5                  3.7                 .41
                1986                1.8                  34                  .53



B. R&D   Scientists    & Engineers ÷   Total   Employment

                1978                   1.4               3.1                 .45
                1979                   1.4               3.3                 .42
                1980                   1.5               3.2                 .47
                1981                   1.5               3.3                 .45
                1982                   1.5               3.8                 .39
                1983                   1.5               3.9                 .38
                1984                   1.5               3.8                 .39
                1985                   1.7               4.0                 .43
                1986                   1.7               3.6                 .47
                                                                   53




                         Table 13

       Proportions of (Current or Previous) LBO Firms
         and of all Firms Increasing R&D - Intensity
                     From Previous Year


                      Firms Involved in
                       LBOs in Current              All R&D-
Year                  or Previous Years         Performing Firms


1981                          50%                       20%


1982                          75                        55



1983                          41                        30



1984                          29                        29



1985                          48                        38



1986                          37                        31
