                          NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             HOW ELASTIC IS THE GOVERNMENT'S DEMAND FOR WEAPONS?




                             Frank R. Lichtenberg




                           Working Paper No. 3025




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   July 1989




Columbia University Graduate School of Business, and National Bureau of
Economic Research.  I am grateful to Larry Axtell of the Office of the
Assistant Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) for a number of helpful
discussions, and to two anonymous referees for helpful comments on a previous
draft.  This paper is part of NBER's research program in Productivity. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                     NBER Working Paper #302 5
                                     July 1989


          HOW ELASTIC IS THE GOVERNMENT'S DEMAND FOR WEAPONS?


                                 ABSTRACT

     We attempt to make inferences about the elasticity of the govern-

ment's demand for specific weapons by analyzing the statistical relation-

ship between quantity and cost revisions across the population of major

weapon systems, using data contained in the Pentagon's Selected Acquisi-

tion Reports.     The cost revisions are due in part to the arrival of

technological information generated in the course of research and devel-

opment.   When we standardize the data by program base year, we find that

the elasticity of demand is .55, and is significantly different from both

zero and unity.     Thus, the governments demand for specific weapons is

inelastic, but not perfectly inelastic.     The estimates also imply that

weapons acquisition is characterized by increasing returns: the wean and

median values of the elasticity of total cost with respect to quantity

are .78 and .72, respectively.




 Frank R. Lichtenberg
 Graduate School of Business
 Columbia University
 726 Uris Hall
 New York, NY 10027
 (212)854-4408
 BITNET: FAFLIGHT@GUGSBVM
     The weapons acquisition process has long been recognized to be

characterized by considerable uncertainty.    A 'major thesis" of Peck and

Scherer's (1962) seminal monograph on defense procurement was that       there

is uniqueness in both the magnitude and the diverse sources of uncer-

tainty in weapons acquisition" (p.   17).   They defined two broad classes

of uncertainties: internal and external.


     Internal (or technological) uncertainties relate to the possible
     incidence of unforeseen technical difficulties in the development of
     a specific weapon system. External uncertainties relate to factors
     external to an individual project and yet affecting the course and
     outcome of the project (p. 24).


The extent of internal (and possibly also of external) uncertainty about

a weapon system is greatest at the beginning of its "lifecycle.'      As

resources are devoted to the system's research and development (R&D),

information about the true cost of acquiring the system is generated, and

the degree of technological uncertainty is reduced.

     The question analyzed in this paper is, how do defense decision

makers --   the people in the Pentagon and Congress who make decisions
about the allocation of defense resources -- respond to the arrival of

new information concerning the cost of weapons acquisition?    Because in

most economic settings it is inefficient not to change behavior in

response to new information, this question relates to the degree of

efficiency of defense procurement, an issue of considerable concern to

policy makers and the public.1




     'In a recent paper, Rogerson (1988b) provides a theoretical model
which accounts for the stylized fact that the equilibrium "quality," or
     More specifically, we seek to determine the elasticity of the

governments demand for individual weapon systems.     When the government's

estimate of the cost of acquiring a given weapon changes as a consequence

of data generated in the course of R&D, how much (if at all) does the

desired "buy" (quantity) change?   An important determinant of the elas-

ticity of demand for a specific weapon is the degree of substitutability

between it and other weapons actually or potentially being acquired.

Scherer (1964, pp. 51-53) suggests that even systems that have no obvious

technical or operational substitutes are "threatened" by rival systems in

the bureaucratic competition for budgetary support.    In the early 1960s,

for example, (offensive) Polaris missiles and the Nike Zeus ballistic

missile defense programs were regarded by top Defense Department (DOD)

officials as substitutes, in effect.

     Early in a program's life—cycle, there is often intense competition

among a few potential suppliers to develop and produce the weapon.     But

once the design and technical competition is over, the system is likely

to be produced on a sole-source basis.   The winning contractor then

enjoys a monopoly with respect to the supply of the system.    The extent

of the contractor's market power, and his ability to earn monopoly

profits, are inversely related to the elasticity of the government's

demand,   The higher the demand elasticity, the lower the price the

contractor will seek to set and the lower his profit.2    It may also be




extent of technical sophistication, of weapon systems tends to be
inefficiently high.

     2Elastic demand is not the only feature of the environment that
might reduce monopoly profits. As Rogerson (1988a) has argued, such
profits tend to be dissipated through contract- or "rent-seeking" expen-
ditures on R&D during the design competition.  Lichtenberg (1988a)
                                                                               3




the case that the higher the demand elasticity, the lower the optimal

level of government expenditure to monitor and regulate the costs and

profits of defense contractors.

     Our research strategy for determining the demand elasticity is to

examine empirically the relationship between revisions in cost estimates

and revisions in quantity estimates across the population of major weapon

systems.   The revisions are from original or   baseline" estimates (made

around the start of full-scale development) to "current      estimates (made

at a subsequent date).

     A number of previous investigators have presented and analyzed data

on weapon system cost 'variance factors,'t defined as the ratio of actual

(ex post) system cost to the baseline (ex ante) estimate.      Peck and

Scherer (1962, p. 22) found that the mean cost variance factor in a

sample of 11 programs was 3.2; only one program had a factor less than 2.

These findings were consistent with earlier results obtained by Marshall

and Heckling (1962).     But Rich and Dews (1986, p.   12) found that

'acquisition programs of the 1970s and 1980s experienced less percentage

cost growth than acquisition programs of the 1960s"; they also found that

nondefense programs (except for highway and water projects, generally

characterized by only modest technical risk) "experienced greater cost

growth than the defense programs, in some cases much greater't (p. 10).

Some limited attempts have been made to explain differences across




provides evidence that firms incur considerable unreimbursed R&D costs in
connection with these competitions.

     3Tirole (1986) develops a theoretical model of contract negotiations
which provides a "justification" for equilibrium cost overruns.
systems in cost variance factors in terms of the magnitude of the techni-

cal advance sought.

     Previous authors have also, in some cases, provided distributions of

time and performance variance factors; these are, respectively, the ratio

of ex post to ex ante development time (in years) and system performance

(e.g., aircraft speed).    But we are not aware of any previous analysis of

         variances, or of attempts to relate these to cost variances in

order to make inferences about the elasticity of demand.

     En the next section we present a simple model of revisions in

weapons system quantity and cost estimates.    The following section

describes how the data contained in the Defense Departments Selected

Acquisition Reports can be used to estimate the parameters of this model.

Empirical results are reported and discussed in the next section.       The

paper closes with a suiary and concluding remarks.

I.   A Model of Quantity and Cost Revisions

     How do defense decision—makers determine the quantities of various

we&pon systems that the government will buy?     One might hypothesize that

decision-makers choose those quantities that maximize the amount of an

intangible ultimate good called "national security,'t subject to a budget

constraint.    There is a technology for producing national security, a

"national security production function."   The arguments of this function

are the quantities of N different weapon systems (X1, X2,. .   .,XN),   and the

quantity of (rvector of) other inputs Y (such as the number of troops

deployed).    DOD does not face a perfectly elastic supply of any given

weapon system at an exogenously—detertnined price.    Rather, there is a

cost function for each system, which indicates the (expected total) cost

of producing various quantities of the system.     DOD maximizes the
                                                                                   5




national security production function subject to the cost functions

(which may be nonseparable) and to an overall resource constraint.4

     Although we believe that specifying a national security production

function might be a useful approach to analyzing procurement behavior, we

will adopt the simpler approach of directly specifying demand functions,

rather than deriving them from a production function.          The particular

demand functions we specify implicitly impose (quite strong) restrictions

on the form of the production function (e.g., the elasticity of substitu-

tion between weapon i and weapon j    (i,j   = 1,...   ,N) is the same for all i

and j).

     We   postulate that at any given time in the life-cycle of a weapons

system, the Pentagon has estimates of (the slopes and intercepts of) both

the marginal cost schedule (the supply curve) and the marginal benefit

schedule (the demand curve) of the system.       In particular, the Pentagon

has such estimates at two times: the date at which full-scale development

begins (time 0), and at a later date (time t).          (Estimates made at time 0

are referred to as   tbaseline estimates.")     We assume that the supply and

demand schedules are log-linear.     The baseline schedules may be written


           £nMCÔ0-a2nQ                                                   (1)


           £nMBO0- 2nQ                                                   (2)




     4
      This model obviously abstracts from purely political factors that
may influence procurement decisions.   See Lichtenberg (1989) for a
discussion of theory and evidence concerning the possible link between
procurement decisions arid campaign contributions by government
contractors.
                                                                             6




where MC denotes marginal cost, MB denotes marginal benefit, Q denotes

quantity, and    is the elasticity of demand.5   For simplicity, we also

assume that the baseline quantity chosen by the government is the one

satisfying the equality between £n MC and £n MB6:


                                    00 -
           £nMC=2nMB>2nQ0              1
                                                                   (3)
                                           -a-

In order for     to be an equilibrium quantity, it must be the case that
  1
      > a: the demand curve must be more negatively sloped than the supply

curve.   Because, as we see below, weapons systems typically exhibit

decreasing marginal costs, the condition is not a trivial one.    Figure 1

illustrates the determination of baseline equilibrium quantity.

      As time passes following the start of full—scale development,

decision makers will revise their estimates of the supply andJor demand




     5The objection might be raised that the NB schedule is unlikely to
be log—linear in Q, since there will be a threshold number below which
the force is not viable. Below this threshold, MB will be zero (or
perhaps negative if adding a unit to an unsurvivable force increases an
opponent's incentive for preemptive attack), and it will either jump or
rise slowly before starting to fall with Q. However, it is not clear
that the sample includes observations where threshold force size effects
are important.

     6By making this assumption, we are abstracting from several problems
often thought to severely affect weapons procurement, much as moral
hazard, risk aversion and asymmetric information.   As Baron and Besanko
(1988, p. 342)-demonstrate, under these conditions the equality MC=MB
will not hold at the second-best optimum.   Because we are analyzing
changes in equilibrium quantity, however, there are two alternative
conditions under which deviations of the difference A E (ln MC - ln MB)
from zero will not affect the consistency of our estimates.   First, if A
is unchanging over the life of a weapons system, then A will cancel out
when we analyze revisions in Q over the life cycle. Second, even if A
does vary over the life cycle, our estimates of a and    will be consis-
tent provided that changes in    are uncorrelated across weapons systems
with changes in the intercept of the MC schedule.
                                                                                   7




schedules.    Information generated during the course of development about

the cost or difficulty of acquiring the system would result in supply-

curve revisions.7       Changes in the actual or perceived nature of the

"threat" from enemy forces, and revisions in supply-curve estimates of

other (complementary or substitute) systems under development would

result in demand-curve revisions.          We represent the Pentagon's estimates

of the supply and demand curves at time t (t > 0) as follows:


             2nflCô-a2nQ                                                  (4)

             2nNB=O_'2nQ                                                  (5)

We   assume that only the intercepts, and not the slopes, of the supply and

demand curves are subject to revision; data limitations would not allow

us to identify changes in the slopes.           Equilibrium quantity at time t

therefore satisfies


                    U    -o
             2nQ=                                                         (6)
                          -a


     71n addition to changing their estimates of marginal (variable)
costs, decisions makers may change their estimate of fixed costs. Eq.
(1) implies that the total cost (TC) function of the system may be
written
                               TC =   exp(00)
                                                     Qla   + K3
                                                1J
where K is fixed cost.    Changes in TC may be due to changes in K as well
as to cRanges in 0.   Only changes in 0 should affect equilibrium quanti-
ty.  In our empirical analysis, we use changes in ln TC as our indicator
(or measure) of changes in 0.    Since TC is also affected by changes in K,
our indicator is a "noisy" one, i.e. it is subject to error. If revi-
sions of K are uncorrelated with revisions of 0, then we have classical
measurement error and our estimate of the demand elasticity will be
biased towards zero.   If K and 0 revisions are positively correlated (as
one might expect), a downward bias also occurs, but it is smaller in
magnitude.   See Lichtenberg (1988b).
The revision in equilibrium quantity between time 0 and time t can be

calculated by subtracting (3) from (6):


                                  -   ôo)           0t    —   00
            £n(Q/Q) =        -'             ÷        -'
                                                              -a
                                  -a

The log-change in quantity is due to both Cupply- and demand-curve

revisions, each divided by the difference between the slopes of the two

curves.8    Equation (7), along with the baseline supply curve (1), can

under certain assumptions provide a basis for estimating the parameters a

and .      We have data, for 84 major weapons systems, on the quantity- and

supply-shift variables £n(Q/Qo)             and          (o -      ôo).       Unfortunately,   we do not

have data on the demand shift                                      But suppose, as seems
                                                -

reasonable, that demand shifts are uncorrelated with supply shifts across

weapons systems.     Moreover, assume that a and                          do not vary across

weapons systems.     Then the regression equation:


             (2n(Q/Qo)). =    -('       -   aY'(ô - ô).                   ÷
                                                                                                (8)


where the i subscript denotes weapon system i and c is a disturbance

term, will yield a consistent estimate of the nonlinear function of the




     8
       Supply- and demand-curve revisions may result in changes in the
performance, or quality, as well as in the quantity, of the system. We
will discuss below our admittedly imperfect attempt to adjust the data
for such quality change.

     9We have, however, what may be crude proxies or instruments for
demand shifts -- "year effects"; this issue is discussed below.
                                                                                       9




                 —1           —1 10
parameters -(         - ci)     .      Of course, neither ci nor   can be separately

identified from this equation alone, but the available data permit us to

estimate another equation which identifies a.              By simultaneously estimat-

ing the system of two equations, we can identify both parameters.


II.   Selected Acquisition Reports Summary Data

      The Department of Defense is required by law to submit periodically

to Congress Selected Acquisition Reports (SARs) for all major weapons

systems it is acquiring.              All programs that are estimated to require an

eventual expenditure for research, development, test, and evaluation of

more than $200 million (in fiscal year 1980 dollars), or an eventual

expenditure for procurement of more than $1 billion, are covered by this

requirement.     Routine acquisitions (such as trucks and common ammunition)
                                                                      11
and   highly sensitive classified            programs are excluded.

      The SAR provides a summary of key cost, schedule and technical

information about the program.             Current estimates of cost, schedule, and

technical data are compared with established and approved baseline

estimates, and a      'disciplined approach to the calculation of variances

[between baseline and current estimates] is applied."12                Most of the

schedule and technical data are classified, and therefore cannot serve as

a basis for economic research.             But the cost and (in most cases) the




     '0Even if-this function varies across systems, provided that it
varies randomly --       i.e.,
                         is not correlated with supply or demand shocks
-— the equation will yield consistent estimates of its mean.

     11According to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, the share
of DOD's budget authority for procurement, R&D, and construction that is
classified increased from 13.3 percent in fiscal year 1986 to 18.5
percent in fiscal year 1988.
      12
           Department of Defense (1986), p.         3.
quantity data are not classified, and in fact the Assistant Secretary of

Defense (Comptroller) regularly publishes a Program Acquisition Cost

Summary, which contains such data for all major weapons systems covered

by the reporting requirement.13

     The empirical analysis performed in this paper is based on data

reported in the SAR Summary Tables as of December 31, 1987) Among the

data items recorded for each weapons system are the following: weapons

system name, baseline estimates of quantity (Q0)    and cost (C0), base year

(year in which the baseline estimate was made), and current estimates of

quantity      and cost (C).'5     Thus, we can infer the (absolute or

logarithmic) changes in estimates of both quantity and cost between the

base year and the end of 1987 for each system.     These data alone would

not be sufficient to identify the demand and supply curve parameters.

But in addition to reporting the total cost change to date, the SAR

provides a distribution of the cost change by category (or "reason' for




     3Unfortunately, the published Summary doesn't provide data on
program attributes such as whether the program is strategic or tactical
(strategic programs tend to be given higher budgetary priority) and
whether the program is incremental in nature (a follow-on or modifica-
tion) or represents an entirely new endeavor.
     14
       Clearly, this methodology is potentially subject to the problem of
                  .




censoring of the data. Previously initiated programs that had either
been ("successfully") completed or ("unsuccessfullytt) terminated are
absent from our data set.   (Relatively few programs are cancelled,
however.) This means that the programs we observe are a nonrandom (in a
relevant sense) sample of the population of all weapons programs. To
address the censoring issue, we would need to collect data on completed
and terminated programs as well as programs in progress.   This is beyond
the scope of this paper.

     '5Both baseline and current estimates of costs are given in both
base—year (constant) dollars and in current-year dollars. Revisions in
current-year dollar estimates reflect changes in inflation assumptions
and projections as well as changes in real program costs.  In this paper,
we analyze only the estimates expressed in base—year dollars.
                                                                               11




the cost change).   The six categories and brief descriptions of them are

as follows:


     Quantity change.  A change in the nuxnber of units of an end item of
     equipment.  This does not include changes in support items.

     Schedule change.  A change in a procurement or delivery schedule,
     completion date, or intermediate milestone for development or
     production.

     Engineering change. An alteration in the physical or functional
     characteristics of a system or item, after establishment of such
     characteristics.

     Estimating change. A change in program cost due to correction of an
     error in preparing the baseline cost estimate, refinement of a prior
     current estimate, or a change in program or cost estimating assup-
     tions and techniques.

     Support change.  Cost changes associated with training and training
     equipment, peculiar support equipment, data, operational site
     activation, and initial spares and repair parts.

     Other.  A change in program cost due to natural disasters, work
     stoppage, and similarly unforeseeable events not covered in other
     variance categories.


     For the moment, we will group the last five categories together, and

think of revisions in estimates of total costs as occurring for two

distinct reasons: (1) quantity changes, and (2) all other reasons.       We

will argue that under the accounting framework used for preparation of

the SARs, these two categories correspond to movements along the (base-

line) supply curve and shifts of the supply curve, respectively.

     Figure 2 illustrates how DOD accountants allocate the change in

total cost into these two categories.    NC0 and NC represent the baseline

and current marginal cost schedules, respectively, and Q0 and      the

baseline and current quantities.   The area under the NC0 curve to the

left of Q0 corresponds to the baseline estimate of total cost, C.        The

area under the NC curve to the left of      corresponds to the revised
estimate of total cost, C.                The difference C1 - C0 may be represented as

the sum   of two components, which we denote by CQ and iCN.                         iCQ is the

change in cost that would have occurred if on:Ly the quantity had changed,

and the MC curve had not shifted.                      is the cost change that would have

occurred if only the MC curve had shifted, and the baseline quantity had

been        iCQ corresponds to the first of the six categories into which

total cost change is allocated, CN to the sum                     of   the other five.

       It is perhaps apparent that information about C0, CQ and

enables us to determine both the slope and the shift of the supply

function.    In fact, our assumptions of log-linear supply curves with

constant slopes and (possibly) shifting intercepts imply the following

relationships between supply curve parameters and the observable
            16
variables



            £n(1 +       _q) = (1     -    a) Pn(Q/Q0)
                         0




                                           CN
                 -   60 =    £n(1                                                        (10)
                                    + C0



Substituting for              -       in    eq.   (8) using eq. (10),



                                                             CN
  (n(Q/Q0)).         =               - aY1(2n(1                           +     -        (11)
                                                      ÷ C0




     16See the Appendix for derivation of eqs. (9) and (10). It is, of
course, possible to solve eq. (9) explicitly for a; we write the equation
in this form because we will interpret it as a regression equation for
estimating a.
                                                                                   13




Equations (9) and (11) consitute a system of recursive nonlinear simulta-

neous equations, which provides a basis for estimating both the demand

and supply elasticities.

     The intercept &   of   eq.    (ii) may be interpreted as the mean value of

the demand shock.    Notice that eq.      (9) has a zero intercept.    This

reflects the fact (which applies to our data) that a weapon system with

zero quantity change has zero quantity-related cost change.           This equa-

tion, however, was based on the assumption of a log-linear MC curve.           If

the true MC curve is not log-linear, then a log—linear curve fitted to it

may have a nonzero intercept, even if the true curve passes through the

origin.    We therefore estimate variants of eq.      (9) both excluding and

including an intercept.

     Although above we tentatively defined aCQ simply as "quantity-

related cost change" (the first category) and ACN as "all other cost

changes" (the remaining five categories), we need to make two amendments

to the latter definition.         We will treat both engineering-related and

support-related cost changes as neither shifts in nor movements along the

supply curve.    As defined above, engineering-related cost changes are due

to efforts to alter the physical characteristics, or "quality,t' of the

system.    (In practice, most such expenditures are incurred to modify

"mature" weapons in order to extend their useful lives, and avoid the

acquisition of entirely new systems.)        Our analysis thus far has been

based on the implicit assumption that we were examining the relationship

between cost changes and quantity changes of systems of unchanging

quality.    In the literature on ("hedonic") price measurement and quality

change, an accepted technique of "adjusting" for quality change in price

indices is to subtract the producer's cost of increasing the product's
quality; this technique is used by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the

government agency that produces the official price indices.17          Thus,

eliminating engineering-related cost changes from consideration appears

to be appropriate if we want to examine the relationship between

"quality-adjusted" changes in cost and quantity.

        Support-related cost changes are excluded from both CQ and

because these represent changes in the cost of complementary goods rather

than changes in the cost of the weapon system itselfj8           It may be useful

to interpret support-related cost changes within the context of a simple

two-equation system of demand equations.          Let the subscripts 1 and 2

denote end-items and support items, respectively, and P, Q,         and C denote

price, quantity, and cost.         Suppose that the supplies of both products

are perfectly elastic at exogenously-deterinined prices, and that the

demand equations are log—linear:


        ln Qi =   Bij   ln P1 + °12 ln P2
                                                                          (12)
        in Q2 = 821 in P1 + °22 in P2

Hence

        ln C1 = (eu      + 1) ln P1 + °12 ln P2
                                                                          (13)
        ln C2 = °21 in P1 + (22 + 1) ln P2


Since the two goods are assumed to be complements, the cross— as well as

own—demand elasticies are assumed to be negative.          Changes in C1 and C2




     175ee Early and Sinclair (1983) and Lichtenberg and Griliches (1988)
for discussions of the issue of quality change in the context of output
and price measurement.

     18We initially conjectured that support-related cost changes should
be included in our definition of AC   on the grounds that the baseline
                                            ,



cost estimate C0 includes the cost f support items (e.g., spare parts)
                                                                                                  15




are seen to be jointly endogenous; it would be incorrect to regard

support-related cost changes as causing changes in C1.                       Although we can

observe changes in P1 (i.e., the supply shift                       -   oo), C1,   and C2,

unfortunately we cannot observe changes in P2, so we can't identify the

e.
 1]
      other   than e11.

      To summarize, CN will be defined as the sum of schedule, estimat-

ing, and other changes.             We will also estimate models in which ACN 1

disaggregated into its components.


III. Empirical Results

       This section begins by presenting descriptive statistics on quantity

and cost revisions for 84 major weapons systems.'9                      We then report and

analyze estimates of the model developed in the previous section.                            To

facilitate discussion, we adopt the following notation:


       DQ =   log(Q/Q0)                 (log change in system quantity)




       DC.Q =   log(1   +                   (log   change in cost due to quantity change)




       DC.NONQ =   log(1    +   C       +   CQ          (log change in cost not due to
                                    0                   quantity   change)




as well as the-cost of the ("end-item") weapons themselves.                         But this
definition led to nonsensical estimates of .

     '9The SAR Summary Tables contained data for exactly 100 systems.
Thirteen systems had classified data on program quantities and therefore
had to be excluded from the sample.   The value of the ratio Q /Qo was
zero for 2 systems (the Navy }tFAJ and the Air Force I—S/A AMPk) and
extremely small (3/645) for the Air Force small ICBH.   The former two
also had to be excluded; the latter one was also because it was a major
outlier.
                                           Ac
                                                SCHED
     DC.SCHED =           log(1    +
                                                                       (log       change in cost due to
                                            o           Q              schedule change)


                                           Ac
                                                ESTIM
     DC.ESTIN =           log(1    + c
                                                                       (log change in cost due to
                                            o           Q              estimating       change)


                                           Ac
     DC.OTHER             log(1
                                   +
                                                            )          (log   thange in cost due to other
                                            o           Q              change)


     LAGE =      log(1988.1            —   Base Year)                   (loz of       'age" of baseline estimate)


     Because ACN            ACScHED + ACESTIM + ACoR, and because all four of

these variables are small, on average, relative to (C0 + ACQ) DC.NONQ is

approximately equal to the sum of DC.SCHED, DC.ESTIM AND DC.OTHER (since

£n(1 + x)        x when x is "small").                            Using this notation eqs.         (9) and (11)

may be written


     DC.Q = (1        -    a) DQ                                                                          (14)

     DQ. =        -   (1 a) DC.NONQ. ÷ (c.
                              -                                               -   U
            =     + it DC.NONQ. + u.                                                                      (15)



where t -(                - aY1 and u.                      (c.    -


     Table 1 presents descriptive statistics and a correlation matrix for

these variables.           The mean change in log quantity is                               .23, indicating a 26

percent average increase in the number of units.                                        The huge defense

buildup of the-early 1980s is no doubt largely responsible for this

increase.       Mean cost change attributable to quantity change (DC.Q) is

lower than quantity change (DQ) itself --                                     .18 compared to .23 -- evident-

ly reflecting decreasing marginal cost.                                   Mean cost change not due to

quantity change (DC.NONQ) is quite small (.03) and not significantly
                                                                                               17




different from zero.          Perhaps this is because firms are forced to "eat"
most of the costs of schedule, estimating, and other changes.
      There are two alternative approaches one can take to estimating the
parameters     and , and           we will pursue both of them.            One can estimate a

separate value of ,
                              .,       for   each weapons system using the equation

(based on (14))


                     =    1   -    (DC.Q/DQ.)                                           (16)


Obviously,   . can   be calculated only if DQ.                     0, which is true in the

case of 64 Out of 84 observations.20                 Statistics relating to the

distribution of the 64 ce's are as follows:
                                   1



                              mean                          .222
                              std. dcv.                     .630

                         guantiles
                              .95                           .779
                              .75                           .513
                              .50                           .284
                              .25                           .099
                              .05                       -   .508


The mean and median values of . appear to be quite consistent with

previous estimates of the elasticity of cost with respect to quantity

contained in the empirical learning-curve literature on the defense

industry.    One can then replace the constant c by the variable c. in

eq.   (15) and estimate            by nonlinear OLS (NOLS)           estimation   of that




     20Due to the presence of   and u. in eq. (15), one cannot estimate
separate values of ,          ., from
                               that e4uation (conditional on ct) in an
analogous fashion.  Attmpts to do so yield absurd values of te .; for
example, their mean is —.74, and their standard deviation is 10.5.
equation alone.       The alternative approach is to assume (as we did above)

that both a and        are invariant across observations, and to interpret

eq.   (14) as a regression equation for estimating a.                                    Disturbances in this

equation arise due to both non-log-linearity of the MC schedule and to

deviations of a. from the assumed common a.                                 Estimates of a and             are

obtained via simultaneous estimation of eqs.                                (14) and (15).       The distur-

bances of the two equations may be correlated, so we may increase the

efficiency of the estimates by using nonlinear seemingly unrelated

regressions (NSUR),     or joint generalized least squares, estimation.
        Because eq.   (14) has a zero intercept, the OLS formula for the

slope of this equation is


                                                     Z(DC.Q.)(DQ.)
                                                 =              1               1
                                  (1 —
                                                          I (DQ.)       2



                                                     Z(DC.Q)(DQ.)
Hence                              a =       1   -   _____________
                                                           1    1

                                                          I (DQ.)
                                             Z(DC.Q)2(DC.Q./DQ.)
                                                      1                     1        1
                                  =1—
                                                          Z(DQ)2

                                    1    -   Zw.(1    -    a.>      =       Zw.a.
                                                                                    11
                                                 1          1



using (16) and the definition w.                     BQ/ZDQ (hence Zw. = 1).                      &   is   a


weighted average of the individual a.ts, with weights proportional to

the square of the log-change in quantity.                           The sign of the difference

between & and E E           Za.         .222 (the unweighted average of the a's)
                      -4—
depends on the sign of the correlation between a. and w.: sgn(& -                                              =

sgn(corr(a.,w.)).      The sample value of the correlation coefficient is
                                                                                  19




positive (.176) although not very significant (prob.-value =       .16),   so &

will   exceed the simple average of the cr's.21

       Table 2 present estimates of the demand elasticity for the version

of the model with individual a's         and estimates of both demand and cost
                                 1


elasticities   for the version with common a.      The first line shows nonlin-

ear OLS estimates of eq.    (15) in which the parameter a is replaced by the

computed aj's as defined in eq. (16).        The estimate of   is positive (as

hypothesized) but far from being significantly different from zero.         The

intercept      is positive and highly significant.     The insignificance of

implies that we cannot reject the hypothesis that quantity demanded does

not respond to supply shocks.        The correlation matrix in Table 1 reveals,

however, that both DQ and DC.NONQ are positively correlated with the age

of the baseline estimate (a proxy for the age of the program itself):

older programs tend to have experienced both higher quantity growth

(perhaps due to larger demand increases) and greater supply shifts.

These correlations might tend to bias downward the estimated demand

elasticity.

       We can, perhaps, eliminate or at least reduce this bias by control-

ling for system age in the DQ equation,        The most general way of doing

this is to include (program base) "year effects" as regressors in that

equation.     When we allow for these effects, we are analyzing the within—

xi     relationship   between DQ and DC.NONQ, i.e., we are asking whether

programs that experienced larger supply shifts had lower quantity

increases than other programs with the same base year.         This seems a more




       2l view of eq. (16), this positive correlation may be at least
partly spurious, induced by errors of measurement of DQ, due for example
to "phony" estimates of baseline quantity Qo. Such errors would also
bias upward the estimate & from eq. (15).
                                                                                  20




appropriate reference group than the entire set of programs, which vary

considerably in age.      To the extent that there are changes over time in

overall defense demand (e.g., the 1979-84 defense buildup) that affect

all programs then in existence, these year effects may be considered as

capturing demand shocks common to systems of given age.

        Line (2) of the table displays the estimates when year effects are

included in the DQ equation.         As expected, the estimate of the demand

elasticity increases, to about .54.         Its t—ratio is now 1.66, so the

elasticity is significantly greater than zero at about the 5 percent

level, using a one-tailed test.

        The estimates in line (3) and in subsequent lines are from the

common—a version of the model, and are therefore based on a larger sample

(observations for which DQ =     0    are included).   The estimates of     and

in line (3), which correspond to the model without year effects, are

similar to, but slightly smaller than, their counterparts in line (1).

The estimate of a    is   larger than the simple average of the a., consistent

with our earlier discussion of the relationship between & and         .     The

estimated intercept of the DC.Q equation (a0) is small but statistically
               22
significant.

        In line (4) we replace the intercept       of the DQ equation by a

complete set of year dummies.         This has virtually no effect on the

estimates of a and a0 but almost triples the point estimate of ,            to

.557.     This icvirtually identical to the point estimate of         in line 2

(although the standard error is 30 percent lower), which suggests that




     22The correlation between the disturbances of the DQ and DC.Q eqs.
is close to zero (—.01), so the NOLS and NSUR estimates of this model are
virtually identical.
                                                                                21




the   estimate of   is not sensitive to what assumption we make about the
                     23
heterogeneity of

       In line (5) of the table we include year effects in the DC.Q

equation as well as in the DQ equation.       Their inclusion has essentially

no effect on the estimates of       and a.

       The estimated standard errors reported in Table 2 are correct if and

only if the disturbances of the equation(s) are homoskedastic.         We tested

the null hypothesis of homoskedasticity using the test of first and

second moment specification proposed by White (1980), and rejected the

null hypothesis in the case of both equations.24        Because eq.   (14) is

linear in the parameter a, it is straightforward to compute the

heteroskedasticity-consistent standard error of a: it is .064, about 75

percent larger than the uncorrected standard error of .037 on line (5).

Because eq.    (15) is nonlinear in ,   it   is unfortunately not straightfor-

ward to compute the heteroskedasticity—consistent standard error of .

However we can, perhaps, get an idea of the magnitude of the appropriate

correction by computing both the uncorrected and heteroskedasticity-

consistent    standard errors   of the "reduced—form" parameter




     23Pojt estimates of the year dummies corresponding to line (4) are
as follows for 1970—87, respectively: .63, .54,.96, 75, NE (not esti-
                                                           .

mated -- no observations with program base year 1974), .35, .22, .81,
.48 ,,12,.03,.22,.09,. 70, -.02, .42, .03, -.01. The standard errors
on the individual year dummies are large, so that most are not signifi-
cant, but the coefficients reveal a clear pattern.  The average value of
the 1970-78 (pre-defense buildup) year dummies is .59, and that of the
1979—87 dummies is .18.  Programs initiated before the defense buildup
experienced much larger (positive) demand shocks than those started
during or after the buildup.

     24This is somewhat surprising since the logarithmic transformation,
which usually attenuates heteroskedasticity, is applied to all of the
variables.
                                                                                      22




     =          -
it                          these are .395 and .469, respectively.     Since the value

of it    is   predominantly determined by ,      this   may indicate that the stan-

dard errors of             reported in Table 2 are underestimated by no more than

16 percent.

         For each equation, we also tested the hypothesis of normality of the

residuals using the Kolomogorov D statistic.                Despite the fact that plots

of both distributions appeared similar to normal curves, the hypothesis

was rejected at the .01 level in both cases.                Given the moderate size of

our sample, however, rejection of normality is unlikely to seriously

undermine the validity of our inference procedures.

         Because the total shift in the supply curve DC.NONQ is (approximate-

ly) the sum of shifts occurring for three different types of reasons --

schedule changes, estimating changes, and other changes -—               it   seems

natural to inquire whether the response of quantity demanded to supply

shifts depends on the nature of or reason for the shift.                We investigate

this issue by removing DC.NONQ from the DQ equation and, instead, includ-

ing as regressors its three components, DC.SCHED, DC.ESTIN, and DC.OTIIER.

We allow the              coefficient associated with each of the three components

to differ.          Estimates (standard errors) of the         coefficients associated

with DC.SC}EED and DC.ESTIM were as follows:25


                                   DC.SC}EED       1.215
                                                   (.227)
                                   DC.ESTIN         .333
                      -                            (.324)




      25Estimates of the coefficient on DC.OTHER would not converge after
 numerous attempts with different starting values.  This may be due to the
 relatively low variability of DC.OTHER: the number of observations with
                                                                           23




It is obvious that our finding above of a negative correlation between

DC.NONQ and DQ (hence a nonzero demand elasticity) was due primarily to

the negative correlation between DCSCHED and DQ.26      The response to cost

revisions due to schedule changes is large -- indeed, greater than one

--   and highly significant.   These estimates suggest that procurement

officials adjust program quantities mainly in response to cost revisions

that are associated with schedule changes.

        This interpretation, if it is correct, appears in certain respects

consistent with the observations made by Peck, Scherer, and others about

tradeoffs between cost, time, and performance in weapon system acquisi-

tion.     Improving the performance, or quality, of a system entails in-

creases in development cost and/or time.     Reducing development time

requires increases in cost and/or sacrifices in quality, and reducing

cost means either slower development or lower quality.     Data presented by

Peck and Scherer suggest that decision makers attach the greatest impor-

tance to achieving performance objectives, the least importance to

achieving cost objectives, and intermediate importance to achieving

development time objectives.     For a sample of 12 weapon systems, they

found that whereas "actual performance more frequently exceeded original

promises than fell below them" (p. 23), actual development time was on

average 1.36 times as large as the original time estimate, and actual

cost was 3.2 times the original cost estimate.     This suggests that




 nonzero values of DC.SC}IED, DC.ESTIM, and DC.OTJ1ER were 51, 82, and 15,
 respectively. See also their standard deviations reported in Table 1.
      260ur previous estimate of     of about .55 is close to a
 variance-weighted average of the     coefficients associated with DC.SCHED
 and DC.ESTIN.
                                                                            24




decision makers have lower tolerance for time slippage than for cost

growth, and are willing to incur substantial additional cost to keep    a


program close to schedule.   A program that experiences significant

schedule delays despite the infusion of additional funds might be inter-

preted as one encountering unusually serious technical difficulties, and

therefore one liable to the greatest quantity reduction (or the smallest

quantity increase).

     Our key empirical finding is that there is an inverse relationship

between program quantity changes and (non-quantity-related) changes in

program costs, particularly those due to schedule changes.    We have

interpreted these program cost changes as reflecting exogenous "supply

shocks" that occur in the course of weapons acquisition, an activity

characterized by considerable technical uncertainty.    As Peck and Scherer

note, this is "the most common explanation offered for time, cost and

quality variances" (p. 435), and it is consistent with data analyzed by

Marshall and Heckling, who found that "average production cost and

development time variances were an increasing function of the size of the

technological advance sought't (p. 435).   But Peck and Scherer argue that

'ttecbiiological uncertainty is one likely cause of development cost

overruns, but by no means the only cause" (p. 436).    They maintain that

the most significant cause of schedule delays is the "lack of urgency in

connection with lower priority programs" (p. 459).

     In this vein, one could argue that the negative correlation across

programs between quantity changes and schedule—related cost changes is

due to the response of both variables to unobserved demand shocks, rather

than the response of the first to the second.    In this case, of course,

our estimate of   could no longer be interpreted as a demand elasticity.
                                                                           25




Suppose that changes in the (actual or perceived) nature of "the threat"

change the relative demand for different programs: some programs seem

more, others less, attractive than they did under previous evaluations of

the military environment.   In the case of programs that have become less

attractive, decision makers might be hypothesized to do two things:

reduce program quantities and "stretch out" the development and acquisi-

tion of the remaining quantities.   Such "stretch—outs" will generally

result in schedule-related cost increases, so that these demand shocks

could contribute to the observed negative correlation.

     We have both a theoretical and an econometric response to the

objection that    may not be identified due to our inability to measure

demand shocks.   First, Defense Department officials claim that decisions

to stretch out programs are generally not related to decisions to change

the ultimate size of the program.   (In fact, stretching out a program may

be the only or easiest way of preserving the original size of the pro-

gram.)   Also, because both positive and negative deviations from the

original schedule of program milestones will generally result in

schedule—related cost increases, programs that have experienced demand

increases would (under the assumptions of the previous paragraph) exhibit

both quantity increases and schedule-related cost increases.   This would

induce a positive correlation between DQ and DC.SCIIED, and tend to offset

the effect of programs whose demand has declined.

     We can attempt to address the potential problem of endogeneity of

DC.SCIIED by estimating the DQ equation via instrumental variables.     The

difficulty, of course, is finding appropriate instruments for DC.SCIIED,

and our choices are severely limited.   Because DC.ESTIN was not signifi-

cant in the DQ equation, and also because based on their definition it
                                                                                     26




 seems to be a relatively "pure" supply shock (less likely than DC.SCHIED

 to be contaminated by demand shocks) we dropped it from the DQ equation

 and instead used it as an instrument for DC.SCHED.             We also used DC.OTI-IER

as an instrument.     The ("first-stage") linear regression of DC.SCJED on

these two instruments is as follows (standard errors in parentheses):


            DC.SCHED = .024 + .176 DC.ESTIM +.l67 DC.OTHER +             error
                      (.008)   (.039)               (.488)

When we estimate equation (15),         replacing   DC.NONQ   by the   predicted value

of DC.SCIED from the first—stage regression above,             the estimate (standard
error) of      is 1.317 (0.422), about the same as (indeed, slightly larger

than) the non-instrumental estimate.         The standard error approximately

doubles, but the parameter remains highly significantly different from

zero.     The similarity of the two estimates suggests that (conditional on

this set of instruments) we do not commit a specification error in using

NSUR, and therefore that the NSUR estimates should be viewed as

consistent.


IV.     Summary and Conclusions

        We have attempted in this paper to make inferences about the elas-

ticity of the government's demand for specific weapons by analyzing the

statistical relationship between quantity and          cost revisions across the

population of major weapon systems.         We interpret the cost revisions as

due in part t& the arrival of technological information generated in the

course of research and development.         If the government's demand is less

than perfectly inelastic, it will react to this information by changing

the quantity of the weapon it will buy.         The more elastic the demand, the
                                                                                27




less market power is wielded by sole-source suppliers of particular

systems.

     When we standardize the data by program base year --        in   effect

comparing a program only to those other programs entering full-scale

development at about the same time -- we find a significant negative

correlation between quantity and cost changes.         The estimated elasticity

of demand is .55, and is significantly different from both zero and

unity.     This suggests that the government's demand for specific weapons

is inelastic, but not perfectly inelastic.         The estimates also imply that

weapons acquisition is characterized by increasing returns: the mean and

median values of the elasticity of total cost with respect to quantity

are .78 and .72, respectively.

     Further analysis revealed that the negative correlation          between

quantity and cost revisions -— hence the nonzero demand elasticity -- was

entirely attributable to one component of cost revisions: those associat-

ed with changes in the acquisition schedule.         The elasticity of quantity

with respect to schedule-related cost increases is about twice as great

as the elasticity with respect to cost increases generally.           In princi-

ple, it is possible that schedule-related cost increases are due to

demand-induced stretch-outs of programs rather than supply-related, or

technological, shocks.     But it.   is   not clear on theoretical grounds that

unobserved demand shocks could account for the correlations we observe,

and the demand—shock interpretation is also not supported by one econo-

metric attempt to correct for it.
                           Figure 1

    Determination of Baseline Equilibrium Quantity and Cost


$




                       MB =   Oo   -   P12n   Q




                                                  Zn MC   60 - a Ln Q



                                                                  Ln Q
    N::
                     Figure 2

    Allocation of C into Components CQ and


$
                                     TABLE 1

                        DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS:
                     QUANTITY AND COST REVISIONS,
                       84 MAJOR WEAPONS SYSTEMS



Variable     Mean          Std. Dev.       Median               Mm.          t1ax.

DQ           .229            .664              .063         -2.52            2.55
DC.Q         .175            .412              .0T9         -1.17            1.64
DC.NONQ      .052            .237          -.004            -0.28            0.95
DC.SCHED     .029            .080              .000         -0.14            0.45

DC.ESTIM     .027            .208          -.009            -0.43            0.74

DC.OTHER     .003            .017              .000         -0.09            0.08

LAGE        1.80             .915          1.808            —2.30            2.90




                           CORRELATION MATRIX


                    ç9     DC.NONQ     DC.SCHED       DC.ESTIM    DC.OTHER    LAGE

DQ         1.00
DC.Q        .87     1.00
DC.NONQ    -.07     -.17      1.00

DC.SCHED   -.20     -.26       .66        1.00

DC.ESTIM   -.06     -.14       .97         .47           1.00

DC.OTHER    .26      .15       .28         .13            .22         1.00

LAGE        .14      .19       .31         .29            .25          .21     1.00
                                                heteroskedasticity. for corrections appropriate
    of discussion for text See     errors. standard tieteroskedasticitrconsistent not are These         a,   Note:
                                         (.227)                               eqs.
             (.037)
              .449    •
                                          .548                              DC.Q DQ,                           (5)
(.024)       (.034)                      (.227)
                                          .557                               eq. DQ                            (4)
 .048         .443
(.024)       (.034)       (.075)         (.256)
 .051         .458         .240           .199         84         NSUR        none         Common              (3)
                                         (.324)
                                          .539                               eq. DQ                            (2)
                                                                                                    •
                          (.098)         (.316)
                           .332           .255         64         NOLS        none     -   Indiv.              (1)
                  a                                    N       techniqt     DC.Qegs.         a                Line
                                                               Estimation     DQ, in    commbn or
                                                                             Effects    Individual
                                                                               Year
                  standard (asymptotic                                      Specification_features
         errors)a
              estimates Parameter
                              ELASTICITIES SUPPLY AND DEMAND OF ESTIMATES
                                                  2 TABLE
                                                                      32




                                       Appendix

                 Derivation of Equations (9) and (10)



nMCô0-a2nQ
   MC =                   where             a exp(60)



TC(Q) =   ôqdq        =   ô(1     -




2n TC = 60   -        - a)   +    (1    -    a)2n    Q


2n TC        - 2n   TC(Q0)   = (1       -    a)[9n       -   2n Q0]


[2n TC(Q)]oo        - [n     TC(Q)]oo            =
                                                                         33




                                       References


Baron, David, and Besanko, David (1988), "Monitoring of Performance in
     Organizational Contracting: The Case of Defense Procurement,"
     Scandinavian Journal of Economics 90, 329-356.

Department of Defense (1980), 'Preparation and Review of Selected Acqui-
     sition Reports,'t DOD 7000.3-G, OASD (Comptroller), Nay.

__________ (1986),      'Instruction 7000.3," April 17.

_________ (1988),    Selected Acquisition Report (SAR) Summary Tables, as
      of Date: December 31, 1987," OASD (Comptroller), Nay 13.

Early, John, and Sinclair, James (1983), "Quality Adjustment in the
     Producer Price Indexes," in Foss, Nurrary (ed.), The U.S. National
     Income and Product Accounts: Selected Topics (Chicago: University of
     Chicago Press).

Lichtenberg, Frank (1988a), 9The Private R&D Investment Response to
     Federal Design and Technical Competitions," American Economic Review
     78, June, 550-59.

__________ (1988b), "Aggregation of Variables in Least-Squares Regres-
     sion," unpub. paper, Columbia Business School, June.

__________ (1989), "Contributions to Federal Election Campaigns by
     Government Contractors," Journal of Industrial Economics,
      forthcoming.

__________ and Griliches, Zvi (1986), "Errors of Neasurement in Output
     Deflators," NBER Working Paper No. 2000; Journal of
     Business and Economic Statistics.

Narshall, A., and Neckling, W. (1962), "Predictability of the Costs,
     Time, and Success of Development," in Nelson, Richard (ed.), The
     Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social
     Factors (Princeton: Princeton University Press), 461-75.

Peck, Nerton, and Scherer, Frederic (1962), The Weapons Acquisition
     Process: An Economic Analysis (Boston: Harvard Business School).

Rich, Nichael, and Dews, Edmund (1986), 'Improving the Nilitary Acquisi-
     tion Process: Lessons from RAND Research,' RAND Corporation Report
     R-3373—AF/RC, February.

Rogerson, William (1988a), "Profit Regulation of Defense Contractors and
     Prizes for Innovation: Theory and Evidence," unpublished paper,
     Northwestern University, January.

_________ (1988b), "Quality vs. Quantity in Military Procurement: An
       Organizational Theory of Decision Bias,' unpublished paper, North-
       western University, February.
                                                                       34




Scherer, Frederic (1964), The Weapons Acquisition Process: Economic
     Incentives (Boston: Harvard Business School).

Tirole, Jean (1986), 'Procurement and Renegotiation," Journal of
     Political Economy 94, April, 235-59.

White, Halbert (1980), "A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix
     Estimator and a Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity,' Econometrica
     48, 817—838.
