NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FORMAL EMPLOYEE TRAINING PROGRAMS AND THEIR IMPACT ON
EVIDENCE FROM A HUMAN RESOURCES SURVEY
LABOR PRODUCTIVITY:

Ann P. Bartel

Working Paper No. 3026

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1989

This paper is part of NBER'a research program in Labor Studies
Any opinions
expressed are thoaa of the author not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #3026
July 1989

FORMAL EMPLOYEE TRAINING PROGRAMS AND THEIR IMPACT ON LABOR
PRODUCTIVITY: EVIDENCE FROM A HUMAN RESOURCES SURVEY

ABSTRACT

Although economic models of training decisions are framed in terms of a
company's

calculation of the costs and benefits of such training, empirical
work hss never been able to test this model directly on company behavior. This
paper utilizes a unique database to analyze the determinants of the variation
in formal training across businesses and the impact of such training on labor
productivity. Major findings are that large businesses, those introducing new
technology end those who rely on internal promotions to fill vacancies are more
likely to have formal training programs. Formal training is found to have a
positive effect on labor productivity.

Ann P. Bartel
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
710 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027

I. Introduction
According to a recent issue of Training Magazine, U.S. organizations
with fifty or more employees spent $32 billion on formal programs for

employee training and development. Although human resource mauagers
argue that training is critical for developing a productive workforce,
very little is known about how companies make decisions about budgets for
formal training and whether such training increases measured labor

productivity. Previous research by labor economists on employee training
has focused on the impact of training on the individual's success in the
labor market, i.e. how training raiaes the individual's wage and reduces

the probability of a layoff. Economists have also studied why eeployers
are more likely to train certain individuals than others, and, in partic-

ular, have shown that individuals who are expected to stay with the firm
are more likely to be the recipients of training. Hence, economic
research on training has been concerned with the impact of investments in

training on the distribution of earnings. Likewise, research on training
by industrial and organizational psychologists has been conducted at the
individual level, focusing on the impact of training on the employee's
cognitive skills, work effort, and morale.

This paper is unique in that it focuses on the organization as the

unit of observation. Although economic models of training decisions are
framed in terms of a company's calculation of the coats and benefits of

such training, empirical work has never been able to test this model

directly on company behavior. Researchers have been forced to make
inferences about company behavior based on data on the careers of indi-

viduals. By utilizing a unique data base on human resource practices in
U.S. businesses, I am able to study the variation in the training effort

2

across companies. A simple economic model is used to derive several
testable hypotheses about the variables that can explain why some busi-

nesses invest more in employee training than others. The role of firm
characteristics, such as technological change and firm size, as well as
characteristics of the company's industry, such as the extent of competi-

tion in the product market, are studied. The impact of formal training
programs on labor productivity is also analyzed.

In the next section of the paper, the literature on employee training is summarized in order to show the types of data that have been
available to researchers who have previously studied the topic of employ-

ee training- In Part III, I describe the survey I am using and discuss
its strengths sod weaknesses relative to other databases that have been

used for the study of employee training. Fart IV specifies a simple
model that is tested with the survey data. In Part V, the impact of

training

-

of labor productivity is measured. Conclusions are provided in

Part VI-

II. Literature Review
In this section of the paper, I suasaarize the literature that exists

on the subject of employee training and development. In preparing this
summary, I have reviewed work by economists and industrial psychologists
as well as the results of previous surveys of corporate training programs.

A. Economists
Econosists who study on-the-job training have primarily been interested in eDdelling who receives training and how it affects the individu-

al's growth in earnings over his working life. Examples of this literature are the studies by Mincer (19837 1987), Brown (1983), Lillard and

3

ran (1986), Pergamit and Shack-Marques (1986), Barron et al, (1987, 1988)

and Lynch (1988). These studies use data from national surveys such as
the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, the National Longitudinal Surveys,
the Current Population Survey and the Employment Opportunities Pilot

Project. Information on training from the first three data sets is
obtained directly from the individuals who are surveyed. For example, in
the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, which was used by Mincer and Brown,

individusla are asked "On a job like yours, how long would it take the
average person to become fully qualified?" and "Are you learning skills

on the current job which could lead to a better job or promotion?" The
National Longitudinal Surveys, which were used by Mincer, Lillard and
Tan, and Lynch, contain a variety of training questions depending on the
particular cohort that was surveyed. For example, in çbe older IlLS
cohorts, the training questions are "Do you receive or use additional

training (other than schooling training) on your job?" and "What was the

longeat type of training you have had since the last interview?" The NIS
youth cohort, however, contains information on all training spells in the
respondents' working life and it is possible to separate company training

from apprenticeship training. The individuals in this survey were first
interviewed in 1978 when they were between the ages of 14 and 21 and have

been re-surveyed every year or two since that time. The January 1983
Current Population Survey, used by Lillard and Tan and Pergamit and

Shack-Marquez, contains the following question on training: "What training was needed to get the current or last job and what training is needed

to improve skills on the current job?" Finally, the 1980 Employment
Opportunitiea Pilot Project Dataset, used by Barron et al. •

is

unique in

that it surveys employers. The employers were asked to provide information on the amount of on-the-job training provided their most recently
hired worker, as measured by the number of hours typically spent by
various personnel in training such an individual.
The main findings of this research csn be summarized briefly.
Individuals who receive training are likely to be young, white males.

Host studies also find that the more educated individuals receive more

training than the less educated. Private sector training is found to
play a significant role in the wage determination and career patterns of
young workers; individuals with more training have significantly larger

wage growth and longar job tenure. The data from the EON' Survey also
show that individuals who received more training in their first three

months of employment have significantly faster productivity growth during
their firat two years with the employer.

B. Industrial Psychologists
Industrial psychologiata have studied the effects of employee

training utilizing experimental methods and case studies. They have
measured the effectiveness of training in one of four ways; (1) subjective learning (judgments of course participants or trainers); (2) objective learning (results on standardized tests); (3) subjective behavior
(changes in on-the-job behavior, sa perceived by course participants,

peers or aupervisors); and, least commonly of all, (4) objective results
(tangible indicators such as reduced costa1 improved quality or quantity

of output). An excellent survey of studies conducted by industrial
psychologists on the subject of managerial training is provided in Burke

and Day (1986). They review seventy articles that evaluated the effectiveness of training programs for managerial or supervisory personnel in

5

various companies. In all of these studies, the individual is the unit

of

observation and individuals who received training are compared to

those who were not in the training program. The comparisons are made on
the basis of scores on skill or knowledge tests, performance rankings,

ratings during role play, and survey ratings by subordinates. n1y a
handful of these studies evaluated training programs in terms of objec-

tive results. The best example of the latter type of study is the one
tonducted by James S. Russell et al (1985) in which 62 retail stores
belonging to the same international merchandising organization were the

units of observation. Russell etsl found that sales volume per employee
was positively and significantly correlated with the percentage of sales

personnel who received training in basic sales procedures and with the
sales personnel's perceptions of the emphasis given training in the
store.

The main problem with these studies is that each one is limited to a
relatively small group of individuals (normally between 50 and 100) in
one company so that it is difficult to generalize the findings beyond the

company under study. Although the Russell article examines 62 companies,
they are in the same industry and belong to the same organization. In
her critique of the psychologicsl research, Ingols (2987) accuses the
researchers of minimal cross—referencing; "they do not look for common

themes across companies, but focus on the specific case at bend." She
concludes thst this line of research has left us with a limited and
fragmented knowledge about the role of training in corporations.

C. Surveys of Corporate Training Progresis

Information on investments in employee training csn also be obtained
frc)n

surveya that are conducted by vsrioua organizations. For example,

6

each year1 Lakewood Research, a division of Lakewood Publications, the
publisher of Trainingjlajazine, conducta a survey of U.S. organizations

with 50 or more employees. Respondents are asked for information on the
amount their organization budgets for formal training, the number of
individuals who receive training during the year, and the number of hours

of training they receive. The information from approximately 2400
respondents is extrapolated by Lakewood Research to a universe of 230,000

brganizations and reported in aggregate figures only. For example, the
results of the 1987 survey, published in Nay 1988, indicate that $32

billion was budgeted for formal training that year with 38.8 million

workers scheduled to receive 1.2 billion hours of traioing. The survey
also described the types of training (e.g. managenent skills, technical
skills, clerical skills, sales skills, etc.) provided by the respondent
companies and showed how these differ across industries and size of firm.

A second example of a corporate survey is the study prepared by The

Conference Board in 1975 (Lusterman, 1977). They surveyed 2800 companies
that had st least 500 employees and received usable responses form 610
firma. These data were then extrapolated to the universe of 7600 fines.
Information on per employee expenditures for formal in-house training,

tuition aid and other outside training was obtained. The main findings
of this study were that the companies spent an average of $60 per employee on the three types of training, $48 of which was spent on formal
in-house training; large companies spent more per employee than small
companies; and the share of the training budget attributed to formal
in-house training rose from 47% for the firms in the smallest size

category to 87% for the firms in the largest size category. Converting

7

the 1975 expenditures to 1987 dollars would produce an expenditure of $93
per employee on formal in-house training.

In 1985, The Conference Board surveyed 218 companies to obtain
information on changes in corporate education and training that had

occurred in the previous five years (Lusterman, 1985). While this new
report did not contain any cost information, it discussed how the train-

ing function had increased in importance at the surveyed companies. A
larger proportion of employees in all major job categories were involved

each year in formal training ss compared to five years earlier. The
companies reported that they were strengthening and widening the role of
corporate training departments and were using more sophisticated methods
to evaluate the need for and to assess the impact of employee training.

A third example of a corporate survey is the one conducted by the
Battelle fluman

Affairs

Reaearch Center in 1987 (see Saari et al., 1988).

This group sent a mailed questionnaire to 100 U.s. companies randomly
selected from all private-for-profit companies having at least 1000

employees. While the response rate was excellent (61%), the survey only
collected data on management training. The information is in the form of
categorical variables such as the company's use of formal on-the-job

training, mentoring, job-rotation, training needs assessment and training

evaluation aystems. The survey also collected information on the reasons
companiea give for selecting various training program approaches (e.g.

external vs. internal), and the process used to select participants for
these programs. The major finding from this survey is that 89% of the
companies reported using formal training/education programs with usage of

this training being positively correlated with company size. In spite of

8

the prevalence of formal training, there was limited evidence of systematic evaluations of management training by the companies in this sample.

D Summary
As this literature review has revealed, what we know about employee
training is that it has positive career impacts on the individuals who
receive it, that U.S. companies spend a fair amount on formal training,
and that many case studies conclude that employee training is effective
in improving job performance. What, is lacking, however, is a clear
understanding of why some companies invest heavily in employee training

and others do not. To date, no one has been able to study the variation
in formal training across businesses, to describe the factors that
determine that variation, and to analyze the impact of formal training on
the organization's labor productivity; with the exception of the EOPP
survey, the focus has always been on variation in training across indi-

viduals. It is the purpose of the current research to shift the focus of
analysis to the company that is making the training decision.

Ill. The Columbia Business School Human Resources Survey
In 1981, the Industrial Relations Research Center of the Columbia

Business School conducted a survey of human resources policies and

practices in American businesses. A questionnaire was sent to the
executives responsible for 7,765 business units during the time period

covering the fall of 1986 though the spring of 1987. The name and
address of the executive in charge of each unit was obtained from the

Compustat data files. Responses were received from 854 business units
(11 percent response rate), though useable data were received from only

493 business units (6.4 percent overall response rate). Although this

9

response rate is low, it is not substantially different from the response
rates obtained by anelysts who conducted much less comprehensive surveys
of organizations' HR?1 policies (for example, see Hitt and Ireland, 1986).

The businesses in the Columbia survey are smaller than those used in the

Battelle survey. Fifty-percent of our businesses have fewer than 900
employees; twenty-five percent have fewer than 240 employees. Recall
that the Battelle survey only included businesses with at least 1000
employees and this may, in part, explain why their response rate was so

high. We did indeed have a better response rate from larger business
units. Responding business units tended to be: larger than nonrespondents

and reported significantly higher sales, operating income, capital

expenditures, assets, and equity than nonreapondenta. The industrial
distributions of the two groups were very similar.
The survey instrument sent to COMPUSTAT business units elicited

detailed data pertaining to 1986 on organizations' HRH policies and
practices covering various occupational groups: (11 managers; (2) unionized and (3) nonunion professional and technical workers; (4) unionized
and (5) nonunion clerical workers; and (6) unionized and (7) nonunion

manufacturing and production workers. Information on training and
development, selection, evaluation and compensation policies, and commu-

nication and employee involvement policies was obtained for each of these

groups. In addition, the business units provided information about their
overall human resource planning.

The data from the human resources survey have been merged with the

data on the COMPUSTAT files. Hence, for each of the business units in
the survey, we have information on capital expenditures, value of assets,

operating income, research and development expenditures, and net sales.

10

Demographic characteristics of the business's employees are proxied by
the characteristics of the employees in the organization's industry and
geographic labor market, as reported in the Current Population Survey

data. In addition, for the business units in the manufacturing sector,
we have information on the following attributes of the business unit's
four-digit SIC category: concentration ratio, value of exports, value of
imports, value of the capital stock, value of inventories, value of
bhipments, total factor productivity, energy expenditures, and number of

employees. Data on these variables are evailsbls for the time period
1958—1984 inclusive.

On the subject of employee training and development, the survey asks
several questiooa as they pertain to each of the seven occupational
groups.
(1)

The questions for each of these groups are:

Does your business have a formal employee training and development program?

(2) If yes, when was the program instituted?
(3) If yes, who participates in decisions about the types of
training and development program undertaken by your business?

(4) What was the approximate cost of formal training and development programs per employee in your business last year?

(5) What indicators are used to assess employee training and
development (e.g. employee opinions, productivity on the job,
cost-benefit analysis)?

As this list indicates, the only measure of amount of training is the

cost figure. Unlike the EOPP Survey, information on time spent by

supervisors

-

or others in training individuals or the amount of time it

11

takes for a newly hired individual to become "trained", was not solicited.
A follow-up questionnaire is being prepared to obtain these data.

Although the response rate in the Columbia survey is low relative to
those of the surveys of corporate training programs discussed in the
previous section, the Columbia survey clearly surpasses the others in

terms of the wealth of detail that is available on the company's human

resource policies and its economic characteristics. As I show in the
next section of the paper, these data are critical elements of a model of

corporate investments in employee training. The earlier studies that
utilized corporate surveys were not concerned with hypothesis testing
regarding variation in the training effort across businesses and, hence,
could conduct a less intensive data collection effort while concentrating

on maximizing sample size. The Columbia Business School Survey took an
alternative approach, namely, the need to collect a large amount of

information from each respondent in order to be able to systematically
study how and why human resource policies and practices differ across
American businesses.
Table 1 reports mean values for training questions Cl), (3), and (4)

above for each of the seven occupational groups. Formal training programs are used in one-third to one-half of the businesses in our sample,

depending on the occupational group under study. These training programs
have been in existence longer for unionized employees than nonunionized

workers. Unfortunately, data on the cost of formal training per employee
were reported by a amall percentage of the businesses in the sample.
However, these data can be utilized to make a rough estimate of the total

amount that the average business spent on training. Assuming thst it had
the average number of employees in each employee category, the average

12

business would have spent about $5.5 million on training in 1986.
Multiplying this figure by the number of businesses in the COMPUSTAT
files (including those without useable names and addresses for execu-

tives) would result in a total expenditure of $55 billion for 1986.1
Table 2 provides information on the prevalence of formal training

programs across industry categories. The variable PCTTRAIN, defined as
the

percentage of occupations in each business for which a formal train-

ing program existed, is calculated, and mean values by industry are

reported. As Table 2 shows, the mean value of PCTTRAIN is .412, wiLh a
low of .083 in the entertainment services industry and a high of .635 in

the transportation industry. We also see that retail trade and the
finance and insurance industry have above average values for the training
index.

As the data in Table I indicated, many companies with formal training programs did not respond to the question regarding the cost of formal

training per employee. Since this variable is particularly important for
measuring variation in training intensity across business, we need to
explore why some businesses answered this question and others did not.
In particular, the existence of selectivity bias must be considered.

Table 3 provides more detail on this issue by showing how the response
rate varied across occupation groups and across size categories where the
businesses are divided into four quartiles based on number of employees.
Each entry in Table 3 shows, for each occupation, the percentage of

1Unlike the CO1WUSTAT "company" dataset, the COHPIJSTAT "buaineas-line"
data act does not include a weighting factor that would have enabled me
to calculate an estimate of the amount spent on training by the population of U.S. businesses.

13

businesses with a formal training program that reported cost of training

for that program. The entries in parentheses show the percentage of
businesses with formal training programs for that occupation. The data
show no clear pattern. While the response rate initially rises with
size, it falls off for the very large businesses. Although these large
organizations are most likely to have formal training programs, they
either do not have or choose not to report information on cost of train-

Ing. The entries in Table S are highly correlated across occupations.
In other words, if a company reports training costs for one occupation,

it reporta it for the others as well. Indeed, the correlations across
occupations are all above .75, and, in many cases, exceed .9. This
suggests that firm characteristics aside from size may be important in
explaining the response rate.

To test this hypothesis, I estimated a binary logit model on the
subset of firms that reported having a formal training program for the
particular occupation under study; the dependent variable equals one of
the businesses reported cost of training information, and equals zero if

it did not. Three categories of variables are used. The first describes
the economic characteristics of the business unit and includes SIZE number of employees, ROA -

return

the

on assets, calculated as the ratio of

met income to identifiable assets and CAPLAB -

the

capital-labor ratio,

calculated as the ratio of capital expenditures to the number of employ-

ees. The second category describes the business's human resource policies and includes Y'ItPGN -

the

year in which the training program was

instituted, and POLICY — an index measuring the degree of sophistication

of the business unit's human resource policies.2 The third category is a
set of industry dummies where the excluded category is finance, insurance

and real estate.3 The binary logit results are shown in Table 4 for
managers and the three nonunion occupations; sample sizes were to small

for the unionized occupational categories. There is no evidence in Table
4 of any systematic relationship between the business's economic characteristics and the probability of reporting training cost information;
heither SIZE nor ROA have significant effects and CAPLAB is significant

in only one equation. Businesses with more sophisticated human resource
policies are not more likely to report cost information, and in one case,

are even less likely to report it. The year the training program was
instituted is significant in only one case. In sum, there is no obvious
explanation as to why some companies reported training costs and others

did not. My guess is that many respondents were not sure what costs
should be included in our definition and/or they were unable to readily
locate a cost measure for their organization.

IV. Determinants of Company Training Programs
In this section of the paper, I show how a simple model can be
specified and estimated to explain the observed variation in the presence

2The index is defined as follows. The organization receives one
point for escb yes answer to the following questions: (1) Does the
organization have a formsl written KEN plan? Does the organization
formally evaluate policies developed in the following 11KM areas:
(2) Work organization and job design? (3) Employee selection and staffing? (4) Employee training and development? (5) Communication and
participation programs? (6) Performance appraisal? (7) Compensation?
(9) Employee relations?
(8) Union-management relations?
3The industry variables are NONDUR - nondurable manufacturing, OUR —
manufacturing, TRANSP - transportation, WIITRADE - wholesale

durable

Is

of

formal employee training programs across the busineases in our sample.

A. A Basic Framework
Using the assumption that the businesses in our sample are profitmaximizers, we can derive several testable hypotheses about the determi-

nants of company training expenditures. The company's profits are
defined as grosa sales minus the wage bill, training expenditures, and
all other expenditures on inputs:

II = P II -

x

where P =

the

produced, w =

training

wL -

tL

-

rK

price of the the product X, X

the

wage rate, L =

the

the quantity of output

quantity of labor utilized, t =

expenditures per unit of labor, K = a composite index of all

other factors of production, and r =

the

per unit cost of this composite

index.

Maximizing fl with respect to t,

training

expenditures per unit

of

labor, results in the following condition:

xatLx
a

which simply states that the businesa will choose that level of t where
the marginal return from an additional dollar spent per worker on train-

ing just equals its marginal cost. According to the left-hand side of
equation (2), the marginal return from an additional dollar spent per
worker will be higher in those businesses where the average product of

retail

trade, RETAIL trade, BUSSERV PERSERV - personal services.

business and repair services and

16

labor is more sensitive to investments in training. Equation Cl) can be
modified to describe the company's maximization problem as one of maxi-

mizing the discounted flow of future profits. In this case, the marginal
return on a current expenditure on training will equal the discounted sum
of increases in the average product of labor over the expected working
life (T) of the company's employees:

T
(3)

.'
i=l

We

k!)i. = 1
1

can derive several hypotheses about the variation in per worker

training expenditures across businesses by considering what factors are
likely to lead to a greater sensitivity of the average product of labor

to training expenditures. First is the degree of technological change in
the firm. Companies that are introducing new technology have a greater
need to train their employees in order to implenent the technology and

reap its benefits. The productivity of labor in this type of company
will be more sensitive to training because the potential for learning is

greater. A second variable to study is the average tenure of the workers
in the company. As equation (3) indicates, the payoff from training is
higher in those companies where employees are likely to stay longer.

Third, the role of company size needs to be considered. As the literature review indicated, previous surveys have shown that large companies

spend wore per employee on formal training than small companies. If
tenure is longer, on average, in large companies than small ones, this

could explain the role of size. If this is not the case, then, according
to equation (2), the only way to explain the role of size is to argue
that labor productivity is more sensitive to training in large firms than

17

in small ones. There-are two possible explanations. The first is based
on the argument that it is more difficult to monitor worker productivity

in large firms. According to this view, training is more critical in
large firms, than small firms, ceteris paribus, because workers are more

likely to shirk there. A second explanation relies on the notion of
public goods. Instead of expressing training expenditures as the product
of per worker expenditures and the number of workers, we could simply

Write total training expenditures, T. Then the marginal return from an
additional dollar spent on T will be greater in large firms because a one
dollar increase in T will increase the productivity of all workers.

While this is a somewhat extreme case, it is consistent with a perhaps
more realistic notion that there are "economies of scale" in the provision of training; one aupervisor can teach a class of trainees and each
trainee could learn as much as he would have in a private training

session. Finally, product competition should play a role in the firm's
calculation of the returns to training. For example, a company that is
facing tough competition from domestic competitors or from foreign
companies may increase its investments in employee training as a way of
improving product quality and lowering production cost.

B. Empirical Specification
The hypotheses discussed above are tested on the survey data using

the binary variable on the presence of a formal training program.4 The
data are stacked so that the number of observations equals the number of

4Tbe training coat variable was also used and produced very poor
results. In light of the low response rate on this question and the
difficulty that companies may have had in interpreting it, the poor
results are not surprising.

18

companies multiplied by the number of occupation groups in the company.
The equation that is estimated is;

TR..

a0 + aj FIRFL

13

3

+

a2 OCCV.

-

13

+ O OCCDIJN.
1

where TR.. equals one if business j has a formal training program for
occupation i, and zero otherwise; FIRM. is a vector of characteristica
describing the firm such as size, technological change, industry dummies,

industry characteristics, and the extent of human resource planning in
the company; OCCV.. is a vector of variables describing the business's
human resource practices that are specific to the occupation; and OCCDU1I.

is a vector of occupation dummies. As equation (4) is specified, the
coefficients on the variables in OCCV. are constrained to be the same
1
across all occupations but the equation will also be estimated without
this restriction.

The variables in the vector FIRMJ

are measured as follows. First

the degree of technological change in the business is measured in several
ways.

I use the ratio of R&1

expenditures

to sales (RDRATIO) and the

ratio of capital expenditures to the number of employees in the business
(CAPLAB)

These two variables are calculated from the COMPUSTAT files.

The extent of technological change in the business's industry is also

proxied by the average education level of workers in that industry. As
Bartel and Lichtenberg (1987) have shown, industries undergoing technological change increase their demand for educated workers because education increases an individual's ability to learn new things and to adapt

to environmental changes. Hence, we would expect that businesses in
industries with highly educated workers are more likely to be introducing
new technology, and, as the model showed, will therefore be more likely

to invest in employee training and development.5 The average education
of workers in the company's three-digit SIC industry (ETHiC) is calculated

from the 1983 Current Population Survey. The size of the business is
obtained directly from the survey responses to the questions regarding

number of workers in each occupational category (SIZE). When this was
unavailable, information on the number of employees was obtained from the

COMPUSTAT files. In order to control for variation in the importance of
human resource policies to business strategy, a variable measuring the
extent of human resource planning in areas other than employee training

in the organization was calculated from the survey. This variable,
called KRPOLICY, is similar to POLICY defined in footnote 1; the only
exception is the deletion of the response to the question on training.
Information on product competition in the business's industry is only

available for the businesses in the manufacturing sector and refers to

the four-digit SIC category of which the business is a member. Two
variables are used to measure product competition. The first, the
concentration ratio in the industry (CRATIO), is a measure of the extent

of domestic competition, There are two problems with this variable.
First, the latest date for which it is available is 1982, and, second, it
can be argued that even in industries with high concentration ratios, the
degree of competition among the leaders in the industry can be very

intense. In the absence of these problems, CRATIO should have a negative
coefficient. The second variable, the ratio of net imports (imports

5Education can also have a direct effect on formal training, rather
than simply working indirectly through technological change. Since more
educated individuals are better learnera, the marginal return on a dollar
spent on training will be higher for these people.

20

minus exports) to the industry's total value of shipments (ILfESHARE), is

used

to measure the degree of foreign competition that the domestic firms

face. The coefficient on IMPSHARE

should

be positive if employee train-

ing is used as a device to improve productivity and competitiveness
relative to foreign producers.

Two variables are included in 0CCV.. The average tenure of
ii

employees in each occupation was not available on the survey, but was
kroxied

by the response to the following question: "To the best of your

knowledge,

about what percentage of your nonentry level jobs have been

filled from internal sources in recent years?" This variable (INTPROM)
should be highly correlated with average tenure, since businesses that
rely on internal promotions will have long tenure employees compared to

businesses that hire from the outside. The variation in the extent to
which

the businesses screen job candidates for different occupations may

also play a role in the decision to train. Presumably, organizations

that benefit from trained workers will screen applicants more carefully
in order to reduce training costs.- A variable measuring whether or not
job candidates are required to take a written or other formal test of
skill (SCREEN)

is used and is expected to be

positively correlated with

training.

The occupation dummies are defined as UPROF -- unionized professional and technical, NIJEROF --

nonunion professional and technical, UCLER --

unionized clerical, NIJCLER -- nonunion

clerical, UNIt --

unionized

their analysis of the EQPP data, Barron et sl (1987) found a
significant positive correlation between screening of applicants and
intensity of training.

21

manufacturing and production workers, and NUMFG --

nonunion manufacturing

and production. The excluded category is managers.

C. fleaults

Table 5 contains the results of estimating a binary logit model

where the dependent variable equals one if the business reported that it
had a formal training and development program for the particular occupa-

tional group, and zero otherwise. In Column (1), businesses in all
industries are included, while Columns (2) and (3) include only those in

manufacturing. The predictions of the model are generally confirmed.
Two of the three indicators of technological change, LCAFLAB and RDRATIO,

are

positive and significant in all three columns. EDUC is positive but

insignificant possibly because it refers to the industry group to which
the business belongs and is therefore not specific to the business

itself. The size of the business, LSIZE, is always positive and significant. Whether this is due to the "shirking" problem or to economies of
scale in the provision of training unfortunately cannot be determined.7
The other firm

characteristics,

CRATIO and IMPSHARE, also have the

expected signs in the manufacturing sector; formal training programs are
more likely to be used as product market competition increases, as
measured by either a decrease in CRATTO or an increase in IMPSHARE.
The occupation related variables, INTPROFI and SCREEN, also have the

predicted signs. Training programs are more likely to be usçd as average

TSince the dependent variable refers to forsial training only, the
impact of firm size on informal training can not be ascertained.
ilaber (1989) provides evidence based on wage growth patterns in the
Survey of Income and Program Participation that individuals who work in
small firms are more likely to receive informal training than individuals

22

tenure, as proxied by INTPRON, increases, and as screening intensity

increases. The occupation dummy variables themselves are also significant, indicating greater reliance on formal training for managers as

compared to the other groups. Table 6 shows the interactions of INTPROM
and SCREEN with the occupation dummies. The effect of tenure on the
probability of a formal training program is strongest for managers.
According to the model, this implies that a business's calculation of the
returns on formal training is more closely related to tenure when train-

ing managers as compared to the other occupation groups. Screening and
training are also more highly correlated for managers as compared to all
other groups except unionized professionals.8

V-

The Effect of Training on Labor Productivity

A. Empirical Specification
In order to measure the impact of formal employee training on labor
productivity, I assume that the production functions for the businesses
in the survey can be represented by a Cobb-Douglas function and that
there are two inputs in the production process, capital, K, and "effec-

tive labor", EL. Effective labor is the amount of labor services that

in large firms. Whether this finding would be supported by data collected from businesses in my sample is the subject of future research,
is possible to estimate a fixed effects model by including a set
of business dummy variables in equation (4). The fixed effects model
only includes the variables in OCCV.. and the occupation dummies since
the variables in PIRN. are perfectlFcorrelated with the business
dummies. When this mdel was estimated, the coefficients on INTEROM and
SCREEN decreased in magnitude but remained significant, and the pattern
of the coefficients on the occupation dummies followed the one shown in
Table 5.

23

are actually supplied by the workers that the company employs. Let the
number of workers employed be represented by the variable, R, or reported

labor. Then the effective labor input is given by:

R(1+t)

EL =

where t is an index of the amount of training that each worker receives.

According to equation (5), workers that receive more training provide more

"effective labor" input to the firm. The production function can be
written as:

Q = AIêEL''

or substituting equation (5) into (6), results in:

Q =

AK(R(itt))

in the data I observe output per worker, or Q/R, which is written in
equation (7) as:

Q/R =

AJCR''1(i+t)

Taking logarithms of both sides of equation (7) gives the equation
that will be estimated:

in (Q/R) =

in

A + 1nX + ('j-i)ln R +

assuming that t is a small number.

Equation (8) is estimated across all of the businesses in the survey

and each businesa is treated as an observation. The dependent variable
is calculated as sales per worker, K ia capital expenditures and R

is the

number of employees. In order to measure the extent of training in the

24

organization, two variables were calculated from the survey. The first,
?CTTRAIN, is the percentage of occupations in the business for which

formal training is conducted. If training programs exist for all of the
occupations in the business, this variable equals one; if there are no
formal training programs, the variable equals zero; if there are training
programs for some occupations and not others, the variable takes on a

value between zero and one.9 The second variable that is used is based
bn questions posed to those companies that had training programs regarding how they evaluate the success of their programs. The compsnies were
asked to indicate what indicators are used to assess employee training;

one of the indicators was productivity on the job. For each compaoy, I
calculated the percentage of occupations for which a formal trainiog

program existed and the company assessed that program based on an indica-

tor of productivity on the job. This variable is called ASSESSPRD. It
seems likely that ASSESSPRD should have s stronger effect on labor
productivity than PCTTRAIN

since

companies that sre assessing productivi-

ty effects will likely be designing their training programs with productivity impacts in mind.

The otber variables that are included in the labor productivity
equation are the percentage of employees in the business that are unionized, (PCUNION), the average job tenure of all employees, calculated as
an average of the proxy for tenure used in the previous analysis, (INTPRON),

alternative variable is the percentage of employees for whom the
business provides a formal training program. Unfortunately, about
one-quarter of the businesses did not provide complete data on the number
of employees in each occupation category (even when they provided data on
the human resource policies applicable to each occupation) so utilizing
this variable would have substantially reduced the sample size.

25

the percentage of occupations for which job candidates are required to
take a formal test based on the occupation responses to the variable
SCREEN, the extent of human resource planning in the organization (RRPLCY),
and a vector of industry dummy variables.

B. Results
The results of estimating equation (8) are shown in Table 7. In
columns (1) through (3), training is measured by PCTTRAIN, and in

columns (2) through (4), training is measured by ASSESSPRD. According to
equation (8), the coefficient on LGKEXP is the elasticity of output with
respect to capital while the elasticity of output with respect to labor

is obtained by adding one to the coefficient on LSIZE. In addition, the
specification in equation (8) indicates that the coefficient on the
training variable should not be significantly different from the labor
elasticity.

In equations (1) and (3), the effect of training on labor productivity is estimated without controlling for any of the other human
resource policy variables such as INTPRO!1, SCREEN and HRPLCY. Both
training variables have positive and significant effects using a one

tailed test. In columns (2) and (4), INTPROM, SCREEN and HRPLCT are
included in the equation and neither of the training variables remains
aignificant. Tenure (as meaaured by INTPRDtI) and skill testing of
applicants (SCREEN) have positive and significant effects on labor

productivity. In columns (3) and (6), SCREEN is deleted but INTPROM and
IIRPLCT are kept in the equation. The training measure ASSESSPRD becomes
aignificant again, and the coefficient on PCTFRAIN recovers almost to ita

original magnitude and significance level. Since busineaaea that train

also rely more heavily on skill testing of job applicants and the screening of applicants contributes significantly to raising labor productivity1
the results in columns (2) and (5) show that this relationship swamps the

independent effect of training on productivity. Although companies that
train also have lower turnover which enhances labor productivity, unlike
the effect of screening1 this does not eliminate the effect of training
on productivity ss shown in columns (2) and (5).
•

In terms of the other variables in equation (8), the elasticity of

output with respect to capital is estimated to be .50 and the elasticity

of output with respect to labor is .38.10 Unionization has a positive
effect in all equations and the effect is significant when tenure is

deleted. Finally, when the equations were estimated restricting the
coefficient on the training variable to equal one plus the coefficient on
LSIZE, the hypothesis regarding the restriction could not be rejected at
the 5 percent level of significance.

TI. Conclusions
This paper has utilized corporate survey data to study employee

training and development. The review of previous research showed that
most studies of training rely on data provided by individuals and therefore focus on the variation in training across individuals and its

impacts on their career advancement. Although economic models of training decisions are framed in terms of a company's calculation of the costs

101n a stepwise regression analysis, LSIZE and LKflP were the first
variables to enter the equation, with coefficients of -.526 and .446,
respectively, implying a scale factor of .92.

27

and benefits of such training, empirical work has never been able to test
this model directly on company behavior.

The econometric analysis of the deterwinants of the variation in
training across the businesses in the sample showed that the predictions

of the profit-maximization model were borne out. For example, large
businesses, those introducing new technology, and those with a high
proportion of internal promotions were more likely to have formal train-

ing programs. In addition, the extent of product competition in the
business's industry had the expected sign. Formal training was found to
have a positive effect on labor productivity, especially in those businesses that evaluated their training programs based oP productivity

indicators. An important finding is that the increase in productivity
attributable to training is largely due to the fact that businesses that
train rely heavily on screening of joh applicants which significantly
enhances labor productivity.
How does this analysis contribute to the debate on the market's

ability to provide "enough" formal training for employed adults? On the
one hand, we can argue that the companies in this sample are providing
the right amount of formal training because we observe their behavior to
be consistent with the predictions of the profit-maximization model.
These companies provide formal training when it is in their best interests to do so, and we find that this training raises labor productivity.

Alternatively, we saw that only one-third to one-half of the businesses

have formal training programs for various occupation groups. If the goal
is to insure that virtually all American workers have the opportunity to

participate in formal training programs at the work site, this statistic
suggests that there is mot enough training. In order to induce American

28

businesses to provide more formal training, public policymakers would
need to create the right incentives; policy changes that increase the
perceived marginal return or reduce the marginal cost (e.g. training

vouchers) of providing such training would be required. But it seems
nore reasonable to argue that employers themselves have better information regarding labor market conditions, the market for their goods and
services, and the potential benefits of new technology, all of which are
used to judge the potential benefits from additional investments in

training. Employers who consistently underinvest in training should
eventually succumb to the superior productivity of competitors who invest
more.

29

Bibliography

Barton, J., Black, D. and Lowenstein, N., "Employer Size: The Implications for Search, Training, Capital Investments, Starting Wages and
Wage Growth," Journal of Labor Economics, January 1987.

____________

"Job Matching and On-the-Job Training," February 1988.

Bartel, Ann P. and Frank R. Lichtenberg, "The Comparative Advantage of
Educated Workers in Implementing New Technology," Review of
its and Statistics. February 1987.

Brown, James, "Are Those Paid More Really No More Productive? Measuring
the Relative Importance of Tenure as On-the-Job Training in Explaining Wage Growth," Princeton Industrial Relations Papers, 1983.
Burke, Michael J. and Russell R. Day, "A Cumulative Study of the Effectiveness of Managerial Training," Journal of Applied Psychology,
1986, Vol. 71, No. 2.

Carnevsle, Anthony, "The Learning Enterprise: A Report on the Size and
Scope of Training," Training and Development Journal, January 1986.
Haber, Sheldon, "Returns to Workers from On-the-Job Training and Its
Relationship to Firm Size," mimeo, 1989.
Hitt, Michael A. and R. Duane Ireland, "Relationships Among Corporate
Level Distinctive Competencies, Diversification Strategy, Corporate
Structure and Performance3" Journal of Management Studies, July
1986.

Ingols, Cynthia A., "Management Education: Articulating the Unspoken,
Riding the Herd, Wasting Money, or Preparing for Tomorrow?" in
Leslie S. May, Carol Ann Moore and Stephen J. Zammit, eds.,

Evaluatin& Business and Industry Tran, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, 1987.

Lillard, Lee and Hong Tan, "Private Sector Training: Who
Are Its Effects?", Rand Monograph R-3331-DOL/RC.

Gets It and What

Lusterman, Seymour, Education in Industry, The Conference Board, 1977.
Trends in Corporate Education and Traininl, The Conference
Board, 1985.

Lynch, Lisa, "Private Sector Training and Its Impact on the Career
Patterns of Young Workers," mimeo, Massachusetts Insitute of Technology, October 1988.
Mincer, Jacob, "Union Effects: Wages, Turnover, and Job Training," in
Research in Labor Economics, 1983,

30

"Job Training, Wage Growth and Labor Turnover," mimea,
Columbia University, November :1987.

___________

Pergamit, H. and J. Shack-Marquez, "Earnings and Different Types of
Training," mimeo, BLS and Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserver, 1986Russell, James, S., James ft Terborg and Mary L. Powers, "Organizational
Performance and Organizational Level Training and Support,"
Personnel Psychology, 1985.
Saari, Lise N., Terry R. Johnson, Steven B. McLaughlin and Denise H.
Zimmerle, "A Survey of Management Training and Education Practices
in U.S. Companies," Personnel Psychology, Winter 1988.

-

(62)

$229,513

N.A.

(6)

$368
(70)

14
(143)

20
(26)
$873

(474)

32.9%

37.7%
(85)

Clerical Employees
Union
Nonunion

a

$706,526
(23)

$470
(26)

(62)

20

47.5%
(162)

bCalcIllated

$1,299,167
(42)

(49)

$359

12
(115)

(323)

40.6%

Hanufactnring/
Production Employees
Nonunion
Union

by multiplying the training cost per employee by the number of employees in the
occupational category.

(74)

$2,108,745

N.A.

(89)

$1,164,821

(84)

(3)

aThe sample size is in parentheses.

Total Cost of
Training Per
Business

$1,408

$1,037

(101)

(21)

13
(188)

(468)

(55)

22

45.1%

47.3%

Professional/
Technical Employees
Nonunion
Union

$1,343

12
(222)

Mean Age of
Program in Years

Mean Cost of
Training Per
Employee

49.2%
(488)

Managers

Percent With a
Formal Training
Program

Variable

-

Training Programs and Training Expenditures

-

Table 1

32

Table

2

*

Mean Value of PCTTRAIN, By Industry

PCCTRAIN

Industfy

1. All (N =

.412

491)

2. Mining (N = 28)

.200

3. Construction (N = 3)

.167

4. Nondurable Nanuf. (N = 70)

.463

5.

Durable Manuf. (N = 154)

6. Transportation (N =

.635

83)

7. Wholesale Trade (N =

8. Retail Trade (N =

.254

.242

10)

.536

27)

9. Finance, Ins., Real Estate (N =
10.

Business &

59)

.531

Repair Services (N = 34)

.480

11. Peraonal. Services (N

.217

8)

5)

.083

13. Professional Services (N = 10)

.467

12. Entertainment Services (N =

*PCTTRAIN =

proportion

training program.

of occupations for which the business had a formal

33

Table 3
Percentage of Businesses With Formal Training
Programs That Reported Cost of Training By Size Quartile*
SIZE 3
(899-3900)

.386
(.358)

.386
(.396)

-413
(.563)

.337
(.769)

0.0
(.286)

0.0
(.273)

.333
(.500)

.063
(.666)

.328
(.382)

.368
(.355)

.400
(.519)

.343
(.638)

0.0

.375
(.381)

(.611)

(2-241)

1. Managers

SIZE 4
(3901—316900)

SIZE 2
(242-898)

SIZE I

2. Unionized
Professional/
Technical

3. Nonunionized
Professional/
Technical

4. Unionized
Clerical

5. Nonunionized
Clerical

0.0
(.167)

(0.0)

.091

.395
(.247)

.371
(.321)

.413
(.422)

(.519)

.111
(.581)

.333

(.462)

.400
(.392)

.270
(.627)

.378
(.336)

(.373)

.313
(.421)

.244
(.594)

.291

6. Unionized
ManufacturingJ
Production

7. Nonuionized
Manufacturing/
Production

.357

*Nunbers in parentheses show the percentage of businesses with formal
training programs.

34

Table 4
Probability of Reporting Cost of Training Given that Formal
Training Program Exists

Managers

SIZE

RCA

CAPLAB

YRPGM

POLICY

Nonunion
Clerical

Nonunion
Mfg/Prod

-.298
(—1.27)

-.128
(-1.45)

-.038

—.025

(—.41)

(—.26)

.604
(1.24)

1.07
(1.41)

(.75)

-4.82

-5.52

-3.56

(-.98)

(—.83)

(—.72)

-.01
(-.32)

(.13)

-.014
(-.32)

.198

NONDIJR

(.34)

.785

DUR

TRAIlS?

Nonunion
Prof/Tech

.002

.55

--Cl
(-.68)

-.03

-.01

(—.64)

(-.15)

-.40

-.80

(—.65)

(-.96)

—.01

(1.49)

(—.11)

1.30
(2.49)

.53
(.94)

1.95
(1.02)

40.48
(1.86)
-.05
(-2.05)
-.15
(—2.19)
1.58
(.82)

2.19
(1.18)
.73
(1.41)

.89

(.41)

.93

WETRADE

(.63)

RETAIL

BUSSERV

1.54

1.15

1.36

3.73

(2.38)

(1.32)

(1.78)

(1.87)

1.05
(1.67)

1.11

1.99

.43

(1.63)

(2.57)

(.21)

-.70

-.136
(—.09)

1.08

PERSERV

2.19
(1.57)

Constant

-.55
(-.44)

N

186

(-.55)
155

121

(.57)

102

Table 5

Binary Logit Models of Presence of Formal Training Program
(Stacked Data)

(1)
All
Induatries*

(N = 1694)

(2)

(3)

Manufacturing

Manufacturing

9&i
(N =

(N =

853)

849)

Independent
Variable
LSIZE

LCAPLAB
RDRATIO

.26

(3.61)

(2.92)

(2.58)
4.83
(2.38)

3.27
(2.69)

IIRPLCY

SCREEN
INTPROM

EDUC

.13

(7.17)
1.04
(7.26)
.01

(4.78)
.12
(1.45)

UPROF
NUPROF

UCLER

NUCLER
IJMFO

NUMFO
IMPSHARE

CRATIO

-1.10
(-2.94)
-.28
(-1.62)
-2.28
(-6.77)

—1.49
(-7.63)
-.61
(-2.58)

-.44
(—2.34)

.21

.19

(7.46)
.12

(3.75)
.20

.18

(2.68)
5.52
(2.67)
.17

.16

(5.91)
1.29
(6.11)
.02
(5.30)
.05
(.40)

(5.99)
1.23
(5.79)
.

.02
(5.29)
.15
(1.18)

—1.42

-1.47

(—1.70)

(—1.73)

-.08
(-.32)
—2.38
(-3.97)
—1.69
(—5.75)
-.88
(-2.55)
-.61
(—2.56)

-.08
(-.34)
-2.39
(-3.93)
—1.67
(-5.66)
-.89
(-2.56)
-.66
(-2.52)

.99
(2.74)
- .01

(-1.30)

flhe excluded industry category is finance, insurance, and real estate.
The coefficients and t-values on the industry dummies are MIN, -2.80 (—6..
CONS, —1.89 (-1.94), NONDUR, —1.34 (-4.48), DUR, —1.90 (-6,80), TRANSP,
-.34
—.74 (—2.49) WHTR.ADE, -2.05 (-4.52), RETAIL, —.75 (—2.05), BUSREP,
(-1.82), PERSS, —2.12 (—2.42), ENTERT, -2.87 (-3.52), and PROFSER,
-1.62 (—2.45).

Table 6

Interactions of SCREEN and INTPROM with Occupation Duimiiiefl

Independent
Variable

No

(1)

SCREEN

(2)

INTPROM

.01

1_al
(2.94)

(4.00)

Interaction

1.33
(1.59)

—.003
(—.27)

NUPROF
Interaction

(.45)

-.005
(—1.04)

-.17
(-.23)

(—2.50)

Interaction
UPROY

UCLER
Interaction
NUCI.ER

Interaction
1.1MPG

Interaction
N1JMFG

Interaction

.05

- .41
(- .95)
.46

(.80)
.26

(.57)

-.03

-

.02

(—3.02)

-.003
(-.40)

—.01
(—1.23)

*All other variables shown in Table 5 were included in these regressions.

37

Table 1

Dependent Variable: Log (Output per Worker)

Independent
Variable
LSIZE

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-.62

—.64

-.63

—.62

-.64

-.63

(—18.89) (-18.69) (-18.37) (-19.08) (-18.68) (—18.44)
LKEXP

.50

(19.20)

PCTTRAIN

.18

(1.64)
ASSESSPRD

PCUNION

.50
(18.74)

08.47)

.11
(.88)

(1.45)

-—
-—

.35
(1.79)

(1.45)

.29

.39

SCREEN

(2.45)

N

.30

.48

1.30
(5.11)

.59
409

387

-—

(2.10)

.13
(1.30)

.21
(2.11)

.33
(1.7])

.28
(1.43)

(1.46)

.60

390

.29

.48

--

——-

1.14
(4.78)

.61

--

-—
-—

1.05
(4.39)

.50
(18.55)

-—

--

-.01
(—1.03)

.50
(18.78)

--

--—

(2.72)

(—1.17)

-.02

HRPLCY

.50

(19.27)

.20

(1.50)

.49

(2.76)

CONSTANT

.17

——-

---

INTPRON

.50

(2.71)
.37

(2.29)

-.02

-——

1.30
(5.68)

.59

409

*A1l equations include a vector of industry dummies.

.47

(2.70)

——
——

(—1.23)

—.02
(—1.15)

1.05
(4.39)

1.13
(4.74)

.61

387

.60
390

