                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 COMMODITY TRADE AND INTERNATIONAL RISK SHARING:
                      HOW MUCH DO FINANCIAL MARKETS MATTER?




                                 Harold L. Cole
                                Maurice   Obstfeld




                             Working Paper No. 3027




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   July 1989




Financial support has been provided by the NBER's Olin visiting scholar
program, the National Science Foundation, and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.
We are grateful for suggestions made by William English and by seminar
participants at the National Bureau of Economic Research, the University of
Western Ontario, the University of Rochester, the University of Pennsylvania,
Northwestern University, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. This
paper is part of NBER's research program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                      NBER Working Paper #3027
                                      July 1989


          COMMODITY TRADE AN!) INTERNATIONAL RISK SHARING:
                110W MUCH DO FINANCIAL MARKETS MATTER?


                                  ABSTRACT

     This paper evaluates the gains from international risk
sharing in some simple general-equilibrium models with output

uncertainty.   Under empirically plausible calibration,            the

Incremental loss    from     'a   ban on international       portfolio

diversification is estimated to be quite small--O.15 percent of

output per year is a representative figure.     Even the theoretical

gains from asset trade may disappear under alternative sets of

assumptions on preferences and technology. The paper argues that

the small magnitude of potential trade gains, when coupled with

small costs of cross-border financial transactions, may explain

the apparently inconsistent findings of empirical studies on the

degree of international capital mobility.




Harold L. Cole                        Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics               University of California at Berkeley,
University of Pennsylvania            National Bureau of Economic Research,
Philadelphia, PA 19104                and Harvard University
                                      Department of Economics
                                      Littauer Center
                                      Cambridge, NA 02138
1. Introduction

       The expansion of global financial-market activity over the

past two decades has inspired a large body of empirical research

into the forces linkIng individual countries' financial markets.

Findings about the nature and strength of these forces are

important for their implications about public policy toward

international capital movements.           If international financial

integration      remains     incomplete,    measures   to    facilitate

cross-border capital flows could enhance economic efficiency. An

opposing position holds that the rapid pace of market integration

has undermined the effectiveness of policies meant to safeguard

economic stability.        On this view,       international financial

integration has proceeded too far too soon, and should be
curtailed through taxation or direct controls.

     Empirical     studies    of   financial    interdependence   among

industrialized economies have proceeded along several lines and

have uncovered three major facts that together constitute a

puzzle. The first fact is that yields on comparable assets seem to

be well arbitraged across borders              (absent overt official

restrictions), a finding consistent with a high degree of

cross-border capital mobility. The second fact, which appears to

contradict the previous one, is that the extent of international

portfolio diversification is too low to be explained by standard

models of financially integrated economies (even allowing for

nontraded goods). A third fact, documented most prominently by

Feldstein and Horioka (1980), is the generally low extent of

foreign intertemporal trade, as measured by current-account


                                    1
 balances. Some have argued that the small average size of current

 accounts, like the evidence on international portfolio positions,

 indicates high barriers to international asset trade.'

          In this paper we propose a way to reconcile these seemingly

contradictory findings. Our basic point is that the direct welfare

gains from cross-border portfolio diversification- -from the

 international pooling of national consumption risks- -are likely to

be quite small. That thesis leads to the following coherent

interpretation                        of        observed                 financial             relationships                       among

industrialized countries. When the gains from diversification

abroad are small, even minor impediments to asset trade can wipe

them out.                 Similarly, minor trade impediments can wipe out small

gains               from             consumption-smoothing                        intertemporal                         exchanges.

International interest-rate differentials would remain within

narrow limits despite some transaction costs, and national capital

markets might still be quite open to foreign linkages at the

margin. A world with small barriers to foreign asset trade, but

with limited gains to diversification, is therefore a world that

could generate the empirical findings described above.2
1
 Some       of            the         evidence         on       international             financial               integration    is
surveyed            and         evaluated        by          Obstfeld          (1966.          1989a)           and     by    Tesar
(1988).             Golub             (1987)          discusses            the          extent             of           international
portfolio            diversification             by          OECD         countries.           In       the           past         decade
the        current-account                   imbalances     of    some     major     countries      reached
postwar—record                  levels,          with      the      result     that       the      original
regression            findings             of     Feldstein    and     Horioka     (1980)     have     been
weakened. See, for example, Frankel (1990).
2
 Amy       attempt              to      match         this          account       with          the        data          would         be
complicated     by     divergences      between     the     social    benefits                                         we         attempt
to    estimate     below    and     the    perceived     private    benefits                                      that           motivate
private     capital     flows.     For     example,     even     when     the                                      social           gains
from    diversification     are    small,     tax    evasion    nay    result                                      in        a      large
voln.          of         two-way        international              financial         flows.        This         is         just      one
of      many         issues           that      would        have         to     be       confronted             to         test      our




                                                                     2
         We make our case that the gains from international risk

sharing are small by examining the theoretical and empirical

implications of some completely specified general-equilibrj
models of rudimentary world economies.3 In particular, simulation

experiments based on an endowment model with exogenous stochastic

growth show that the welfare loss from prohibiting international

diversification is unlikely to exceed 0.15 percent of average

national product per year, even at high levels of risk aversion.

The models we use are, admittedly, very stylized; and a litany of

important qualifications to our results is given in the conclusion

of this paper. Nonetheless, we take the models seriously as

parables that yield important lessons                                                      and,      possibly,             as

springboards for further quantitative research. A major advantage

of the general-equilibrium approach, one that in our view amply

justifies the simplifications it requires, is that it gives a

complete account of the mechanisms through which economic

disturbances are transmitted among countries.

         Given our underlying consumer-preference model and the

stochastic properties of actual output growth rates, it is not

surprising that we find small gains from international risk

sharing. Using a related model, Lucas (1987) estimates the cost of

postwar United States consumption variability to be quite small.'

hypothesis rigorously.

 This      paper       therefore         follows          the         approach       in      Cole         (1988),       which
develops            alternativ,              models                 for        studying             the             aggregate
implications of different international risk-sharing arrangements.

While        Lucas's        empirical          assumptions                include      a         deterministic          trend
growth       rate      of     consumption,            we            assume       a    stochastic           trend.        This
difference      prevents                us         from             appealing         to          simple            quadratic
approximations,    such            as        the      one            Lucas    uses          to      estimate          welfare




                                                                3
A crucial mechanism underlying our results, however, and absent

from Lucas's (1987) framework, is the effect of output shocks on

the relative prices at which international commodity trade occurs.

We find that fluctuations in international terms of trade may play

an important role in automatically pooling national economic

risks, since they contribute to a negative correlation between a

country's relative output growth rate and its terms of trade.

Indeed, the models we work with below to highlight this effect,

although quite standard, have the property that for certain

parameter choices, terms-of-trade responses alone provide perfect

insurance against output shocks. In such cases the gains from

international portfolio diversification (and possibly the gains

from intertemporal foreign trade as well) are nil. These are

knife-edge results, of course, hut the simulations mentioned above

suggest that they are not dramatically wrong within realistic

ranges of parameter variation.S

          In the paper's next section we use Lucas's (1982) barter

model of perfectly-pooled world financial markets to derive a

first example of an economy in which international asset trade is

redundant.6 The model shows that for Cobb-Douglas commodity

losses.      Our      assumption   of     purely    stochastic     growth    may    also    be    the
cause      of      larger    estimated     welfare     losses    than     those    Lucas     reports.
Another         result     similar     in     spirit      to     those     reported      below     is
Cochran's          (1999)    estimate     of     minor     costs     of     empiricalLy     plausible
individual departures from           intertemporaL optimality.
S
    The      result           that           intertiational           comodity        trade              can        make
internationaL          asset         trade        unnecessary           is     reminiscent          of         tiundell's
(1957)          celebrated       insight          into        the       substitutability          between          trade
and factor movements.
6
 By       characterizing    asset             trade      as         'redundant,"     we      will         mean      only
that        the      allocation              reached       without           asset        trade          cannot       be

Pareto—improved          by          introducing         asset           markets.




                                                          4
demands and isoelastic utility, world equilibrium is Pareto-

efficient even when international asset trade is prohibited. This

specific equivalence result relies heavily, of course, on the

assumed unit elasticity of relative demand with respect to price.

          Lucas's economy is a pure exchange economy; our result is

extremely sensitive to this, as extensions of the model that

incorporate investment show.                             In section 3 we present two

investment models--one a separable logarithmic model, one a model

with a            linear production technology subject                                      to        serially
uncorrelated shocks- -in which the earlier equivalence result

carries            through.7          Despite               these          theoretical            examples,

considerations discussed in our concluding section suggest that

future research along the lines of the present paper should focus

on investment.

          The mechanism driving the results of sections 2 and 3 is that

all output shocks are transmitted positively between countries

through the international price mechanism; in some very special

circumstances, this transmission mechanism may provide complete

insurance for domestic and foreign residents alike. When countries

are not specialized in production, however, production shocks in


7The      logarithmic     model      of      this      section          draws heavily     on          Long     and
Plosser         (1983).    In        interesting            work      closely     related         to         ours,
Cantor       and   Mark     (1988)         examine      a      logarithmic     modelinvestment
                                                                                        with
in       which   both   countries    produce   the    same     good,     rather    than     the
distinct      national     outputs     assumed    by     Lucas      and     by     us.      The
nonspecialization      assumption     is     a   complication       that     allows      Cantor
and    Mark     to solve their model in closed form onLy when production
shocks      are    serially     independent.    (Basically,      the     solution      approach
used       by     Long    and        Plosser         becomes        inapplicabLe.)    As         we       observe
below,       nonspecialization        in       production          is      an   important        reason       why
our equivalence results do not hold in general,




                                                        5
common industries are transmitted negatively between countries.

The price mechanism thus provides no automatic insurance in this

case. Section 4 develops a model with nonspecialized economies to

illustrate this negative transmission mechanism, and also studies

the effects of an alternative kind of nonspecialization due to

nontraded goods. The introduction of nontradables shows that

Pareto efficiency does not necessarily imply a high correlation

among national aggregate consumption levels.

     Section 5 contains the paper's numerical results. In the

simulations we conduct, preferences are varied to allow for

various degrees of risk aversion and various elasticities of

intratemporal substitution between national outputs. (Included is

an infinite elasticity for the perfect-substitution case). Under

all plausible parameter combinations, the gains from international

portfolio diversification are quite small.

     Section 6 summarizes and qualifies the paper's results.

     Before commencing our analysis, it is useful to place the

equivalence propositions derived below in the context of related

research. Diamond (1967), Hart (1975), Newbery and Stiglitz (1982,

1984.), and Stiglitz (1982), among others, examine the allocational

efficiency of economies in which some markets are missing. Our

theoretical investigation can be viewed as an extension, based on

a different class of models, of the program pursued by these

authors. Stiglitz (1982), for example, considers the constrained

Pareto optimality (in Diamond's 1967 sense) of a multigood
one-shot stock-market economy equilibrium. He finds a result akin

to ours, that constrained optimality holds when price elasticities



                                 6
 of demand equal unity (the Cobb-Douglas assumption), so that there

 is no real-income risk. As is shown below, however,
                                                                             unitary price
 elasticities do not always suffice to ensure full                                     Pareto

 optimality. Newbery and Stiglitz (1984) study the implications of

 Cobb-Douglas/isoelastic preferences for risk sharing between

 producers and consumers in a trade model with missing insurance

 markets. They focus on the possibility that in the absence of

 insurance markets, opening a country to commodity trade may make

 both producers and consumers worse off. Flelpman and Razin (1978)

 in an          international context1              earlier noted            the     special

 implications of Cobb-Douglas preferences for the substitutability

of equities in different industries.8



2. A Pure Exchange Economy

       This section describes a two-country pure exchange economy

and analyzes its behavior under two polar assumptions: perfect

international integration of asset markets, and complete absence

of international asset trade. The main conclusion is that for a

popular class of utility functions,                           the portfolio-autarky

equilibrium entails a Pareto-optimal allocation. Since any Pareto

optimum can be decentralized as the competitive equilibrium of an

economy with complete,                 integrated asset markets, financial

integration has no observable implications in our example.

       All the models we will use assume a single representative

6Newbery       and  Stiglitz     (1982)      present     some    approximate      welfare-cost
calculations   whose    message    is    the     same    as   that    of   the     simulations
in     section     5      below:      for       empirically     plausible      cases,      the
efficiency losses caused by missing risk markets may be smalL.




                                              7
resident within each country. By making this abstraction, we do

not mean to imply a belief that onshore financial markets are

literally perfect. Rather, our goal is to evaluate the incremental

welfare gain that international diversification opportunities

offer. A finding that these incremental gains are small does not

imply that financial markets in general are unimportant. It does

imply that the reduction in individual consumption variability

attained through the diversification opportunities available at

home leaves little scope for further reduction through additional

diversification abroad.

    Equilibrium with financial integration. The basic setup of

the model comes from Lucas (1982). There are two countries, the

"home" and the "foreign" country, with stochastic endowments of

distinct national outputs, denoted by K and 1 respectively.

Home-country residents maximize expected utility,



      U(O) -                                             (fi C   1),
               E0{                      }

where x(t) and y(t) are their consumptions of the home and foreign

outputs. Foreign-country residents maximize the same function of

their own consumptions, x*(t) and y*(t).

     Lucas (1982) considered a perfectly-pooled equilibrium of the

model in which the residents of each country own a fifty percent

share of the other country's endowment process. In that

equilibrium,     portfolios   are       perfectly   diversified        across

countries and the two countries always have equal wealth and

consumption levels, Other equilibriums of the model can be


                                    8
generated, however, by considering a global central planning

problem in which outputs are allocated optimally by command.
Solutions to this problem are Pareto optimums whose counterpart

equilibriums generally involve differing national wealth levels.

      Because       the pure-exchange        case has no            intertemporal

dimension, the planning problem takes the (timeless) form:


       Maximize p.u(x,y) +          (l-p).u(x*,y*   )




subject   to


(1) x+x*X,                     y+y*—Y.

Above, p is a planner weight that determines relative national

wealth levels in the counterpart market equilibrium. Optimal

allocations are determined by (I) and the first-order conditions


(2)    uj(x,y)/u.(x*,y*) —         (l-p)/p              (j —   x,   y).


This fundamental condition states that the international ratio of

marginal utilities from consuming any good must be constant across

states of nature. In statistical terms, condition (2) states that

national marginal utilities from consuming any good are perfectly

positively correlated across countries. We use condition (2)

repeatedly to test whether allocations are Pareto optimal.

      Specialize now to the Cobb-Douglas/isoelastic-preference case,

                      9 1-9 1-Il
      u(x,y)    —   (x y   )   /(l-R).

Given this utility function, the planning solution is




                                         9
(3)     x — wX,           x* —   (l-w)X

        y — wY,           y* — (1-w)Y


where, defining a — 1/R,


(4)
            1 +   [(lp)/p]U
Notice that when p — 1/2,             the solution is the one studied by

Lucas (1982), in which national wealths are equal ( — 1/2 —          l-w).
       Different p values, however, correspond to differing national

wealth levels and different (efficient) market outcomes. In all

cases, national consumptions of the two goods are perfectly

correlated. By pooling portfolios, countries effectively insure

each     other,      to     the     maximum    extent   possible)   against

country-specific output shocks.

       Equilibrium    under portfolio autarky. Now        consider a model

with no    opportunity      for international asset exchanges. In this

case the home country's income is its endowment X, the foreign

country's its endowment Y. If p is the price of good y in terms of

good x, portfolio autarky forces the countries to face the

respective budget constraints


        x+py—X,              x*/p+y*_Y,

in each period.

       In a one-good model, a ban on asset trade would reduce both

countries to complete autarky. That does not happen here because

balanced trade in the two goods remains possible despite the

unavailability of trade across time or across states of nature.



                                          10
Endowment disturbances thus continue to be transmitted abroad.

       Desired consumptions under portfolio autarky are


(5)     x — OX,                         x* — OpY,

        y —   (l-O)X/p,             y* —     (1-flY,

demand functions valid for any utility function that depends on a

Cobb-Douglas index. Market clearing requires that the total demand

for good x equal the global endowment,


        x +   x*    —   OX + OpY    —


that   is, that


              (1-fix
                   9Y


       This price solution, when combined with the consumption

demands listed in (5), implies that equilibrium consuinptions are:


(6)     x — OX,             x* —    (l-9)X,

        y     9?,           y* —    (l-9)Y.

       An equivalence proposition. Now compare (6) with (3). The

market solution under portfolio autarky is the member of the

Pareto-efficient family of planning solutions corresponding to 0 —

to. Thus, a planner weight of

                        1
       IA—                      R
             1 +    [(1-9)19]

for the home country leads to the same allocation as the market




                                              11
 would if cross-border asset trades were prohibited.9

        An example showing a Pareto-optimal market allocation under

 portfolio autarky has some potential implications for empirical

 assessments               of      the        extent           to which capital                    is      mobile

 internationally. First, commodity real interest rates and other

 real asset returns can be identical across countries even with no

capital mobility. Second, under capital mobility there may be no

departures from current-account balance, even if the menu of

assets traded internationally is quite limited. (In an exchange

model,         current-account                      imbalances              merely          substitute        for

diversification, and thus have no role to play if diversification

is redundant.) Finally, quite small costs of international

investment transactions could give rise to complete portfolio non-

diversification even in an unrestricted market setting.

        Counter-examples. The foregoing theoretical results are quite

special, and disappear under slight generalization. Simulations we

report later examine the empirical importance of deviations from

some of the assumptions made above. For now, however, we simply

present two counter-examples that show how the equivalence

proposition can break down even in a pure endowment world with

unitary Intratemporal elasticities of substitution in consumption.

        Counter-example j:                Country-specific                  preferences. Suppose that

different nationalities attach different geometric weights to
their        consumptions                of         the        two         goods;       thus,      u(x,y)

(xOy1O)1/(lR) but u*(x*,y*) —                             (x*O*y*1O*)/(lR),                       9 # 9*

 It   is     easy     to        show that      if     9    —     1/2,       the     equivalence   result    holds,
not   only      for         isoelastic        preferences,           hut     for      any    nonotonic     concave
function of a Cobb-Dou5las index.




                                                          12
            Equilibrium allocations without asset trade turn out to be


             x — OX,                          x* —         (l-O)X,

             y — 9*Y,                          y* —            (l-O*)Y,

Ed. (6)]. So once again consumptions of each good are perfectly

positively                      correlated                      across                countries.               Nonetheless,                 the

allocation above is inefficient (except in one case to be

discussed in a moment) because marginal utilities are not

perfectly correlated across countries. To see this, just plug the

above market-generated consumptions into the planner first-order

conditions (2); the result is


                                            (R—1)(O*       - 9)
             8(X(t)/Y(t)]                                       —


where 8 is a constant that depends on 8 and 9*, Clearly, the

condition above cannot hold in all states of nature unless X and Y

are perfectly correlated or unless R — 1 (the logarithmic case).

             It may be surprising, even in the log case, that price

responses alone ensure efficient risk sharing when country tastes

differ!° One can check directly that the planner weight
replicating the incomplete-markets allocation for R = 1 is
10
     To      see      why             the      Log         case          "works,"     observe     that    the   equiLibrium
relative           price         of         good      y,        p.      must    equaL     a   coonon   marginal   rate    of
substitution               between                 the              two    goods,       p      —     (Bu/By)/(Du/Bx)       —

(Bu*/By*)/(äu*fôx*).                        Consider                a      fall        in        y       output,        which      causes      p
to        rise.      If         preferences              are            isoelastic          x    and      x do           not    change,      and
if         they           are          logarithmic                      (and         thus        separable          in         contemporaneous
consumptions),              ôu/Ox
                                öudfôx*    do andnot   change                                                      either.        So      ôuiöy
and Bu*fây* must rise in proportion to p, and to each other.
           Notice         that         in       the        syunetric                 case       (1-8)      —       O,     the     equilibrium
price    is         p —           X/Y,         so        national               incoces         are     the    same       in    every   state
of    nature.             This          equality               is         not        always           enough   to        ensure        efficient
risk sharing, as the discussion in the text shows.




                                                                                13
                   1                              9*
     p —                            —

           1 +   [(l_e)/9*]              1 - 9 +       9*


     Counter-example       Z:       Nonisoelastic           preferences. Let both
countries share the same utility function,


                        9 (1-9)
      u(x,y) —   -exp[-x   y            ].


This form leads to the same incomplete-markets equilibrium [given
by (6)) as the Cobb-Douglas but isoelastic cases we've considered.

     That equilibrium is now inefficient, however, as can be seen

from looking once again at (2). Plugging the equilibrium outcomes

(6) into the planner's first order condition yields


      exp{(l-29)X(t)9Y(t)'9] —


which cannot hold for all realizations of X and Y except in the

special symmetric case 9        —
                                    1/2.
     Thus, the constant expenditure share assumption, which leads

to perfect correlation of consuniptions across countries, is not

generally sufficient to guarantee perfect correlation of marginal

utilities across countries, as a first-best allocation requires.



3. The logarithmic and linear i.i.d. investment models

     Investment is now introduced to add an intertemporal
dimension to the inquiry. The basic setup of the first model

analyzed in this section comes from the closed-economy analysis of

Long and Plosser (1983) (which is easily reinterpreted as an

open-economy analysis in the complete-markets case). As before,

the model is worked out twice, once under free international trade


                                             14
in a complete set of state-contingent claims, once under the

assumption of portfolio autarky. The second model discussed below,

which is treated only briefly, is a two-country adaptation of

Levhari and Srinivasan (1969). In both models, the underlying

uncertainty comes from shocks to production technologies.

     The assumptions under which the equivalence propositions of

this section are derived are, once again, quite stringent. In an

economy with investment, one can think of shocks to production

functions as having two distinct effects. First, they affect

current output, and second, they provide information about the

future return on current investment. By itself, the first effect

calls for no radical modification of our previous conclusions:

insofar as domestic investment opportunities merely provide a

channel for smoothing incipient consumption fluctuations, they

reduce the incremental benefits from international risk sharing.

The second effect is more consequential. Information about future

investment productivity contained in current output shocks might

cause a level of consumption variability that could be reduced

through access to foreign capital markets.

    The preference/production assumptions of this section's

models ensure that current output shocks have no effect on

expected investment profitability. This is one reason why

portfolio autarky turns out to be efficient in the cases studied

below. An appendix presents another special investment model in

which international asset trade is redundant. In section 6 we

discuss some empirical reasons for believing that the models of

this section do not capture fully the role of investment.



                               15
     Setting up the logarithmic model. The home and foreign

countries are now specialized in their production of the two

goods, rather than in endowments. Output of a good in period t+l,

say, depends on a random period-t+1 productivity disturbance and

period-t inputs of both goods. Let k.(t) [k.(t)] and kxy(t)

[k(t)] be the home (foreign) inputs of goods x and y into the

production of period-t+l outputs. As in Long and Plosser (1983),

this investment depreciates completely in the production process.

     Home and foreign production functions are written in
logarithmic form as



         lnX(t+l) —   lncX(t+l)      +
                                         lnIc(t) + iyThy(t)t
         lhY(t+l) —   lnç(t+l)       +
                                         ilnk.(t) + ilnk(t).
Above,        —   1   -        and          —   1   -       (the   constant-returns

assumption). No specific distributional assumptions need to be

made at this point about the multiplicative productivity
disturbance ç —           (çXçY)     other than the standard ones: ç is

Markovian and and its elements have positive support.

     Let x(t) [x*(t)I and y(t) (y*(t)] again stand for home

(foreign) conswnptions of the two goods. Home residents maximize



  U(O) -
            £4 xflt[emn(t)           +   (l-O)lny(t)]
                                                        }

  and foreign residents maximize




                                           16
      U*(O) —       at[o*lnx*(t)        +     (l-9*)lny*(t)]
                                                               }

Notice     that the countries are allowed to attach different

geometric weights to their consumptions of the two goods.

       Efficient     allocations.           Consider      again    the    set   of

Pareto-optimal solutions to the planning problem of maximizing



        p'U(t)     (l-p).U*(t)

subject to constraints. As before, these can be decentralized as

market equilibriums corresponding to various international

distributions of wealth. Linearity allows one to decompose the

planning problem into two stages. The first of these is to

allocate given world aggregate consumption levels,                       Cx(t) and
          between residents of the two countries. (This stage

corresponds to the market process of sharing risks optimally given

the international distribution of wealth.) The second stage of the

planning problem is to choose the aggregate consumption levels

Cx(t) and C(t) optimally at each point in time.

       Consider stage one first, the same static problem examined in

section 2. In this stage the planner maximizes


(7) p.(Glnx(t) +         (l-9)lny(t)J   +   (l_p).(6*lnx*(t) + (lO*)1ny*(t))

subject to the constraints


(8)     x(t) +   x*(t)     Cx(t),
                                        y(t) ÷    y*(t)   C(t).



                                         17
The resulting allocation rules are;


(9)     x(t) —


        x*(t)   —
                    (gU)B*Cx(t)/,

        y(t)


        y*(t) —

where


(10)       — p0 +    (l-p)O*,   l-    p(l-9) +    (l-p)(l-O*).

       The result of maximizing (7) subject to (8) defines an
indirect    planner     utility function that depends on the world

aggregates Cx(t) and C(t). Direct substitution of solutions (9)

and (10) into (7) shows that this indirect utility function equals


(11) W[C(t)Cy(t)] — lJflCx(t) +
                                          (l-4')1nC(t)

up to an additive constant. Equation (11) brings one back to stage

two of the planning problem, choosing the optimal aggregate

consumptions of the goods. This stage-two problem takes the form:



(12) Maximize E0{
                                Cx   Cy(t)] }

subject   to the constraints


        Cx(t) +     k(t) + k(t)      X(t),

        C(t) +      k.(t) + k(t)


                                     18
 and given the intertemporal tradeoffs defined by the national

 investment functions.

        When the aggregate planning problem is posed as in (12), it

 is clear that it is exactly the same problem as the one studied by

 Long and Plosser (1983). The solution to stage two therefore can

be lifted from their paper with no modification. That solution is:


 (13) Cx(t)


        C(t) —

                 —
        k.x(t)        lCjlix/Kx)X(t)             (j
                                                      —




        k.(t)    —
                     (a'c.-v./n)Y(t)             (j
                                                      —




where


(14)       —
               (('-Pi)       +


           — [(l-)(l-fri)         +


          — (i-fli)(l-$i)             -
                                          p-1Yx7xY > 0.

The parameters         and       are the coefficients of lnX(t) and lnY(t)

in the planner's period-t value function.

       Allocation rules          (9) and (13) have several important
implications about world equilibrium with complete markets (given

the classes of utility and production functions under study here).

Specifically, consumption of every good is perfectly correlated

across countries, as in Lucas's endowment model. Thus, each

country's consumption of a good is perfectly correlated with world




                                            19
consumption of that good, which is proportional in turn to world

output. Investment of every good is also perfectly correlated

across countries, and proportional to current output.

         In comparing the foregoing equilibrium with the one that

results when there is no asset trade, it is useful to derive a key

shadow price associated with the optimal allocation, the shadow

price of good y in terms of good x, p. At any time t, p(t) is the

marginal rate of substitution in consumption of good x for good y,


                                                       —
(15) p(t) —             (lb)C(t)/tCy(t)                    lcyX(t)/nxY(t).

This price depends on ji                      only      if C and 9* differ isee (10) and

(14)]. In that case, an increase in the welfare weight of the

country with a relative preference for y, say, raises the shadow

relative price of y. The change lowers the amount of y invested

in producing future units of good x and raises the amount of x

invested in y.

         Equilibrium under portfolio autarky. Market equilibrium is

found in two steps. First, we solve the maximization problem of

home and foreign social planners who take the path of the terms of

trade,            (p(tfl,         as        exogenously           given.           This            step         yields

price-dependent consumption and investment demands for the two

goods. Second, we solve for the terms of trade that clear world

goods markets. This step yields reduced-form consumption and

investment demands that can be compared with (9) and (13).h1
11
  Deltas       (1986)      studies      a     model     similar     to         this     one        and     draws    on
the      Long—Plosser        solution         to      describe     its         equilibrium,          even        though
his        model,       assumes        balanced        international           trade,         We         have      been
unable       to     find     any       direct      justification         for      the     solution          procedure
Deltas   proposes.



                                                        20
     Consider first the problem of a home social planner. Our

conjecture is that this planner's value function takes the form


(16) V[X(t),cX(t),p(t)] - sclnX(t) +             J[cX(t)]   +   H(p(t)]

(up to an additive constant), where p(t), the price of good y in

terms of good x, is given. Bellman's principle states that

V(X(t),cX(t),p(t)] solves the problem of maximizing



      Olnx(t) +     (l-9)lny(t)     +   PE(V[X(t+1),cX(t÷1),p(t+1)])

subject to the X(t+l) production function and the constraint of

balanced international trade,


      x(t) +
               k(t) + p(t)[y(t) + ky(tfl              —   X(t).

Given conjecture (16), first-order conditions for the problem are


(17) 9/x(t) —

      (l-O)/y(t)    —   A(t)p(t),

      fiK7/k(t)

      thcYy/ky(t)
                        —   A(t)p(t),

where A(t)     is    the Lagrange multiplier associated with the

trade-balance constraint. The parameter K can be derived from the

envelope condition,


      OV[X(t),cX(t),p(t)]/8X(t) -             tc/X(t) — A(t)

and (17); it is given by




                                         21
(18)   ic     A(t)X(t)

       Combination of (17) and (18) with the economy's budget

constraint leads to the solution


         —   l/(1-$)

and to the following demand functions:


(19) x(t)

       y(t) —    (l-O)(1-)X(t)/p(t),
                 —
       k.(t)


       k(t)      —
                     fr1yX(t)/P(t).
The corresponding demand functions for the foreign country are the

analogues of those listed in (19):


(20) x*(t) —         8*(l-fl)p(t)Y(t),
       y*(t) —       (19*)(1$)Y(t),
       kyx(t) —      fryp(t)Y(t),
                 —
       k(t)

Note that the investment demands in (19) and (20) do not depend on

cX(t) or ç1Rt): here as in the complete-markets case, production-

function shocks can be thought of as pure endowment shocks.

       Equilibrium in the market for the x good determines p(t):




                                         22
       x(t) +   x*(t)    +
                             k(t) + ky.x(t)            x(t.


Equations (19) and (20) imply that this condition holds when


                 X(t)        (1-9)(1-fl) +
(21)    p(t) —           X
                 Y(t)          9*(l.fl) +
                                              fi'y
       An equivalence proposition. When combined with the price

function (21), (19) and (20) show that the portfolio-autarky case

bears many empirical similarities to the complete-markets case.

For example, consuinptions of every good are perfectly correlated

across countries, as are investment levels. Aggregate consuniptions

and investments are again proportional to total supply. In fact,

the equilibrium with restricted asset trade implies the same

resource allocation as a particular optimal plan. We demonstrate

this equivalence, once again, by constructing an optimal plan that

calls for the incomplete-markets allocation.

       Equation (15) giving the set of shadow prices p(t) generated

by efficient allocations can be written as


                 X(t)        (1-)(l-fi) +
(22)                     x
                                           fli
       p(t) —
                 Y(t)         (l-fl) +

Compare (21) and (22). They are the same for a planner weight of



(23) p—
                        9*(l-fl) +
                                       fry,
            (1 - 9 +      9*)(l-fl) +              ÷


In the special case           —   9   — 9*, it is easy to verify directly that

the planner weights producing the autarkic market allocation are p



                                              23
— Kx(lfl) and        i-p —
                             #c(l-$)     where tc. and   are given by (14).

        If the relative price of the two goods under portfolio

autarky equals the price generated by the plan, however, equations

(iS), (19), (20), and (23) can be used to show directly that both

sets of arrangements lead to the same allocation. Efficiency is

therefore assured even without asset trade.

        The linear i.i.d. investment model. The next model extends

the assumptions of Levhari and Srinivasan (1969) to a two-country

trading world. Results are described only briefly. More detailed

derivations would parallel the arguments in the appendix.

        Preferences are again Cobb-Douglas/isoelastic with risk-

aversion parameter R, and are the same everywhere. Production

functions are, however, linear, such that available outputs are


        lnX(t+i) —    lncX(t+l)     +
                                        1nk,jt),
        lnY(t+1) —    1nç'(ti-l)    +
                                        lnk.(t).
The crucial assumption, which ensures that production shocks

communicate no information about future productivity, is that

cX(t)    and c(t) are identically and independently distributed
(i.i.d.) over time.

        It can be verified that the aggregate planning solution is


(24)
         Cx(t)
                 —
                     aX(t),

                 —
         C(t)

         k,(t)    —
                      (i-cz)X(t),



                                           24
         k1(t) —       (l-a)Y(t).

The constant consumption share a, which is the same for both

goods, generalizes the formula of Levhari and Srinivasan (1969):12



(25)      - 1 -
                  {n[(cX)l(cY)(19)(1]}u/R.
       Under portfolio autarky, however, the investment rules given

by (24) and (25) remain optimal for price-taking residents of the

two countries, given the commodity demands implied by their Cobb-

Douglas preferences. The equilibrium terms of trade, the same as

the "shadow" terms of trade associated with the plan, are p(t) —

(l-9)X(t)/9Y(t),        and the balanced-trade equilibrium is in fact

efficient. The planner weight leading to the portfolio-autarky

allocation is

                   1
            1 + [(1-9)/9]


just as in the equivalence proposition of section 2.



4. Nonspecialization

       So far we have concentrated on models in which each of two

countries is specialized in producing a single output. To

illustrate      that portfolio-autarky equilibria are generally
inefficient when this assumption is relaxed, we examine in this

section two types of nonspecialization in pure exchange economies.

First we assume that in addition to their respective endowments of
12
  See also equation (AS) in the appendix.




                                            25
goods x and y, both countries have a stochastic endowment of a

third good, z, which is tradable. Our second example endows both

countries with nontradable outputs in addition to their
country-specific tradable endowments.

    NonspecializatLon in tradables. Assume that the home country

now has a stochastic endowment of a second good, z, along with x.

The foreign country has a stochastic endowment of the same good,

z, along with y. Denote by Z and Z* the realizations of the home

and foreign endowments of z.

     Both countries'          residents have Cobb-Douglas/isoelastic

preferences with expenditure shares Ox, Oy, and Ox. If p is the

price of x in terms of z and Py the price of y in terms of z, then

it is easy to show, as in section 2, that equilibrium prices are


           — Ox(Z + Z*)           p
                                        9y(2 +    Z*)
      px                  ,

                                  y
                OzX                         O1Y

    To check that condition (2) is generally not satisfied,

consider consumptions of the x good, which are



(26) x —                          x,   x* —             z*] +         x
            {o[           + ox}
                                              {o{               OY}


For log preferences, the international ratio of marginal utilities

from consuming good x is proportional to x*/x, which, as (26)

shows, is not constant across states of the world unless Z and Z*

are perfectly correlated. So the equilibrium with no asset trade

is generally inefficient.

    The discussion brings out the important distinction between

country-specific output shocks, which simultaneously affect all


                                       26
sectors within a country, and industry-specific shocks (for

example,            technological advances disseminated quickly across
national borders) which affect sectors producing the same good

regardless of location. If most shocks to z output are
industry-specific, it is plausible that Z and Z* are highly

correlated and that international asset trade yields little in the

way of efficiency gains. If shocks tend to be country specific,

however, countries can gain by exchanging shares in common risky

industries. Notice the implication of (26) that z-shocks are

transmitted negatively to foreign consumption. This is the basic

source of gains from asset trade in the present model.'3

          Nontradable goods. Another type of nonspecialization is due

to the presence of nontradable goods. It is easy to incorporate

into Lucas's (1982) model stochastic home and foreign endowments,

N and N*, of nontradables.'4 Preferences are still assumed to be

Cobb-Douglas/isoelastic, with expenditure shares Ox, Gy,                                                                   and    On

and a risk-aversion coefficient R common to both countries.

          The balanced-trade equilibrium can be found by calculating

demands as above and assuming that the two nontradable-good

markets and the world market for the x good clear. The resulting
13
  Stockman            (1988)          concludes         from          evidence            on          seven                European
countries         that          country-specific            shocks           have         had             a           substantisi.

influence      on         output    growth    in    the    period                 since        the        mithl96Os.              His

findings    are            therefore     consistent     with    the                 existence                 of          efficiency
benefits from international portfolio diversification.

  Stockman          and         DelLas        (1984)           extend         Lucas's           model                in          this

way.      Their        focus,         however,         is      on         exchange—rate         determination,                    and

they         assume            that       nontradabLes              and         tradabLes             affect                utiLity

separably.          Our         example      makes          clear          that      separability                    has         very

special             implications              far              optimal              international                         portfolio
diversification.        Separability              is        rather          implausible              in             any       case,

because         tradables      often                come            'bundled"         together                     with          such

nontradables as marketing and distribution services.



                                                            27
demands for tradables are


(27) x — [Bx/(l-On)]X,       x*     [By/(1-Bn)IX,



      y     [Ox/(l-On)]Y,    y* —   [Oy/(l-On)]Y,

expressions similar to those in (6) and which imply that

consumptions of the same tradable good are perfectly correlated

internationally. Of course, consumptions of nontradables are N and

N* in the home and foreign countries, and thus can have an

arbitrary correlation structure.

     If the planner optimizes over tradable consumptions only,

condition (2) still characterizes optimal allocations, except that

marginal utilities of tradables may now depend on N and N*. This

dependence turns out to be critical in assessing the efficiency of

the incomplete-markets allocation.

     To see this, note that the marginal-utility ratio in (2) is




where (1 is a constant that depends on 9 and By. But unless N and

   are perfectly correlated, or unless the utility function is

separable in consumptions (K —      1),   the expression above cannot be

constant across states of nature. The presence of nontradables may

therefore     lead   to     additional     efficiency   benefits    from

international risk sharing.

    Nontradables also may influence the statistical correlation

between broad national consumption measures. The models examined

before imply that innovations in national consumption levels are




                                    28
much more highly correlated than is in fact true. But when a

significant fraction of each country's consumption falls on

nontradables, innovations in aggregate national consumptions need

not be highly correlated, despite financial integration.'5



5. How big are the gains from risk sharing? Some numerical results

       In the previous sections we examined several very special

models in which international portfolio diversification yields no

welfare benefits at all. We now ask how far one must deviate from

the specific parameter settings assumed in those models before the

prohibition of asset trade causes a significant welfare loss. The

results reported below are limited to the case of pure exchange.

Future work will need to incorporate the additional gains from

intertemporal trade between investment economies (see section 6).

       Even within a pure exchange setting, there are several

directions along which one could relax the extreme assumptions

that lead to asset-trade redundancy above. As a first step, it

seems most natural to continue assuming that both countries

are specialized in their endowments,                                            but to relax                   the

Cobb-Douglas preference assumption, which makes the terms of trade

unit-elastic with respect to relative output. One case covered is

that in which the outputs of the two countries are perfect

                                         could      stiLl         have          a     definite         stochastic
t5Consumption          aggregates
relationship,           however,          depending          on           the          equilibrium             price
                                                                    the         equilibrium          price        of
functions.       In        the         exampLe      above,
home-country          nontradables        in       terms       of         x         goods       is         p      —



                                        national                                    measured          in         any
(On/fl—On)I(X/?O,            so                            consumptions
numeraire       are       still        perfeotLy      correlated.          Such        simple        correlations

                don't       arise        with      non-Cobb-Douglas             utility        functions,       not
typically
even with those separable           in tradables and nontradabtes.



                                                      29
substitutes, so that terms-of-trade effects are altogether absent.

       Preferences and           equilibrium.          To allow for non-unitary price

elasticities, we change from the earlier Cobb-Douglas to a

constant elasticity of substitution (CES) utility specification.

Period utility is CES/isoelastic:


       u(x,y) —      [(xe   +    yP)t/P}lR/(lR)                       (p <   1).

For p — 1, goods x and y are perfect substitute in consumption; p

— 0 is the Cobb-Douglas case, with equal weights of 1/2 on the

two goods.t6

       Absent asset trade, desired consumption levels are


(28) x —      X/[l   + PI(P-')1                          — pY/(1 +


        y —   "'X/[l+"""}                    ,    y*    — pP/CPl)y/[l÷PP/(P1)]


Market clearing yields the equilibrium price function


(29) p —      (X/Y)'

Equilibrium price is elastic with respect to relative supply if p

< 0 and inelastic if p > 0; only for p — 0 are the two countries'

incomes always equal. Cases in which p < 0 imply "immiserizing

growth" and probably are unrealistic. Our simulations therefore

look only at cases in which p e [0,1].

       Numerical methodology. National outputs are assumed to grow

according to

16
 Th.   logarithmic    perfect.    substitution        case   CR   —
                                                                        1,    p    —   1)   is   the
one studied by cantor and Mark     (1988).




                                                 30
(30) X(t÷l) — [1 ÷ €X(t)]x(t), Y(t+1) — [1 +


where (2(t)} and (c1*t)) are exogenous stochastic processes. Each

of these processes is a two-state Markov process, with the two

states corresponding to "high growth" and "low growth." The state

of the world economy as a whole on date t is given by the vector
  x        Y           .
[c (t),c (t)], which can take four possible values.
                                                                           1?



        We calibrate our simulation model so that the mean, standard

deviation, and first lagged autocorrelation of either country's

output growth rate equal those of the United States annual output

growth rate over the years 1968-1987. The numbers are 2.7 percent

per year (mean growth), 2.5 percent per year (standard deviation

of growth), and-O.156 (first lagged autocorrelation of growth). It

is also assumed that the contemporaneous correlation coefficient

between the two countries' growth rates equals that between U.S.

and Japanese growth over the same two decades (that is, 0.334).18

        Calibration amounts to choosing the two possible realizations

of the Markov growth processes and the probability entries in the

state transition matrix. The four possible states for the world

economy are taken to be:


        State 1:       — 0.052, c a 0.052

        State 2:       —   0.052,        a 0.002

        State 3:       — 0.002,          —   0.052

        State 4:       —   0.002,        —   0.002.

17The    simulation   model     is   a   two-country   version        of    the     model     used

by Mebra and Prescott (1985).

tData ce from OECD            Economic Outlook 43             (June    1988),     tabLe Ri,     p.

170.                                                      -




                                              31
Let         denote the probability of moving to state j next period

when the current state is i. The transition matrix II —               [ir.   ] is
                                                                        ii



              0.600   0.050        0.050     0.300

              0.129   0.299        0.443     0.129
      II—
              0.129   0.443        0.299     0.129

              0.300   0.050        0.050     0.600


with an implied steady-state distribution described by the uncon-

ditional probabilities 1 "2                w4] —   [0.36    0.14 0.14 0.36].

      The model has been set up so that the two countries are

perfectly symmetric under portfolio autarky. In particular, the

transition matrix 11 implies a symmetric joint distribution for the

two countries'        growth rates.          The symmetry assumption is
deliberate: it implies that the opening of asset trade would move

the world economy immediately to a perfectly pooled equilibrium in

which both countries hold equal wealth. In the numerical results

that follow, it is with the latter perfectly pooled equilibrium

that the autarkic equilibrium is compared.

      Results. We assume that the two countries always start out

with predetermined base output levels X and Y, where X                         Y is

assumed to maintain symmetry. A single realized history for the

world economy is generated as follows. In period t                0, an initial

pair of growth rates,               [2(0),€'(0)],          is drawn from the
steady-state distribution. Consuniptions for t — 0                      are then

determined      according     to     the     assumptions      about     financial

integration, given that output levels are [1 + EX(o)]x and [1 ÷




                                       32
              Subsequent growth rates are draws from the conditional

distribution defined by the transition matrix II,                                     and these

generate subsequent output and consumption levels.

        Estimates of home-country expected utilities under portfolio

autarky and under perfect pooling, denoted UA(X) and

respectively, are obtained by averaging the lifetime utility

levels achieved in 5,000 independent histories. (Expected utility

is the same at home and abroad, under either set of arrangements.)

In these calculations, it                 is   assumed that fi —            0.98 and that the
economy's horizon is 50 periods.19

        Our measure of welfare cost is the fraction 5 by which the

base outputs X and Y would have to be reduced in the perfectly

pooled case to leave individuals with the expected utility

attainable when balanced trade is imposed. The fraction & is

estimated as the solution to                                  '[(l - 8)XI.            It is the

permanent percentage reduction in average global product equivalent

to the prohibition of international portfolio diversification.
                                                        A
        Table 1 reports the estimates S for CES coefficients ranging

from 0.25 to 1.0 and for risk aversion coefficients ranging from 2

to 10. (Approximate standard errors, which indicate that the

output-loss estimates are quite precise, appear in parentheses.)

The most striking fact revealed by the table is how small the

gains from international asset trade are in this pure exchange

model. The largest welfare loss reported, 0.29 percent of output

t9We     estimated     expected     utility        under      both    regimes,       rather      than

calculating     it     exactly     with        closed-form      solutions     such      as      those

'iven    by    Nehra     (1986),     because          those    solutions     are     not      readily
applicable to the portfolio-autarky        case.




                                                 33
                              Table 1


   Welfare Loss Due to a Ban on International Diversification

                (fraction of national product per year)



          p     0.25          0.50          0.75          1.00
   R

   2          0.000045     0.000351      0.000916     0.001743
              (0.000000)   (0.000000)   (0.000000)    (0.000002)


   4          0.000094     0.000518      0.001274     0.002369
              (0.000000)   (0.000001)   (0.000005)    (0.000016)


   6          0.000114     0.000580      0.001403     0.002595
              (0.000000)   (0.000002)   (0.000012)    (0.000043)


   8          0.000127     0.000618      0.001482     0.002738
              (0.000000)   (0.000004)   (0.000023)    (0.000082)

   10         0.000136     0.000647      0.001545     0.002855
              (0.000000)   (0.000006)   (0.000036)    (0.000135)




Mote: For a given CES utility function parameter p and risk
aversion coefficient R, the reported number is the fraction by
which base—year output must be reduced to yield a welfare loss
equal to that caused by a ban on international asset trade.
Expected utility levels are calculated as the average of utility
realizations in 5,000 independent replications of a symmetric
two—country world economy in which national output growth rates
follow a two—state Markov process. (Approximate standard errors,
rounded, appear in parentheses below the output-loss
estimates.)
 per year. occurs when p —                 1     and R — 10. Recall that when p —                  1

national             outputs       are     perfect       substitutes         and endogenous
 terms-of-trade fluctuations therefore provide no insurance against

endowment risk. Estimates based on p — 1 might be relevant for a

small country producing an output that is also produced by many

foreign producers; but welfare losses are certainly smaller for

larger economies. In any case, even a yearly welfare loss
equivalent to 0.3 percent of output is not crushingly large.2°

         Values of p somewhere between 0.25 and 0.75 are probably

relevant for most industrial countries. The likely magnitude of R

suggested by the empirical literature seems to be below 4 (see,

e.g., Mehra and Prescott 1985, Obstfeld 1989a); most recently,

Pindyck (1988) has reported point estimates that tend to lie

between 3 and 4. For reasonable parameters, table 1 thus implies a

yearly welfare loss unlikely to exceed 0.15 percent of output

         If these           low estimates of                 the    welfare          gains    from

international risk pooling are accurate, rather small impediments

to asset trade could discourage a large volume of two-way capital

flows. Since current-account movements can in some respects

substitute for international portfolio diversification, small

gains from diversification could help explain the small scale of

current-account imbalances as well. Strong conclusions cannot be

drawn from simulations that do not account for investment. A

conservative inference, however, is that limited gains from asset

20This      figure     is   less    then   hail    the   probabLe    Loss    to   the    U.S.     due
to   a       ceteris    paribas     move    from    a    zero    net    external,   debt     to     a

permanent      debt/Gt1P    ratio     of    25     percent    (Obstfeld    1989b).     See    Lucas
(1987) for discussion of other pertinent welfare comparisons.




                                                   34
trade offer a possible clue to the puzzles surrounding empirical

measures of capital mobility among industrial economies.



6. Conclusions and qualifications

       This paper has evaluated the gains from international risk

sharing in some simple models with output uncertainty.              Under

alternative sets of restrictive assumptions on preferences and

technology, these gains may disappear. Numerical simulations show

that empirically plausible deviations from the assumptions

yielding risk-market redundancy still imply small welfare gains

from international portfolio diversification. To find significant

gains from international asset trade, one must go beyond the gains

attainable through the pooling of national business-cycle risks.

       For reasons spelled out in the introduction, our findings may

help    explain   the   seemingly        contradictory   evidence   about

international capital mobility among industrialized economies.

More detailed empirical work is needed, however, before such an

explanation can be accepted with any confidence. The key

limitation of our simulation analysis is that it neglects

investment. Although there are several investment models in which

international asset trade does not enlarge the set of consumption

opportunities, there are good reasons to believe that these models

capture only part of the role investment plays in reality. They

capture how investment can be used to smooth consumption in the

face of transitory output shocks- -essentially the "storage" role

of investment- -but not the possibility that output shocks contain

information about future investment productivity, information that



                                    35
might induce welfare-enhancing intertemporal trade.

          Time-series evidence supports the hypothesis that output

shocks do contain such information. Three robust empirical

regularities, valid across a broad sample of countries and time

periods, are that net exports are countercyclical, that investment

is procyclical, and that the percentage variance of investment

exceeds that of output (Backus and Kehoe 1988). These patterns

suggest a world in which positive output shocks contain favorable

news about investment productivity, leading to higher investment

financed in part out of foreign savings. In contrast, the variance

of investment would not exceed that of output if investment were

basically a storage activity: in the models of section 37 for

example, the variance of investment and output are the same.

          More realistic models of investment would also help account

for the gains reaped in the past from foreign capital flows to

developing countries. Our analysis has not addressed the

possibility of substantial intertemporal trade gains between

countries at very different stages of economic development. One

reason for this omission is that the puzzle about international

capital mobility described in the introduction is somewhat less

relevant for developing countries than for developed. For example,

the Feldstein-Horioka finding of tightly correlated saving and

investment rates comes through more weakly in studies of

developing-country experience prior to the early 19805.21

2'See      Dooi.ey,      Frankel,         and         Mathieson        (1987)     and      Suinners       (1988).      A

model      suited       to      capture         the      role     of      capital        flows      in     developcnent
would                          incorporate            both        capital         installation           costs        and
            probably
country—specific             factors       of          production         (such         as       land      and       raw

Labor).      tlendoza         (1989)      presents           an   interesting           study     of      the       costs



                                                             36
         There are some other possible gains from asset trade that the

models we have worked with may overlook. Monetary and fiscal

policy disturbances, for example, are absent. To the extent that

such omitted factors affect welfare through their consumption

effects, however, their explicit inclusion should not add much.22

         A more interesting extension would allow for the possibility

that international financial integration itself affects output

growth rates, as suggested by the recent literature on endogenous

long-run growth.23 Opening national capital markets to foreign

competition might improve the efficiency of domestic financial

intermediation, with permanent effects on the level of investment

and growth. Or, direct investment by foreigners could increase the

speed with which technolgica1 innovations are disseminated

between countries.                         The mechanisms through which financial

integration promotes growth might well involve externalities not

captured by private investors.

         Our hunch is that growth effects such as these are likely to

be a source of quantitatively important gains from financial

integration. Even if this guess is right, however, our suggested

resolution of the capital-mobility puzzle could still stand: while

growth effects may alter our assessment of the gains from asset

trade, they can influence private capital flows only to the extent

of      capital         controls      in     a      stochastic         small—country         model         with     these
features.          His         application           to         the          Canadian            economy         produces
estimates     of         welfare    toss   of        the        same       order     of     magnitude         as    those
reported above.
22
  Stockman        and      Svensson        (1981)    describe          a     model        with     a       richer   menu
of disturbances.
23
  See   Romer (1909) for       a survey.




                                                           37
that they are reflected in the private returns that investors

perceive. Further research into these questions is needed to

resolve the riddle in the data and to evaluate the role of global

financial markets more generally. More than intellectual curiosity

is at stake. Ultimately, the policies governments adopt are likely

to depend on the way economists interpret the empirical record.



Appendix: The symmetric investment model

      If international symmetry conditions are imposed on the

Cobb-Douglas/isoelastic utility functions of individuals and on

production functions, another equivalence proposition, valid for

all values of the risk-aversion parameter R and for serially

correlated output shocks, can be derived. To this end, assume


       9 =   9*   1/2

and

      "xx — "YY —


We return to the assumption that capital depreciates fully in use.

      Characterizing a planning solution. The planning solution

that will turn out to be relevant is one in which residents of the

two countries have equal welfare weights (p —   1/2).   In this case,

the planner's period utility, in terms of consumption aggregates,

can be taken to be



      W[Cx(t) C(t)] — [Cx(t)uIt2Cy(t)h/z]lR/(l_R)

these world consumption aggregates are allocated equally between

the two countries.



                                 38
        We now characterize a solution but stop short of a formal

existence/uniqueness proof. As the first step, write the Euler

conditions for goods x and y:


             —(1tR)    (1—R)
                                                       17   -(1tR)    (1—R)
              _____    ______
(Al) Cx(t)2 C(t)2 -                                    Cx(t+l)2 C(t+l)2
                                                                              },




             —(1+R)    (1—R)
                                                       17   _____     (1—R)
                                                 t
        C (t)2 C (t)2           $E Iic(t+l)            C(t÷l)2
         Y                                                       Cx(t+l)2
                                 t1           k1(t)J                          }.



Let    the marginal consumption propensities out of the two goods be

ax(t) and a(t); corresponding to these fractions are the
investment rules



(A2)    k,.(t) —

        k(t)      —
                      (1-y)[l-a(t)JY(t),

        krx(t)
                  —
                      (l-r)[lax(t)]X(t)
                  —
        k(t)          i(l-a1(t)1Y(t).

The assumed consumption and investment rules can now be used to

write all quantities in (Al) in terms of X(t) and '1(t), e.g.,

Cx(t+l) —
After   this step and tedious algebra, (Al) reduces to the equations




                                        39
                                            1—R)
                                             2
                             a(t)
(A3)
                            I -   (t)

                                                 (1—R)           —(1t-R)        (1—R)
                   1-R
                                                      2              2               2
            PEt{r [cX(t+l)cY(t+l)]                        Qx(t+fl          a(t±l)
                                                                                             }


                                        (1-It)
                                             2
                             ax(t)
                            lCx(t)

                                                   (1—It)         —(1+R)          1—It)
                                                                                 ______
                    1—It
                                                      2               2                  2
                           [cX(t+l)cY(t+l)]                 a(t+l)         ax(t+l)
                                                                                             }

where '    a -(l--)'.              The equations in (A3) are necessary

conditions for an optimal consumption/investment plan.

       Conjecture now that the amounts of goods x and y consumed on

date t   under   an efficient plan are


(A4) Cx(t) —     a(t)X(t),           C(t) —           a(t)Y(t)

(that is, ax(t) —          a(t)    =    a(t) for all             t). This conjecture is

suggested by the symmetry of the model;                             under the parameters

assumed in this section,                —        in the      earlier logarithmic model,

so (A4) holds there with a(t) constant over time. Our general

strategy will be to argue that we can characterize a single random

process (a(t)) such that when ax(t) —                       a(t) — a(t), the         planner's

intertemporal Euler conditions are satisfied.

       Suppose that there exists a process (a(t)) that satisfies




                                                 40
(AS)
          a(t)
         1-a(t)
                       —R


                            —
                                flEjr
                                      I




                                      I
                                          '                  (1—R)

                                              (ç (t+1)ç (t+l)]
                                                                 2
                                                                          -R
                                                                     a(t+l)


It   is straightforward to check that if one sets ax(t)
                                                                                 Qy(t)

a(t)   for all t,               then      the processes {Ox(t)) and {a(t)} satisfy

both of the necessary conditions listed in (A3). Furthermore, the

conditions of static efficiency and market clearing hold. Thus,

assuming the existence of a solution to the stochastic difference

equation (AS) with 0 <                        a(t)   < 1 on all dates, and assuming

uniqueness of the optimal plan, the marginal propensities ax(t)

and a(t) must be the same, and equal to a(t), on all dates.

       An analytical characterization of processes satisfying (AS)

is obviously too much to hope for if It 0 1. When productivity

shocks are i.i.d. over time, however, a(t) is a constant, a, and

(AS) implies that



(A6) a —      1    —
                         {flrlE[(cxcl/2]}l/R.
Notice the resemblance between (A6) and equation (25) of section

3. These two equations coincide when 1 — 1 and B —                        1/2.
       Portfolio autarky: Necessary conditions for equilibrium. Turn

once again to the case in which all assets are nontraded. Let p(t)

continue to denote the relative price of the y good, and introduce

the following convenient definitions:

        c — x +        py,
          —       x*/p      +   y*.



                                                     41
Thus, c is home consumption measured in home output, c* foreign

consumption measured in foreign output.

       In the above notation, the intertemporal Euler condition for

the home country, taking the terms of trade as given, is


                     —(1-SR)                                                 (l—R)
                                -
(A7) c(t)Rp(t)           2
                                    pEt[rcx(t+l)p(t)hip(t÷l)                  2       c(t+1YR].


In essence, (Al) is an "indirect utility function" version of the

standard intertemporal Euler condition.24                                    The corresponding

condition abroad is


                        (1—R)                                                 (1—R)
(A8) c*(t)Rp(t) 2 -                  sE[rc         (t+l)p(t)'p(t+1)               2




      An equivalence proposition. The egalitarian command optimum

examined earlier can be characterized by the marginal propensity

to consume out of either output, a(t), which is a function of the

state of the economy, s(t) —                        [X(t),Y(t),c(t)1.             The optimal plan

also induces conditional distribution functions F[s(t+l) ls(t)],

and it is with respect to these c.d.f.s that the Euler condition

(A5) must hold.

      The basic idea of the argument is to show that when saving

and investment decisions under balanced trade are governed by the

optimal plan, and when market expectations about the transition

between states are governed by the c.d.f.s Fs(t+l)IS(t)I,

conditions (A7) and (AS) hold for the resulting equilibrium

terms-of-trade (which coincide with the corresponding shadow price

24                              —1                 (1—R)          —(1-R)/2
  Indirect   utility is (1—R)        ((1/2)c(t)]           p(t)




                                                     42
in the plan). Since market expectations are then rational, this

demonstration proves that the incomplete-markets equilibrium is

the same as a particular complete-markets equilibrium and is thus

efficient even without international asset trade.

         The first step is to calculate the equilibrium terms of

trade under portfolio autarky. Equality of supply and demand in

the market for the x good means that


         x(t) +     x*(t)          +
                                         k,(t)             +
                                                               kyx(t)
                                                                         —   X(t).

Under the optimal plan, domestic spending is a(t)X(t) and foreign

spending in terms of the x good is n(t)p(t)Y(t). The equilibrium

condition above therefore implies (recalling the assumption of

common expenditure shares of 9 — 1-9                                                     —    1/2)      that X(t) —

(1/2)a(t)[X(t) + p(t)Y(t)]                                     +    [l-a(tfl[7X(t)+               (l--y)p(t)Y(t)].25

Solving for p(t) results in



(A9) p(t) —            X(t)/Y(t).

         Substitute into (A7) and (AS) using (A9) and the saving and

investment functions associated with the plan. After calculation,

it turns out that both (A7) and (AS) hold if


                         -R                                                     (1-R)
                a(t)                           i
                                                    i-a
                                                                                     2
                                                                                                  -R

            l-a(t)
                           —
                                    $Er        I
                                                          [ç (t+1)ç (t+1)]                   a(t+l)



This      equation is, however, the same as (A5), the equation
25
  Here      is     where           the             balanced-trade       assumption       comes       in.     Notice   that
the      last     term        in previoustheexpression                               comes       from      the   assumption
that production functions are Cobb—Douglas.




                                                                   43
characterizing the command optimum. It follows that the market

allocation under portfolio autarky is efficient.




                               44
References

Backus, David K., and Patrick J. Kehoe. "International Evidence on
the Historical Properties of Business Cycles." Mimeo, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 1988.

Cantor,    Richard,   and Nelson C.    Mark.    "The    International
Transmission of Real Business Cycles.1' International Economic
Review 29 (August 1988): 493-508.

Cochrane, John H. "The Sensitivity of Tests of the Intertemporal
Allocation of Consumption to Near-Rational Alternatives," American
Economic Review 79 (June 1989): 319-337.

Cole, Harold L. "Financial Structure and International Trade."
International Economic Review 29 (May 1988): 237-259.

Dellas, Harris. "A Real Model of the World Business Cycle."
Journal of International Money and    Finance   5 (September 1986):
381-394.

Diamond, Peter A. "The Role of a Stock Market in a General
Equilibrium Model with Technological Uncertainty." American
Economic Review 57 (September 1967): 759-776.

Dooley, Michael; Jeffrey Frankel; and Donald J. Mathieson.
"International Capital Mobility: What Do Saving-Investment
Correlations Tell Us?" International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 34
(September 1987): 503-529.

Feldstein, Martin, and Charles Horioka. "Domestic Saving and
International Capital Flows." Economic Journal 90 (June 1980):
314-329.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. "Quantifying International Capital Mobility in
the 1980s." In The Economics of Saving, edited by B. Douglas
Bernheim and John B. Shoven. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1990 (forthcoming).

Colub, Stephen S. "International Capital Mobility: Net versus
Cross Stocks arid Flows." Mimeo, Swarthmore College, November 1987.

Hart, Oliver D. "On the Optimality of Equilibrium when the Market
Structure   is  Incomplete." Journal of Economic Theory 11
(December 1975): 418- 443.

Helpman, Elhanan, and Assaf Razin. A Theory of International Trade
under Uncertainty. New York: Academic Press, 1978.

Levhari, David, and T.N. Srinivasan. "Optimal Savings under
Uncertainty." Review of Economic Studies 36 (1969): 153-163.

Long, John, and Charles Plosser.   "Real Business Cycles." Journal
of Political Economy 91 (February 1983): 39-69.


                               45
 Lucas, Robert E. ,    Jr.   "Interest Rates and Currency Prices in a
 Two-Country World." Journal of Monetai-y Economics 10 (November
 1982): 335-359.

             Models of Business Cycles. Oxford: Basil
                                                        Blackwell, 1987.
 Mehra,  Rajnish.      "On   the Existence and Representatjo          of
 Equilibrium  in      an Economy with Growth and           Nonstationary
 Consumption," International Economic Review 29 (February 1988):
 131-136.

Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward C. Prescott. "The Equity Premium: A
 Puzzle." Journal of Monetary Economics 15 (March 1985): 145-161.

Mendoza, Enrique G.          "A Quantitative Investigation of the
Macroeconomic Effects of Capital Controls and the Stabilization of
the Balance of Trade." Miineo, University of Western Ontario, 1989.

Mundell, Robert A. "International Trade and Factor Mobility."
American Economic Review 47 (1957): 321-335.

Newbery, David MG., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "The Choice of
Techniques and the Optimality of Market Equilibrium with Rational
Expectations." Journal of Political Economy 90 (April 1982):
223-246.

           ."Pareto Inferior Trade." Review of Economic Studies 51
(January 1984): 1- 12.

Obstfeld, Maurice. "Capital Mobility in the World Economy: Theory
and Measurement" In The National Bureau Method, International
Capital Mobilityand Other Essays, edited by Karl Brunner and
Allan H. Meltzer. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, vol. 24 (Spring 1986): 55-103.

             "How Integrated are World Capital Markets? Some New
Tests." In Debt, Stabilization and Development: Essays in Memory
of Carlos Diaz-Alejandro, edited by Guillermo A. Calvo et al.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell: l989.(a)

          "Comment (on Robert J. Hodrick, 'U.S. International
Capital Flows: Perspectives from Rational Maximizing Models')."
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy (Spring
1989). (b)

Pindyck, Robert S. "Risk Aversion and the Determinants of Stock
Market Behavior." Review of Economics and    Statistics 70 (May
1988): 183-190.

Romer, Paul. "Capital Accumulation in the Theory of Long-Run
Growth." In Modern Business Cycle Theory, edited by Robert J.
Barro. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1989.



                                   46
Stiglitz, Joseph E.     "The Inefficiency of the Stock Market
Equilibrium." Review of Economic Studies 49 (1982): 241-261.

Stockman, Alan C. "Sectoral and National Aggregate Disturbances to
Industrial Output in Seven European Countries." Jourrzal of
Monetary Economics 21 (March/May 1988): 387-409.

            and Harris Dellas. "The Roles of Terms of Trade and
Non-Traded-Goods    Prices   in    Exchange   Rate    Variations."
Working Paper No. 1342, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1984.

         and Lars E.0. Svensson. "Capital Flows, Investment, and
Exchange Rates." Journal of Monetary Economics 19 (March 1987):
171-201.

Summers,   Lawrence    H.    "Tax   Policy    and   International
Competitiveness." In   International Aspects of Fiscal Policies,
edited by Jacob A. Frenkel. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1988.

Tesar, Linda L. "Savings, Investment and International Capital
Flows." Brookings Discussion Papers in International Economics No.
64, 1988.




                               47
