                             NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           COPYCATTINC: FISCAL POLICIES OF STATES AND    THEIR NEIGHBORS




                                   Anne C. Case

                               James R. Hines, Jr.

                                 Haney S. Rosen




                              Working Paper No. 3032




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 1989




We are grateful to James Poterba, Edward Granilich, Douglas Holtz-Eakin, Gilbert
Metcalf. two anonymous referees, and seminar participants at Berkeley. Baruch,
Hanard, L.S.E. • M.I.T., Michigan and Rutgers for useful suggestions. Marlon
Boarnet, John Capeci and Dean Jolliffe provided exemplary research assistance.
This research was supported in part by the NBER project on State and Local
Government Finance, and in part by a grant from the Olin Foundation to
Princeton University. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3032
                                        July 1989




          COPYCAflINC; FISCAL POLICIES OF STATES AND THEIR NEIGHBORS



                                   ABSTRACT


     This paper formalizes and tests the notion that state governments'

expenditures depend on the spending of similarly situated states. We find

that even after allowing for fixed state effects, year effects, and common

random shocks between neighbors, as state government's level of per capita

expenditure is positively and significantly affected by the expenditure

levels of its neighbors. Ceteris paribus, a one dollar increase in a state's

neighbors' expenditures increases its own expenditure by over 70 cents.




Anne C. Case              James R. Hines, Jr.          Haney S. Rosen
Department of Economics   Department of Economics      Department of Economics
Harvard University        Princeton University         Princeton University
Cambridge, MA 02138       Princeton, NJ 08544          Princeton, NJ 08544
                    "We do everything everyone else does."
                        —Arkansas State Senator Doug
                          Brandon, describing his state's
                          budgetary policies.t



 1. INTRODUCTION

      State and local governments consume a significant part of the
                                                                      economy's
annual output, about 14 percent of GNP. In addition, there is considerable

cross—sectional variation: in 1985, per capita direct expenditures ranged from

$1,775 in Missouri to $4,166 in Wyoming.2 An enormous amount of theoretical

and empirical research has been devoted to explaining such differences.    At

this time, however, there is no consensus concerning the process that

generates government spending decisions. Following the work of Slack [1948],

many investigators have found the median voter model to be a useful framework.

However, a number of other candidates also have their advocates, The

"Leviathan" model suggested by Brennan and Buchanan [1977], special interest

group models (Mueller and Murrell [1986]), and general "political economy"

models (Craig and Inman [1986]) are just a few that come to mind.3

     When it comes to estimating the parameters of the various models, there

is a striking similarity regardless of the underlying theoretical framework,

In a generic estimating equation, a jurisdiction's spending depends on

income, jfl grants from other levels of government, and its demographic and/or



     tApplebome [1989, p. 1.267]

     2Tax Foundation, Inc. [1988, p. 174].

     3See Inman [1988] for a survey of various models of government expenditure
determination

                                       1
political characteristics. Such differences in characteristics obviously need

to be taken into account. Fiowever, this paper proposes that there is another

important determinant of state and local government expenditures in the United

States: the expenditures of neighboring governments.

     Casual observation suggests that jurisdictions' spending levels do affect

each other. When one state perceives that its spending levels are out of line

with those of similarly situated states, this often leads to demands for

change. For example, in April 1984 the governor of Texas called a speciaL

legislative session to consider a billion dollar increase in school

expenditures. Part of the reason was that a few months earlier "... a study by

the Federal Department of Education found that Texas ranked next to last among

the states in the portion of income per capita spent on public education.

These and other indicators.. .spurred wide concern among Texans" (Reinhold

[L984, p. 173). Indeed, documents prepared for state legislators commonLy

focus on their state's spending in a given category reLative to other stares.

Thus, a 1988 report for the New Jersey legislature noted that "Since 1976, New

Jersey has ranked third or fourth nationally in per pupil expenditures"

(Program for New Jersey Affairs [1988, p. 76]).

     In this paper, we formalize and test the notion that a state's spending

can depend on the spending of similarly situated states.     Instead of the

somewhat awkward construction "similarly situated states", we will use the

word "neighbors". It must be stressed, however, that for our purposes.

nei,ghbQrtjness does not necessarily connote zeozraphic oroximity. States that

are economically and demographically similar may have more effect on each




     4There is also anecdotal evidence that changes in a state's tax structure
are influenced by those of its neighbors. Because of the difficulties involved
in characterizing state tax structures (see Feenberg and Rosen [1986]), we prefer
to attack the relatively simpler expenditure issue.


                                        2
 other than two dissimilar states that happen to share a border. Citizens of

 New York, for example, might find comparisons to Illinois more relevant than

 those to Vermont.

      Section 2 lays out our theoretical framework.
                                                       tie construct a simple

 model in which the optimizing level of expenditure by a state decision—maker

 is affected by the expenditure levels of that state's "neighbors." We discuss

 the empirical specification in section 3. Special attention is devoted to

 resolving the econometric problems that arise because various states'

expenditure levels might be subject to common random shocks. The data, which

consist of annual observations for the continental United States
                                                                    during the
period 1970—1985, are described in section 4.

     The results are presented in section 5. A major finding is that even

after allowing for state individual effects,    year effects, and correlated

random shocks between neighbors, a state's level of per capita expenditure is

positively and significantly affected by the expenditure levels of its

neighbors. Ceteris uaribus, a one dollar increase in a state's neighbors'

expenditures increases its own expenditure by over 70 cents. We also analyze

spending in specific categories such as education, and there too other states

matter. Moreover, we find that failure to include neighbors' expenditures in

the equation leads to substantially different estimated effects of other

important explanatory variables such as federal grants and age structure of

the population. In particular, failure to account for neighbor effects leads

to a substantial upward bias in the estimate of a state's   grants upon its

ex!enditures. Section 6 concludes with a brief summary.




                                      3
2. THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS

        There are many reasons why one might expect the expenditures of one s:ac

to affect the fiscal policies of other states. In this                section,   we outline

several possibilities that build upon traditional models of public expenditure

determination.

         In simple normative models of government choice, governments concerned

with their citizens' well—being choose expenditure levels that equate the sum

of individual marginal behefits from public services to their marginaL coscs.±

Assume, for example, that all consumers in a state are identical, taxes are

lump—sum, and that only one type of public good is provided by the government.

Then the utility level of the (representative) consumer in state I can be

expressed as:



               V1    V[Y — P, G]                                                        (2.1)



where    Y is per capita income in state 1, Tt            is the (lump—sum)   tax burden of
each    consumer, and C1 is the level of public services provided. The price of

private goods is the numeraire. If public services are measured in per—

consumer cost units, budget balance requires:



               V                                                                        (2.2)


       Now, define pt as the consumer's marginal willingness to pay for public

goods,     p5' — OV'()/8G1   /   8V()/8CYt—Tt).       Then if the state government seeks to

maximize      consumer   satisfaction (2.1), subject to the budget constraint (2.2),

the   first—order condition is the familiar p11— 1 : at             the margin, the



       5See   Samuelson [1954]. This description abstracts from benefit spillovers
between communities and other potentially important phenomena.
                                                  4
 consumer's willingness to pay for the public good just    equals the resource
 cost of providing it.

         Note that in this model, a state's expenditure level does
                                                                     not respond
 directly to changes in the expenditures of its neighbors. Just as in the

 empirical models discussed above, a state's expenditures are determined

 entirely by variables relating to that state. However, we will show that with

a more complicated political or economic environment, expenditure

 interdependence becomes a distinct possibility. Suppose, for example, that

government decision—makers have tastes for controlling large "empires" as

reflected in the size of C. (See Brennan and Buchanan [1977].) What holds

the potentially avaricious budget appetites of government decision—makers in

check? One mechanism that may limit state governments' abilities       to

misallocate resources is political voice. Hirschman [1970] observes that

voice can be an effective method of forcing powerful entities to respond to

consumers or voters. Voice takes obvious forms in struggles over subnational

fiscal policies: dissatisfied citizens can (and do) complain publicly about

their elected officials, they can vote for opposition candidates, and can

contribute time and money to opposition election campaigns.6

     Citizens may not, however, know         to complain. It is hard to

establish de novo that any particular tax and spending package is wasteful.

After all, it is very hard to measur, the true flow of value from government—



     6
       Another possible response to governmental inefficiency is exit.     (See
Tiebout (1956).) However, the Tiebout hypothesis assumes interjurisdictional
movement to be costless, an unlikely condition to be met by population movement
between states. The evidence suggests that such movement is rather uncommon.
In 1985, only 8.7 percent of Americans lived in a different state than they did
five years earlier. (U.S. Bureau of the Census (1986, p.25].) There is little
evidence that a significant fraction of this migration is driven by differences
in state and local fiscal policies. Another reason for preferring the voice
approach is that, as a framework for econometric analysis, an exit model has a
major drawback.    If people shift in response to fiscal policies, then the
economic and demographic characteristics of the states become endogertous, and
the model is not identified.

                                         5
provided services. In our model, citizens Look to other states in order to

evaluate the performance of their own Legislators. In particuLar, suppose

that consumers compare their current utilities to the utility Levels they

would obtain if they lived in neighboring states. Suppose further that

legislators worry about the consequences of adverse political voice if they

offer their citizens a fiscal package worse than one obtainable in a

neighboring state. A possible objective function for such a government

decision—maker' is:



              —   Vt()   +    — (i/2) (V — V')2[sgn(V     —   Vt)]          (2.3)

                                       7i'     >



where V' is the level of utility the representative consumer in state i would

obtain if she moved to state j



            V- —v[Y — T,     cfl                                            (2.4)


The first term on the right side of (2.3) expresses the degree to which

Legislators directly weigh the well—being of their own citizens, and the

second term expresses legislators' tastes for large empires. The third term

reflects the political costs government officiaLs pay for providing their

citizens a fiscal package that is worse than one available in neighboring

state j .   The sign of this quadratic terra is defined so that a state

government always faces incentives to improve the quality of its fiscal




       Without elaboration, we consider the objective function (2.3) to represent
an approximation to the outcome of interest—group politics and other forces that
determine state and local fiscal policies.

                                         6
 package.

        Another consideration that would change the simple objective       function

 (2.1) is fiscal competition among states. States use both          expenditure and tax
 policies to compete with each other for businesses. Businesses         are desired

because they provide tax revenues. Furthermore, additional business
                                                                             expands
 local shopping and employment opportunities, and business      may be involved in
beneficial activities such as supporting local charities. (Of
                                                                       course,

businesses may also be associated with disamenities such as pollution and

congestion.) Let 8be state i's amount of "business," measured in dollars.

Then the simplest way to include a "taste'1 for more business is to augment the

objective function (2.3) as follows:



             — Vt() +      —     (,2/2)(V'—V)2 (sgn(Vt—Vt)J + y B                (2.5)

                                          li' 72' Y3   > 0


If rt   is   the tax rate on business in state i, the budget constraint becomes



                                + r1 B                                           (2.6)



Interdependence enters the picture because the amount of business that state i

attracts depends both on its own tax rate, r1, and the tax rate of its

neighbor, i-a:




                         St —   B'(cyJ)                                          (2.7)




     6 Similarly, reductions in the utility available in other states are always
advantageous to legislators.

                                               7
where 8B/3r C 0 and dB/8r> Q.

     The voice model and the fiscal competition model are not mutually

exclusive. NevertheLess, to simplify the exposition it helps to analyze them

separately. We begin with the voice model (72 > 0, y —           0),   and then turn to

the fiscal competition model (7a —        0,   7j > 0).

     Voice model.          Assuming for simplicity that Vt > V', the first—order

condition characterizing maximization of (2.3) over the choice of G', subject

to (2.2) is:




           qL(pL 1) +          + 72 A '' (c51— I) — 1z A' (dV4'/dG') —   0         (2.8)



where '   is   the marginal utility of income in state i and A' — (Va' — V1) is

the difference between the utility available to a citizen of state i in her

own state and that obtainable in state j .          The last term on the left side of

(2.8) is a function of state j's expected response to spending changes in

state i. Assume that this term is zero. Then (2.8) becomes:



           (P81 —   1) —   _/(,1 (1   + 7z AL)]                                    (2.9)




Note that the right side of (2.9) approaches zero as either 71 becomes zero or

72 becomes very large. Thus, we will obtain efficient provision of public

goods (p8' — 1) only when the weight on government expenditure per se (-y) is

low, or when the fact that citizens can obtain more utility in another state

Leads to a lot of trouble for legislators (7z is large). More generally,




     91n addition, business executives might compare their own utilities in
states i and j along the lines suggested above. To keep things simple, we have
not included this factor in equation (2.7).If we did, it would serve to
reinforce the basic conclusion that one expects to observe expenditure
interdependence.

                                               8
 (p— 1) is negative, reflecting government overprovisjon of public goods.

       Equation (2.9) suggests how changes in a state's expenditures affect the

 spending decisions of its neighbors: the effect comes through the o term in

 the denominator of (2.9), and generally takes the form that increases in v

 are matched by shrinking c (increasing p — 1)             .   More formally, totally

 differentiating (2.9) and rearranging yields:




                                     7z'Vi

                         + .72)2   (dp1t/dG' —   2   d'it/dC + ziaLu!.zil )             (2,10)
                                                 'l+y2t)       (1 +


Diminishing marginal utility of government expenditures implies dp,u/dCt C 0.

 If we are further willing to assume that d.11/dC > 0, then the right side of

 (2.10) is negative.'0

      An important question is whether states will necessarily match their

neighbor's spending changes. Not necessarily: states can be expected to

follow other states' spending increases, for example, only if spending

increases in other states increase va'. While this certainly may be the case,

it is not necessarily true. For example, suppose that residents of state i

believe that i spends "too much," but that its neighbor, state J, spends "too

little." Then according to our model, if j were to increase its ipending,

legislators in i would reduce their spending.

     Fiscal conetitiQn model.          In this case, we set         — 0 in equation

(2.5). The state chooses C1, T' and r        to   maximize (2.5) subject to the

constraint (2.6). The three first order conditions can be combined to yieLd

the following equations



     10Because dct — dT' in this model, either strong separability of the utility
function (2.1) and diminishing marginal utility of income    diminishing marginal
utility of income and (uncompensated) complementarity of yt and C' are sufficient
conditions for dr7t/dct > 0.

                                             9
                    — —-y3/q    —
                                                                                                     (2.11)
               Ps17'      '1                                                                         (2.12)


where          is the marginal utility of government expenditure (8V'/3C1) and, as

before, ,?L    is    the marginal utility of income (8V"/8Y'). Our strategy is to

find the response of p'ii' to a shock in its neighbor's expenditures. Assuming

that 0L and its marginal utility move in opposite directions11, this will tell

us whether C increases or decreases.

        Suppose théré is a "taste shock" in neighboring state j, meaning that for

given values of (Y —            T3)     and G3, there is an increase in p83. From equation
(2.12) we know that p53 —               1 — -y1/q'3    so that if pJ increases, so will ,           and

C3. From equation (2.11), the impulse effect of this change is to raise r'——
the additional revenue to finance the increased government expenditure comes

partly through increased business taxes. How do these increases in r and C3

affect state i? Substituting the expression for ,                             implied   by equation (2.11)

into (2.12), and differentiating, we obtain


                                    1
                                               '3B'                 32Bt
                     73   (                               —     Bt ________   ] / (35L /3r1)2 I
   d     Li                    dr3          8r3 Br'
  ________                                                                                          (2,13)
       dr3                               [r + B'   /   (38'   /Brt)]'




We have already shown that changes in p57y                       are linked to C1, as are changes in
  to    C. Hence, equation (2.13) establishes our basic proposition ——

neighbors' expenditure levels are interrelated. In general, the sign is
indeterminate. Suppose, however, that the cross effects of tax rates on




        11A   sufficient condition for this to be true is that V'() is strongly
separable, and both of the components                    are globally concave.

                                                         10
 business location are zero (82 8' /3r',3T —    0),   and that the direct effect of

 state j's tax rate change upon business in state i (8B'/3r)        exceeds the effec:
 generated by the induced change in state i's tax rate
                                                              ((38t/3r1)(ört/3ri)j .   In
 this case, equation (2.13) indicates that 3p11j/ôr C 0, which implies that 8G'/3c

 > 0, Thus, as in the voice model, it seems reasonable
                                                              to expect that
 expenditures of neighbors will move in the same direction,
                                                                   although this is
not necessarily the case.

      Summary.     We have shown that in both a voice model and a fiscal

competition model of public expenditure, expenditures in one         state may be
affected by the expenditures of its neighbor, although one cannot know a

priori whether they wilL move in the same direction. A reasonable
                                                                            question is
whether it is feasible to distinguish between the two models.          Data problems

would make this very difficult. We simply do not know which taxes and

expenditures are designed to attract business. Our goal, however, has been to

develop a choice theoretic framework to explain why there might be

interdependence among states' aggregate expenditures. For this particular

purpose, it does not matter whether one or the other of the mechanisms is

dominant.

     A related observation is that both models are very simple. For example,

they ignore the possibility that states will respond strategically to

budgetary changes in other states. (See Johnson (1988].) While incorporating

strategic behavior would enrich the models, it would not change the basic
conclusion —     consistent   with casual evidence, we must take seriously the

possibility that expenditure levels in one state exert an independent effect

on expenditure levels in other states,




                                          11
3.   EAMPIRICAL IMPLEMENTATION

3d Econometric Model

     Our theoretical model implies that state i's per capita expenditures in

year t, E, depend on its own characteristics (a vector         and the

expenditures of its neighbors. Continue to assume for simplicity that each

state has only one neighbor, with per capita expenditure E+,. Then in a

linear specification we can write:



              —      +   *E +                                             (3.1)




where $ and    are parameters, and    is a random error.12

      Several econometric studies of sub—federal government expenditure have

suggested that a state's public expenditures are characterized by an

individual effect — an unobserved characteristic of the state that influences

its fiscal decisions and does not change over time (for example, "climate" or

"political make—up"). (See Holtz—Ealcin [1986].) Hence, we use pooled cross—

section time series data, and augment equation (3.1) with an individual

effect. In addition, we allow for "time effects." (This amounts to including

a series of year specific intercepts.) The time effects are intended to

control for variables that might have a common effect on the states in a given

year, such as business cycle conditions, the "national mood" toward

government, etc. Also, year—to—year changes in federal matching rate programs

that change the effective price of spending for all states are subsumed in the

year effects. Including time effects is particularly important in the context




      '2Equation (3.1) assumes that the neighbor effects are transmitted
concurrently, which is reasonable given that the data are yearly observations.
We also analyzed a model in which E._1 appeared on the right hand side, and
found that it did not perform as well as (3.1) — with      the value of the
log likelihood was substantially lower than with

                                       12
 of our problem, because we do not want to attrthuce behavioral
                                                                  significance to
 any across—state correlations in spending that are really due to common
 national influences.

      In short, our estimation equation takes the form



              —   Xfi   +   +   f, + h   ÷                              (3.2)



where f and h are the individual and year effects,
                                                       respectively.

     As stressed above, the unique aspect of equation (3.2) is the presence of

the neighbor's expenditure as a right hand side variable.'3 The inclusion of

    raises several related issues that have to be addressed.

     MultiDle neizhbors. A state may have more than one neighbor. In the

context of our voice model, citizens of a given state compare themselves

simultaneously to those of several other states — people in New Jersey, for

example, might be concerned about developments in both New York and Michigan.

Similarly, with a fiscal competition model, a state may try to lure away

business from several other states. This does not imply that all neighbors

have equal influence. The impact of state j on state i's spending may, for

example, depend on the extent to which they are demographically similar. A

state that is very much "like" Wisconsin will have more of an impact on

Wisconsin's decisions than one that is less so. We assume that the impact of

other states' spending on state i depends on a weighted average of all other

states' spending, where the weights depend on the "degree of neighborliness."

Specifically, we allow for the possibility of multiple neighbors by replacing

   in equation (3.2) with




     '3Grainljch and Laren [1984) estimate a model in which a state's welfare
expenditures are influenced by those of surrounding states. However, their model
does not allow the benefits in a state to influence its neighbors.

                                             13
              n
              2
             i—I
                   w E4,                                                         33.


where E Wjj —      I,   and wu — 0 if state j is not a neighbor of state

         Every state is associated with a vector of w's that indicates the

relative importance of its neighbors' expenditures. We take note of this

fact by writing the system of expenditure equations for all the states in year

t   in   matrix form,




              E —WEt+Xfl+u                                                      (34)


where E is a (48 x 1) vector of state expenditures for the continental U.S.

in year t;     X   is a (48 x k) matrix of explanatory variabl.es that includes year

and state effects; and W is a (48x48) weighting matrix that assigns neighbors

to every state. That is, the ith row of W assigns to            a weighted average

of neighbors' spending: L w1                In principle, it would be desirable to

estimate the elements of the IJ matrix along with the other parameters. In

practice, such an approach is out of the question because of insufficient

degrees of freedom. We discuss below strategies for specifying 1.1 a priori,

and the problems associated with each. For the moment, however, we will put

this issue aside, and continue the discussion assuming that the W matrix is

known.

         Correlated random shocks. While the presence of time effects in the

model controls for systematic influences common to all states in a given year,

neighbors might be subject to correlated random shocks. For example, if

neighbors are defined by physical proximity, state cleanup of floods or shared




     "That weights sum to one for each state's neighbors imposes the restriction
that all states have neighbors.

                                            14
  toxic waste sites would lead to positively
                                                 correlated random shocks between
  neighbors. If a foreign company selects a state in
                                                          which to place a new
  factory, the company's short list of possible sites
                                                          may include states that
  are close demographic neighbors. To the extent that
                                                           state i's selection as
  the new site influences the state's
                                         spending, the choice of state i over its

 neighbors would induce negative correlation in the errors of neighbors13

         Whatever their cause, the presence of such shocks produces a correlation

 between neighbors' levels of spending that can lead one to "find" causal

 influences of one state's spending on another's that
                                                           are not actually present.
 To avoid drawing such incorrect conclusions,     we allow for potential

 correlation between the errors of neighbors by
                                                    writing



             Ut —   pWu +
                                                                                  (3.5)


 where     is idiosyncratic error, uncorrelated between states: E(e1te) — 0 for

 i not equal to j

     Analogous to the time series phenomenon in which the
                                                               presence of a lagged
dependent variable [Y —     (-.1)] and   serial correlation [tat —
                                                                     f(u_1)]   mimic
each other, in this work there is potential for
                                                    dependence on neighbors

through spending (E) and through errors (u) to mimic each other. As with time

series, the presence of other right—hand side variables ()Q can be used to

identify the effects separately.

     £irni4ltanepus estimation of exDenditures across states. As Equation (3.4)

stands it cannot be estimated consistently since the errors are correlated



     13To see this more formally, consider replacing (2.7) with B1
in which c is a random shock to the level of business in state i (3B/8ct >0).
Then e1 affects tax collections and optimal state tax and expenditure policies;
under normal circumstances dC/dc > 0. If c' and c3 are negatively correlated
for neighbors i and ii then the residuals in the two states' spending equations
(3.2) may exhibit negative correlation as well.

                                         15
with the right—hand side dependent variables. But inverting the system5

aLlows us to remove the dependent variables from the right—hand side:



           E —   (IWY' Xfl +   (I—W)'(I—pW)'.                                   (3.6)




In (3.6), where the potential correlation between errors of neighbors has also

been incorporated, expenditure is now written as a nonlinear function of

exogenous variables X. 1ote that ignoring the presence of correlation in

neighbors' errors would not bias estimation of fi,   but   would reduce the

efficiency of the estimation and produce biased estimates of standard errors.

Ignoring the influence of neighbors' levels of E can cause more severe

problems. If state i's neighbors expenditures belong in (3.6), but are

ignored, state i's right—hand side variables (Xi) are correlated with state

i's errors, leading to inconsistent estimates of fi.

   Equation   (3.6) indicates that despite the constancy of the fi   vector   across

states, the ultimate effect of a change in an exogenous variable differs

across states. When one of the Xs changes exogenously in state i, the induced

change in E1 then affects spending by state i's neighbors. These changes feed

back to state i through #W and induce a tertiary effect on E. Because two

neighbors may weight each other differently, the diagonal elements of (I—Wy'
                      -

vary between states, and the ultimate effects of changes in X differ.

Algebraically, a change in state i's level of a single exogenous variable x,

after allowing for reverberations between state i and its neighbors, can be

written:




     16The matrix (I — *W) is invertible if  lies strictly between (—1,1). See
Case [1987, Appendix 3] for a proof and discussion of this result.

                                        16
             8 E1




 where A is the (ii) element of (i—W)'.
                                                    Intuitively, one expects the
 derivatives in (3.7) to differ substantially from        fi   in   the presence of large
 neighbor effects ()       for   those states with close neighbors.

      We estimate (3.6) using maximum likelihood methods. Defining A —

 (I—W-      and C — (I—pW)1, the likelihood function (L) for (3.6)
                                                                   can be
 written,



             L —    constant — N/2 ln(E'C'A'M A C E) + ln JAI + In C
                                                                                      (38)


 where the likelihood has been concentrated with
                                                       respect to fi and     2; and
where (In IAI + ln c) is the log of the Jacobian of the transformation

between c and E; M is the matrix [I — AX
                                         (X'A'AXy1 X'A'J; and N is the total
number of observations. Maximum likelihood estimates can be obtained using

standard non—linear estimation techniques. See Case [1987] for details.



3.2 Soecifying the Weizhtinz Matrix.

     Estimation of the system requires that we determine which states are -

neighbors.    We indicated earlier that estimating the parameters of the W

matrix is infeasible, so that its elements must be        specified a priori.

According to the theory developed in Section 2, state j is a neighbor of state

i if the citizens and/or decision—makers of state i take into account state

i's fiscal package when they are evaluating their own          state's   situation.

Unfortunately, this does not give us too much guidance with respect to

observable variables that would tell us whether two states are neighbors.

An obvious possibility is geographical proximity — two states are neighbors




                                            17
if they share a common border, for example. However, it is not obvious that

geography is the most relevant factor. In terms of the voice model, citizens

might compare their well—being to those of people in states that are

demographically similar. If so, then states with similar racial compositions

would view themselves as neighbors. Alternatively, in a fiscal competition

model, certain types of businesses might prefer high (or low) income states to

others. In this case, decision—makers would view themselves as competing with

other states with similar income levels. In short, states may regard as

neighbors other states that are similar to them economically or demographi-

cally. regardless of geographical proximity.

     These considerations suggest that we explore several alternative criteria

for neighborliness, and see which one is most consistent with the data. We

construct W matrices based on geography, per capita income, and percentage of

the population that is black."

     This procedure is somewhat arbitrary. However, we stress that the

typical practice of ignoring neighbor effects also amounts to an arbitrary

assumption: that parameters describing the relationships between neighbors

are equal to zero. There is no reason why the arbitrary assumption that

  — p — 0 should have primacy over all other values of * and p. In addition,

we reduce the arbitrariness of our neighbor selection process by nesting

potential candidates for neighborliness in order to test the strengths of

various measures. For example, in order to test whether income or geography

is a better way to characterize neighborliness, we can nest these two

criteria:




     "We also constructed ti matrices based on proportion of population employed
in agriculture, in manufacturing, in services, and in trade.       None of these
criteria improved the likelihood as much as geographic neighbors did, and further
analysis was not carried out using these W matrices.

                                       18
            W—             +




and estimate the model, varying a between 0 and 1.
                                                                By comparing the

likelihoods of the models while varying a, we can assess the merits of

different candidates for neighborliness.'6

       Once we have selected a criterion (or criteria) for neighborliness,               we

stilL face the problem of using it to compute the individual elements of W.

This step requires that some assumptions be made. Consider the
                                                                             geographical
criterion, for exampLe. One possibility is to make this a dichotomous

variable: to set       —   1   if states i and j share a common border,       w —    0

otherwise, and specify wu —       co,/k,   where k —    2 ij'   An alternative is to view

proximity as a continuous variable, One could define d14 as the distance

between the capitals of states i and j            set     —
                                                              l/d,   and construct
from      as before. One might also try 0ij — l/d12 or                —         This
highlights another potentiaL stumbling block in           defining neighborliness: even

after we have specified the qualitative nature of the criterion, a decision

regarding functional form must be made. However, we found that in practice

various measures of distance between neighbors yield similar results, as long

as the measures are powerful enough to select a           small   number of states as a

given state's neighbors.'9




       t8This idea was suggested to us by James Poterba.

       t9For example, using qj as the characteristic according to which neighbors
are being measured, the distance measures      —
                                                  l/Iq—qI and     —
                                                                    l/(q1—q)
yield answers that are insignificantly different from one another.       Other
measures we tried (for example Wjj — l/[l+(log(q/q3)]2 did not single out any
states as more neighborly than others. AsA consequence, the algorithm for
maximizing (3.8) did not converge.

                                             19
       We estimated equation (3.6) using combinations of the following

alternatives for W:

W°. neizhbors with common borders.            —   l/S   if i and j share a border;
      — 0 otherwise; and Si — the number of borders state i shares.

Wt. neighbors with sirnil.ar incomes.         —
                                                    l/IINC—1NCjI/S1 where INC1 is
per capita income in state I (mean over sample period)20; and S is the sum

S l/IINC1—INCJ

W3. neihbprs with similar Dropprtions of blacks in their oooulatipns.

V13   — l/IMACK — BLACKjI/Sj where   BLACK1    is   the proportion of state i's popu—

lation that is black (mean over the sample period); and S1 is the sum

E 1/I BLACKS—    BL.ACKJ I.




4.    QAIA

       We   estimate the model using annual data on the continental U.S. over the

period 1970—1985. All dollar figures are put on a per capita basis, and

deflated using the personal consumption expenditure deflator. (The base year

is 1982.) Our measure of government expenditures for state I in year t,

is the sum of the direct expenditures of state and local governments,

exclusive of expenditures for interest, state—run liquor and utility concerns,

and insurance. An alternative strategy would have been to analyze state but

not local government expenditure. However, wide cross—sectional variation in

the division of spending responsibilities between state and local

jurisdictions, along with the possible substitutability of state and local

spending in response to exogenous changes, make the current approach of

aggregating state and local expenditures less likely to run afoul of features




     20Because W' depends on between state differences in mean income while the
X vector depends on within state differences in income, there is no induced
correlation between the X vector and the error term.

                                         20
 of political hierarchy.

      The following variables comprise the Kit vector of equatidn (3.2): real

per capita income, income squared, real per capita total federal grants to

state and local governments, population, proportion of the population at least

65 years old, proportion of the population between 5 and 17 years old, and

proportion of the population that is black. This selection of
                                                                  conditioning
variables is fairly uncontroversial. Income and grants are     measures of the

resources available for state and local spending. The square of income picks

up possibly nonlinear effects of changing resources and also the effect of

federal deductibility on the cost to citizens of state and local taxes.21

State population captures the possibility that there are congestion effects or

scale economies in the provision of state and local government services.

States with different age and racial structures may have different demands for

publicly provided goods — hence the presence of the demographic variables.22

In addition the conditioning matrix X contains state and year indicator

variables. Federal matching rate programs exert potentially important

influences on state and local spending. Year—to—year changes in the structure

of these programs affect all states similarly; hence, their impact is subsumed

in the time effects.

     We also estimate our basic equation for selected categories of spending.

The categories studied are: expenditures on health and human services (health



     2tFor a taxpayer who itemizes deductions, the cost of an additional dollar
of state and local tax payments is only one minus her marginal federal tax rate.
Since marginal federal tax rates (and the propensicy to itemize) are nonlinear
functions of income, we include income squared to proxy for the price effect of
federal deductability.    As a consequence, we are unable to disentangle the
resource effect and the tax price effect of income changes, but this is not
necessary for our purposes.

     22Data are from the following sources: Expenditure, grant, and state per
capita income are from the Bureau of Census, U.S. Covernment Finance Series; data
on population demographics are from Current Population Reports and unpubli.shed
data from the Bureau of Census consistent with the Current Population Reports.

                                       21
and hospital spending plus public welfare expenditures); expenditures on

administration (financial administration and general control); expenditures on

highways; and expenditures on education.

     Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for these data; the numbers

represent unweighted averages of state means, so they differ slightly from

national averages. Of the average annual total state and local expenditure of

$1,865 per person, 40% is spent on education ($146); 20% on health and human

services ($367); and 12% on highways ($220). The coefficients of variation

for these expenditure categories reveal that there is a great deal more

variation in per capita spending on various components than there is in total

spending.



5. RESULTS

5.1 Total Exøenditure

     Testina the Neighbor Model. Table 2 presents the results of estimating

model (3.6) for state and local expenditures. The first column presents

conventional OLS results; these can be estimated in our framework by

constraining — p — 0.    The results are not dissimilar to those found in the

literature. Here, we see no significant effect of population on per capita

spending; economies of scale and congestion effects either offset each other,

or are not present. Both state per capita income and income squared are

significant. As mentioned earlier, these represent both resource effects and

tax price effects; we do not attempt to distinguish between them. The

coefficient on grants (1.03) suggests that, ceteris paribus, states spend

roughly one dollar for each dollar obtained in grants. This is an enormous

effect compared to the derivative of spending with respect to changes in

personal income (0.07 at mean income). This "flypaper effect" — the apparent

proclivity of subnational governments to spend much more out of their grant


                                      22
income than personal income of their residents — has been observed by several

researchers.23 The results in the first column of Table 2 also suggest that a

0.01 increase in the proportion of elderly in the state population, cererjs

paribus,reduce state per capita spending by about $67, and a 0.01 increase

in the proportion black reduces state per capita spending by about $16.

   Columns (2), (3), and (4) present the results using geographic proximity,

per capita income, and proportion black, respectively, to define

neighborliness. A striking result is that any of these specifications

suggests that neighborliness matters. For WE and W5, one can reject the joint

hypothesis that   —   p —   0 by a wide margin. For W°' one cannot quite reject

this joint hypothesis, but on an individual basis,      and p are statistically

significant. 24

   Given the success of all the W matrices exhibited in Table 2, a skeptical

reader might wonder whether there is something inherent to the econometric

procedure that produces significant results regardless of how "neighbors" are

defined. In order to investigate this possibility, we re—estimated the model

with an intentionally absurd W matrix. Specifically, we set         — 1 if state

j followed state i in the alphabet, and zero otherwise.5       The estimates of

# and p were both less than l0' in absolute value, an4 the log likelihood did

not change measurably. Of course, there are an infinite number of silly

criteria that one could use to construct a J matrix. This experiment with an

alphabetical criterion, along with a few others, convinced us that the results




     23See, for example, the papers surveyed by Inman [1979J

     2The joint hypothesis is examined by using a likelihood ratio test: twice
the difference in log likelihoods is distributed chi—square with 2 degrees of
freedom. Using geography as the weighting matrix, this statistic is only 4.57
while the 95% critical value is 5.99.

     "The last state, Wyoming, was assigned the second to the last state,
Wisconsin, as a neighbor.

                                         23
in columns 2 through 4 are not merely artifacts of the statistical procedure.

   As an additional check on the model, we ran OLS regressions of state

expenditure on exogenous variables X and neighbors' exogenous variables WX.

Neighbors' variables, (IX, were found to be jointly significant. It could be

argued that the reason neighbors' X's (or expenditures) are statistically

significant is that the states' own X's are measured with error, and the

neighbors' X's (or expenditures) just happen to be proxying for the true

values of the own X's. Of course, such an interpretation can be given to

virtually any right hand side variable in any regression model. As always.

one must makea judgement as to which interpretation is more plausible.       Is it

really believable that Michigan's expenditures affect New Jersey's

expenditures because Michigan's expenditures are helping to improve the

measurement of New Jersey's per capita income? We think not. The

"copycatting" interpretation suggested by our theoretical model is more

persuasive.

     The increase in the log likelihood is most marked in the case in which

neighbors are defined as states with similar racial compositions. The use of

W' increases the log likelihood a full 40 points above the case in which both

coefficients of correlation are constrained equal to zero. The chi—square

test for significance is 80;   and p are jointly significant with a

probability of 0.9999.

     We can confirm the superiority of the W3 matrix by nesting neighbor

assignment based on geographic proximity with W5, and nesting assignment based

on income with W3. In both cases, the maximum likelihood is obtained by

assigning all weight to proportion black. Algebraically, if tJ — aW3 ÷ (1—

a)Wt the maximum likelihood is reached at a — 1.

     Several readers of an earlier draft of this paper suggested that

proportion black "must be proxying for something else," perhaps the income


                                      24
distribution or degree of urbanization of the population. In response, we

constructed W matrices based on proportion of the population below the
                                                                           poverty
line (in 1980) and on the proportion of the population living in meropo1itan

areas (in 1980). Neither of these criteria improved the log Likelihood as

much as W6; indeed, neither did as well as W°. Another possibility is chat

the success of the W3 matrix simply reflects the high correlation between

spending and region of the country. Of the nine states with the highest

proportion black, eight are in the south and one (Maryland) is a border

state. To investigate this possibility, we deleted these nine states from the

sample and re—estimated the model, With this smaller sample,     —   0:7103
(s.e.— 0.0367) and p — —0.7732 (se.— 0.0538).26 These results are

essentially identical to those in column (4) of Table 2. Hence, our results

are not due to the dominance of a "region effect."

     On the basis of these experiments, we feel that the results in Table 2

should be taken at face value: racial composition has an important impact on

state expenditure patterns, and states with similar racial compositions look

to each other as points of reference. One should note that the importance of

race in state and local public finance is well established: Craig and Inznan

(1986, p. 203], for example, show that proportion black is a statistically

significant determinant of state spending; Cramlich and Rubinfeld (1982, p.

547] argue that micro demand equations for some public budget items are

Affected by race; and according to Aronson and Mariden (1980, p. 101], even

Moody's municipal credit ratings of a jurisdiction are influenced by its

racial composition, ceteris oaribus   In short, we view the success of the W8

matrix as noteworthy, but not anomalous.

     lntervreting the Coefficients. Because our preferred specification is



     26The chi—square test statistic for the joint significance of the twc
parameters is 63.80.

                                      25
 the one in column (4) of TabLe 2, we discuss chose coefficients. Note the

 strikingly large, positive significant degree of correlation in the level of

 expenditure between neighbors ( — 0.7256), and the negative and significant

 degree of correlation between neighbors' errors (p — —0.7753).    The

correlation in states' expenditures suggests that the ultimate effect of a

spending increase by state i's neighbors is, ceteris øaribus, to increase

state i's spending by seventy—three cents.

     Furthermore, incorporation of neighbors' expenditures into our analysis

substantially changes the parameter estimates for the explanatory

variables, X. The effect of state population becomes positive and obtains

marginal significance, suggesting that if state population increased by

one million, state spending per person would increase by ten dollars. The

increase in spending out of grants, ceteris paribus, drops from the dollar for

dollar estimate in column 1 to sixty—six cents on the dollar in column 4,

diminishing the impact of the "flypaper effect. One interpretation of this

difference is that conventional estimates of the flypaper effect overstate its

impact by ignoring simultaneous changes in other jurisdictions. Since federal

grants are often made available to many states at the same time, each state's

expenditure responses are magnified by its neighbors' spending changes, which

are induced by the same federal grant program. The spending impact of

proportion elderly also diminishes with the inclusion of state neighbor

effects; its coefficient falls in magnitude from —6667 in column 1 to —1988 in

column 4. Interestingly, the coefficient on proportion black becomes

insignificant in column 4. This suggests that the influence of race found in

conventional equations is not due to the fact that racial   composition directly

affects tastes for public expenditure. Rather, the channel    through which race

operates is the determination of states' neighbors.

     The presence of neighbors changes not only the magnitudes of the fl's; it


                                      26
 affects their interpretation as eU, As su&gested by equation (3.7)
                                                                              the

ultimate effect of a change in a iight—hand side variable on stite
                                                                          expenditure
differs from fi, due to interactions    among states, Specifically, to compute

the effect of a conditioning variable on state i, one must multiply that

variable's $ by &',       the (ii) ?leruent of the matrix (I—Wy'. We computed

the diagonal elements of A arresponding to the estimates in column (4) of

Table 2; i.e.,    — W and      — 0.7256.    We found that few values of A"

exceeded 1,10. (A table with all the values is available upon request.) For

most states, then, the change in expenditures induced by a change in X is           not

very different from fi.     Hence, the first impression one gets from compring

columns (1) and (4) of Table 2 is correct: standard models that ignore

neighbor effects substantially overstate the size of response parameters.

     The A matrix also can be used to calculate the cross effeots of one

state's X variables on the spending of other states. Specifidally,        suppose

that the conditioning variables in state i change by dXi. Then the ultimate

effect of this change on state j is A$ dX1. By the definition of the A

matrix, the cross effects depend on how neighborly states are —     the   effect of

state i on any state j dies away i i is distant from j .      Indeed, for most
states, the cross effects appear to die away quite rapidly with "distance'."

Our computations for New Jersey, for example, suggest that A1 —     0.57   for its

closest neighbor, but only O.OS for its fourth closest neighbor.

5.2 Categories of SDending

     As suggested earlier, there is no reason to assume that patterns of

expenditure interdependence are the same for all categories of spending. In

the voice model, for example, the sign and magnitude of the impact in state i

of an expenditure change in neighboring state j depends on the change. in

potential utility (Va') produced by the expenditure change; this effect may be

positive for some spending categories and negative for others. 'urthermore,


                                           27
heterogeneous consumers within a state may desire different services, pay

taxes at different rates, and have different abilities to influence their

state's fiscal policies in response to changes in neighboring states.

     To explore these possibilities, we estimate the model separately for four

different types of expenditures: health and human services, administration,

highways) and education. These categories account for 75% of total

expenditure. Omitted categories include fire and police protection and

expenditures on the environment. In order to keep down the number of

computations, we use only the W3 matrix for estimation. That is, we assume

that the criterion for neighborliness that does best for total expenditures

also is most suitable for the various categories.2' We continue to analyze

expenditures on a per capita basis, except for education, where we deflate

expenditures by the number of school—aged children.2°

     The results are presented in Table 3. Chi—square test statistics for the

joint significance of    and p are presented at the bottom of each column.

Strikingly, in each category one can reject the hypothesis that taking into

account interdependence does not enhance the explanatory power of the

equation. Apparently, the results for aggregate expenditures that we found in

Table 2 are not due to the dominating presence of a single spending category

for which neighbor effects matter.




     27However, a persuasive case can be made that, for highway expenditures,
geography is more relevant than demographics for determining
We therefore estimated the highway equation using WG as well as neiborliness.
                                                                 (4 . The chi—
square test for the joint significance of # and p using tP is 48.36. This is
more that twice the value obtained using ¶J3   (See the discussion of Table 3
below.)

     Z&In theory, one might want to use a separate deflator for every expenditure
category—highway expenditures per automobile, for example. However, only for
education is it fairly obvious what the appropriate deflator should be.

                                       28
6. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

     Subnational   governments do not make their decisions in isolation.

Citizens and public servants are Likely to have information relating to

governxnenta]. activity in neighboring states, and this information is likely to

affect what they want their own state government to do. In this paper, we

employ data on state and local spending in the continental U.S. to test a

model that explicitly allows for such expenditure interdependence. We find

that states' expenditures are indeed significantly influenced by their

neighbors. In our preferred specification, the impact effect of a dollar of

increased spending by a state's neighbors increases its own spending by more

than seventy cents. This expenditure interdependence appears even though our

model allows for individual effects on state spending, year effects that might

affect all states in the same year systematically, and unobserved shocks that

might induce spurious correlation in neighbors' expenditures.

     The most difficult methodological problems in this study arise in the

course of assigning neighbors. What frame of reference do people use in

evaluating the adequacy of their own state's fiscal package? Theory does not

provide firm answers, so we experiment with several alternatives. One measure

of neighborliness, similarity in racial composition as measured by percent of

the population that is black, performs significantly better than any other.

The selection of criteria for neighborliness inevitably introduces some

arbitrariness into the analysis. We find it extremely encouraging, then, that

each of several reasonable alternatives suggests that interdependence is

present. And each does better (in the sense of statistical significance) than

the conventional assumption that no interdependence is present.

     We also showed that taking into account neighbor effects substantially

changes the estimated impacts of various conditioning variables on state

expenditures. This suggests that conventional estimates of the impact of


                                        29
grants on state and local expenditures might be wide of the mark. Moreover,

the importance of neighbor effects casts doubt on the validity and usefulness

of several popular models of government behavior. Neighbor effects might be

present because governments lack complete information on the costs and

benefits of public services, and hope to learn about these by looking at other

states. Alternatively, as observed in Section 2, neighbor effects could arise

because governments are not attempting to maximize efficiency at all. In any

case, it is not easy to reconcile the conventional view that fully informed

governments choose fiscal policies that maximize the well—being of their

citizens with the observed importance of neighbor effects.

     Finally. we note that "copycatting" need not be confined to subfederal

jurisdictions. For national governments, there is some anecdotal evidence

that even apart from considerations of macroeconomic coordination, fiscal

policies in one country are affected by people's perceptions of changes in

other countries. Andersson t1988, p. 2] notes that a "factor precipitating

the (recent Scandinavian] tax reforms was the tax reforms undertaken elsewhere

in the 1980's. The Scandinavian countries.. .have by tradition always

carefully followed developments in other countries." Similarly, McLure [1988.

p. 281 states that one of the reasons that Colombia adopted income tax

indexing was that indexing was being considered in countries that Colombia

wanted to emulate. The extent to which nations' budgetary policies affect

each other is an important topic for future research.




                                      30
                                   REFERENCES

Applebome, Peter, "Governors in the South Seek to Lift their States," New Yorl<
Times, February 12, 1989, L26,

Andersson, Krister, 'Tax Reforms in Scandinavia During the l980's," Mimeo,
International Monetary Fund, 1988.

Aronson, J. Richard, and James R. Marsden, "Duplicating Moody's Municipal
Credit Ratings," Public Finance QuarterLy 8, January 1980, 97—106.

Black, Duncan, "On the Rationale of Group Decision—Making," Journal of
Political Economy 56, 1948, 133—146,

Brennan, Geoffrey, and James H. Buchanan, "Towards a Tax Constitution for
Leviathan, "Journal of Public Economics 8, December 1977, 255—74.

Case, Anne C., "On the Use of Spatial Autoregressive Models in Demand
Analysis," Mimeo, Princeton University, 1987.

Cliff, A.D. and J.K. Ord, Spatial Processes, London: Pion, 1981.

Craig, S.C. and R.P. Inman, "Education, Welfare, and 'A New Federalism':
State Budgeting in a Federalist Public Economy," in H.S. Rosen (ed.) Studies
in State and Local Public Finance, University of Chicago Press, 1986, 187—222.

Feenberg, Daniel R. and Harvey S. Rosen, "State Personal Income and Sales
Taxes, 1977—1983," in MS. Rosen (ed.), Studies in State and Local Public
Finance, University of Chicago Press, 1986, 135—179.

Gramlich, Edward M. and Deborah S. Laren, "Migration and Income Redistribution
Responsibilities," Journal of Ruman Resources XIX, 1984, 489—511,

Cramlich, Edward H. and Daniel L. Rubinfeld, "Microestimates of Public
Spending Demand Functions and Tests of the Tiebout and Median—Voter
Hypotheses," Journal of Political Economy 90, June 1982, 536—60.

Hirschman, A.D., Exit. Voice ang Loyalty, Harvard University Press:
Cambridge, MA, 1970,

Holtz—Eakin, Douglas, "Unobserved Tastes and the Determination of Municipal
Services," National Tax Journal XXXIX, December 1986, 527—532.

Inman, Robert P., "The Fiscal Performance of Local Governments: An
Interpretive Review," in P. Mieszkowski and H. Straszheim (eds.), Current
Issues in Urban Economics, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins, 1979, 270—321.

Inman, Robert P., "Markets, Government, and the 'New' Political Economy," in
Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public EconQmics,
Amsterdam: North Holland, 1988.

Johnson, William ft., rlncome Redistribution in a Federal System," American
Economic Review 78, June 1988, 570—573.

McLure, Charles E. , "Tax Reform in an Inflationary Environment: The Case of
Colombia," Mimeo, The Hoover Institution, 1988.

                                      31
Mueller, Dennis and Peter Murrell, "Interest Groups and the Size of
Government," Public Choice 48, 1986, 125—146.

Program for New Jersey Affairs, New Jersey Issues: PaDers from the Council. on
New Jersey Affairs, Princeton Urban and Regional Research Center, Princeton,
NJ 1988.

Reinhold, Robert, "Texas Considers Taxes for Schools," New York Times, April
17, 1984. p. 117.

Samuelson, Paul A.,"The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure," Review of
Economics and Statistics 36, 1954, 387—89.

Tax Foundation, Facts and Figures on Government Finance, The Johns Hopkins
University Press: Baltimore, 1988.

Tiebout, Charles, "A Pure Theory of Local Expenditure," Journal of Political
Economy, 64, 416—424, 1956.

U.S. Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract of the United States: 1987
(107th edition), Washington, D.C. •   1986.




                                         32
                 -                        Table   I


                     Variables Used in Analysis of State Spending


Variable                Mean      S.D.       Minimum     Ma,d,num Standard     CV
                                              Value       Value    Error
                                                                  nE Mean


Total                     1865    304.7           1363    2826      3.97
expenditure

Health and              367.3    96.49        235.7      745.5      13.93    26.26
human services

Highway                 219.7    74.71        11.7.2     520,5      10.78    36.01

Administration          81,77    22.37        51.01      157.1      3.229    27.36

Education               745.8    123.7        561.2       1180      17.86    16.59

Population (106)        4.541    4.640        0.425      22.61     0.670     102.2

Income                  10050     1274            7350   12837      183.9    12.67

Grants                  430.1    90.13        285.0      770.0      13.01    20.95

Prop. elderly           0.109    0.017        0.076      0.168     0.003     15.72

Prop. school age        0.228    0.012        0.201      0.261     0.002     5.187

Prop. Black             0,112    0.088        0.006      0.362     0.013     78.70


Sources: Expenditure, grant and state per capita income data are from the
Bureau of Census, Government Finance Series, General Revenue Tables. Data
on population are from Current Population Reports and unpublished data
from the Bureau of Census consistent with the CPR.

Notes:

1. All dollar figures are real per capita expenditure dollars.

2. Total expenditure is the sum of direct expenditures of state and local
    governments, exclusive of expenditures for interest, state—run liquor
    and utilities concerns, and insurance.

3. Health and human services expenditure includes spending on health and
    hospital expenditures plus public welfare expenditures.
                                     Table 2

               Estimation of State Expenditure Levels 1970—85
            Using Different Measures of Neighbor Characteristic

                     (standard errors in parentheses)



                             Model         feog        wtncome       .81ack


Coefficient of spatial         —           —0.2271       0.1246       0.7256
correlation in dep.var. ()                 (0.1045)     (0.0972)      :0.0324)

Coefficient of spatial         —            0.3022      —0.3210       —0.7751
correlation in errors (p)                  (0.0899)     (0.0999)      (0.0485)

State populatton*            —1.0943       —2.1049      —1.1324        1.1761
                             (1.1809)      (1. 1698)    (1.. 1157)    (08935

State per capita income       0.1408        0.1344       0.1109        0.1576
                             (0.0328)      (0.0339)     (0.0310)      (0.0248)

State per capita income2*    —0.3589       —0.3329      —0.2233       —0.6741
                             (0.1416)      (0.1467)     (0. L331)     (0.1077)

Grants                        1.0274        1.0410       0.9938        0.6652
                             (0,0836)      (0.0823)     (0.0804)      (0.0677)

Proportion of population     —6666.6       —6921.7      —6798,4      —1.987.6
above age 65                 (786.66)      (871.90)     (748.69)      (870.27)

Proportion of population     —474.63       —351.34      —391.71        75.753
aged 5—17 years              (692.72)      (724.60)     (692.65)      (559.94)

Proportion of population     —1648.6       —1642.1      —2549.4        78.755
Black                        (781.27)      (704.96)     (754.67)      (540.86)


CM square test statistic's                     4.574     14.772       79.498


*Coefficients and standard errors multiplied by 10g.

+ For column j ,cM. square test statistic is twi'e the difference in log
likelihoods between models in column J and column 1.  It is distributed
chi square with 2 degrees of freedom.
                                                                   Table   3

                                             Estimation of State Expenliture Levels 1970—85
                                            Using Pan Piwortion Black in State Rp.ilation
                                                       as the Neighbor tharacteristic
                              State Administration      Health anl    Human        Highway                 Education
                                                             Sexvi
efficient of spatial                        0.5955                   0.4446                     0.5251                   0.7189
czrrelation in dq,. var.                   (0.0505)                  (0.0580)                  (0.0546)                 (0.0350)
                                  —        —0.6068         —                         —                         —
Cetficient of spatial                                              —0.5891                     —0.5751                  —0.7781
cx)rrelation in errors                     (0.0747)                  (0.0647)                  (0.0671)                 (0.0346)

State pcpllation*              —0.1500     —0.0618     —0.8130     —0.2518         0.3102       0.2884     —2.3011      3.0259
                               (0.0621)    (0.0606)     (0.3116)     (0.2343)     (0.2610)     (0.2302)     (2.4112)    (1.9254)
State per capita               —0.0044     —0.0029      0.0146       0.0151        0.0279       0.0249      0.2379       0.2978
ins                            (0.0024)    (0.0020)     (0.0122)   (0.0104)       (0.0104)     (0.0099)     (0.0752)     (0.0618)
                                0.0321      0.0235     —0.0272     —0.0277        —0.0834      —0.0755     —0.5112     —0.8872
         PgQt                  (0.0101)    (0.0087)     (0.0533)   (0.0461)       (0.0459)     (0.0442)     (0.3213)    (0.2676)
Grants                          0.0243      0.0137      0.3129      0.2764         0.2435       0.2122      0.8611       0.3200
                               (0.0061)    (0.0057)    (0.0299)    (0.0289)       (0.0241)     (0.0255)     (0.1859)    (0.1603)

Prq. pcpilation               —588.555     —375.401     366.037 —419.801        —388.005      —42.260     —16082.2     —5867.33
abe age 65                      (58.253)    (64.206)   (334.500) (333.760)      (313.217)    (256.939)     (1969.7)    (1802.72)
Prcp. of pcçnlation       :   —167.572     —138.292     —88.449    —80.230      —453.702     —422.746     —9889.98 —8070.45
ag&     5—17 years              (45.201)    (37.150)   (251.349) (217.377)      (189.087)    (166.780)     (1451.58) (1057.69)

Prop. of popilation           —95.7664     —21.4554    —916.451 —629.655         516.684      503.257      —3873.56     272.845
Black                          (52.8001)   (43.8195)   (265.850)   (219.005)    (254.785)    (229.476)     (1982.93) (1436.22)
fl-ti   square   test4-                     36.06                  15.82                       21.23                    77.76
*Coefficients ard starxiard errors nultipli& by 10*E5                  __________
+For eath experxiituxe category, the thi=sqaare test is twice the difference in the 1c
the nxtels with aix! withc*it neighbor effects.                                        likelThcnj of
