NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTEREST RATES

Patric

IN

H.

THE REAGAN YEARS

Hendershott

Joe Peek

Working Paper No. 3037

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1989

Prepared for a Conference on the Economic Legacy of the Reagan Years:
1989.
Stability or Chaos, Oakland University, Rochester, Michigan, June 30,
Comments by James Wilcox and conference participants are gratefully
acknowledged. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Financial
Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3037
July 1989
INTEREST RATES

IN

THE REAGAN YEARS

AZS TRACT

The Reagan Administration entered office in 1981 with one of the
clearest and moat ambitious agendas in recent times. The new administration
advanced five economic/budgetary goals to rebuild America economically and
militarily: (1) reduce inflation, (2) deregulate the economy, (3) cut
taxes, (4) increase military spending and (5) reduce nondefense spending
sufficiently to balance the budget. Achieving, or not achieving, these
economic/budgetary goals likely had a significant impact on interest rates.
Six specific hypotheses are investigated in this paper.
During the first Reagan term, the battle to lower inflation acted to
maintain the high real interest rates carried over from the Carter years
and, while the increase in structural deficits did not raise real rates
much, the reduction in private saving due to the unwinding of the second
OPEC shock and an aggressive foreign policy that heightened fear of nuclear
war raised real interest rates to levels not seen since the late 1920s.
Moreover, the increased volatility of interest rates during this protracted
battle with inflation raised yields on callable fixed-rate mortgages by over
a percent'age point relative to the already inflated yields on noncallable
Treasuries.
By the end of Reagan's second term, inflation, marginal tax rates,
nuclear fear, and interest rate volatility were all down. As a result,
nominal Treasury rates have plunged (real bill rates since 1986 are below
their average values for the previous quarter century), and yields on
callable securities have receded to more normal levels relative to
noncallable Treasuries. Yields on tax-exempt securities are one and a
quarter percentage points higher relative to Treasuries than in the preReagan years, and yields on fixed-rate mortgages are up by a half percentage
point. These constitute an intended reduction in the previous financial
subsidies to state and local and household capital formation, respectively.

Patric H. Hendershott
Faculty of Finance
Ohio State University
321 Hagerty Hall
1775 College Road
Columbus, Ohio 43210
(614)292-0552

Joe Peek
Department of Economics
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02167
(617)552-3686

1

The Reagan Administration entered office in 1981 with one of the
clearest and most ambitious agendas in recent times.

The new administration

advanced five economic/budgetary goals to rebuild America economically and
militarily:
taxes,

(1) reduce inflation, (2) deregulate the economy, (3) cut

(4) increase military spending and (5) reduce nondefense spending

sufficiently to balance the budget.

Deregulation and the military buildup

were begun under the Carter Administration; major commitments to reduce
inflation and to cut taxes and nondefense spending were new.1
In its first term, the Reagan Administration successfully achieved the
first four goals.

However, while nondefense spending was Cut, the reduction

was insufficient to offset the tax reductions,
structural deficit.

leaving a substantial

In its second term, some progress was made toward

reducing this deficit, but the progress was achieved largely by scaling back
defense, not nondefense, outlays.

In addition,

tax reform was passed, but

this was a tax shift (household taxes lowered, business taxes raised),

an overall cut.

not

Nonetheless, both personal and corporate marginal tax rates

were cut.
Achieving, or not achieving, these economic/budgetary goals likely had
a significant impact on interest rates.
investigated in this paper:

Six specific hypotheses are

a)

the cur in the inflation rate from 10 to 4 percent lowered nominal
interest rates generally by reducing the inflation premium in them,

h)

the increased structural deficits raised real interest rates
generally (Feldatein, 1985)

c)

the tight money leading to the inflation reduction was

unprecedented in severity and caused equally unprecedented high
real interest rates, (tlarida and Friedman, 1983; Blanchard and
Suamers, 1984).
d)

the process by 4hich inflation was cut - the switch- - of the Federal
increased the
Reserve from interest rate to money supply targets

volatility

of nominsl interest rates and thus raised real rates on
securities with borrower call or prepayment options, such as long
term fixed-rate mortgages (1-tendershottand Buser, 1984),
a)

the deregulation of thrift institutions raised rates on fixed-rate
mortgages relative to those on Treasuries, and

f)

the cut in personal and corporate msrginal tax rates and "tax
reforms" raised yields on tax-exempt securities relative to those
on Treasuries.

The first

three hypotheses relate to interest rates generally and are best

addressed by examining yields on noncallable Treasury securities. The
second three pertain to the relationship between yields on Treasury and
other securities and thus require analyses of other yields.
Our investigation is divided into three parts dealing with Treasury
securities (six-month and ten-year maturities), fixed-rate mortgages, and
tax-exempt securities (one and five years).

In each part we begin by

examining how interest rates (or interest rate relationships) have changed
in the l980s relative to the 1970s and then discuss the role of Reagan
policies in these changes. The first two parts draw heavily on Hendershott
and Peek (1989) and Hendershott and Van Order (1989).

We generally find

3

support for all the hypotheses except those relating to the impact of
monetary and fiscal policies on real interest rates.

These impacts have

been overstated.

I.

Treasury Rates

Expected Inflation, Nominal Rates, and Real Rates
The top two series in Figure 1 are the yields on six-month and ten-year
Treasury securities, both computed on a bond-equivalent basis, for the 1970a
and 1980s.

April and October values of the yields are plotted. The bottom

two series are expected inflation races from the Livingston and Hoey surveys
on corresponding dates; the latter survey did not begin until September 1978
and was not collected continuously until the 1980s.2 The long rise in
nominal rates up to 1981 is clear, as is the decline since then
and fall correspond to

a

The rise

rise and fall in expected inflation, although the

correspondence is far from perfect. The figure suggests about a one-for-one
relationship between interest rates and expected inflation,

and empirical

estimation supports this view.
The term structure of interest ratea appears to be related to the term
structure of inflation rates.

Twice the term structure became inverted (the

aix-month rate exceeded the 10-year rate), briefly in 1913-74 and for an
extended period between 1978 and 1981.

Both episodes correspond to a sharp,

but temporary surge in inflation. If the temporary nature of this shock was
perceived, short-tern expected inflation would likely exceed longer-term

4

expected inflation. We have a long-run expected inflation rate for the
second inversion only:

Durirg this inversion, the short-term expected

inflation rate did exceed the long-term rate, and when the short-term
expected inflation rate fell below the long-term rate, the inversion ceased.
Figure 2 plots the pretax real six-month and 10-year Treasury rates and
the after-tax real six-month rate.

The tax rate is a weighted average

rarg6nsl. tax rate paid by households on interest

incoee. To put these

real rstos in perspective, we have plotted them for the longer 1964-88
period.

Here,

the high pretax real rates in the early l980s, especially

relative to the middle 1970s, are obvious. Thereel six-month Treasury rate
averaged 5.5 percent in the 1981-84 period, a level observed previously only
in the 1926-30 period, as opposed to 0.2 percent in the midl974-mid1978
span.

Reel 10-year Treasury rates appear to have jumped similarly in the

early 1980s.

Furthermore, reel short- end long-term Treasury rates have

been similar in magnitude in the 1980s, i.e., the long-term premium has not
systematically exceeded the short-term premium.
Also noteworthy is the decline in reel interest rates since 1984.
reel six-month bill rate in the 1986-88 period was slightly
average in the previous quarter century.

gjpw

The

its

This little recognized fact is

particularly remarkable because real activity has been so strong in recent
years and real bill rates have historically exhibited a strong procyclicsl
pattern (Hendershott, 1986).

5

Movements in the after-tax real bill rate are also interesting.
According to this measure, the interest rate puzzle really hasn't been the
high rates in the 1980s so much as the low rates in the l970s; the after-tax
real rate never exceeded

jms

one percent for the entire 1974-80 period.

The early 1980s values are quite comparable to those observed throughout the
1960s, and more recent values are roughly half those in the l9GOs.
event, explaining the jump

in

In any

real interest rates in the l980s, either

before or after tax, requires starting with why interest rates were so low
in the middle l970s (Wilcox, 1983, attributes these low rates to the first
OPEC shock)
Reagan Policies and Real Rates
How did fiscal and monetary policy affect the pattern of real rates in
the l980s?

Figure 3 contains the real interest rate and two fiscal policy

variables;

the structural federal deficit as a fraction of middle-expansion

trend ON? and the average marginal tax rate used to measure after-tax real
interest rates.4 The deficit would appear to be negatively correlated with
real rates in the l970s and early 1980s.

More specifically, the structural

deficit had hardly begun to rise when the real rate peaked in the l980s, and
the real rate was back down
course.

to

a normal level before the deficit reversed

While the deficit might be badly mismeasured, any reasonable

measure must have risen between 1981 and 1983, just when the real rate was
declining.5 The tax rate series is positively correlated with the real
rate during the 1977-88 period, as we would expect (the pretax rate rises in

6

response to an increase in the tax rate in order to maintain the after-tax
rate

at a
Our

given

level)

aultivariate analysis (Henderahott and

Peek, 1989) auggeata a small

positive irpact (less than a quarter percentage point) of the 1980a
structural deficits on yields. However, the cut in marginal tax rates has
an even larger negative impact.

Thus fiscal policy, broadly defined, tended

to lower Treasury rates, not raise them, during the Reagan years.
Figure 4 plots the real aix-month rate againat our estimate of the
impact of monetary policy on the aix-month rate.

(Monetary policy is

attributed to Reagan, despite the Federal Reaerve'a "independence," because
of his strong support of the Federal Reserve.) Our estimate is obtained by
first constructing a proxy for monetary policy and then using this ptoxy as

a regressor in an equation explaining bhe after-tax bill rate.

We developed

this proxy because customary money measures are of doubtful validity when
effective deposit rate ceilings are changed and/or new "money-like"
financial claims are introduced.

Our proxy is based on the behavior of the

aix-month bill rate, which the Federal Reserve can control over abort
periods,

relative to that of the five-year Treasury bond rate, over which

the Federal Reserve has decidedly less control.

More apecifically,

we

explain the term structure of interest rates with the term structure of
expected inflation, the business cycle, and traditional monetary polity
variables and then attribute the residual (plus the traditional monetary
policy variable's contribution) to monetary policy.

7

A

number of observations follow from Figure 4.

First, the decline in

the real rate from two and a half percent in late 1973 to negative one

percent in early 1977 and the rebound to two and a half percent in 1980 are
almost fully accounted for by monetary policy.

Second, while changes in

monetary policy explain both the rebound in real rates to normal levels in
the 1978-SO period and much of the decline Since 1984,

monetary policy doea not account for the jump
and 1981-84.

In summary,

monetary

in

by our estimates

real rates between 1978-80

policy was not noticeably tighter in the

early 1980s than in the 1973-74 period, although the period of tightness,
midl979 to

mid1983,

lasted much longer.

As a result, the quarter-century

upward trend in inflation was finally broken,

Similarly, the recent period

of ease has been longer than any in the last quarter-century and has
contributed to the longest peace-time expansion on record.
Our principal conclusion is that the emphasis on the high real interest
rates

in the early l980s has been overdone.

The key to understanding real

interest rates in the last quarter century is the extraordinarily low
interest rates in much of the l97Os owing to the two OPEC oil shocks, which
lowered investment demand and increased world saving by transferring wealth
from the high consuming developed countries to OPEC.

Figure 4 clearly

indicates lower real rates relative to the contribution of monetary policy
in the 1974-80 period than either before or after.

Monetary policy was

tight for a long stretch in the early l98Os, but only tight enough to cause
real interest rates to be about a percentage point and a half above normal.
Fiscal policy, on the other hand, had little impact, with decreasing

marginal tax rates more than offsetting the intrease in structural deficits.
Finally, some evidence suggests that
posture in his first term --

rthn policy --

contributed

Reagan's evil empire

marginally (about a half percentage

point) to the high real rates by increasing the feat of nuclear var and thus
reducing the private propensity to save.
II.

The Yield on Fixed-Rate Mortgages

Volatility and Yields on Fixed-Rate Mortgages

A

fixed-rate mortgage differs from a Treasury security vith equal

duration because homeowners tan tail or prepay the mortgage while the
Treasury cannot prepay its debt.

For equal coupon securities,

investors

will prefer the Treasury; if market interest rates decline, investors in
Treasuries will continue to receive their now above-market coupons, while
investors in mortgages will find their funds repaid end themselves forced to
invest in the now lower market coupons.

To compensate for the possibility

of borrowers prepaying when rates decline,

investors

in fixed-rate mortgagea

must receive a higher coupon than investors in Treasuries, the size of this
coupon differential depending on the probability that interest rates will
decline sufficiently to trigger prepayment.

This probability, in turn, will

be greater the more volatile are interest rates and the greater is the
expectation that interest rates will decline.
Figure 5 plots the ax post volatility of interest rates and the spread
between the conventional new issue mortgage rate and the seven-year Treasury
rate (comparable duration Treasury).6 The spread oscillated between about

one and two percentage points in the 1970s before the switch to a more
volatile interest-rate monetary policy in late 1979.

From this point, the

spread trended upward until it peaked at over three percentage points in
1981 and 1982.

After dipping below two percentage points in early 1984, the

spread again rose to nearly three percentage points in late 1986 before
finally declining to about two percentage points.
That increased interest rate volatility explains some of the increase
in the mortgage-Treasury rate spread is obvious from the figure.

Volatility

jumped in late 1979, just when the spread did, and remained high through the
peak of the spread in late 1982.

That is, much of the relative increase in

the mortgage rate in 1981-82 simply reflected a more valuable prepayment or

call option.

However, more than the rising call value contributed to the

relatively high mortgage rates in the early l980s.
The Savinas and Loans, the Agencies and the Mortgage Rate
Figure 6 plots both the actual conventional mortgage coupon rate and an
estimate of what the rate should have been given seven-year Treasury rates
and the value of the homeowner's call option (Hendershott and Van Order
label

this the "perfect-market' coupon rate).

As can be seen, the actual

rate was about a half percentage point too low during most of the 1970s, but
then was about a half point too high in the 1982-86 period, giving a total
increase of a full percentage point.

Since early 1987, the actual rate has

been equal to the perfect market rate.
In the l970s, mortgage lending was largely tied to the thrifts.
Portfolio restrictions on savings and loans (no corporate loans, bonds, or

10

equities) encouraged their investment in residential mortgages, and these
inveatmenta ware especially profitable to rhrifts owing to special tax
advantages. Thrifts that invested a large fraction of their assets in
houaing-related loans cr liquid assets could transfer a large fraction of
their pretax income ro loan loss reserves,

thereby avoiding taxes.

Between

1962 and 1069, this fraction was 60 percent; between 1969 and 1979, the
fraction was gradoally reduced to 40 percent: the Tax Reform Act of 1966
lowered the fraction to 8 percent.

The inrentive for mortgage investment

provided by the extraordinary transfers to loan loss reserves was
substsntial in the 1960s and 1970s; savings and loans would have accepted a
half to three-quarters of a percentage point lower pretax return on tsx
preferred housing-related assets than on comparable nonpreferred assets.
Thrifts have shifted sharply out of fixed-rate home mortgsges (FRMs) in
the l980s.

Most strikingly, the share of savings and loan total assets in

home mortgages and agency securities (largely Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
pess-thtoughs) fell from 72 to 57 percent during the 1982-87 period.
Because ssvings and loans have aggressively added adjustsble-rste mortgages
(ARMs) to their portfolios, the shift out of FRMs was far greater than 15

percent of the portfolio, These portfolio shifts were in response to the
reduced profitsbility of savings and loans (first due to high interest rates
and a msturity mismatch and then due to disinflation and credit losses), the
expsnsion of savings and loan asset powers, and s regulatory-enhanced
aversion to interesc-rste risk.

The reduced profitability eroded the tsx

incentive for residential mortgage investment, while the expansion of powers

11

and regulatory risk aversion encouraged thrifts to invest more widely (the
latter also encouraged switching from FRMs to ARMs).

The net result was the

mortgage rate rising from a half percentage point below the perfect-market
rate to a half point above.
The half percentage point premium in the early l980s provided the
incentive

for the securitization of conventional FRMs

Freddie Mac,

Fannie Mae and

The premium covered both the start-up cost of the securitizers

and the liquidity premium demanded by investors.
Freddie did:

by

And securitize Fannie and

roughly half of newly-issued conventional fixed-rate mortgages

originated in 1986 and 1987 were sold directly to Fannie and Freddie to be
packaged into mortgage pools.

As the volume of mortgage pools grew, bid/ask

spreads were bid down (and thus the liquidity premium fell), and the

marginal costs of the securitizers declined. As a result, the yields on
conventional loans have fallen back in line with capital market rates.
Nonetheless, conventional FP,M rates are still about a half percentage
point higher, relative to Treasury rates, than they were in the 1970s.
Attributing this half point increase to Reagan policies seems inappropriate,
however.

The deterioration of the thrifts'

relative position as profitable

investors can be traced to policy errors, such as regulatory prevention of
adjustable-rate mortgages and the imposition of deposit rate ceilings,
date back to the l960s.

that

12

ields
III.

Yields on Tax Exempt Securities

Because investors are interesred in after-tax returns, rhe tax-exempt
status of a security will result in its pretax yield being bid down relative
to pretax yields on fully taxable securities.

Tax-exempt yields, then, will

only ha a fraction of taxable yields, the fraction being greater the less
heavily taxed are returns on taxable aecurities.
default-free yields on exempts

(r)

and taxables

state of the economy aa well as tax rates.

The relationship between

(r)

will depend on the

A deteriorating economy,

for

example, could lead to greater probability of bankruptcy (larger debt
contracting rosts) and thus reduced issues of fully tsxable debt.

Also, the

deterioration could stimulate a flight to quality or greater demand for
Treasury debt.

In both cases, fully taxable retes would fall relative to

tax-exempt yields.

rex/rtx

We thus express the ratio of exempt to taxable rates as

(tctpiP)

where to is the corporate tax rate, t
personal tax rate schedule,

is an index representing the marginal

and p is a risk adjustment that varies with the

state of the economy.
Figure 7 plots the ratio of one-year exempt to one-year taxable yields

(r/r),

l-t, and a proxy

for cyclical swings in the economy (CAP).

The

latter is measured as 100 times the difference between middle-expansion
trend CE? and actual ON?, all divided by trend ON?.

The corporate tax rate

13

is not plotted because it varied so little during this period.

The personal

tax rate is the average marginal personal tax rate on interest income earned
(see footnote 3).

The broad decrease and then increase in

l-t

reflects

both the bracket creep of the 1970s and the l980s Reagan tax cuts.
plots the same ratio for five-year securities.

Figure 8

Here the personal tax rate

is a five-year forward-looking rate (the single tax rate applied to all

future cash flows that gives the same after-tax rate of return as the stream
of after-tax payments based upon the average marginal personal tax rates
that actually evolved). The general correlation of the rate ratios with the

l-t's and CAP seems clear.7
Closer inspection of the figures suggests two further points.
the cyclical impact of GAP seems
is negative in the 1972-73,

First.

to be limited to positive values; when GAP

1978-80, and 1986-88 periods, the rate ratios

cease to follow its movements. This is consistent with a risk adjustment
that develops when the economy falls below trend but is fully eliminated
when the economy gets back to trend.

Also,

the one-period future,

than current, value of CAP seems to influence the rate ratio.

rather

Second, both

the one-year and five-year race ratios are too high after about 1984

relative to the pattern existing over the 1970-84 period.

More

specifically, the rate ratios are far closer to the 1-tn's than they were
during comparable periods when the economy was above trend (1972-73 and
1978-80).

An alternative or additional proxy for the risk adjustment is the
spread between the six-month commercial paper and Treasury bill rates
divided by the bill rate (PREM).8 As Euser and Hess (1986) note, the
corporate-Treasury yield spread is a contemporaneous proxy for expected
bankruptcy. This variable moves somewhat like GAP, but falls far more
abruptly in 1975 and rises much less in the 1980-82 period.

utin

thmact of Rca aol

ic ice

We have estimated some simple regression equariens for the 1970-84
period and extrapolated them through 1988.

The equations confirm both the

importance of our variables and the unusually high rate ratios in the late
1980e.

Representative equations are:

One Year:

r

-

cx/r tx

(.107)

= .709, SEE
Five Year:

r

cx/r tx

i.012(1-tp ) + .0080

.179 +

= - .111

(0.155)
.022, OW =

+

=

.724,

SEE = .019, OW

where GAPZ is zero when

(.0022)

(.057)

1.69

l.008(l-t p ) +

(.125) (0.183)

GAPE + .159 PREM

.0084 GAPZ + .093 PREM
(.0019)

(.050)

1.32

GAP+I is negative and equals GAP+i otherwise and

coefficient standard errors are in parentheses. Note the similarity of the
tax rate and GAP coefficients in rhe two equations and the closeness of that

on 1-t

to unity.

15

Plots of the actual and fitted/forecasted rate-ratio values are
presented in Figures 9 and 10.

The one- and five-year rate ratios appear to

be roughly 0.08 and 0,06 too high, respectively, in 1986-88.

That is, the

tax-exempt rates are roughly 50 basis points too high.
The rise in the rate ratios far above those predicted in 1985-88 is
likely due to the anticipation and enactment of the 1986 Tax Reform Act.
The 1986 Act cut corporate tax rates from 0.46 to 0.34 (the impact of the
personal rate cut is already included in the forecasted rate ratio),
disallowed all bank interest expense allocable to newly-acquired tax-exempt
bonds, enacted an alternative minimum tax with tax-exempt interest included
in the base, and substantially restricted future issues of business
industrial revenue and household mortgage revenue bonds (since the end of
1985,

the quantity of these bonds outstanding has declined

by 10

percent).

The rate cut, the disallowance of bank interest expense, and the alternative
minimum tax should all reduce commercial bank demand for tax-exempts (Neubig
and Sullivan,

1987).

In fact, commercial bank holdings of tax-exempts have

declined from $231 billion at the end of 1985 to $152 billion at the end of
1988.

The increase in the rate ratios in 1985 reflected a surge in tax-

exempt issues in anticipation of the Tax Act.

Tax-exempt debt outstanding

rose by $139 billion in 1985 ($98 billion in the fourth quarter alone)
versus $5l-54 billion in 1983 and l984.

16

What do we conclude about the impact of Reagan policies on tax-exempt
yields?

In effect, we can attribute all of the 0.1? increase in the rate-

tatios aince 1980 to Reagan polities, first the 1981 rate cuts and later the
1986 Act.

At a ?,5 peccent taxable rate,

this amounts to a one and a

quarter percentage point increase in tax-exempt yields.

Of course, if the

Reagan tax outs themselves lowered taxable rates by nearly a percentage

point

aa we are prepared to argue, then the net increase in tax-exempt

yialds ia only about three-quarters of a percentage point.
IV.

Suimsary

During the first Reagan term, the battle to lower inflation acted to
maintain the high real interest rates carried over from the Carter years
and, while rhe increase in structural deficits did not raise real rates

much, an aggressive foreign policy increased them by half a percentage point
by heightening nuclear fear and thus reducing private saving.
factors,

These

strongly reinforced by the unwinding of the second OPEC shook,

raised real interest rstes to levels not seen since the late 1920s.
Moreover, the increased volatility of interest rates during this protracted
battle with inflation raised yields on callable fixed-rate mortgages by over
a percentage point relative to the already inflated yields on nonosllsble

Treasuries.
By the end of Resgsn's second term, inflation,

marginal tax rates,

nuclear fear, and interest rate volatility were all down.

As a result,

nominal Treasury rates have plunged, and yields on csllsble securities such

17

as fixed-rate mortgages have receded to more normal levels relative to
noncallable Treasuries. Real Treasury rates sInce 1986 are below theIr
average values for the previous quarter century. Yields on tax-exempt
securities are one and a quarter percentage points higher relative to
Treasuries than in the pre-Reagan years, and yields on fixed-rate mortgages
are up by a half percentage point.

These constitute an intended reduction

in the previous financial subsidies to state and local and household capital
formation, respectively.

18

References
Blanchard. Oliver J. and Lawrence H. Summers
Real Interest Rates

"Perspectives on High World

kAQ5ifl.gLPaneloflconomiAptivit,

1984:2.

pp. 273-324.

Buses, Stephen A. and Patrick J. Hess,

"Empirical Determinants of the

Relative Yields on Taxable and Tax-Exempt Yields," Journal of Financial
Econcaice. 1986.
Clarida, Richard A. and Benjsr.in M. Freidman, "Why Have Short-Term Interest
Ratss Been so High?," Brcokings Papers on Economic ActiMit',

1983:2,

pp. 553-78.

Eisner,

Robert,

"Divergences of Measurement and Theory and Some Implications

for Economic Policy," Americsn Economic Review, March 1989.
Feldstein, Martin,

"American Economic Policy and the World Economy,"

EpARign....

Affairs, 63, Summer 1985, pp. 995-10D8.
Hendershots, Patric H .,"Tax Reform and Financial Markets," Economic
Consequences of Tax Simplification, Conference Series No. 29, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston, 1985.
Hendershott, Patric H., "Debt and Equity Returns Revisited," in B. Friedman
(ed), Financing Corporation Capital Structure, The University of

Chicago Press, 1986.

Hendershott, Patric H. and Stephen A. Buser,
..Qndar

Spotting Prepayment Premiums,

Mortgage Markets, August 1984.

Hendershott, Patric H. and Joe Peek, "Treasury Bill Rates in the 1970s and
l980s," EBER Working Paper, July 1989.
Hendershatr, P,:ric

d,

3nd Robert Van Order, "Integration of Mortgage and

Capital Markets and the Accumulation of Residential Capital,'
Science and Urban Economics,

Kotlkoff Laurence

i.

'Deficit

Regional

1989.

Delusion," The Public Interest,

Neuhig, Thoras S. and MarLin A. Sullivan,

Summer 1986.

"Implications of Tax Reform for

Banks Holding TaxExempt Sorurities," National Tax Journal,
September 1987.
Wilcox,

James A

"Why Real Interest Ratea Were so Low in the l970s,"

Arerir-n Economic Review,

73, March 1983, pp.

4453.

20

Footnotes

1,

While

office,

the

period of tight money began well before Reagan took

his support of that policy allowed it to continue until

inflation was substantially reduced.

Numerous previous

administrations had begun attacks on inflation, but all had
backed off before inflation was permanently lowered.

2.

The interest

rate series are the April and October monthly

averages of daily secondary market six-month Treasury bill rates
(converted from a discount basis to a bond-equivalent yield) and
the ten-year constant maturity Treasury bond yield, both from the
Federal Reserve Bulletin.

The April and October observations

were selected to correspond with the approximate date at which
respondents to the semiannual Livingston survey form their
expectations. The six-month Livingston expected inflation rate
series was provided by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
The ten-year expected inflation rate series is from the DecisionMakers Survey conducted by Richard
Lambert, Inc.

B.

Hoey at Drexel Burnham

This series is not available for every April and

October; when necessary, it has been interpolated from the data
for nearby months.

21

3.

The ex ante six-month pretax real interest rate is

calculated as the six-month Treasury bill rate less the six-month
Livingston expected inflation series.

The

cx

ante ten-year

pretax real rate is from the Decision Makers Survey.
April and October observations have
data for

nearby months. The

Missing

been interpolated from the

after-tax real rate is

the after-tax nominal rate less expected inflation,

calculated as
The tax rate

on interest income is an average marginal tax rate constructed
from data contained in

annual

Individual Income Tax Returns

editions of Statistics of Income,

as

a weighted average of the

statutory marginal personal income tax rate for each adjusted
gross income class.

The weight for each class is equal to its

share of the total interest received by all income classes.

4.

Both the real interest rate and the tax rate were described

in footnote 3.

The deficit measure is the cyclically-adjusted

federal budget deficit as a percerLtage of middle-expansion trend
GNP and is based on the series constructed by the Bureau of
Economic Analysis.

Our measure is an average of this series for

the quarter beginning in April (or October) and the subsequent

quarter to correspond to the time span covered by the six-month
Treasury bill rate.

22

5.

An inflation-adjusted measure of the deficit would exhibit an

even sharper increase between 1981 and 1983 because the inflation
rate was falling.

However,

any particular deficit measure will

suffer from a number of problems.
see, for example,

6.

On general measurement issues,

Eisner (1989) and Kotlikoff (1986).

The seven-year Treasury rate is the constant maturity series

from the Federal Reserve Bulletin.

The mortgage rate

and

the

volatility measure are both based on data from Flendershott and

Van Order

(1989).

The mortgage rate is the conventional

commitment mortgage coupon rate adjusted for points, where that
adjustment is equal to (Points-1)/(4.2 + .106 slope

-

.69 vol),

where slope is the difference between the seven-year and sixmonth Treasury rates and volatility (vol) is one-half the
cumulative absolute change in the seven-year Treasury rate over
the previous 20 weeks.

We plot semiannual averages of weekly

data.

7.

The five-year rate ratio exceeds the one-year ratio by about

0.05 on average.

This could reflect the value of the tax-trading

option (let capital gains run but take capital losses) of the
longer term securities (Rendershott,

1985, pp. 158-60).

23

7.

The commercial paper rate is for firms with bond ratings of

Aa or equivalent, from the Federal Reserve Bulletin.

8.

Part of the 1985 surge was matched by an increase in

commercial hank demand

billion

an increase of $57 billion in 1985 ($4C

in the fourth quarter) versus $11 billion in 1984

banks stocked

up in anticipation of the 1986 Act.

--

as

to

cnwej
(Ylviufoti

(vO(1IrJ-'J3

:

fVt? 'OtSI#S

'-"L r4kl -rlQW-j)$

5

S LI

U SI

S

U UT

S 'L

U

S Z

ho:Lb,

Perce#sj

10.1)

•/ S

2.5
0.1)

—2,5

-5.0

Ex fli Ie.. Pre4x

F,ctirt

9:,o p.';o

':oy

Prh

A1kr4, (?eJ I'i 4eeF )eS

qi:oy

Xr)1ON Pre+,*x

7iO t,Viv 1;Dv

If)

1,

7—

0

1" I

nii :i

c7

00

U

I

oi:i,i

ci'wJL lv

o:i
h,:tt,
oi,c1

fr'Ow

-nfij

)4Lf?Jd

#hiY?Q r?ArrfJ - ,,4/)Jpcl,

o,.'c

1l4q/lJt#!,U 1tY j'g

!VO:LS

!o:tL,

SEO

szc.

SLZ

o:oLbi

18.8

7,5

5.8

8.8

—2.5

F,vre )
Preft Reil c,x-moN\ 7es)rj ,',ii
&1J rnpt, P0)3 Ik1p1ct

ik

c:,o 1l1 '1.'K fl;o ?;io 9cs Py,o tVo4

N

tJ)1vr p4/

lfLfi(94

O/,'6L,

r'-'dS ?jv2) cinsj _,j

bo:u
O/!/,j

91'

9C

SZ

9Z

Si

01

S9

0.L4

/O,'tbI

I

19
13

fT
13
15
14
13
12
11

8

7
19711

Figure 6
Ac*ual & Pirfect

I TY rTrrrri rTT

Mk.t

Prfict Mk.t

1379.1

+

1963i

Effective Commitment Rate

rr rm
1375.1

0 Actu

1987.1

I.'LI

;:rg

L

?Jlj

oJNa?tg JV??A1QjOO14Jj

JM_, v1U?)Jd P'49 t#j (iij (t'iv#,JlUJ )1w/jf

r(,,,4 (7X

/. .t

9.

Si

I. U

F,'ta

(toI..II

iiio:s

ft,o of flit
/flIN1IS, mAR

'1:!

cNt6Ap

Eem,i+i4, Fe-e,,r ThX441t' Y,e/J,

IVA

IT4X/?4Ie/4p Per(e,1j?,j

17:1

8.8

8.5

N)

tcpi)'4 ,i'tL

ta

putt (414/.?

(U/if)

ws-?MQ O,L+JlU?(3 ncW,-?/Q

t:14

o

(:eb

St '9

ore

890

5S'8

I:oLe
5F 0

8.75

• 8.70
6.65
8.60
0.55
0.50
/ 97o:

ave- +4r

AcirnI,L

/0

T,rx,LIe 5',eIdc

-vJ/Forec#ed

rn

