NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO FIRMS CARE WHO PROVIDES THEIR FINANCING?

Jeffrey K. Mackie-Mason

Working Paper No. 3039

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1989

This paper was prepared for the Conference on Information, Capital Markets and
Investment at the National Bureau of Economic Research, May 5-6, 1989. I would
like to thank participants at that conference far many helpful comments, and
members of the NBER 1988 Summer Institute Workshop on Credit Markets and
Economic Activity for helpful comments on a preliminary presentation of some
results from this paper. I have particularly benefitted from the comments of
Glenn Hubbard and David Scharfstein. Superb research assistance was provided
by Donna Lawson and Kenneth Kim, through financial support from the Rackham
Graduate School and the NBER. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #303 9
July 1989

DO FIRMS CARE WHO PROVIDES THEIR FINANCING?

ABSTRACT

Several types of evidence are presented to demonstrate that firma are
concerned with who provides their financing, not just with the debt/equity
distinction. Aggregate and industry trends and patterns in the incremental
sources of financial capital are documented, and a large sample of incremental
corporate financial decisions is econometrically analyzed. There are large and
persistent differences in the patterns of internal and external financing,
both in the aggregate and across industries. Individual firms are shown to
have distinct preferences for different providers of funds. Several indicators
of potentially costly hidden information problems are important and significant
determinants of choices between private and publicly-marketed sources, even
after controlling for the type of security (debt or equity).

Jeffrey K.
Department
University
Ann Arbor,

w

Mackie-Mason
of Economics
of Michigan
MI 48109-1220

Most capital structure studies have focused on the type of financial liabilities that firms

use to finance their investment.1 As noted by Robert Taggart, Jr., "primary attention is
devoted to corporations' relative use of debt and equity financing. This has been the focal

point of most previous attempts to trace patterns in corporate financing and of capital
structure theory as well" (1985, 15). The purpose of this paper is to investigate whether
firms care who they get their funds from, in addition to the type of funds. Finding that firms

do distinguish between private and public, internal and external sources of funds, would
help to explain the widely documented effect of cash flow on investment. More generally,

if firms care about who provides a given type of funds then credit market conditions are
likely to have wide-ranging effects on many types of economic activity.

To address these questions I document aggregate and industry trends and patterns
in the incremental sources of financial capital, and then econometrically analyze a large
sample of incremental corporate financial decisions. I find that there are large and persis-

tent differences in the patterns of internal and external financing, both in the aggregate
and across industries. The study of financing choices by individual firms shows that firms
prefer particular providers of funds under various circumstances. Asymmetric information

problems appear to be important determinants of financing choices. Since different funds
providers have different access to information about the firm and different ability to mon-

itor firm behavior, the importance of asymmetric information gives a reason for firms to
care about who provides the funds.

1
See, e.g., MacKie-Mason (1988); Auerbach (1985); Bartholdy, Fisher and Mintz (1989); Bradley,
Jarrell and Kim (1984); Long and Malitz (1985); Ang and Peterson (1986); and Williamson (1981).

1

In the first section I briefly review some of the major theories of capital structure
decisions, emphasizing the distinction between theories that have predictions for the type
of security (debt or equity) a firm chooses and those that predict preferences for different
types of providers (publicly-marketed or private). In Section 2 I present aggregate data on

patterns in sources of financial capital, and in Section 3 disaggregate the financing trends

into broad industry groupings. The striking fact that emerges is that there are persistent
trends in the aggregate and differences in financing patterns across industries that cannot
be explained if firms care only about the type of financing, and not who provides it.

The macro evidence motivates the econometric analysis of individual firm decisions

in the second part of the paper. In Section 4 I develop a choice model for incremental
decisions by individual firms, and describe the selection of explanatory variables. The
econometric results are presented in Section 5.

1. THEORIES OF FINANCING
In this section I distinguish between two major themes in the literature on corporate
financing, and emphasize the different predictions that emerge from them.2 The traditional
view is that firms consider the costs and benefits of debt and equity then choose an optimal

leverage ratio. The more recent view emphasizes costs associated with different providers

of funds, rather than with the type of funds provided. It is the latter type of model that
provides the central focus of this paper.
The two schools of thought are not mutually exclusive, although almost no theoretical

work has appeared that integrates them.3 I describe them separately not to challenge
one with the other, but to highlight the distinguishing predictions they make. The data
and econometric analysis presented below establish a number of empirical regularities
that cannot be explained by the traditional optimal leverage theories. However, the other
view—that who provides the funds matters—predicts several of the regularities that I find.
2
In recent years a number of good overviews of capital structure theory have appeared. See,
e.g., Myers (1984); Auerbach (1985); Taggart (1985). 1 shall not provide a redundant development of the
standard models.

Myers (1984) described his view as an eclectic, "modified pecking order theory," but did not
integrate the elements into a careful model.

2

1.1 Different Security Types
Most of the financing literature has been concerned with the use of different types of
security contracts for funding. Sources of funds can be thought of as contingent claims on
the firm's cash flows, with different contingencies distinguishing between types of financing.

The best-known examples are simple debt and common equity: debtholders have a senior

claim on the firm's cash flows up to a fixed amount, and the equity owners receive the
residual. If the firm is unable to meet the fixed interest commitment the remaining assets
are turned over and the equity claims become worthless.
If managers try to maximize shareholder wealth then new investment should be financed

with debt or equity depending on which contributes most to the firm's present value. Three

aspects of the different debt and equity contingencies are usually emphasized as benefits
and costs for debt and equity: (1) more debt increases the likelihood of bankruptcy, which

may impose real wealth costs on shareholders; (2) more debt may distort incremental
investment incentives, reducing firm value by the inefficiency cost; and, (3) the government

takes different shares of cash flows to debt and equity. These effects are specific to the
type of security—i.e., the specific contingencies that define the security—and thus have
no particular implications for who should provide the funds.

Financial distress and bankruptcy are usually presumed to cause real reductions in
shareholder wealth (Miller and Modigliani 1966). Since greater fixed interest obligations
increase the probability of financial distress, a firm should use less debt the higher are its
expected bankruptcy costs.
A related cost of debt financing is that the fixed interest commitment may distort the
managers' incentives for future investment decisions, thus reducing the value of the firm's

wealth-increasing opportunities. Firms with large debt burdens may take on projects that
are too risky because the shareholders gain if the projects succeed but the debtholders lose

if the projects fail (Jensen and Meckling 1976). Myers (1977) and MacKie-Mason (1987)
present models in which debt leads to underinvestment in future opportunities because

prior interest commitments have first claim on the cash flows from the new project, thus
reducing the likelihood that the project will yield a return on its incremental investment
cost.

-

3

Tax claims also impose benefits and costs on security types. The most important
rule is that interest paid is tax-deductible for corporations while dividends paid are not.
Debt financing appears to be substantially favored, with a horizontal supply curve at the

interest rate that equates the after-tax cost of financing with debt and equity. However,

Miller (1977) pointed out that the corporate tax advantage to debt could be offset by
personal tax disadvantages. A clientele should form for each firm's securities consisting of

investors whose tax rates make them indifferent to the after-corporate and personal tax
value of the firm's mix of debt and equity payouts. In Miller's model taxes have no effect
on the choice of security type.
DeAngelo and Masulis (1980) studied an oversight in the Miller (1977) argument: ad-

ditional interest commitments reduce the probability that the firm will be paying taxes,
and a tax-exhausted firm loses the benefits of other, non-debt tax shields. Thus, the firm
is likely to have an upward-sloping debt supply curve, and should have art optimal leverage

ratio determined by the intersection of the supply curve and the investor-clientele demand
curve.

1.2 Different Providers of Funds
A manager's valuation of a claim on a firm's future cash flows depends on what she expects

about the firm's future performance. Managers seeking to maximize the wealth of current
shareholders will only sell securities if investors are willing to pay as much or more than the

managers—given their expectations—believe the securities are worth. Investors determine

willingness to pay based on their expectations for the future. Investors who believe firm's
prospects are good will offer more than pessimists. The firm will care about who provides
the funds because different providers will have different information and expectations, and

thus be willing to pay different amounts for the securities.
Suppose managers have better information, and thus more accurate expectations about
the firm than do outside investors. I shall refer to this as the problem of hidden information.
Hidden information problems have been proposed as a reason for firms to have hierarchical
preferences over various sources of finance by Myers (1984). I place the emphasis somewhat

differently: hidden information problems predict firm preferences over providers of funds

4

but not security types, while the optimal leverage factors affect choice of security types
but not of the provider of funds. This dividing line is too bright, but it provides a useful
organizing point for the investigation in this paper.
The basic prediction of the hidden information theory is that investors who believe they

have poorer information than managers will pay less for new securities than will betterinformed investors. The intuition is simple: since managers sell securities only if buyers

are willing to pay as much or more than the managers believe the securities are worth,
poorly-informed investors will assume that they are being exploited.
This story is a version of the well-known "lemons" model, and has been formalized for

new share issues by Myers and Majluf (1984). A similar phenomenon can lead investors

to ration the amount of financial capital they are willing to provide. Stiglitz and Weiss
(1981) present a model in which banks ration credit because the bank cannot completely

distinguish between good and bad firms. At some point no more funds will be offered
regardless of the interest rate the firm is willing to promise because of the risk that the
firm is a lemon.

Thus firms will prefer to obtain funds from investors who are better informed and
don't require as large a premium. For example, firms will prefer to use retained earnings
over new share issues: retained earnings are reinvested equity by current shareholders, so

there is no possibility for information exploitation to transfer wealth from new investors
to existing owners.4 Likewise firms might prefer borrowing from their regular commer-

cial bankers rather than from publicly-marketed bonds if the banker has better access to
relevant information (or can verify it more cheaply) than do bond purchasers.

We thus expect that firms care about who provides their financing. In general such

asymmetries of information are not related to the type of security, and as such do not
predict financing preferences over debt and equity per se.

The literature on managerial capitalism (e.g., Berle and Means 1932, Leibenstein 1966) suggests
that managers act at least in part in their own interest, rather than the interests of current shareholders.
One effect of managerial opportunism on financing is discussed when I discuss the role of cash flow, in
Section 4.

5

1.3 Summary
The general predictions of the two views are summarized in Table 1. Debt—equity choices

should depend on tax shields because of crowding out by new interest deductions. The
composition of a firm's assets between fixed capital in place and future investment oppor-

tunities affects the cost of debt because of the possibility of inefficient future investment

decisions. And, firms with a high likelihood of bankruptcy may avoid new debt rather
than increase the expected realization of financial distress costs. For the most part these
factors are not important for the choice between different providers of funds.

The main prediction of the hidden information view is that firms will seek betterinformed investors when the perceived likelihood of a hidden information advantage is
high, or when the potential difference in valuations due to hidden information is high. For
example, the probability of financial distress per se is not a hidden information problem if
that probability is common knowledge, but the costliness of small information differences is

likely to be magnified for a firm near bankruptcy, leading to an indirect effect of potential
financial distress on preferences over providers of funds. Thus I have put a "maybe" in the

table for that cell.

The other characteristics in the table are predicted to influence choice of provider,
but not type of security. We need to look for publicly observable factors that are likely
to indicate significant divergences in information or its value, without actually knowing

what hidden information the managers have. For example, if firms pay dividends as a
costly and informative signal to reveal hidden information then hidden information may

be a bigger problem for firms that don't pay dividends. When the forecast variance of
a finn's earnings is high a small amount of asymmetric information may be reflected in

a big difference between earnings predictions by managers and investors. On the other
hand, firms with government rate regulation have much relevant information revealed and

validated for investors by the regulatory body. Rate regulation also might intentionally
dampen the effects of good or bad surprises.
Specific variables to measure these effects shall be discussed in Section 4. First, in

the next two sections I investigate the trends and patterns in sources of funds in the
aggregate and across industries. If firms care only about debt and equity choices, then we

6

should see more or less random variation in the degree of reliance on various providers of
funds. Of course this prediction is too strong, and a microeconomic analysis of individual

firm financing is necessary if we are to draw strong conclusions. However, from a look

at the macro data we shall see important trends arid cross-industry variation in reliance
on different providers of funds as distinct from different types of securities. These results
motivate and reinforce the later analysis of firm decisions.

2. AGGREGATE SOURCES OF FUNDS SINCE WWII
In this section I present data on sources of funds for the nonfinancial corporate sector since

1945 and discuss the apparent patterns at the aggregate level.5 These data introduce some
of the empirical regularities that will be examined in the econometric analysis of financial
choices.

Sources of funds are presented as a percentage of total sources in Table 2. The data are
averaged over business cycles (measured from trough to trough, using the nearest quarter)
to control for cyclical effects.6

Before studying the different patterns in various incremental sources of funds, two
broad facts illustrated in Figure 1 deserve notice. First, the profit flow out of the nonfinancial corporate sector has been very close to zero. That is, pre-distribution earnings
have averaged 97% of total sources of funds, and have rarely strayed far from 100% (Table

2). Since earnings represent net income after interest payments on debt, the net total flow

of financial payments out of the corporate sector has been consistently close to nominal
interest payments on debt. Why does the corporate sector maintain a debt level such that
investment is almost identical to after-interest earnings?

The second intriguing fact concerns the well-known dividend puzzle. Dividends are

a tax-disadvantaged means for transferring funds from the corporate to the household
sector. One obvious alternative is to repurchase shares. In fact firms recently have begun
The discussion of aggregate sources of funds updates some of Raymond Goldsmith's flow-of-funds
studies (1956, 1963) done for the National Bureau of Economic Research.
6
The last cycle is shown to end in 1987 because no more recent data were available; the economy
was still expanding at least into the middle of 1989.

7

to repurchase huge amounts of equity, but dividends have not declined correspondingly.

Although the long-run trend is slightly negative, dividends have been almost a constant
share of total sources since 1970, even as new shares have plummeted from 6.5% of total
sources over 70Q4—75Q1 to —12.8% in the most recent cycle. It seems that corporations

have discovered share repurcbases but have not been using them to reduce dividends, at
least in aggregate.7

Details on the major sources of funds are presented in Table 3. 1 distinguish between

four major sources: retained earnings, non-publicly marketed debt, corporate bonds and
new equity share issues. This paper focuses on two dimensions of financing: private vs.
publicly-marketed, and debt vs. equity. Some data on internal vs. external sources of funds

are also presented. Retained earnings are the only internal source; retained earnings plus
private debt comprise private sources.

2.1 Internal vs. External Sources
Internal and external funds are shown in Figure 1. Over the entire period nearly threequarters of funds were provided internally (Table 1). The reliance on internal funds fluc-

tuates somewhat but the variance is low. If the stagflation- and OPEC-dominated cycle
from 1970-TV to 1975-I is dropped the internal/external ratio is extremely stable.
There is no evidence of any long-run trend in internal financing. This finding contradicts

Taggart's conclusion that "internally generated funds have also declined relative to total
sources during the postwar period" (1985, 28). Taggart examined data through 1979; his

conclusion might have been due in part to the abnormally low use of internal financing
during 1971—1975. Since 1975 retained earnings have hovered around the post-war average

of 73%. During the last six years the internal fraction has ranged from 73% to 83%, but
those years comprise only the expansion part of the strongest economic boom since 1945.

The dominance of internal equity funding is one of the stylized facts that prompted

Myers (1984) to contemplate a hierarchy theory of corporate financing, with retained
See Shoven (1986) for a detailed look at repurchasing behavior.

Further, the averages he reports appear to be in error, although the discrepancy might be the
result of revisions of the series by the Federal Reserve.

8

earnings the most preferred source. Hierarchical preferences follow from some asymmetric
information problems. However, firms might prefer internal funds over new shares because

of transactions costs and the tax penalty on dividends. Thus observing a high share
of internal equity funding need not indicate that a firm has hierarchical preferences for

internal funds over debt. We need to examine the data more carefully before drawing
conclusions about the existence of financing hierarchies.

2.2 Private vs. Public Sources
Another distinction between sources of funds is whether the funds are raised in a public

competitive market. The alternative, which I call "private" sources, is to use retained
earnings or debt sold through private placements or negotiated directly with a bank. The

shares of private and public sources of funds are shown in Figure 2. Publicly-marketed
sources are defined as net new share issues and corporate bonds. Private sources include
retained earnings, bank loans, finance company loans, mortgages, and a variety of miscel-

laneous (but generally small) sources such as taxes payable and net trade debt.
One point appears obvious from the figure: the corporate sector is turning steadily away

from public sources of funds. However, we must look separately at the trend components,

shown in Figure 3. Although net public financing has dropped from nearly 20% of total
sources during the 1970—75 cycle to almost 0% during the most recent years the result

is entirely due to the strong downward trend in new equity shares. In fact, during seven

of the last ten years net new share issues have been negative (i.e., there have been net
repurchases). During 1982—1987 new shares have averaged — 12.8% of total sources.

Although net public financing has fallen almost to zero, firms are still turning to the
public bond market for substantial funds. As seen in Figure 3, corporate bond financing
has been steadily around 10% since 1946. There was a substantial drop during the short
1981—82 cycle, but bond financing has been significantly above average during the last few

years. Thus there is not a trend away from public sources of funds; rather there is a trend

away from new shares. This observation might be consistent with a financing hierarchy
that has new shares as the least preferred form of finance. On the other hand, if firms have

a strong aversion to issuing new shares we might expect them to invest available cash in
9

liquid financial assets rather than in repurchasing their own shares, building up reserves
to reduce the likelihood of needing to issue new shares in the future.
The rising trend in private sources shown in Figure 2 is also somewhat deceptive. Much

of the increase is due to an increase in the funds provided by "miscellaneous sources,"

consisting primarily of taxes payable and foreign direct investment in the U.S. These
sources are not easily controlled by individual firms and thus the trend in non-public
sources may not reflect conscious decisions by managers.

2.3 Debt vs. Equity
Incremental debt and equity financing are shown in Figure 4. There is little evidence of
abnormally high reliance on debt during the past decade. Total debt has provided a higher
than average fraction of t0tal funds during the 1980s, however the debt contributions have
been no greater than they were during the long expansion and following cycle from 1961 to

1975. The debt percentage was also equally high during the first post-war cycle (although
this average is due almost entirely to the 54% reliance on debt in 1946). The average debt

percentages for the 1980s are well within one standard deviation (8.3 percentage points)
of mean post-war debt reliance, although several of the individual years in the 1980s are

more than one standard deviation above the mean. Thus in the aggregate recent debt
usage does not appear to be alarming. Nonetheless, there may be room for concern about
debt usage in some industries, or about the riskiness of recent debt issues.
A somewhat more pronounced trend occurs in the equity series. Equity financing has
declined fairly steadily since 1958. The share of retained earnings has never again been as
high as it was in 1958 (85%), although it came close in 1987 (83%; see Figure 3 and Table

3). New shares have fallen precipitously since 1971. But the difference between total
sources and equity sources has been made up largely from miscellaneous sources rather
than standard debt sources.

A few interesting facts emerge from this review of aggregate patterns in sources of
funds. First, the share of internal financing is dominant and exhibits no long-term trend:
since 1975 the share has fluctuated closely around the four-decade average. This contrasts

with earlier observations by Friedman (1980) and Taggart (1985), who saw a post-war
10

trend away from internal funds toward debt. By extending the time series past 1979 there

appears to be no trend away from internal funds, and the movement towards debt (away
from external equity) is not outside the normal long-run variation.

Second, any strong hierarchical preference for internal funds is offset by an equally
strong preference for dividends: in aggregate firms have paid out about 20% of earnings

as dividends and simultaneously raised about 20% of their funds from external sources.

Third, although there has been substantial movement away from net new share issues,

firms still raise a substantial fraction of funds in public debt markets. The persistence
in the preference for retained earnings over new shares, and the stability of the share of

corporate bonds suggest that firms do care about who provides the funds, rather than
selecting randomly from different sources of debt and equity.

3. INDUSTRY VARIATION IN SOURCES OF FUNDS
The main finding in this section is that there are significant and persistent differences
in the reliance on internal funds both across industries and over time. These persistent
variations support the idea that capital structure decisions involve more than the choice

of a debt/equity ratio.

3.1 Data
The Federal Reserve does not detail its flow-of-funds accounts by industry. I constructed

the data in this section from the 1988 COMPUSTAT database. It is not possible to construct a series strictly comparable to the aggregate Federal Reserve data because COMPUSTAT contains an unweighted sample of only about 6500 firms.

I constructed industry aggregates directly from the individual firm data. The firm
data were selected for use in the econometric analysis below, and represent a distinct
subpopulation of firms. A firm is included for a given year if long-term capitalization

increased that year, that is if retained cash plus net sales of debt and equity is greater
than zero. The restriction to firms with increased capitalization will be justified in Section

4. For now, notice that the composition of each industry aggregate may change from
year to year, either because of an addition to or deletion from COMPUSTAT coverage
11

or because some firms increase their capitalization in some years but not in others.9 The
data were collected for 1977_1986.b0 The aggregates are constructed from approximately
1400 individual firm observations each year. The data are again presented as averages over

business cycles, however both the first and last cycle are incomplete. The industry codes
correspond to aggregates of 2-digit SIC codes as detailed in Appendix Table 1.

3.2 Internal Financing By Industry
The shares use of internal funds over 1971—1987 are presented by industry in Table 4. The

numbers display marked variation in reliance on internal funds across industries, and in
many cases over time within a given industry.

Selected industries are graphed in Figures 5a and Sb. Firms are grouped by similar

patterns in the use of internal funds. Figure 5a presents the largest group, for which
reliance on internal funds dipped dramatically during the 1981—82 cycle, but then rose in

the most recent period (usually to even higher levels). Some other industries with this
pattern were not graphed for visual clarity. The firms in Group I account for about 74% of
the net assets in the sample. The four Group III industries in Figure Sb (15% of net assets)

relied more heavily on internal funds during 1981—82, but (except for Agriculture) ended

the period at a lower level than they began. The intermediate group of industries are not
graphed (Wholesale Trade (5000); Textile Mills, Lumber, Furniture, Paper and Printing
(2200); and Ground, Water and Misc. Transport (4000)) due to space limitations. These
displayed a slight downward trend in internal funds and almost no change in either debt
or equity shares (examined below).

Industries differ in the long run as well as from period to period. At the extremes,
the Hotel, Entertainment and Service aggregate (7000) obtained only 65% of its financing
from retentions on average, while Petroleum Refining (2900) provided 96.6% of its funds

internally. These two industry groups exhibited the same time-series pattern of internal
The temporary disappearance of a firm from an industry aggregate may have a substantial impact
on levels of the variables, but will only affect the relative shares that are reported here inasmuch as that
firm deviates substantially from the industry mean.
10
Earlier data were not collected because the other information needed for the econometric analysis
is unavailable before 1977.

12

financing (Figure 5a), but are very different in the extent to which they turn to outsiders
for new funds.

The variations suggest that the use of internal funds cannot be entirely explained by
business cycle effects, secular trends in the economy, or widespread changes in financial

practices. Of course the distribution of financing patterns might be due to pure chance

rather than to different firm preferences arid opportunities. I shall look for systematic
determinants of financing decisions in Section 5.

Variations in the share of internal financing are offset by changes in external shares.
I shall now examine how the shifts in external sources were distributed across debt and
equity for different industries.

3.3 Debt Financing by Industry
Reliance on debt exhibits substantial variation, as did internal financing. However, firms

that followed similar patterns in the use of internal funds do not look similar in their use

of debt. The business cycle averages as a percent of total sources are given in Table 5.
Figures 6a and 6b graph the industries using the same groupings as before.

I noted in Section 2 that debt usage has increased during the last 10 years, but not
dramatically. For this sample, incremental reliance on debt rose from 16% during the first

period to 20% during the last period (Table 5). But while some industries increased their
debt use substantially, quite a few decreased.
Figure 6a displays a jumbled pattern for the Group I firms. Petroleum Refining (2900)

added huge amounts of new debt, going from an average 4% debt share in 1977—80 to a
30% share during 1983—86. Machinery firms (3500) went from 12% to 24% to 5% debt

usage. Metal Mining (1000) dropped from 23% to 5% (see Table 5). In addition to the
time-series variation, the cross-sectional spread in debt usage is large: from about 5% to
30% debt shares both at the beginning and end of the period.

Two other industries greatly increased debt usage: the Textile, Lumber, Furniture,
Paper and Printing group (2200) went from 13% to 23%; and Agriculture (100) went from

31% to 57%, (but with net debt retirements of 16% in the middle period). Other industries
maintained relatively steady or slightly increased rates of debt usage.
13

The data reported here contradict Lintner's contention that "there are clear and remarkably persistent patterns in the relative use of debt financing by firms in different
industries" (1985, 79). At least over the past decade, the use of debt within industries has

fluctuated significantly. It may be that the relatively high level of aggregation is masking

persistent patterns for more disaggregated industries, and that the changing relative importance of more narrowly defined industries leads to the variation in my aggregate figures.

So much variation in the composition of industries over ten years seems unlikely, however.

3.4 New Share Issues
Net new share issues have sharply decreased in recent years and in fact have become
substantially negative due to repurchases. Shoven (1986) has estimated that cash payments

to equity holders through repurchases and cash-financed mergers and acquisitions have

been much larger than dividend payments during recent years. We shall see that the
intensity of equity absorption has been far from uniform across industries.

Table 6 presents net share issues by industry. The industries are graphed by group in
Figures 7a and 7b. Recall that firms in Group I industries reduced their reliance on internal
funds during the middle period, but then moved to higher levels of internal financing during

the most recent years (Figure 5a). There was no consistent pattern in their debt policies
(Figure 6a). We can see from Figure 7a that this group was for the most part alternating

between internal and external equity. During the initial stock market rise in 1981—82,
many firms brought out new issues; Group I shows constant or increased rates of net new
shares during this period.11 For most of these industries net share issues fell dramatically

after 1982, and were negative for several years. From Figure 7a we can see that most of
these industries also were decreasing their use of external debt during the last few years.
The Group III industries are those that increased the share of internal funds in 1981—
82, then decreased more recently. Two (Fabricated Metal and Electronics) offset shifts in
internal financing with changes in the share of external debt rather than equity; Agriculture
(100) decreased and Retail Trade (5200) substantially increased their reliance on new equity
This sample misses the huge boom in initial public offerings during those years, because newly
public firms are usually too small to be immediately covered by COMPUSTAT.

14

(Figure 7b). The large negative share for Agriculture is due to major repurchases in 1984
and 1985 by U.S. Sugar, DeKalb, and Castle & Cooke.

There is quite substantial cross-sectional variation in the degree of reliance on new
shares in the total sample, even with the high level of aggregation. Many industries cluster

around 5% net new shares, but several industries use external equity for as much as 15%
to 20% of their funds during the 1981—82 period. The range during the last cycle is from
-45% to 13%.

It is also important to note that although in aggregate corporations were absorbing large
amounts of equity during the last several years, quite a few industries were using increasing

and positive amounts of net new equity: Machinery (3500); Airlines (4500); Fabricated

Metal (3400); Ground and Water Transport (4000); and Wholesale Trade (5000). The
movement towards non-dividend cash distributions was far from universal.

3.5 Summary
The stability of aggregate reliance on internal funds seen in Section 2 does not carry
over to industry patterns of financing. Even at high levels of industry aggregation there

is substantial variation in both the time-series and cross-sectional patterns of internal
financing. The variation is even greater if examined year-to-year, rather than as business
cycle averages. Many industries shifted significant shares of financing from internal cash
to external equity during 1981—82, and then again increased the share of internal funds in
more recent years while dramatically decreasing net new share issues, as well as decreasing
reliance on debt in some cases. However, several industries exhibited precisely the opposite

pattern, and a number of others can not be categorized in either way.'2
12
We must be careful about drawing inferences from relative financing shares. There is an important
distinction between extent to which a firm relies on a particular source, and the exposure of that firm to
particular markets. Even a firm relying predominantly on internal sources may face the external market
quite often. For example firms in this industry on average provided 96.6% of their funds internally (Table
4). However, these companies also obtained large amounts of debt financing: debt sources were equivalent
to 30% of total sources during 1983—86 (Table 5). The large influx of debt was offset by equally large
share repurchases, with net new shares at -34% during the period. Thus the industry provided 104% of
total funds through internally-generated cash, but the firms were heavily involved in external securities
transactions as well. We cannot necessarily take high reliance on internal funds as measured above to be
support for Donaldson's hypothesis that internal financing "avoids the glare of publicity and shareholder
attention which accompanies the decisions and actions of management if externally financed" (1961:54).
In fact the financial decisions of petroleum firms were among the most publicized and scrutinized during
recent years.

15

There are large and persistent differences in the degree to which different industries

rely on internal funds. There are also significant variations in the pattern of internal financing over time. When the reliance on internal funds changes, the compensating sources
of external finance—debt or equity—also vary over time and across industries. We clearly

cannot explain the use of internal funds simply with aggregate trends in the economy or

in financial institutions and practices. Different firms rely to varying degrees on internal funds. In the next two sections I present an econometric analysis of individual firm
financing decisions.

4. DETERMINANTS OF FINANCIAL CHOICES
The data presented in the first two sections showed substantial variations in the use of
internal funds that are not explained by business cycle fluctuations. The data also reveal

large differences in the use of internal funds across industries. It thus appears that there
are nontrivial distinctions between the providers of funds, as well as differences between

types (debt and equity).
Are these variations purely random, or due to the effects of economic forces on firm
financing decisions? As a first step in answering this question, I estimate a simple econo-

metric model of individual firm decisions. Unlike many prior researchers, I distinguish
between who provides the funds, as well as the type of funds. I find several factors that
help to explain firm reliance on various sources.
Some important prior research has indicated that it matters who provides financing. For
example, Chris James (1987) examined stock price reactions to announcements of different

types of debt financing, and found that the market reaction varies with the identity of the
provider (e.g., bank, private placement, public bond). In a more direct study of financing
preferences MacDonald and Soderstrom (1988) estimated multinomial choice models for
dividend and share repurchase decisions. Their approach is quite similar to the analysis in

this paper. Their evidence suggests that a financing hierarchy exists and that the marginal
source of funds for a firm changes over time.

Although there has been only a little empirical research on this financing question,
several investment studies have allowed for effects from distinctions between providers of
16

funds. If there are significant asymmetric information costs for different sources then the

Modigliani and Miller (1958) irrelevance result fails to hold and financing should affect

investment. Fa.zzari, Hubbard and Peterson (1987) find that investment hy those firms
most likely to face external credit constraints is significantly determined by cash flow.
Blundell et al. (1988) and Devereux and Schiantarelli (1989) obtain similar results in two

studies of investment by U.K. firms. Whited (1988) finds that implicit constraints on
debt issuance affect investment in a panel of firms. Hoshi, Kashyap and Scharfstein (1988,

1989) study investment by Japanese firms and conclude that access to bank finance within

a "trading group" increases investment relative to firms unaligned with a bank.

The approach I take to financing distinctions is to study incremental decisions. In
the remainder of this section I describe the choice model, the data, and the hypothesized
determinants of choice among sources of funds. The results are presented in Section 5.

4.1 Choice Among Financing Alternatives
Consider a firm that wishes to raise new financial capital. I presume that the managers
seek to maximize firm value. Funds can be obtained from several sources, each potentially

having different effects on firm value. Choices are distinguished by the type of contingent
financial claim (debt or equity) and by the provider of funds (private or publicly-marketed

sources). Thus, I model the alternatives as a multidimensional choice set, with one dimension M = {public, private}, and the other choice dimension S = {debt,equity}. A
financing choice is given by cms M x 5, a combination from the two choice dimensions.
For example, corporate bonds are denoted by cpubljc,debt.

Each source of funds can affect firm value. Let the increment (positive or negative) to
the firm's objective function from a particular source be decomposed as

Vms = Urn + Us + Urns + m + 5+ ms
The U terms represent the deterministic effects on firm value peculiar to each financing

dimension separately (market, security type), and the effects peculiar to the particular
combination (Urns). The i terms decompose the random effects on value in the same way.
That is, the effect specific to a security being publicly marketed (regardless of whether it
17

is debt or equity) is given by Upublic + public, and likewise for the security dimension. Any

interactive effects peculiar to a particular source raised in a particular market setting are
captured in Urns + rns This decomposition allows for similarities between sources which
share a dimension, but still permits for effects specific to each source.

If we assume that either var(5) = 0 or var(rn) = 0, and make appropriate assumptions
about the distribution of the remaining stochastic terms, then the choice model is known
as a nested logit model (McFadden 1981)13 The restriction that one of the choice dimen-

sions not have its own stochastic component (i.e., the zero variance condition) limits the
description of the possible effects of financing sources on firm value.14 I estimated both
choice models, with the two different variance restrictions. The two models are illustrated

in Figure 8, as Choice Tree 1 and Choice Tree 2. The first mode, Tree 1, has the interpretation that firms choose whether to use public or private sources, and then from one of
those branches choose either debt or equity. The second model has the firm choosing debt

or equity first, then deciding from what provider to obtain the funds.
To estimate the determinants of choice, I specify Urn, U3, and Urn., as linear functions

of hypothesized explanatory variables, X; e.g., U5 = Xi?.. The probability that a firm
chooses a particular source from the multidimensional choice set can be written as:

Pr(m,s) = Pr(slm)Pr(m)
and with the nested logit stochastic specifications we have

Pr(sjm) =

e Urn. + U.)

-

Pr(m) =
L.ernEMC

(Urn+14o

13
This structure avoids the problem of Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives that characterizes
a better known model, the multinomial logit. If hA were imposed it would mean, for example, that the

probability of choosing public equity over public debt would be unaffected by whether or not it was possible

to use retained earnings. That is, internal equity would substitute identically for either public equity or
public debt. The model I use avoids this implausibly extreme independence.
14
A more general model is the multinomial probit, which allows for any pattern of correlations
among the choices. I attempted to estimate a multinomial probit model, but found it computationally
infeasible for this sample. Each evaluation of the likelihood function requires the calculation of a triple
integral. With about 14,000 observations and 30 iterations this procedure involved over 500,000 triple
integrations per estimation run. A further complication is that some of the covariances appeared to be
poorly identified, possibly because about 80% of the choices were of one source (retained earnings).

18

where Im = ln(E3.sepWms + U5)), the log of the denominator of Pr(slm), and , a
parameter to be estimated. !m is known as the inclusive value. Given the probabilities of
observing particular choices, the model can be estimated using either maximum likelihood,
or a nonlinear sequential estimator (McFadden 1981).15

4.2 The Observed Choices
Two data problems complicate estimation of the determinants of financing decisions using

a discrete choice model. First, although firms may be making decisions incrementally
and discretely the sampling frame of the data is more coarsely grained. In MacKie-Mason
(1988) only public issues were studied. Since public securities must be registered SEC data
tapes precisely identify each incremental issuing decision. To study financing decisions that

include private debt and retained earnings, we must rely on annual accounting statements.
Thus the financing decisions must be treated as if the firm chooses its sources of funds once

per year. In most cases this means that a single observation actually represents several
financing decisions.

Another problem is that firms may raise funds from more than one source at a time.

In only a tiny fraction of instances do firms register more than one public security at a
time, and in only a few more cases do firms separately register different types of securities

within a short time frame. However, in data that combine private and public sources and

that are aggregated over a year the problem will be much more common. In fact, most
firms in the COMPUSTAT universe use at least retained earnings and private debt, and
often one of the public sources of funds in a given year.

I have taken the following approach to defining financing choices. My a priori logic
was suggested by the possibility of a financing hierarchy of the sort proposed by Myers
(1984): firms prefer to use internal funds, then private debt, then only if necessary publicly-

marketed securities. This is consistent with the frequencies of public issues in the sample:
of the 14,398 observations on firms that increased their capitalization in a given year over
1977—1986, only 1463 were public security issues. Thus, I coded the choice variable as "new
15
For computational feasibility I used the sequential estimator, and calculated standard errors
corrected for the two-stage method.

19

shares" if the firm issued stock or "bonds" if the firm sold corporate bonds, both regardless

of any private source financing; "private debt" if the net increase in debt exceeded the net

increase in equity (but the firm did not issue stock or bonds); and "retained earnings" in
all other cases. That is, if the firm did not publicly issue, it is classified as private debt or

equity depending on which source contributed the most funds that year. If the firm did
publicly issue it is coded as public debt or equity regardless of issue size.
The sample is drawn from the COMPIJSTAT universe. A nonfinancial corporation was

included for a particular year if its long-term capitalization (net changes in equity plus net

changes in debt) increased that year, according to the Statement of Changes in Financial

Position. Most of the tax, moral hazard and hidden information theories that predict
financing choices imply that the Modigliani—Miller irrelevance proposition does not hold.
That means that the financing choice may depend on the intended use of funds. There is no

practical way to measure the nature of the incremental investment decisions made by the

firms each year. In order to control for the some of the simultaneity between investment

and financing I restrict analysis to firms that increased their total capitalization, thus
holding constant the direction of change in the firm's capital stock.
Firms were retained only if complete data were available for the dependent and explanatory variables.16 Firms that issued publicly were identified by matching the COMPUSTAT

sample to the SEC's Registered Offering Statistics tape, which has records for every registered public offering since 1977.17 The sample runs from 1977-4986. The full sample has
14,398 observations, of which 832 are public stock issues, 631 are public debt issues, 1720

are coded as private debt, and the remaining 11,215 are coded as private equity (retained
earnings).
16
Because of the small size of the subsample that issued publicly, I made an effort to fill in as
much missing COMPUSTAT data as possible for those observations by a hand search through Moody's
Manuals and the firms' 10-K reports to the SEC. Public utilities were dropped because flow-of-funds data
are not available for them on COMPUSTAT.
17
Tbe SEC tape contains records for registrations beginning with 1974. However, the tape layout
was changed in 1977 at which time the SEC tried to recode the old observations according to the new
format. I discovered that the recoding was done incorrectly, and after discussions with programmers at
the SEC determined that it was not possible to recover any correct registration data for 1974—1976.

20

4.3 Explanatory Variables
The explanatory variables were selected from COMPLJSTAT as those measures a priori

expected to best capture the hypotheses discussed in Section 1. Most of these variables
have found support as financing determinants in other empirical papers. I did not want to
contaminate the statistical inference process by pre-testing and selecting among possible
factors, so all variables were retained in the analysis even if they have insignificant or
puzzling coefficients.

To avoid simultaneity all explanatory variables are measured for the year prior to the
financing decision. The variables are described below. Detailed definitions can be found

in the appendix to MaciCie-Mason (1988). All of the accounting variables that measure
levels have been divided by net sales to control for scale effects.

Flotation Costs. We saw in Section 2 that retained earnings are the dominant source
of funds, followed by private and public debt, with public share issues the smallest source.

It is possible that this pattern of financing is due to transactions costs. Issue costs are
lowest for retained earnings, low for private debt, higher for public debt and highest for
new shares, with substantial underwriting and registration fees and costs for public issues
of both debt and equity.
Borun and Malley (1986) found that underwriting and registration expenses averaged
4.1% of the issue value for new public utility stock. A much older study by the SEC (1957)
considered costs for different issue sizes; the smallest issues had average flotation costs over

20%, falling to 5.4% for large issues. Flotation costs for debt are generally much lower
than for new shares. Blackwell and Kidwell (1988) report average costs of 0.8% for private

debt placements and 1.2% for public placements. The SEC study also found that debt
issue costs decrease with issue size.

However, there is no reason to think that flotation costs explain the variation in sources

of funds across time, industries and firms. The analysis below is intended to identify
determinants that distinguish between the financing choices made by particular firms.
The question asked is whether, ceieris paribas (including flotation costs) there are any
economic conditions that influence firms' choices over sources of funds.'8
One factor that might measure variation in flotation costs across firms and time is the size of the

21

Hidden Information. The hidden information theories predict that firms will prefer
certain types of providers, regardless of the type of security. Since I must rely on publicly

available data I cannot directly measure the extent or nature of informational advantages

possessed by firms at particular times. This may not be a serious problem, however:
the investors who decide how large a lemons premium to require also do not possess the

firm's private information. What investors can do is use public information to forecast
the magnitude and severity of informational asymmetries. I selected several variables as
possible indicators of the likely severity of hidden information costs.

The models of Bhattacharya (1979), John and Williams (1985), and Miller and Rock
(1985) suggest that dividend payments function as a signal when managers have private

information. If dividends are an effective signal then investors in non-dividend-paying
firms are likely to have less information about what the managers know, all else equal.

We should expect non-dividend-paying firms to avoid public market financing. On the
other hand, the double taxation of dividends gives firms an incentive to reduce dividends

and use retained earnings as a source of equity finance, rather than issue new shares
(Auerbach 1983, 1985). Thus we might expect a dividend-paying firm to reduce dividends
and finance using internal funds. However, firms are usually very reluctant to cut dividends,

suggesting that the signaling value of dividends outweighs the tax savings from financing

out of dividends.'9
A second indicator of potential hidden information costs is the forecast variance of firm

earnings. It has been well-established in the accounting literature that earnings follow

a random walk (Healy and Palepu 1986; Watts and Zimmerman 1986, ch. 6). Thus,
the standard deviation of the first-difference in accounting earnings is proportional to the
forecast variance of earnings. If this variance, which I call VEARNA, is large then investors

have relatively little ability to forecast future earnings based on public information. In
financing, since unit issue costs are known to vsry with issue size. However, issue size is clearly endogenous,

both because a firm may be able to make its public issues less frequently to reduce flotation costs, and
because the investment and the financing decisions will not be independent if asymmetric information is
important. To avoid simultaneity bias 1 do not include issue size in my list of reduced form explanatory
variables.
15

MacDonald and Soderstrom (1988) study this question.

22

such a case I expect that there is a high likelihood that managers have advantageous
hidden information, and that the correspondingly large lemons premium required by public
investors will discourage publicly-marketed financing.

Another indicator is a change in the firm's stock price. A number of studies have found

that firms tend to issue more new shares when their stock price is high (Taggart 1977;
Marsh 1982; MacKie-Mason 1988). If firms were concerned only with their debt—equity

ratio, then a rise in stock prices should instead lead to more debt -usage to restore the
ratio. One plausible explanation for market timing has been suggested by Bagnoli and
Khanna (1987). They incorporate both real costs of leverage and the Myers and Majluf
(1984) hidden information problem in a financing model. A rising market indicates that
investors have become convinced of a favorable improvement in the firm's prospects, and

thus are more likely to believe that the firm seeks financing for good projects rather than

bad. That is, the market seems to have recently decided that this firm's investments are
not lemons. To measure a market timing effect I include the change in the firm's stock
price over the previous year.

As another explanatory factor I include a dummy variable for industries that were
subjected to economic rate regulation during much of the sample period; viz., trucking,
trains, airlines and telephones. Regulators are hypothesized to play the role of an information collector and validator for public investors, ensuring that any substantially bad news

is made public. Further, regulation might serve to dampen the effects of good and bad
surprises by attempting to stabilize economic returns.20
Tax loss carryforwards may indicate the possibility that any hidden information could

be very costly to investors. A firm is allowed to carry losses back against three previous
years of income to obtain an immediate refund. If the loss is carried forward, it is credited

against future income without any accumulation of interest. Thus firms almost always
carry losses back in order to obtain an immediate tax savings rather than the discounted
value of future savings. If a firm has carryforwards it has usually been a poor performer
20
Electric utilities are another obvious industry in which to look for regulation effects because of the
close regulatory oversight and the heavy and regular new financing undertaken. Unfortunately Standard
and Poor's does not provide the flow-of-funds data that I need for electric utilities in the COMPUSTAT
databsse.

23

for several years. Further, Auerbach and Poterba (1986) have shown that firms with tax

losses tend to persist in that state, further indicating a poor performer. Once a firm is
identified by investors as a poor performer, any hidden information that managers might
have is likely to have a relatively large impact on the value of new security issues, and thus

the required lemons premium will be higher.

A final factor that I expect to influence the firm's preferences over types of providers

is the firm's R&D intensity. When a firm is doing a lot of R&D we might expect many
instances of the managers having important private information about changes in the firm's

prospects. Thus, high R&D firms should avoid external financing.
The predicted effects of these explanatory variables are summarized in Table 7.

Optimal Leverage Determinants. As discussed in Section 1, the predicted determinants of a firm's optimal leverage ratio are the benefits and costs associated with different

contingent claims on cash flow. Three effects have received the most attention: (1) the
tax costs from interest deductions crowding out other tax shields; (2) the real wealth costs

of bankruptcy (made more likely by higher debt levels); and, (3) the costs of inefficient
investment decisions resulting from the senior fixed claims of outstanding debt on incremental investment returns. I shall describe several variables used to capture these effects,
in reverse order.

Outstanding debt claims create a wedge between the returns to new investment and
the firm's shareholders. The more that a firm's value depends on future investment opportunities, rather than on already committed investments, the more costly a debt issue
is likely to be. Thus, firms with relatively low implicit collateral in the form of tangible
assets are expected to use less debt.

I use several measures of debt capacity. The fraction of plant and equipment in total
assets is intended to measure the availability of tangible collateral. Since I am looking at

incremental financing (rather than the firm's choice of total debt level), I also expect the
firm's size as measured by net assets to matter, since a single new debt issue might be more

easily absorbed by a large firm. Bradley, Jarrell and Kim (1984), and Long and Malitz
(1985) have suggested that a firm's advertising expenditures and research and development
24

are indicators of intangible assets and thus predict less reliance on debt.21
The second type of optimal leverage determinants are the real costs of financial distress.

If periods of financial distress or bankruptcy impose costs on shareholder wealth then new
debt—by increasing the likelihood of distress—bears an expected distress costs relative to
equity financing. I expect that the increase in bankruptcy likelihood from a new debt issue

is larger for a firm already facing a substantial probability of distress than for a healthy
firm.22

I introduce two variables that measure the likelihood of a firm becoming financially
distressed. The first is 1/ZPROB, which is Altman's (1966) predictor for classifying firms
likely to enter bankruptcy.23 ZPROB is a weighted average of several balance sheet ratios.

The greater is 1/ZPROB, the greater is the expectation that the firm will enter a state of
financial distress. In addition, I have constructed a second variance measure of the firm's
operating risk: VEARNB. This measure is the standard deviation of percentage changes

in earnings. Recall that VEARNA was described above as an indicator of high forecast
variance, and thus of potential hidden information costs. VEARNE weights changes more
heavily in years following low earnings (the denominator in the percentage change is close

to zero) which should make it a better indicator of bankruptcy likelihood than VEARNA.

However, both measures are imperfect and we should be cautious in interpreting them as
measuring different effects.

The third leverage cost is tax shield crowding-out. The higher are a firm's non-debt
tax shields, the higher is the expected after-tax interest rate it must pay, since there is a
greater chance that the firm will be in a zero-tax status. Thus the firm's supply curve of
21
Note that R&D is expected to indicate both future discretionary opportunities and the potential
for hidden information problems. As we shall see below, advertising and R&D can also be viewed as tax
shields.
22
This would be the case in a simple model in which earnings changes are distributed normally, and
for firms with less than a 50% chance of bankruptcy. The critical point in the distribution below which
the firm is distressed will be closer to the mean for weaker firms (higher probability) and thus a given shift
in that critical point from an increased debt burden will add a greater portion of the distribution than
for a firm with only a small tail probability of bankruptcy. Above a 50% chance of bankruptcy the effect
becomes ambiguous in this simple model, but such instances are unlikely be quantitatively important in
my sample.
23

This measure has been effectively used in MacKie-Mason (1988), Bartholdy, Fisher and Mintz
(1989), and Whited (1988).

25

bonds will slope upwards.24 Thus a firm with high non-debt tax shields will prefer to use
less debt, and more internal funds (retained earnings) or new share issues. Two tax shields
I measure are the firm's tax loss carr3rforwards (which can offset future tax liabilities) and

investment tax credits.25 R&D and advertising play the role of tax shields, since they can

be thought of as investments that are immediately expensed for tax purposes.

Most studies of debt ratios have failed to find tax shield effects, or have obtained
the wrong sign.26 MacKie-Mason (1988) hypothesized that the ITC tax shield might be
confounded with ITC acting as a proxy for new physical assets. The moral hazard theories

discussed above predict that firms with physical assets have implicit collateral and are
more likely to issue debt. These contradictory effects were successfully distinguished by

entering ITC alone and interacted with a measure of financial distress. The tax shield
effect is more important for firms closer to financial distress since the firm is more likely to

be tax-exhausted.27 Thus I expect ITC to measure implicit collateral, and ITC/ZPROB
to measure a tax shield effect.

Other Variables. I have also included cash flow and past leverage ratio variables in
the analysis. A firm with low cash flow is more likely to need external sources of funds. I

am using lagged variables to avoid simultaneity, so cash flow will be a good determinant

of constraints only if it is a good predictor of the next year's flows. Following Auerbach
(1985), I construct a cash deficit variable which is the difference between cash flow and
"committed" expenditures (long-run average dividends and the cash necessary to pay for
capital expenditures while maintaining the firm's long-run debt-to-assets ratio).
24
The same effect would follow from a higher corporate tax rate, but there is no variation in the
corporate tax rates during the sample period to identify a rate effect.
25
Auerbach and Poterba (1986) have noted that hook tax loss carryforwards may substantially
mismeasure the actual loss carryforwards available to the firm for tax purposes. This problem with the
data was discussed in MacKie-Mason (1988). Also in that paper, a short corrected time series constructed
by Auerbach and Poterba was tested with no discernible effect on the results of estimating the choice
between public debt and equity issues.
26
For example, Titman and Weasels (1988); Ang and Peterson (1986); Long and Malitz (1985);
Bradley, Jarrell and Kim (1984); Marsh (1982); and Williamson (1981).

27

See the example in footnote 22and the related text discussion.

26

A conflicting prediction on the effect of cash flows is provided by Jensen (1986). If

it is costly to monitor managers to ensure that they don't waste uncommitted cash on
perquisites and self-interested investments and expenditures, then value might be increased
if firms with large free cash flows issue debt in order to increase future cash corrunitments.

Thus, it is not clear if we should see firms with cash surpluses financing internally or
externally. When we look at the choice between debt and new shares, however, Jensen's
theory predicts a preference for debt to absorb cash flows.

One important reason to study the firm's incremental sources of funds is to avoid the

assumption present in most capital structure research that firms have optimal debt ratio

targets.28 Of course, if firms do have debt ratio targets, then the effects of the other
explanatory variables are conditional on whether the firm is above or below its target
debt ratio. I include the lagged debt-to-assets ratio, and the difference between the lagged

debt ratio and the long-run (ten-year) average debt ratio. If the firm has a stable target
ratio, then the latter measure should indicate on average which side of the hill needs to
be climbed. However, a firm that prefers a high debt ratio will have a high lagged ratio,
ceieris paribas, and will be more likely to rely heavily on debt for new funding.

Summary. The expected effects of the explanatory variables on debt/equity and
private/public choices are summarized in Table 7. At least to first order most of the
variables are expected to be relevant for one choice dimension but not the other. There

are exceptions, such as R&D and VEARNA. But there are enough distinctions that it
should be possible to obtain clear evidence on whether firms care about the provider of
funds separately from the type of financing.

5. ECONOMETRIC RESULTS
The estimation results are presented in Tables 8 and 9. The focus of this paper is on
the distinction between types of providers (private vs. public) so I have presented the
top branch private/public choice from Choice Tree 1 (see Figure 8) in Table 8, and the
two lower-branch private/public choices from Choice Tree 2 in Table 9. I also include the
28

This point is discussed in MacKie-Mason (19s8).

27

public debt/equity branch from Choice Tree 1 in Table 8 to indicate the ability of the
hypothesized debt/equity determinants to explain some debt/equity choices: The other
branches of the two models are not directly relevant to the topic of the paper and thus
are omitted for clarity of presentation.29 For private/public choices a positive coefficient

indicates a greater probability of private financing; for the public debt/equity branch a
positive coefficient indicates a greater probability of debt.

5.1 Private or Public Sources?. I first consider the results from dividing the entire
sample into private or public, shown in the second pair of columns in Table 8. Most of
the indicators of hidden information problems have the predicted sign. Firms that: were
not paying dividends; have volatile earnings (high VEARNA) or tax loss carryforwards;
experienced a stock price decline; or were not publicly regulated were more likely to use
private sources of funds.

Firms are reluctant to cut dividends, thus paying dividends is a signal that the firm
expects to have reliable cash flows. Firms that are unable or choose not to signal expected
cash flows through dividends will be subject to a higher "lemons" premium on their public

securities, and thus prefer to avoid public issues. The same effect is indicated by the
positive sign on VEARNA: if a firm has volatile earnings outsiders are more uncertain

about future prospects and are less willing to buy public security issues, so such firms
prefer to finance privately. On the other hand, hidden information problems are likely to
be less severe for publicly-regulated firms (trucks, trains, planes and telephones) because
of public disclosure and some degree of control over rates of return.30

Tax loss carryforwards suggest poor performance by the firm. Loss carryforwards do
not appear to be a tax shield effect here, since neither investment tax credit (fTC) variable
is significant. What a loss carryforward does indicate is persistent performance problems,

since the firm has the opportunity to carry losses back against three previous years of
income to get an immediate refund. Further, tax loss firms on average tend to continue
29
Coefficients were also estimated for each year and 15 industry dummies to control for time and
fixed industry effects; these results and the omitted branch results are available from the author.
30
There was substantial deregulation for most of these firms during the sample period, but none
of these industries have been completely deregulated.

28

as poor performers (Auerbach and Poterba 1986). Such firms are reluctant to seek public
financing because they will be subject to high lemons premia.

Firms are much more likely to raise money in public markets if their stock price has
risen. A price rise indicates that investors have become convinced that the firm's projects
are good ones. Thus the market is more likely to view a new issue as financing needed for

good investments rather than bad. Since the firm has been sorted into a "good" category,
it will have to pay a smaller lemons premium.
The negative coefficient on R&D is surprising since substantial research was expected
to indicate potential hidden information problems. However, the effect of advertising may

be consistent with the hidden information story: firms that do lots of advertising tend
to be in mature, less innovative industries such as food products or retail. If such firms
provide fewer opportunities for unfavorable surprises to investors then they may be able

to obtain public funds without substantial hidden information premiums. Likewise, the
net assets and fraction plant coefficients may be indicators of mature, more transparent
firms. Large firms are followed much more closely by investment researchers and analysts,

so hidden information costs should be lower.
Most of the variables predicted to affect the choice of security type rather than provider

type have statistically insignificant coefficients in the private/public choice branch. The

likelihood of financial distress as measured by VEARNB and 1/ZPROB has small and
insignificant effects. The cash flow variable predicted by Jensen's free cash flow hypothesis

is near zero and insignificant. The ITC tax shield has no effect. The exceptions are the
debt/asset ratios for which I have no explanation. Thus, the predicted distinctions between

preferences over type of funds and type of provider appear to be strongly supported.
One possible problem with the model underlying Choice Tree 1 is that the private funds

category combines two different types of funds—private debt and retained earnings—that

are also obtained from rather different types of providers. Although neither source is
publicly marketed, which distinguishes them from the other two sources, retained earnings

are obtained internally by management decision, while private debt needs the cooperation
of external lenders. Choice Tree 2 provides a different view (Figure 8 and Table 9). On the

lower branches I control for funding type (debt or equity), and examine the private/public
29

choice just between funds of the same type. That is, given equity, when does the firm
prefer private (retained earnings) to a new issue, and similarly for debt?

The results presented in Table 9 corroborate the discussion above, indicating the robustness of the hypotheses. Of all the variables predicted to be the primary determinants

of the private/public choice, only VEARNA in the equity branch reverses sign, and it is
statistically insignificant. For equity, paying dividends, not having tax losses, a stock price

rise and being regulated continue to predict a greater probability of publicly-marketed financing. For debt paying dividends and low earnings forecast variance are still significant;
the other effects have the predicted sign but are statistically insignificant (notice, however,

that the sample size is much smaller for the debt branch). Also significant for debt are
net assets, advertising and fraction plant, all of which have plausible hidden information
interpretations given above, although the predictions were not as clear cx ante.

Tables 8 and 9 show that a large number of variables help to explain public/private
choices in the direction predicted by hidden information theory. Many of these variables

are not plausibly related to preferences between debt and equity, adding support to the
hypothesis that firms care independently about who provides the funds. This proposition
receives strong support from Table 9 which reports the analysis of private/public choices
conditional on type of funding.
One further piece of statistical evidence is available concerning whether firms care who
provides their funds. The inclusive value in Choice Tree 1 (Table 8) concerns dissimilarities
between alternative providers. Letting a be that coefficient, it can be shown that 1 — a2 =
corr(Vm,debt, Vm,equity),

that is, the correlation between the values of funds sources that

is peculiar to who provides the funds, rather than the type of funds. Thus, if a = 1,
there is no characteristic of the firm's unobservable preferences that distinguishes public

from private sources of funds. The estimated a in this model is more than 25 standard
deviations away from one, so we reject the hypothesis of no difference between types of
providers with a high level of confidence. The conclusion is that firms do not view private
and public sources as interchangeable.

5.2 Public Bonds or New Shares? The first pair of columns in Table 8 report the
estimated effects of the explanatory variables on firm choices between issuing bonds or new
30

shares, conditional on going public. This choice is the subject of MacICe-Mason (1988)
and a similar set of results are discussed in detail in that paper. I will summarize only the
main results here.
The evidence supports the importance of tax-shield crowding out. Several variables in-

dicate the likelihood of a firm being tax-exhausted: tax loss carryforwards, ITC/ZPROB,

and VEARNB. Each of these has a significant coefficient indicating that firms likely to
be tax-exhausted are less likely to issue debt. VEARNA, which was intended to primarily

measure hidden information problems, is also significant, with a sign consistent with its
alternative interpretation as another indicator of the likelihood of tax exhaustion.
Firms with cash deficits are more likely to issue equity, again consistent with the firm's

desire to avoid committed interest payments that might necessitate reducing the dividend.

Viewed another way, firms with surplus cash are more likely to issue debt, which Jensen
(1986) predicted as the appropriate way to control the moral hazard problems from letting
the managers have discretionary control over uncommitted cash flows.

fTC entered by itself is consistent with the theory that fixed physical assets can secure

debt issues, but the plant and equipment fraction of assets and total assets both have
no effect on the firm's preference for debt, so the evidence in favor of this moral hazard
hypothesis is weak.

5.3 Summary. Many estimated effects have been discussed in this section. To summa-

rize it is useful to again refer to the predictions shown in Table 7. Most of the predictions

have been supported by the data, some quite strongly and robustly. Several variables
expected to affect choice of provider but with no obvious importance for type of security
indeed had the predicted signs and were significant. The results were obtained both for the

private/public distinction in the entire sample (Table 8) and for the private/public choice
conditional on debt or equity financing (Table 9).
The models fit the data reasonably well, considering the underdeveloped state of struc-

tural theory in this area. Lerman's R2 statistic (which has the usual "explained variation"

descriptive content as the R2 in a linear regression) ranges from 0.44 to 0.69 in the private/public choice models. McFadden's R2 measures the incremental contribution by the
explanatory variables beyond a naive model that simply predicts the mean. This statistic
31

is low but still substantial for a discrete choice model. So much of the variation in the
data is explained by the dominant use of retained earnings (93% of all equity choices) that

there is not much left to explain after the naive model. Naturally much of the residual
will not be explained by the descriptive proxy variables selected for the analysis. It is
notable, however, that in the debt-only branch of Choice Tree 2 (Table 9) in which the
split between private and public is more balanced (73% private) the McFadden R2 is 0.33,
which is quite large for a discrete choice model.

There still remains much to be learned about firm preferences for different sources of
funds. But the evidence thus far is clear and strong that firms do care about who provides

the funds, as distinct from the type of security.

6. CONCLUSION
This paper has presented data on the incremental financing behavior of U.S. nonfinancial

corporations since 1945. The main conclusion is simple and is reinforced with evidence
throughout the paper: firms are concerned with who provides their financing, not just with

the debt—equity distinction. Debt is more than just debt; equity is more than just equity.
Most optimal leverage theories in the literature have concerned solely the debt/equity
distinction. Stated simply, firms are believed to balance the tax advantages, real bankruptcy
cost disadvantages, and investment incentive inefficiencies of debt. More recently, the possibility that information asymmetries might affect financing decisions has received substan-

tial attention. Hidden information models explicitly direct our attention to distinctions

other than the debt—equity choice. In particular, it becomes crucial to know who the
investors providing the funds are, and what information is available to them.
This paper has provided substantial evidence that hidden information problems are im-

portant. In the aggregate there are large and persistent differences in the patterns of internal and external financing. Different industries—with different information characteristics—

exhibit substantial variations in reliance on internal funds both over time and across industries. When the incremental financing decisions of individual firms were analyzed, we
saw significant and coherent distinctions between the providers of funds.
Internal financing is different from external. Private financing is different from public.

These facts should encourage more research into the nature of financial choices by firms,
32

and into the implications of hierarchicai financing preferences and credit market constraints

on investment. and other firm activities.

33

References
Altman, E. I. (1968) "Financial Ratios, Discriminant Analysis, and the Prediction of Cor-

porate Bankruptcy," Journal of Finance, 23, 589—609.
Ang, J. S. and D. R. Peterson (1986) "Optimal Debt Versus Debt Capacity: A Disequilibrium Model of Corporate Debt Behavior," in Research in Finance, vol. 6, ed. Chen,

A. W.. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Auerbach, A. J. (1983) "Stockholder Tax Rates and Firm Attributes," Journal of Public
Economics, 21, 107—27.

Auerbach, A. J. (1985) "Real Determinants of Corporate Leverage," in Corporate Capital
Structures in the United States, ed. Friedman, B. M.. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Auerbach, A. J. and J. M. Poterba (1986) "Tax Loss Carryforwards and Corporate Tax
Incentives," Working paper, Dept. of Economics, MIT.
Bagnoli, M. and N. Khanna (1987) "Equilibrium with Debt and Equity Financing of New

Projects: Why More Equity Financing Occurs When Stock Prices are High," Working
Paper, Dept. of Economics, University of Michigan.
Bartholdy, J., G. Fisher, and J. Mintz (1989) "Some Theory of Taxation and Financial

Policy with Application to Canadian Corporate Data," Queen's University Working

Paper.
Berle, A. and G. Means (1932) The Modern Corporation and Private Property. New York:
MacMillan.

Bhattacharya, S. (1979) "Imperfect Information, Dividend Policy, and the "Bird in the
Hand" Fallacy," Bell Journal of Economics, 10, 225—235.
Blackwell, D. and D. Kidwell (1988) "An Investigation of Cost Differences Between Public

Sales and Private Placements of Debt," Journal of Financial Economics, 22, 253—278.
Blundell, R., S. Bond, M. Devereux, F. Schiantarelli (1988) "Does Q Matter for Invest-

ment?," Institute for Fiscal Studies Discussion Paper No. 87/12a.
Borun, V. and S. Mailey (1986) "Total Flotation Costs for Electric Company Equity Issues," Public Utilities Fortnightly, February, 33—39.
Bradley, M., G. A. Jarrell, and E. H. Kim (1984) "On the Existence of an Optimal Capital
Structure: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Finance, 39, 857—878.
34

DeAngelo, H. and R. W. Masulis (1980) "Optimal Capital Structure Under Corporate and
Personal Taxation," Journal of Financial Economics, 8, 3—29.
Devereux, M. and F. Schiantarelli (1989) "Investment, Financial Factors and Cash Flow

Evidence from UK Panel Data," in Credit Market Con.,traints and Economic Activity,

ed. Hubbard, R. G.. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Fazzari, S., R. Hubbard, and B. Peterson (1988) "Financing Constraints and Corporate
Investment," Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, , 141—195.
Friedman, B. (1980) "Postwar Changes in the American Financial Markets," in The Amer-

ican Economy in Transition, ed. M. Feldstein. Chicago : University of Chicago Press.
Goldsmith, R. (1956) A Study of Saving in the United States. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press.
Goldsmith, R., R. Lipsey, M. Mendelson (1963) Studies in the National Balance Sheet of

the United States. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Healy, P. M. and K. Palepu (1986) "Corporate Financial Decisions and Future Earnings
Performance: The Case of Initiating Dividends," Preliminary draft, Sloan School of
Management, MIT.
Hoshi, T., A. Kashyap, and D. Scharfstein (1988) "Corporate Structure, Liquidity. and
Investment: Evidence from Japanese Panel Data," Sloan Working Paper No. 2071,
MIT.
Hoshi, T., A. Kashyap, and D. Scharfstein (1989) "Banking Relationships and Investment:

Evidence from Japanese Panel Data," in Credit Market Constraints and Economic
Activity, ed. Hubbard, R. G.. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
James, C. (1987) "Some Evidence on the Uniqueness of Bank Loans," Journal of Financial
Economics, 19, 217—235.

Jensen, M. C. (1986) "Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers,"

American Economic Review, 76, 323—329.

Jensen, M. C. and W. H. Meckling (1976) "Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior.
Agency Costs and Ownership Structure," Journal of Financial Economics, 3, 305—60.
John, K. and J. Williams (1985) "Dividends, Dilution, and Taxes: Signalling Equilibrium,"
Journal of Finance, 40, 1053—1070.
Leibenstein, H. (1966) "Allocative Efficiency and X-efficiency," American Economic Review, 56,

392—412.

35

Long, M. S. and I. B. Malitz (1985) "Investment Patterns and Financial Leverage." in

Corporaie Capita! Structures n the United State.,, ed. Friedman, B. M.. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
MacKie-Mason, J. (1987) "Long-Term Contracts and Sequential Economic Decisions,"

Univ. of Michigan Working Paper.
MacKie-Mason, 3. (1988) "Do Taxes Affect Corporate Financing Decisions?," NBER
Working Paper No. 2632.
Marsh, P. R. (1982) "The Choice Between Equity and Debt: An Empirical Study," Journal
of Finance, 37, 121—144.

MacDonald, R. and N. Soderstrom (1988) "Dividend and Share Changes: Is There a
Financing Hierarchy?," Working Paper, Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern
University.
McFadden, D. (1981) "Econometric Models of Probabilistic Choice," in Structural Analysis

of Discrete Data with Econometric Applications, ed. Manski, C. F. and D. McFadden.

Cambridge. MA: MIT Press.
Miller, M. and K. Rock (1985) "Dividend Policy Under Asymmetric Information," Journal
of Finance, 40, 1031—1051.

Miller, M. H. (1977) "Debt and Taxes," Journal of Finance, 32, 261—275.

Miller, M. H. and F. Modigliani (1966) "Some Estimates of the Cost of Capital to the
Electric Utility Industry, 1954—1957," American Economic Review, 56, 333—391.

Modigliani, F. and M. H. Miller (1958) "The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance, and
the Theory of Investment," American Economic Review, 48, 261—97.

Myers, S. C. (1977) "Determinants of Corporate Borrowing," Journal of Financial Economics, 5, 147—176.

Myers, S. C. (1984) "The Capital Structure Puzzle," Journal of Finance, 39, 572—592.
Myers, S. C. and N. S. Majiuf (1984) "Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions When
Firms have Information that Investors Do Not Have," Journal of Financial Economics,
13, 187—221.

Securities and Exchange Commission (1957) Costs of Flotation of Directly Placed Corporate

Securities, 1951—1955. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
36

Shoven, J. (1986) "New Developments in Corporate Finance and Tax Avoidance: Some
Evidence," NBER Working Paper No. 2091.
Stiglitz, 3. and A. Weiss (1981) "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information,"
American Economic Review, 71, 393—410.

Taggart, R. (1977) "A Model of Corporate Financing Decisions," Journal of Finance, 32,
1467—84.

Taggart, R., Jr. (1985) "Secular Patterns in the Financing of U.S. Corporations," in Corporate Capital Struciures in the United States, ed. B. Friedman. Chicago : University
of Chicago Press.
Titman, S. and R. Wessels (1988) "The Determinants of Capital Structure Choice," Journal
of Finance, 43, 1—18.

Watts, R. L. and J. L. Zimmerman (1986) Positive Accounting Theor!,. Englewood Cliffs,

NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Whited, Toni (1988) "Debt, Liquidity Constraints, and Corporate Investment: Evidence
from Panel Data," Working Paper, Princeton University.
Williamson, S. (1981) "The Moral Hazard Theory of Corporate Financial Structure: An
Empirical Test," Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Sloan School of Management, MIT.

37

120

I

I

I

I

I

I

1.10

100

go
80
70

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

III

I—

—

ø

_,tct

g,c

—

—
—

— External
Dividends

Figure 1: Internal vs. External Funds (% of Total)

100

90

60
70
60
50
40
30

20
—

10

0

I

49

I

I

I

I

io

I

Figure 2: Private vs. Public Sources (% of Total)

— — Public

Private

100

go

80
70

60
50

40
30
20
10

Ret Earnings

• Private Debt

0

O New Shares
0 Corporate Bonds

_10I_

Figure 3: Major Sources of Funds % if Total)

6050I

I

I

I

90

—

60

—

70

.-

.

40

— — — Equity
Debt

Figure 4: Equity

vs.

Debt Sources (% of Total)

110

100

90

* Wholesale

80

* Machinery
Refining

70

Chemical

O Food & Tobacco

60

• Construction
1977—80

1981—82

1983—86

Figure 5a: Use of Internal Funds, Group I

110

100

90
80

O Retail

70

E Electronics

O Fabr. Metal
•
Agriculture

60
1977—80

1981—82

1983—88

Figure 5b: Use of Internal Funds, Group III

60
50
40
30

Wholesale

20

t Machinery

10 -

Refining
o Chemical

0-

1977—80

1981—82

o

Food & Tobaccc

•

Construction

1983—86

Figure 6a: Use of Debt, Group I

60
50
40

30
20
10

Retail
o Electronics

0

o

—10

Fabr. Metal

Agriculture

—20

1977—80

1981—82

1983—86

Figure 6b: Use of Debt, Group III

25
10
—5

Wholesale

—20

* Machinery
Refining
Chemical

—35

O Food & Tobacco
•

—50

1977—80

1981—82

Construction

1983—86

Figure 7a: Use of New Shares, Group I

25
10
—5

—20

O' Retail

o Electronics

—35

o
—50

I

I

1977—80

1981—82

Fabr. Metal

Agriculture
1983—86

Figure 7b: Use of New Shares, Group III

Figure 8: Financial Decision Trees

Pubc

Private

Retained

Private

Earnings

Debt

New

Corporate
Bonds

Shares

Choice Tree 1

Debt

Equity

Corporate

Private

Bonds

Debt

New

Retained

Shares

Earnings

Choice Tree 2

Table 1: Predicted Effects of Financing Choice Determinants

Potential Determinants
Tax Shields

Asset Composition
Bankruptcy Likelihood
Paying Dividends
Forecsst Variance

Public Regulation

Predicted to Have an Effe ct On?
Type of Security
Type of Provider
no
yes
no
yes
yes
maybe
no
yes
maybe
yes
no
yes

Table 2: Sources of Funds, By Business Cycle

(Percent of Total Sources)
Business Cycle
45Q4—49014 49Q4—94Q2 04Q2—09Q2 56Q2—61Q1 61Q1—70Q4 70Q4—75Q2 75Q1—60Q3 80Q3—92Q4 82Q4—07Q4 TOTAL

Net Dies

29.9

RetEurniap

68.4

Pee-Diut Earnings

BsakLoans
Mortgages

Trade Debt
Othee Debt
Corp Bonds

TotalDebt

New Sbares

Misc Sources
Ettentsl Sources
Total Sources

07,3

6.9
6.2
3.4
—03
22.4
28.6

03

268

27.5
70.9
1074

5.5

46

37
67

24.3
73.7
98.0
6.2

40

42
03

—39
0.9

—2.6

—4.3

—22

—4.1

0.6

4.0

7.2

12.1

10.9
19.1

2.9
9.9
17.9
4.2

—1.9
2.2

11.1
23.4

21.2

28 I

10.9
18.3

2.0

6.5
3.4
39.0
100.0

68.7
05.4

62
35

17,7
6.3

27.6
78.4
195.9

5.4

—24

7.4

—2.6

31.6

31.3
100.0

21.6

—2.0
20.1

1000

2000

00.0

3.9

0.9
26.3
100.0

29.2
62.0

822

II.!

29.9
74.8
94.7

21.1
72.7
93.6
10.5

20.6

23.7

776

973

731
960

—19

—iS

260
29.3

ii 4

20.3

2.4
4.4
25.2

—0.6

—12.8

2.6

69

1.0
2.2

27.3

22 4

269

100.0

00.0

lOGO

000

—4.2

3.9
8.9
6.2

50
04
03

Source' Fedecal Reserve Flow of Funds Accounts.

Note' Business cycle troughs are indicated by quarter but the data ace acerages of calendar years. split 01
the closest point to the trough.

Ii
68
33

229

Table 3: Internal and External Financing, 1946—1987
(Percent of Total Sources)

Year
1946
1947
1949
1949
45Q4—49Q4

1950
1951
1952
1953
49Q4—54Q2

1954
1955
1956
1957
54Q2—58Q2

1958
1959
1960
58Q2—61Q1

1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
61Q1—70Q4

1971
1972
1973
1974
70Q4—75Q1

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
75Q1—80Q3

1981
1982
80Q3—82Q4

1983
1984
1985
1986

1987
82Q4—87Q4

All Years

Retained
Earnings

Private
Debt

50.2
57.7
72.0
93.9

50.2
13.1

4.1

12.9
16.6

—2.6

14.1

68.4

16.2

12.4

56.1
60.5
82.1
75.9

10.8
8.3
3.7
3.5

5.1

68.7

92.4
68.4
76.4
76.3

8.2

78.4

8.2

85.6
71.3
82.8

0.1

13.3
10.5

6.0
7.9

79.9

8.0

77.0
77.0
75.5
79.7
74.4
73.1
74.2
68.9
70.0
67.3

5.8

Corporate
Bonds
6.1

New

Payout
Ratio

Sbares
6.4
5.0
3.9
5.9
5.3

39.4
31.7
25.6
25.0
30.4

17.2
12.0

4.1
6.5
8.5
6.0

30.7
28.2
26.7
27.3

6.6

11.1

6.3

28.2

0.2
11.0

13.4
14.4

6.0
3.9
5.7
5.8

26.5
25.0
26.5
25.8

10.9

5.4

26.0

15.8

5.5
4.1
3.2

26.4
24.4
25.7

9.9

4.2

25.5

12.8
16.1
11.2
16.3
13.0
10.8
14.0
15,7

9.2
7.2
6.1
6.1
6.1
11.8
16.9
13.5
12.8

4.4
0.7

7.8

21.2

6.1

25.9
24.4
24.4
24.3
24.2
23.6
24.2
25.4
25.9
26.2

73.7

12.3

11.1

2.0

24.9

65.9
68.0
53.3
60.9

4.4
12.0

16.6

10.1

33.2

9.6
5.2

23.5
22.3
22.6

17.8

13.4

8.6
4.5
2.8

62.0

16.8

11.2

6.5

25.7
23.5

82.1

—7.4

17.9
11.7
10.3

6.5
5.4

20.3

72.5
74.1

70.7
77.2
72.3

10.1

6.9
8.8

13.5

3.8

13.0
16.0
12.4

8.2
6.8

—0.5

1.7
—0.0

1.5
2.8

—0.2

3.7

20.7
21.5

4.7

23.4

10.8

2.4

21.0

6.5

—3.3

6.0

2.0

22.0
22.9

19.1

6.2

—0.6

10.0
24.5
15.3
10.7

4.2

6.1
—16.8
—18.8
—16.5
—18.0

7.2

10.0

74.8

7.5

68.2
77.3

23.7
14.4

72.7
74.6
75.6
81.5
83.0

1.2

10.4
17.1
24.8
23.5

77.6

12.3

16.0

—12.8

73.1

11.5

11.4

1.8

73.1

19.9

'20.3

1.2
—0.0
—3.1

Source: Board of Governors, Federal Reserve System, "Flow of Funds Accounts"

3

I

22.5

21.5
19.4
19.3
20.1
21.3
I

20.3

I

24.5

Table 4: Use of Internal Funds by Industry
(Percent of Total Sources over Business Cycles)
Business Cycle
Industry 1977—80 198 1—82 1983—86 TOTAL
82.5
88.0
65.7
104.8
100
76.3
96.5
66.8
54.8
1000
73.2
64.6
80.0
70.8
1300
77.4
82.7
76.9
68.0
1500
81.0
69.2
89.4
78.4
2000
77.7
81.3
85.0
80.9
2200
90.4
102.7
73.3
86.6
2800
96.6
104.2
95.1
84.6
2900
78.6
75.0
58.6
79.5
3000

5000
5200
7000

69.7
82.5
86.8
84.2
87.2
85.2
79.9
70.6
82.1
76.4
64.1

TOTAL

78.7

3400
3501J

3600
3700
3800
4000
4500

4800

86.5
69.8
88.8
80.0
85.1
81.7
52.4
67.9
77.0
78.3
57.3
74.2

61.8
82.3
80.1
83.4
89.6
79.3
69.6
73.6
71.1
73.6
68.6

81.6

Source: Author's calculations using COMPUSTAT data. See text.
Note: See Appendix Table 1 for industry definitions.

69.9
79.9
84.5
83.0

87.8
82.2
70.3
71.2
76.7
75.7
64.5
79.0

Table 5: Use of Internal Funds by Industry
(Percent of Total Sources over Business Cycles)
Business Cycle
Industry 1977—80 1981—82 1983—86 TOTAL
65.7
104.8
88.0
82.5
100
76.3
1000
66.8
54.8
96.5
1300
70.8
64.6
80.0
73.2
77.4
1500
76.9
68.0
82.7
81.0
2000
78.4
69.2
89.4
71.7
81.3
2200
85.0
80.9
73.3
102.7
90.4
2800
86.6
2900
3000
3400
3500
3600
3700
3800
4000
4500
4800
5000
5200
7000

TOTAL

95.1
79.5
69.7
82.5
86.8
84.2
87.2
85.2
79.9
70.6
82.1
76.4
64.1
78.7

84.6
58.6

86.5
69.8
88.8
80.0
85.1
81.7
52.4
67.9
77.0
78.3
57.3
74.2

104.2

78.6
61.8
82.3
80.1
83.4
89.6

79.3
69.6
73.6
71.1
73.6
68.6
81.6

Source: Author's calculations using COMPUSTAT data. See text.
Note: See Appendix Table 1 for industry definitions.

5

96.6
75.0
69.9
79.9
84.5
83.0
87.8
82.2
70.3
71.2

76.7
75.7
64.5
79.0

Table 6: Use of Debt by Industry
(Percent of Total Sources, over Business Cycles)
Business Cycle
Industry 1977—80 1981—82 1983—86 TOTAL
32.2
57.1
—15.6
31.2
100
18.9
5.4
37.4
23.1
1000
23.6
34.0
20.7
21.3
1300
1500
2000
2200
2800
2900
3000
3400
3500
3600
3700
3800
4000
4500
4800
5000
5200
7000

22.3
16.3
13.0
10.4

TOTAL

4.3

12.1

24.8
14.5
11.4
14.7

13.3
22.4
22.6

16.6

20.5
17.1

7.7

9.6
16.7

16.4
21.6
11.8

35.6
8.9

5.5

2.5

30.1
16.9
30.6
5.1
14.3

10.3

16.0

14.6

8.1

9.4

12.0

9.9

12.9
12.0
18.4

17.0

38.2

16.7
18.9

21.5
29.5

16.2
18.6
14.1

16.7
17.6
20.1

23.5

28.8

16.3

17.9

19.6

15.3
20.0
17.3
17.1
19.5
28.0
17.9

15.8

24.0

Source: Author's calculations using COMPUSTAT data. See text.
Note: See Appendix Table 1 for industry definitions.

6

20.5
22.7
11.6

8.4
13.1

Table 7: Predicted Effects of Explanatory Variables

Potential Determinants Effect on Private
—
Paying Dividends
Forecast Variance (VEARNA)
+
Tax Loss Carryforwards
+
—
Stock Price Change
—
Regulated
R&D
+
0
Advertising
Fraction Plant
0
Net Assets
0
0
Earnings Volatility (VEARNB)
Investment Tax Credits
0
0
ITC/ZPROB
0
l/ZPROB
Debt/Assets — Average
0
0
Debt/Assets
Cash Deficit
0

Effect on Debt
0
0

-

0
0
—
—

+
+
—

+
—
—
—

+
—

Note: Signs indicate predicted effect on probability of choosing private relative to public sources (colunsn
one) or debt relative to equity. Zeros indicate no predicted effect.

7

Table 8: Nested Logit Analysis of Financing Choices
(Choice Tree 1)

Variable
Constant
Paying Divs
VEARNA
Tax Loss CF
Price Change
Regulated

R&D
Advertising
Frac. Plant
Net Assets
VEARNB

ITC
ITC/ZPROB
1/ZPROB
D/A— Avg
Debt/Assets
Cash Deficit
INCLUSIVE

Observations
Mean of dep. var.

Log likelihood
Lerman's R2
Lerman's R2
McFadden's R2

Public Debt/Equity
(Debt=1, Equity=0)
t-stat
Coef.

Public
Private vs.
(Private= 1, Public=0)
t-stat
Coef.

—0.961

—1.39

5.58

19.5

0.472

175

—5.74
—3.04
—1.13
—1.04
—4.41

—2.51
—1.71
—6.40
—1.69
—0.988

—0.672
1.45

—7.13
1.89

0.760

3.41
—7.74
—2.39
—6.68
—2.96
—2.99
—5.36
—0.887
—1.02
—0.410
1.47
6.47
—16.7
0.227
1.53

0.905
—2.03
1.85
—1.92

—0.358
—0.639
—8.62
—3.36
—0.508
—0.101
—0.00174
—5.54
—1.70

2.74

0.0810

—1.36
—1.32
—1.66

—4.44

654

2.27

0.0625
0.0124

0.153

—0.0974
54.2
—69.7
1.45
—1.10
—0.964
—2.49

2.19

0.0696
0.0626

—720.9

14398
0.898
—4165.0

0.289
0.249
0.279

0.583
0.578
0.120

1463

0.431

Note: The lower branch choice between private debt and equity is not reported for clarity. These results are
available from the author. Each branch was estimated with year 10 year dummies and 15 industry dummies.
The t-statistics are asymptotic.

8

Table 9: Nested Logit Analysis of Financing Choices
(Choice Tree 2)

Private/Public Debt
(Private=1, Public=0)
Variable
Constant
Paying Divs
VEARNA
Tax Loss CF
Price Change
Regulated
R&D
Advertising
Frac. Plant
Net Assets
\TE&RNB

Coef.
5.13

t-stat
8.24

5.81

15.6

—1.09

—4.80

6.37
0.630
—0.0462
—0.0301

3.10
1.13

—0.441
—1.32

—4.02
—1.60

0.871
—0.495
—1.14
—8.62
—1.65
—0.0242
—0.0438
—0.00119
—5.20

—8.69
—3.35
—5.84
—1.05
—0.108
—3.51
—0.595
—0.669

1.40
0.0276
1.70

0.235
0.442
4.10

—4.89
—0.220

—14.8
—0.683

—12.2

—7.34
—1.55
—1.10
0.0449

—0.627
—0.0498
—3.39
—2.96
—4.19
—9.69
1.02

ITC
ITC/ZPROB
1/ZPROB

5.49

0.247

—20.2

—0.917

0/A— Avg
Debt/Assets
Cash Deficit

0.127
0.782

0.595
1.02

—1.48

—2.49

4.61

3.82

Observations
Mean of dep. var.
Log likelihood
Lerman's R2
Lerman's ]?2
McFadden's R2

Private/Public Equity
(Private= 1, Public=0)
t-stat
Coef.

2356
0.732

2.20

0.416

12042
0.931
—2624.2
0.686
0.681

0.333

0.133

—913.0

0.441

Note: The top branch choice between debt and equity is not reported for clarity. Those results are available
from the author. Each branch was estimated with year 10 year dummies and 15 industry dummies. The
t-statistics are asymptotic.

9

Appenduc Table 1: Industry Definitions

Code
100
1000
1300
1500
2000
2200
2800
2900
3000
3400
3500
3600
3700
3800

Description
100-200 Agriculture
1000—1200,1400 Metal Mining, Coal, Misc. Mining
SIC Coverage

1300 Oil and Gas Mining
1500—1700 Construction
2000—2 100 Food & Tobacco
2200—2700 Textile Mills, Lumber, Furniture, Paper, Printing

2800 Chemical & Allied
2900 Petroleum Refining
3000—3300 Rubber, Plastic, Leather, Stone, Clay, Glass, Primary Metal
3400 Fabricated Metal
3500 Machinery excl. Electrical
3600 Electronics, Electrical Machinery
3700 Transport Equipment
3800—3900 Measuring Instruments, Photo, Watches, Misc. Mfg.
4000 4000—4400,4600—4700 Ground, Water and Misc. Transport
4500 Airlines
4500
4800 Communications
4800
5000
5200
7000

5000—5100 Wholesale Trade
5200—5900 Retail Trade
7000—8999 Hotels, Entertainment, and Services

10

