                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            TAX EFFECTS ON FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT IN THE U.S.:
                   EVIDENCE FROM A CROSS-COUNTRY COMPARISON




                                 Joel Slemrod




                            Working Paper No. 3042




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   July 1989




This paper was prepared for the National Bureau of Economic Research Conference
on International Aspects of Taxation held on February 24-25, 1989 in Nassua
Bahamas.  I am grateful to David Hartman, other conference attendees, and to
the participants at the NBER Summer Institute for valuable comments and
suggestions.  I also acknowledge the help of Leticia Fernandez and Ken Timbers
in providing exceptionally able research assistance, and of Julian Alworth for
graciously providing critical data.   This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3042
                                        July 1989


            TAX EFFECTS ON FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT IN THE U.S.:
                   EVIDENCE FROM A CROSS-COUNTRY COMPARISON


                                  ABSTRACT


     This   paper investigates how the tax system of the U.S. and the capital—
exporting country combine to affect the flow of foreign direct investment
(FOl) into the U.S.     First, using aggregate data, it corroborates earlier work
suggesting that the U.S.   effective   tax rate does influence the amount of FO!
financed    by transfers of funds, but not the amount financed by retained
earnings.    The data are then disaggregated by major capital—exporting
countries to see if, as theory would suggest, FO! from countries which exempt
foreign—source income from taxation is more sensitive to U.S. tax rates than
FOl from countries which attempt to tax foreign-source income.      The data

ana'ysis does not revea' a c'ear differentia' responsiveness between these two
groups of countries, suggesting either difficulties in accurately measuring
effective tax rates or the availability of financial strategies which render
the home country tax system immaterial in affecting the return on FDI.




                                       Joel Slemrod
                                       Department of Economics
                                       Larch Hall
                                       University of Michigan
                                       Ann Arbor, MI 48109
1.   tntroduction

     The magnitude and financing of foreign direct investment in the U.S.,

which totalled more than S40 billion in 1987,   is potentially influenced by the

tax systems of both the U.S. and the investor's country.     Nevertheless, all re-

cent studies of foreign direct investment (henceforth FM) in the U.S. have in-

vestigated only the impact of U.S. taxation.    The home country's tax system has

been ignored either because the appropriate data is unavailable or, on theoret-

ical grounds, it is deemed to be irrelevant to FDI.

     This paper investigates the impact of both the U.S. and home country tax-

ation on FM in the U.S.   It does this by first   extending and updating the

standard model of aggregate FM in the U.S., and then disaggregating      FIJI by the


country of the investing firm so as to facilitate the study of home country in—

fluences, including taxation.

     The results of this new empirical approach are generally supportive     of a

negative impact of U.S. effective rates of taxation on total FM and new trans-

fers of funds, but not on retained earnings.    The disaggregated analysis does

not, though, provide much support for several propositions    about the impact an

FIJI in the U.S. of foreign countries! tax rates and systems of taxing    foreign—

source income.

     The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.     Section 2 reviews the

existing empirical literature, and Section 3 discusses some of the     important

issues regarding data on FM in the U.S.    The next two sections present the

results of the data analyses——in Section 4 for aggregate FDI and In      Section 5

separately for each of seven major investing countries.      Section 6 concludes.
2.   Review of the Existing Empirical Literature

     It is generally accepted that foreign direct investment is primarily an

issue of industrial organization.   Dunning (1985, p.    6—7) has argued that FUt

by firms of country A in country B is more likely if A's firms (i) possess

ownership—specific advantages relative to B's firms in sourcing markets,

(ii) find it profitable to use these advantages themselves rather than lease

them to B's firms, and (iii) find it profitable to utilize their omership

specific advantages in B rather than A.      A large body of empirical literature

has been addressed to testing this theory of international production, usually

referred to as the "eclectic" theory.     Much of this research has been cross—

sectional, relating the extent of foreign investment in a given sector to

characteristics of that sector that represent ownership—specific and location—

specific comparative advantages.    Several examples of this type of analysis are

contained is Dunning (198-5).

     Studies of the effects of taxation on FM have generally taken the per-

spective that whatever its benefits to firms are, they must be balanced against

the tax consequences of carrying out FifE.    The tax systems of both the firm's

home country and potential host countries can affect the incentives concerning

FDI as well as how to finance a given pattern of Ff1.     Theoretical treatments

of these questions are presented in Alworth (1988) and Gersovitz (1987).      The

limited empirical literature on the impact of taxes on multinationals' behavior

is summarized in Caves (1982).

     Empirical study focusing on the effect of taxation on the time series of

FDI in the U.S. was pioneered by Hartman (1984).      Using annual data from 1965

to 1979 he estimated the response of FDI, separately for investment financed by

retained earnings and transfers from abroad, to three variables:      the after—tax

rate of return realized by foreign investors in the U.S., the overall after—tax
                                       —3—



rate of return on capital in the U.S., and the tax rate on U.S. capital owned

by foreigners relative to the tax rate on U.S. capital owned by U.S. investors.

The first two terms are meant to proxy for the prospective return to new !DI,

the first term being more appropriate for firms considering expansion of cur-

rent operations and the second nore applicable to the acquisition of existing

assets which are not expected to earn extraordinary returns based on production

of differentiated products or possession of superior technology.    The relative

tax term is designed to capture the possibility that tax changes which apply

only to U.S. investors will, by affecting the valuation of assets, alter the

foreign investor's cost and therefore the return to acquiring the asset.1

     Hartman does not attempt to measure either an effective withholding tax

rate or the foreign income tax rate applied to the aggregate of foreign direct      -




investment.   He defends their absence by noting the likelihood that the average

values of these tax rates are relatively constant over time.   Furthermore, no

attempt is made to measure the alternative rate of return available abroad to

foreign investors.

     Hartman's regression results reveal a positive association of both after—

tax rate of return variables with the ratio to U.S. GNP of Ff1 financed by re-

tained earnings, and a negative association of the FDI—CNP ratio with the rela-

tive tax rate on foreigners compared to domestic residents.    The model does not

explain transfers from abroad as well as retained earnings, although coeffi-

cients of all three variables have the expected sign and are significantly

different from zero.   Hartman concludes from this research that the effect of




1Hartman argues that the variable measuring the rate of return to domestic
 capital, because it is based on replacement costs, will not capture these val-
 uation effects.
                                        —4—



taxes on FIJI, both that implied by reinvestment of earnings and that accom-

plished by explicit transfer of funds, is quite strong.

     Boskin and Cale (1986) re—estimate Hartman's equation using the updated

tax rate and rate of return series from Feldstein and Jun (1986).     Although the

estthated elastictties of FIJI to the rates of return are somewhat lower, none

of the point estimates changes by more than one standard devtation.     They also

extend the sample forward to 1984, and in some cases backward to 956, and ex-

periment with a variety of alternative explanatory variables and functional

forms.    They conclude that although the results are somewhat sensitive to sam-

ple period and specification, the qualitative conclusions of Hartman are fairly

robust.

     Young (1988) uses revised data on investment, GNP and rates of return

earned by foreigners to estimate similar equations.    These changes increase the

estimated elastIcities with respect to the rate of return realized by foreign-

ers and the relative rate of return.    However, the equations for new transferR

of funds estimated using the years 1956—84 yIeld very poor results, suggesting

to Young that the stmple Hartman model is inadequate for studying foreign di-

rect investment through new funds when applied to the expanded sample period.

Relaxing Hartman's assumption of a unitary income elasticity and including the

lagged dependent variable as a right—hand side variable does not substantially

alter the conclusions for retained earnings (although the estimated responsive-

ness is significantly lower), but the tax responsiveness of transfer of new

funds still is not supported.

     Newlon (1987) reexamines the results of Hartman as well as Boskin and

Gale.. During his attempt at replication, he discovered that the series measur-

ing the rate of return on foreign direct investment, used in all earlier

papers, had been miscalculated from the original Bureau of Economic Analysis
data for the years 1965 to 1973.    Using the corrected series the equation ex-

plaining retained earnings does not fit as well, although the equation explain-

ing transfers fits better.   tn explaining retained earnings, the estimated co-

efficients on the return to FDI and the tax ratio are slightly larger in abso-

lute value and remain statistically significant, although the estimated coef-

ficient on the net return in the U.S. is lower and is no longer statistically

significant.   For transfers of funds, the estimated coefficient on the return

to FDI is much larger and becomes significant, although the estimated coeffi-

cient on the net return in the U.S. becomes smaller and insignificant. When the

sample period is extended to range from 1956 to 1984, Newlon's results also

differ from those of Hartman and those of Soskin and Gale.    tn particular, the

equation explaining transfer of funds fits poorly, and no estimated coefficient

is significant.2

     tt is notable that none of these studies has deviated very far from the

approach taken in Hartman's 1984 paper.   Although Young (1988) refers to

Feldstein's (1982) dictum that, in the absence of a perfectly specified

model, many alternative models should be investigated, the empirical research

has been extremely one—tracked.    This is a sufficient reason to explore alter-

native methodologies.   Furthermore, there are several problems with the stan-

dard approach which bear further study.

     tn the previous literature, the disincentive to investment caused by the

tax system is implicitly measured by an average tax rate, computed as total




2Newlon also estimates variants of Hartman's original model with several addi-
 tional variables, including a quadratic time trend, dummy variables for the
 years when data revisions were made, and with a definition of the return to
 direct investment that includes the fees and royalties that accrue to the
 parent from its foreign subsidiary.   Most of these changes do not alter the
 qualitative results reported earlier.
                                         —6—




taxes paid divided by a measure of profits.        However, the incentive to under-

take new investment depends on the effective marginal tax rate which, as       is

well know-n, can deviate substantially from an average tax rate concept.

        None of the existing studies attempts to estimate the effect of the home

country's tax system on FM in the U.S.         Of course, collecting the appropriate

data is difficult and perhaps, as Hartman argued, these tax rates have not

in fact varied much.     The observed stability, though, applies to statutory tax

rates and not necessarily to the mare appropriate effective marginal, tax rates.

There is also a theoretical reason to focus attention on the host country tax

rate.     Hartman (1985) has argued that only the host country's tax system mat-

ters for investment coming from subsidiaries' earnings, even when the home

country taxes its residents on the basis of worldwide income.       This is because

the home country's tax equally reduces the parent's return to art investment

and the opportunity cost of making an investment (remitting a dividend to the

parent).3     Thus, for any subsidiary whose desired investment exceeds earnings,

the tax due upon repatriation of earnings does matter.       This situation would

tikely occur for newly formed subsidiaries.       In any event, it is worthwhile to

investigate empirically the impact of both the home country's rate of taxation

and its system of taxing foreign—source income.

        The interpretation of the estimated coefficient on the rate of return

to FM variable is also problematic, as stressed by Newlon.        This rate of re-

turn is defined as the after—tax income from direct investment divided by the

stock of direct investment.     When the home country has a foreign tax credit

with deferral, it is often optimal for the subsidiary to finance investment by

first using retained earnings, and only when these earnings are exhausted to


31f, however, the home country's tax system is expected to change, then there
 is an incentive to time repatriations appropriately.
use funds transferred from the parent firm.    This hierarchy of financing th—

plies that whenever a subsidiary's investment exceeds its retained earnings,

its retained earnings will exactly equal its income.    Thus for these firms we

tould expect a direct association between the calculated rate of return (in

which after—tax income is the numerator) on FM and retained earnings, regard-

less of whether the average rate of return in fact influences decisions con-

cerning new FDt.     As Newlon notes, if subsidiaries were following a fixed div-

idend payout rule (e.g., it pays out a fixed fraction of income), a direct as-

sociation between income and retained earnings would also be observed.     This

argument may also apply to subsidiaries of firms residing in countries that

employ territorial systems of taxation, thus rendering problematic any ob-

served empirical association between FM out of retained earnings and real-

ized rate of return.


3.     Data tssues


3.1.    Definition of Ff1

       Ff1, as measured by the 8ureau of Economic Analysis (henceforth 8EA),

consists of earnings retained by subsidiaries and branches of foreign parents

and transfers of funds from the foreign parents to the 11.5. firms, including

both debt and equity transfers.     Thus Ff1 does not correspond directly to any

measure of real investment, as it excludes investment financed by funds raised

locally (or in third countries) by the U.S. firm and includes purchases of

existing assets by foreigners.     It is more accurately thought of as a measure

of financial flows rather than of real investment.     Unfortunately, no data

exists on real investment made by foreign branches and subsidiaries.     Note

also that the data does not distinguish between branches and subsidiaries,

even though in general the tax treatment by the home country of the two forms
                                         —8—


of organization is different.     Finally, only in this decade has the data on

transfers of funds been disaggregated into debt and equity transfers,

rendering multivariate analysis impossible at this time.


3.2.    Drift from Benchmark Years

       The data on FM in the U.S. is based on benchmark surveys conducted by

BEA in 1959,   1974, and 1980.   For nonbenchmark years, estimates for all series

except ecjuity and intercompany account inflows were constructed by extrapolat-

ing the benchmark data based on sample data from quarterly surveys.     The 1959

benchmark data were extrapolated backward to construct estimates for 1950 to

1958 and were extrapolated forward to construct estimates for 1960 to 1973.

The 1974 benchmark data were used to derive estimates for 1974 to 1979, and

the 1980 benchmark data were used for estimates of 1980 and thereafter.     Re-

ported equity and intercompany account flows are taken directly from the

quarterly sample with extrapolation, due to the unreliable relationship be—

tweett the reported attd uttreported data.

       Note that, except for 1959, the benchmark data is not used to revise the

data based on the quarterly survey for earlier years.     This procedure gives

rise to the suspicion that data for nonbencSark years misestimates true FifE.

This suspicion has been confirmed for 1974, because the SEA has compared es-

timates based on the 1974 benchmark survey with estimates based on an extra-

polation from the 1959 benchmark.     For equity and intercompany account flows,

the extrapolated total is $2.50 billion compared to S3.70 billion from the

1974 benchmark, an underestimate of more than one third.     In contrast, for re-

invested earnings the extrapolated figure is $1.13 billion, actually higher

than the benchmark figure of $1.07 billion.    The discrepancy between the two

estimates varies widely by country and by industry, however.
                                           —9—




     Other important    changes in concept and definition were introduced with

the 1974 benchmark survey.     The minimum ownership criterion in the definition

of FM was decreased from 25 to     10   percent, a change which in 1974 accounted
for $1.2 billion of the $25.1 billion total FM position in the U.S.          Also in

1974 began major changes in the treatment of unrealized capital gains and

losses, the classification of incorporated insurance affiliates, and the coy—

rage of reverse equity ownership (U.S. affiliates' equity ownership in their

foreign parents).     Finally, starting in 1974 FM was classified by the country

of foreign parent — the first foreign person in the ownership chain of the

U.S. affiliate.     Before 1974, estimates for some affiliates were classified by

the "ultimate beneficial owner," which is the person in the ownership chain,

beginning with the foreign parent, that is not owned more than 50 percent by

another person.     This change in classification apparently affected several

large affiliates so that the geographical distribution of the estimates was

significantly affected.

     Some of the earlier studies of FM ignored these data definition issues,

while others included a dummy variable to differentiate pre— and post— bench-

mark periods.     Rowever, none of the studies directly addressed the apparent

problem that the further away from a benchmark year, the greater the survey—

based numbers misreport actual FM.        To account for this tendency, in much of

what follows I utilize a dummy variable whose value is the difference between

the data year and the benchmark year from which the reported data is esti-

mated.   Thus this variable has a value of zero in the benchmark years 1959,

1974, and 1980 and a positive value in all other years since 1960 (when the

benchmark data is extrapolated forward).         It takes on a maximum value of 14 in

1973, when the benchmark data is extrapolated 14 years forward.         This proce-

dure allows for a constant amount of drift between benchmarks of the reported
                                                —10—



FDI data.      In addition, I consider a duy variable for the period beginning

in 1974 to account for the one—time changes in concepts, definittons, and

classification of FM by country that occurred in that year.


4.    Total reign Direct Investment in the U.S.


4.1   Trends

      Figure    1   shows the behavior of FDI in the U.S., as a ratio to U.S. gross

national product (ON?), for the period 1953 to 1987.             It also breaks down this

ratio into two components —         retained   earnings and new transfers of funds, both

as a ratio to U.S. GNP.

      As Figure      1   shows, the ratio of FDI to GN? shows no clear trend until

approximately 1972, when it began to grow quickly.            By 1974, FM amounted to

0.32% of GNP, or more than four times as high as the average percentage in

the two decades from 1953 to 1972.             A second surge of FDI began in 1978,

pushing the ratio to a record O.83Z in 1981 and an average of O.48Z from 1992

to 1984, or five times higher than the 1953—1972 average and two and a half

times the 1977 ratio.          In 1987 FDI in the U.S. totalled nearly 942.0 billion,

or 0.94% of the GN? of $4.49 trillion.            oth the total FD1 and ratio to GNP in

1987 were all—time highs.

      One striking aspect of FDI is the decline within the last decade in the

relative importance of retained earnings compared to new transfers of funds.

Through 1980 retained earnings represented a large, stable component of total

Fill, comprising 37.0% of the total.            In 1977, the contribution of retained

earnings relative to new transfers began to fall and by 1981 it began to

decline in absolute terms as well.             In the period 1981—7, retained earnings

comprised only 1.4% of total VOl.
                                            —1 1—




         Is the rapid growth of FDI in the U.S. since 1972 part of a worldwide

 trend, or does it instead represent a relative shift of FM to the U.S. from

 other locations?     Figures 2 and 3 help to answer that question.          Figure 2

 shows that outward FM from seven major investing nations to countries other

 than the U.S. was flat until 1969, when a large boom lasting until 1973

 occurred, followed by relative stability and another surge from 1978 through

 1981.      According to Figure 3, FDI in the U.S.       as a fraction of the seven

 countries! worldwide FM reached 40.5% in 1969, fell sharply until 1971, and

 then rose steadily until an all—time high of 43.7% was reached in 1981.                It


 has remained at a high level since then.           Apparently the strong growth of FM

 in the U.S. starting in 1972 does indeed represent an increase in the relative

 strength of the U.S. as a location of Fill.


4.2.    Analysis


4.2.1     Replication of Earlier Findings

        As is ritual in this literature,    I begin the analysis by trying to re-

 produce the aggregate time series results of a predecessor in the literature,

 in this case Mewlon (1987).     In a break from precedent,         I am able to reproduce

 his main results to three significant digits.          These results are reported in

 the first column of Tables      and 2.     As discussed in Section 2, they suggest a

 strong positive association between the after—tax return on FM (denoted

 r(1—t)) and FDI financed by retained earnings, but not for new transfers of

 of funds.    The relative tax rate (denoted Sf-i)       variable   and the overall




 4rhe seven countries, whose direct investment in the U.S. will be analyzed in
  more detail below, are Canada, France, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, the
  United Kingdom, and West Germany.
                                          —12—


rate of return [denoted r1(t—t)J have no significant effect on either corn—

ponent of FIJI.5

     Because of my uneasiness about the economic implications of a statistical

association between the components of FDI and the measured average after—tax

rate of return to capital, I next separate out as explanatory variables the

average pre—tax rate of return earned by foreigners (r), the average pre—tax

rate of return earned on all capital in the U.S. (r1), and the two average

tax rate terms     (t for the tax rate on foreigners, t1 for the total tax rate

including taxes paid by U.S. residents at the personal level).6          The results

are reported in the second column of Tables      1   and 2.   While the pre—tax return

to Ff1 retains a positive association with the ratio of retained earnings to

CNP, neither tax term is significantly different than zero.         However, this is

not the case for transfers of funds.     In this case the average tax rate faced

by foreigners does have a -statistically significant negative coefficient and,

as suggested by the theory, the total tax rate faced by a 13.5. investor has a

positive cofficient.


5There are several reasons for the striking differences between Hartman's re-
 sults and the results reported in the first column of Tables I and 2. First,
 all the data has been corrected and updated.   That procedure itself renders
 the coefficient on r1(1—t) in the retained earnings equation to be insignifi-
 cantly different from zero. Second, Hartan deals with the presence of a neg-
 ative retained earnings value by adding a positive constant to the numerator
 of the dependent variable. Because the denominator (CNP) is growing with
 time, this is tantamount to adding a gradually declining value.   Following
 Newlon, I add a constant to the left—hand side variable before taking the
 logarithm.  This reduces the absolute value of most coefficients and renders
 r1(1—t) insignificant in the transfers equation. Finally, the regressions of
 Tables 1 and 2 extend the sample period back from 1965 to 1956 and forward
 from 1979 to 1984.  The latter eliminates the significance of r(1—t) in the
 transfer equation and the combination of the two renders (1—tDI (1—t)
 insignificant in both equations.

6As Hartman (1984) notes, no separate estimate of the pre—tax rate of return
 to FDI is available.  The value used for r is obtained by assuming the average
 rate of corporate and property tax faced by foreigners in the U.S. (t) is the
 same as that faced by U.S. residents, and solving for r using the known value
 of r(1—t).
                                         —13—


     Note that these results concerning the tax rate variables reverse the

conclusions of Hartman (1984), who concluded that the behavior of retained

earnings was consistent with expectations, but that the estiniated response of

transfers of new funds did not conform to expectations.     I attribute his first

finding to the inevitable relationship between retained earnings and a measure

of rate of return whose numerator is highly correlated with retained earnings.

     I next replace the two measures of average tax rate by a measure of the

marginal effective corporate tax rate on fixed investnient (r) in the U.S.,

as calculated by Auerbach and Hines (1988).     This is arguably a better measure

of the expected tax burden on a prospective new investnient.    These results,

shown in column 3 of Tables   1   and 2, suggest that the U.S. marginal tax rate

has had a significant effect on transfer of funds, but not on retained earn-

ings.7   The coefficient on the tax rate corresponds to a tax elasticity of

transfers of —1.40, when evaluated at the average transfers to GNP racio over

the period.8

     None of the previous work reports the results of equations explaining to-

tal FDI in the U.S., but considers only its component parts (retained earnings

and transfer of funds).   Table 3 reports the results of repeating the regres-

sions of Tables 1 and 2 for total FDI.     These results strongly support the

negative association of total FDI with U.S. taxation.     The elasticity of re-

sponse is —1.16, slightly less than that estimated for transfers alone.



7The conclusion does not depend on the log—linear specification.     A linear
 version of these regressions yields the same conclusion.

8The tax elasticity is equal to    (1±), where    is the estimated tax rate
 coefficient, 7 is the average ratioyof transfers to U.S. GNP, and k is the
 constant added to this ratio before taking the logarithm.
                                       —14—


     In Column 4 of Tables 1, 2, and 3,   I preaent the reaulta of the aimpleat

poaaible formulation of this model, with only the effective marginal tax rate

on new investment included as an explanatory variable.     The principal reason

for eliminating the rate of return variables is to investigate whether the

estimated negative tax effect may be related to the definitional relationship

between the dependent variable and these measures.     The results do not indi-

cate this problem is a real one.    The tax variable still has no significant

association with retained earnings, but does have a statistically significant

negative association with transfers and total FDI.


4.2.2.   New Specifications

     In this section the robustness of the finding that both new transfers of

funds and total FDI, but not retained earnings, have a significant negative

association with the effective rate of U.S. capital income taxation is tested

against the kinds of specification changes suggested earlier.     These changes

are discussed below.

     Linear Specification.    The simple association between either total FDI

or transfers and the effective tax rate survives the replacement of the log-

arithmic specification with a linear one.     For both transfers and total FDI,

the estimated tax rate coefficient implies an elasticity similar to what is ob-

tained in the logarithmic specification; in both cases the estimated tax coef-

ficient is insignificantly different from zero in explaining retained

earnings.

     Although there is no theoretical reason for preferring one specification

to the other, because of the presence of negative dependent variables the log—

arithmic specification necessitates the addition to the unlogged value of an

arbitrary constant.    This procedure clouds the comparison of estimated
                                        —15—




coefficients    across equations, which becomes important below when home country

disaggregation is done.

     Including Other Explanatory Variables.     The vector of explanatory var—

iables is expanded to consider potential non—tax influences on     foreign   direct

investment.     In particular I include the following:9

     RGDP:     the ratio of total gross domestic product (GDP) of the seven major

investing countries to U.S. GDP, where the foreign GDPs are valued at the

purchasing power parity exchange rates calculated by Summers and Heston (1988).

This variable is meant to capture the effect of the changing relative size of

the principal investing countries compared to the U.S.

     USUNEMP:    the unemployment rate of prime—age males in the U.S.    This var-

iable is meant to capture poendal business cycle effects on FDI.

     REXC:     the real exchange rate of the U.S. dollar against a GDP weighted

average of the seven major investing counries currencies.        Dunning (1985)

and Pugel (1985) have suggested that a low dollar reduces comparative pro-

duction costs in the U.S., thus providing an incentive to FDI.

     DRIFT:     a dummy variable equal to the number of years elapsed since the

previous benchmark survey of FDI conducted by BEA.'°

     Lagged Tax Rate Terms.     Because of the time it takes to implement an in-

vestment decision, there may be a lag between changes in the effective tax

rate and the impact on FDI.     To allow for this possibility, not only the

concurrent tax rate bu also the ax rate lagged one year and two years are



  See the data appendix for the definftion and source of all the variables used
  in the analyses.


'0Other poenial influences on FDI, for which I wag unable o obtain reason-
  able indices, include the exen of current and expected U.S. tariff and
  non—tariff barriers o imports, and the degree of quantitative restrictions,
  such as exchange controls, on outward foreign direct investment.
                                        —16—


included as explanatory variableeit      Thie procedure limits the length of   t'ie


tag but imposes no structure on the time pattern of the tagged response of

investment.

        The results of estimating this specification are presented in the first

column of Table 4.     Of the non—tax explanatory variables, the estimated coef-

ficients on USUNEMP, RGDP, and DRIFT are not significantly different than

zero.     The estimated coefficient on the real rate of exchange variable, REXC,

is negative and significant, suggesting that a low dollar may in fact have

stimulated FDI in the U.S)2      Though not significant, the DRIFT parameter has

the expected negative sign, suggesting that FDI may be increasingly underesti-

mated as the time elapsed since the previous benchmark survey increases.

        Of the tax rate variables, both the current value and the value lagged

two years have a significant negative coefficient.     There is substantial multi—

collinearity among the three tax variables, however.     The t—statistic on the

estimated sum of —13.3 of the three tax coefficients is —3.67, indicating that

it is different than zero at a 95% level of confidence.     The tax rate etastic—

ity is —1.57 when evaluated at mean values for the entire period.

        That this result is not robust to all reasonable specification changes is

suggested by the results shown in the second column of Table 4.     When a

weighted average of the seven investing countries' unemployment rate is

included (denoted FUMEMP), it is highly positively related to FDI and the tax




110f course this argument also applies to the other influences on FDI.  One
  promising direction for future work is the investigation of more general lag
  structures.


121t has been argued that the strong dollar of the early 1980's was in part
  caused by tax incentives given to investment at that time.   This suggests
  that an instrumental—variables estimation technique may be appropriate.
                                        —17—


coefficients now sum to a positive rather than a negative number.13          Thus a

competing alternative explanation for the time series of FM is that          it has

                                                                                  14
been propeled by deteriorating economic conditions in the home countries.

tn order to focus on the possible tax influences on FM, the analyses that

follow do not tnclude the foreign unemployment rate variable.

       The third and fourth columns of Table 4 display the results of disaggre—

gating FM into retained earnings (RE) and transfers of funds (TR).           The con-

clusion drawn from Tables 1 and 2 still holds——that transfers are associated

with taxes negatively, but for retained earnings no negative association is

apparent.'5    Finally, in the equation shown in the fifth column of Table 4 the

dependent variable is FM from manufacturing for four countries——Canada, Japan,

the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom.       The negative association with     U.S.

effective tax rates is still evident, although the estimated elasticity of

response is about three—fifths of what it was for total P1)1.


5.     Foreign Direct Investment in the U.S. By Investing Country


5.1.    Motivation and Theory of Cross—Country Comparisons

       Most countries choose one of two basic options for taxing the income

earned abroad by its domestic residents.       Under a residence—based (or



 3Secause of data availability, the sample period for this regression begins
   in 1969 rather than 1960. This is not, however, the source of the differ-
   ence in results, because a version of the regression without FUNEMP that be-
   gins in 1969 also shows a significant negative tax effect.

 4Another variable whose inclusion eliminates the tax effect is the dummy
   variable for the post—1974 era, justified above because the SEA definition
   of Ff1 was changed in 1974. Apparently much of the estimated tax effect re-
   flects the simple fact that the post—1974 era is characterized by high Ff1
   and low taxes, relative to the pre—1974 era.

 151n fact, the sum of the tax coefficients has a positive sign that is signif-
   icantly different from zero.
                                        —18—


"worldwide') system, the capitsl—exporting country taxes its residents! incone

wherever it   is earned.   To avoid double taxation these countries as a rule

allow their residents (individuals and corporstions) to credit foreign taxea

paid against the domestic tax owed on the foreign income.     The credit is un—

ited to the tax due under the home country's tax rules.     kny home country tax

lisbility in excess of the tax paid to foreign governments, sometimes termed

the "repatriation tsx," is generally deferred until di:idends are remitted to

the parent company.    Under a source—based (also known as a "territorial" or

"exemption") system, foreign—source income is exempt from home country taxa-

tion.    Furthermore, no credit is given for tsxes paid to foreign governments.

Which principle applies for a given country may depend on the form the invest-

ment income takes (e.g., dividend, interest, capital gains), the    location of

the investment (e.g., treaty vs. non—treaty countries), and the extent of

ownership and control exercised by the domestic owner.

        The impact of a host country's tax structure on inward foreign investment

depends on the tax system of the capital—exporting country.     For example, when

the country of capital export has an exemption tax system, the effective

corporste—level rate of tax on FIJI   is equal to the tax rate imposed by the

host country.     Therefore differences among host country effective tax rates

would he expected to have an impact on the location decision of investment

from exemption countries.     The impact of differences in host countries' tax

structures would be expected to have less influence on foreign investment from

countries which have worldwide tax systems with a foreign tax credit.      In a

simple case without deferral, unless the host country's tax rate is higher

than the home country's tax rate, the effective tax rate on FIJI becomes the

home country's, regardless of the tax system of the host country.      The effec-

tive tax rate is more complicated when there is deferral, multi—country
                                     —19—


investment, and differing definitions of taxable income in different countries.

Nevertheless, for finns based in foreign tax credit countries, the impact of

the host country's tax system is filtered through the tax system of the home

country, and may be substantially mitigated.

     Of the major countries that make FM in the U.S., some operate exemption

systems while others operate a worldwide system with foreign tax credit.      This

fortuitous divergence of approach invites an investigation of whether the sys-

tem of taxing foreign—source income is a factor in the responsiveness of FD

to host and home country taxation.   In what follows I examine the time series

of }tI in the U.S. emanating from seven countries, and investigate whether

these time series are consistent with several propositions about the effect on

FDI of tax rates and systems of taxing foreign—source income.


5.2. Trends

     Figures 4A—IOA and 48—108 present the time series of FDI for each of

seven major investing countries, in 4A—IOA as a ratio of U.S. GNP and in

48—108 as a ratio of total FDI in the U.S. by these seven countries.   The

figures generally show rapid growth in FM beginning in the early 1970's.

They also show the rise in the relative prominence of Japan, whose Ff1 was

negligible in the 1960's but by 1985 represented nearly 20% of total FDI in

the U.S., and the relative decline of FDI from Canada, which in the 1960's

represented about 30% of FM in the U.S. but by the 1980's comprised signifi-

cantly less than 10% of total FM.    The largest investors for most of this

period have been Canada, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, challenged in

the 1980's by Japan.

     Another message that the figures convey is that FDI, while generally

(i.e., except for Canada and Italy) growing as a fraction of U.S. GNP since
                                           —20—


the early 1970's, has followed somewhat different paths in the seven coun-

tries.    Therefore no single story is likely to be sufficient to explain the

behavior of PDI from each of these countries.


5.3.     knalysis

       As discussed in Section 5.1, analysis of the FM data disaggregated by

the residence of the investing firms can shed further light on the impact of

the host and home country's tax systems on the magnitude and location of for-

eign direct investment.       Two empirical strategies are followed.        In the first,

separate FDI equations similar to those of Table 4 are estimated for each of

the seven major investing countries.        The differences in responsiveness in

taxation are then related to the investing country's system of taxing foreign

income.    In particular, the response of countries with exemption systems is

compared to countries with worldwide tax systems and a foreign tax credit.             tn


the second approach, country—specific FDI equations are estimated utilizing

time series data on the statutory corporate tax rates and the effective tax

rates on new investment in the home country.        These results are then examined

for insights into several propositions relating to the effect of taxes on FDI.

       Tables   5,   6, and 7 present the first set of results for country—specific
                                                                       16
FM regressions.         Ordinary least—squares is used in each case.        Table 5 con-

tains the equations for retained earnings, Table 6 contains equations explain-

ing transfer of funds, and Table 7 is concerned with total FDI, each expressed

as a ratio to U.S. GN?.       The explanatory variables used are identical to those

used in the equations of Table 4, except that the overall GD? ratio and over-

all real exchange rate are replaced by country—specific variables.



    also experimented with the method of seemingly unrelated regressions to
  estimate the seven equations as a system. Secause the results were very
  similar to those obtained using OLS, they are not reported here.
                                           —21—



        The countries are grouped by their system of taxing income from foreign

direct investment in the U.S.      In the first group are countries that effec-

tively exempt such income from domestic taxation —— Canada, France, the

etherlands, and West Germany.'7       For these countries' firms it is the U.S. tax

rate, unfiltered by home country tax rules, that affects the attractiveness of

FM in the U.S. compared to alternative investment locations and compared to

no investment at all.

        The second group of countries ——    Italy,   Japan, and the United Kingdom ——

operate a foreign tax credit system with deferral for subsidiaries.         U.S.    tax

is due on the income as earned.     When income is repatriated to the home coun-

try, the grossed—up earnings are subject to home country taxation, but taxes

paid to the U.S. government are credited against tax liability, as long as

this liability does not exceed the home country liability on this income.

        What the effective total tax rate on investment is in this situation has

been the subject of some controversy.       In the absence of deferral (and assuming

that both home and host country use the same definition of income), the home

country tax rate applies unless the host country tax rate exceeds the home

country rate, in which case the host country rate applies.         With deferral,

Hartman (1985) has argued that the host country tax rate is the effective tax

rate on investments which are financed by retained earnings, and the above

reasoning applies to investments financed by new transfers of funds.

        This brief look at received wisdom suggests the following propositions:

        1.   FM from exemption countries should be at least as sensitive to U.S.

tax rates as FM from foreign tax credit countries.


17
     By statute, Canada and West Germany operate foreign tax credit systems.   How-
     ever, both countries exempt from domestic taxation business—related income
     earned within the borders of its treaty partners, including the U.S.
      2.   The greater sensitivity of FDI from exemption countries for U.S. tax

rates should be most apparent in the behavior of new transfers of funds.

     The results shown in Table   6   offer   strong corroboration for the negative

association of U.S.   tax rates and FDI financed by transfers of funds.      The

summed tax coefficient is negative for all seven countries, and significantly

different from zero in four of these cases.        The estimated tax effect on re-

tained earnings, shown in Table 5, range from significant positive to signifi-

cant negative, with no clear trend emerging.        For total FDI (shown in Table 7),

the tax effect is significantly negative for four of seven countries.        The tax

effect in these four countries sum to more than the tax effect shown in the

first column of Table 4.

     The regression analyses are not strongly supportive of propositions       I    and

2.   The four countries which have a significant tax effect on transfers and

total FDI are evenly divided between exemption countries (Netherlands and West

Germany) and foreign tax credit countries (Japan and the United Kingdom).           The

association of tax rates with retained earnings also has no obvious pattern

according to the tax system.

     Table 8 displays the results of repeating the regressions explaining

total FDI for manufacturing investment only.        This data is fully available for

only four of the seven countries——Canada, Japan, the Netherlands, and the

United Kingdom.   The summed tax effect for Japan and United Kingdom remains

negative and significantly different from zero.        The magnitude of the esti-

mated effect shrinks substantially in the case of Japan, reducing the elas-

ticity from —2.90 to —2.25.    The estimated elasticity for the United Kingdom

stays about the same as for total FDI.        For Canada and the Netherlands, the

summed tax effect is, as for total FDI, not significantly different from zero.
                                          —23—


3.4.       The Effect of Rome Country Taxation on FM in the U.S.

       The rate of home country taxation may influence FDt in the U.S. through

at least two different avenues.       First, it affects the after—tax return to

investment in the home country, which is presumably an alternative to FDI.

For this reason we would expect the home country tax rate to be positively

associated with Ff1 in the U.S.

       A    second avenue of influence applies only to home countries that operate

a foreign tax credit system, and not countries wich operate an exemption sys-

tem.       Ignoring deferral and assuming that the multinational operates only in

at most the home country and the U.S. ,     the effective tax rate on income from

FM is the maximum of the U.S. rate and the home country rate.13        When the

home country rate exceeds the U.S. rate, it is the effective tax rate on both

home country investment and FDt, and so its level does not affect the relative

after—tax returns of the alternative investments, although it does depress the

return of all investment alternatives.       In a more general situation, when

there is deferral and rnulticountry operation, the home country tax rate zill

increase the effective tax rate on FT)t, though by less than it increases the

tax rate on investment in the hone country.       Recall, however, Hartman's demon-

stration that, for investment out of retained earnings, only the host country's

tax rate is relevant.



'8The home country effective tax rates technically apply to domestically—
  located investment.  If the tax law discriminates investment by location (as
  the U.S. tax law does), then the series on effective tax rates may not ac-
  curately capture the tax law's impact on foreign—source income.   For example,
  French and Japanese corporations engaged in foreign investment are entitled
  to deduct from taxable income certain special reserves.   Other details of
  the home country's tax system may also be important, particularly the degree
  of corporate and personal tax integration. For example, although by treaty
  dividends from U.S. subsidiaries to West German parent corporations are
  untaxed by the West German government, if and when exempt foreign—source in-
  come is distributed to shareholders by the parent, it is taxed differently
  than dividends from earnings on domestic—source income.
                                           —24—


        This review of the effects of home country taxstion on 101 suggests the

following propositions:

        3.     101 from exemption countries should be positively relsted to the rate

of home country taxstion.

        4.     101 finsnced by new trsnsfers of funds from foreign tsx credit coun-

tries should hsve s less clesrly positive, or even negstive, relstionship to

home country taxstion.

        5.     Retsined esrnings from foreign tsx credit countries should be

unsffected by, or positively relsted to, home country tsxstion.

        Ststutory tax rstes hsve sn influence on multinstionsls' decisions, in-

dependent of their impsct opersting through the effective tsx rstes on invest-

ment.        A multinstionsl hss sn incentive to do its borrowing through firms op—

ersting in s country with relstively high ststutory rstes, SO       ss   to msximize

the tax benefits of the interest deductions.        This would imply a negative re-

lationship between the volume of transfers and the difference between the U.S.

statutory rate and the home country statutory rate.        A multinational also has

an incentive to set transfer prices so as to show lower income in countries

with relatively high statutory rates.        Holding other policies constant, this

also implies a negative relationship between reported retained earnings and

the difference between the U.S. statutory rate and the home statutory rate.

These effects should be stronger for exemption countries compared to foreign

tax credit countries.       They should also depend only on current statutory tax

rates, with no lagged effect as in the case of investment incentives.          The

following proposition summarizes these incentives:

        5.    Both retained earnings and transfers of funds should be negatively

related to the current differential between the U.S. statutory corporate rate
                                        —25—


and the home country statutory corporate rate, with the effect stronger far

exemption countries.

     Tables 9,   10, and 11 present the results of adding four variables to each

country—specific regression equation:    (i) the effective corporate—level tax

rate on new investment in the home country, including the current rate and two

lags and (ii) the difference between the U.S. statutory corporate    tax rate and

the home country statutory corporate tax rate.     Note that these tax rate

series are not available for the Netherlands, so that regression results for

only six countries are presented.

     The results do not provide much support for Propositions 3—5.     According

to table II, in no exemption country is the home country's tax rate positively

related to FM.      table 10 reveals that the effect of home country taxation on

transfers is not obviously more negative for foreign tax credit countries com-

posed to exemption countries.     Table 9 does suggest that retained earnings

are, as proposed, not usually affected by home country taxation in foreign tax

credit countries.     Proposition 6 fares slightly better, with a significant co-

efficient of the expected negative sign on the difference in statutory rates

occurring for West Germany and Italy (for transfers of funds and total    Ff31),


and no case of a significant positive sign occurring.     Note also that the

estimated negative effect of U.S. taxation on total FDI for West Germany and

Japan disappears when the home country tax rates are included, although a

negative effect of U.S. taxes on Canadian investment appears when it did not

in the absence of home country tax rates.

     There are several possible explanations for the lack of a clear difference

in the tax responsiveness of FM from exemption and foreign tax credit coun-

tries.   One is that the data is simply not good enough to pick up the    dif-

ferences in behavior that do in fact exist.      In particular, the effective tax
                                        —26—


rate series have well—known problems as an accurate measure of the disincen-

tives to invest.     Alternatively, it may be that the ability of firms from

foreign tax credit countries to defer indefinitely home country taxation and

to engage in sophisticated financial transactions renders insignificant the

effective rate of hone country taxation,       If the latter hypothesis is true,

then the U.S. tax rate is the important source of investment discentives for

all capital—importing countries, regardless of their system of alleviating

international double taxation.


6.     Conclusions

       This researeh was undertaken in order to shed light on the role of both

U.S. and investing country tax systems on foreign direct investment in the

U.S.    Two distinct approaches were attempted.    In the first, the standard

empirical model relating total Ff1 in the U.S. to U.S. taxation was respeci—

fied to (i) eliminate the spurious bias caused by relating retained earnings

to a measure of rate of return that would be behaviorally related to retained

earnings, (ii) use a measure of the marginal effective rate of tax on new in-

vestment, rather than an observed average or statutory tax rate, (iii) hold

constant the influence of non—tax variables on FDI, and (-Lv) take account of

the data collection process which introduces increasing underestimation of Ff1

as the time elapsed from the previous benchmark survey of Ff1 increases.        The

results of this new empirical approach are generally supportive of a negative

impact of U.S. effective rates of taxation on total Ff1 and transfers of funds,

but-not on retained earnings.    There is, however, at least one very successful

alternative explanation of FDI in the U.S.——that it is propelled by stagnation

in the home country, as measured by its unemployment rate of prime—age males——

that precludes the association of U.S. tax rates with Ff1.
                                      —27—




     In the second approach I examined the time series of FDI in the U.S.
disaggregated by the seven major investing countries. This disaggregation
allows a detailed examination of the effect on FDI in the U.S.      of the rates
of home country taxation and the home country's system of taxing foreign
source income (i.e.   exemption versus worldwide taxation with a foreign tax
credit).   The results of these country analyses generally corroborate the ag-
gregate analysis of the effect of U.S. taxes on FDI.      However, they are not
generally supportive of several propositIons about the differential tax sensi-
tivity of FDI from countries that exempt foreign—source income from domestic
taxation compared to countries that tax worldwide income and offer a foreign
tax credit to mitigate double taxation.      The inability to support these
propositions may be due either to the difficulties in accurately measuring
home country effective tax rates or may indicate that, because of deferral
and the availability of sophisticated financial strategies, the home country
tax rate and its system of alleviating international double taxation is not
an important determinant of foreign direct investment.
                                             —28—



                                           Table    1




         Regression Results for FDI Financed by Retained Earnings, 1956—84


Independent
  Variables

r                                                               —0.0068             0.223
                                                                (0.0846)        (0.141)
t                                               0.493
                                               (0.608)
t'                                             —0.494
                                               (0.835)
r                                               0.800            0.788
                                               (0.105)          (0.094)
r1                                             —0.120            0.062
                                               (0.302)          (0.158)
r(1—t)                   0.766
                        (0.094)

r1(1—r)                  0.048
                        (0.193)

1—ti                    —0.154
i-t                     (0.263)

Intercept                2.602                  2.486            2.71            0.780
                        (0.510)                (0.574)          (0.422)         (0.152)

Durbin—Watson            1.82                      2.04          1.92               1.47
  statistic

                         0.734                 0.731            0.731           0.050


Notes:
       1.   Dependent variable is the logarithm of ((1000RE/GNP +          1.23).
       2.   Column 1 corresponds to equation 2 of Table II.2b in Newlon (1987).

       3.   All   independent    variables are in logarithms.

       4.   Standard errors in parentheses.
                                           —29—




                                         Table    2



         Regression Results for FOl Financed by Transfers of Funds, 1956—84


Independent
  Variables

                                                           —0.683    —0.826
                                                           (0.123)   (0.183)

t                                                —2.790
                                                 (0.874)

                                                  1.788
                                                 (1.202)

r                                                 0.167     0.367
                                                 (0.152)   (0.137)

r'                                               —1.112    —1.46
                                                 (0.434)   (0.231)

r(1—t)                         —0.070
                               (0.283)

r1(1—t)                        —0.319
                               (0.582)

1—ti                           —1.011
                               (0.793)

Intercept                      —0.485            —2.429    —2.07      0.195
                               (1.541)           (0.827)   (0.617)   (0.197)

Durbin—Watson statistic         0.34              1.67      1.80      0.68

j2                              0.104             0.794     0.788     0.407



notes:

       1.   Dependent variable is the logarit of ((1000TR/GNP) + 1.676).

       2.   Column 1 corresponds to equation 4 of Table 11.2b in ewlon (1987).

       3.   All   independent variables are in logarite.

       4.   Standard errors in parentheses.
                                            —30—


                                       Table 3

                      Regression Results for Total FDI, 1956—84


Independent
  Variables

t                                                  —1.161    —1.281
                                                   (0.240)   (0.326)

t                                   —5.646
                                    (1.696)

t1                                   4.476
                                    (2.3 32)

r                                    0.641          1.082
                                    (0.294)        (0.266)

r1                                  —1.632         —2.666
                                    (0.843)        (0.449)

r(1—t)                  0.278
                       (0.498)

r1(1—t)                —0.477
                       (1.024)

1—t1                   —2.157
                       (1.396)

Intercept              —1.215       —4.079         —4.18     —0.978
                       (2.712)      (1.603)        (1.198)   (0.367)

Durbin—Watson           0.46         1.67           1.80     0.60
  statistic

P                      0.183        0.772           0.765    0.332


Notes

        1.   Dependent variable is the logarithm of (1000FDI/GNP).

        2.   All independent variables are in logarithms.

        3.   Standard error3 in parentheses.
                                            —31—

                                       Table 4

                          Further Regression Results for FDI

Sample Period            1960—87     1969—87        1960—87    1960—87     1960—87

Dependent
  Variable               FDI/GNP    FDI/GNP         RE/GNP     TR/GNP      FDIMF/GNP

Mean of Dependent
  Variable                2.85       3.91            0.54        2.31       0.61

Independent
  Variables
                         —7.11        8.81           1.40        —8.51       0.660
                         (7.22)     (11.35)         (1.87)       (7.08)     (1.96)

                          4.28        9.47         —0.199         4.48      —0.53
 —1
                         (8.35)      (9.23)         (2.16)       (8.17)     (2.27)
                        —10.25       10.82           0.689     —10.94       —2.27
'—2                                                                         (1.70)
                         (6.25)     (10.87)         (1.61)       (6.11)
RGDP                     —1.36       15.78           0.551       —1.91      —3.37
                         (6.63)     (20.29)         (1.71)       (6.48)     (1.80)
USUNEMP                  10.24     —183.0          —14.95        25.19      13.07
                        (40.32)     (77.92)        (10.41)      (39.42)    (10.94)
FUNEMP                              440.61
                                   (177.41)
REXC                     —6.21       —4.31         —1.49        —4.72       —2.83
                         (3.30)      (3.77)         (0.851)      (3.22)     (0.894)
DRIFT                    —0.036      —0.135        —0.050         0.014      0.0412
                         (0.114)     (0.148)        (0.029)      (0.111)    (0.0309)
Intercept                16.18      —23.70           2.00        14.18       7.77
                         (9.66)     (31.33)         (2.50)       (9.45)     (2.62)

                        —13.08       29.10           1.89      —14.98       —2.14
                         (3.46)     (18.72)         (0.89)       (3.38)     (0.939)

Durbin—Watson
  statistic               1.30        1.29           1.87         1.24       1.39

                          0.677       0.717          0.455        0.696      0.558

Notes:
        1.   FDI is measured in $ millions, and GNP is measured in $ billions, so
             that the dependent variable is 1000 times the actual value of FDI
             divided by GNP.

        2.   Standard errors in parentheses.
                                                                  Tb1. 5
                       Regression Equation.      Expl.ining    Retained earning., 3y      taveiting    Country

                                          Exnptlon' CountrIes                                           Foreign Tax Credit    Coun:rt.s
                                                                               Wt it                                               ri d
Country                    Canada        Frant.          Netherland.          Germany                 Italy        Jpn             Kigd
SpL.                        960—87       962—97               960—87          1962—87                 1962—87      t960—7           96O—7
Pa nod

              of pende,t    0.0547       —0.00561              0.212           0.0U4                  —0.00885      a.0677          ).    60
     Vnt able
Irtdepend ant
 VnibLes
                            O.&92         0.80                —0. t68         —o.o0                    0.053       —0.129           J.
                           (0.555)       (0.133)              (0.829)         (0. 33k)                (0.049)      (0.378)         •:o.:b)
                           —0.324         0.0076              0.94 7          —0. 09                   0.022       —0.239          —J..79
                           (0.635)       (0.42)               (0.913)         (0.35 3)                (0.053)      (O.37)          :J.3:3)

     2
                            0.47         —0.0053              —0.4 52         —0.189                  —0.0013       a. 32           .384
 —                         (0.57)        (0.106)              (0.675)         (0.260)                 (0.040)      (0.334)          D. 3)
RCDF                        3.72          0.162               —36.04           5.35                    0.16         1.764           J.200
                           (3.85)        (0.594)              (25.89)         (2.30)                  (0.374)      (0.778)         (.38)
USUNEMP                    —5.55         —1.28                —1.34           —321                    —0.229       —2.t.8            .34
                           (2.57)        (0.789)              (3.99)          (.74)                   (0.275)      (2.L6)          (.7)
RXC                         0.307        -0.026               —0. 2!3          0.095                  —0.000047     0.OOLO         -0.5)5
                           (0.528)       (0.00)               (0.122)         (0.045)                 (0.000019)   (0.0006)         0.    56)

DRIFT                      -0.0127       —O.00L2              —0.0 17         —0. 00 15               —0.00045     —0.0069          . JO4
                           (0.0076)      (0.0019)             (0.0L2)         (0. 00 44)              (0.00065)    (0.0064)        (0.0043)

Intentept                  -.07           0.124                2.76              .09                   0.0164      —0.517           O.O1
                           (0.96)    -   (0.115)              (1.30)          (0.50)                  (0.0567)     (3.337)

                                          0.13                                                                                     —Q)2
         —L    —2
                            0.846
                           (0.36L)       (0.068)
                                                               0.327
                                                              (0.5 26)
                                                                              —0.398
                                                                              (0. 244)
                                                                                                       0.074
                                                                                                      (0.027)
                                                                                                                   —0.36
                                                                                                                   O92)            ).:)
.Dunbin—W.ti,n              2.08          1.05                  .44            1.87                    .25          ).2             :95
     Statistic
                            0.479         0.759                0.304           0.099                   0.543        0.240           L]90

S.. notes to Tabl.         4.
                                                               TabLe   6



                     Regression tquat1ons Explaining Transfers of Funds, Sy investing Country
                                 "Enenpt ion'   Countries                                  !orei8n Tan CredIt Touot,3e,
                                                                           Sect
Country          -   Canada      Orance          Oct he r I a nds          Cernanv         Italy         linen       01g0un

Sample
Period               1960—97     1962—97            1960—87                1962—97         1962—97       1963—97      :°63—97

'keen of
Dependent             2.227       0.113              3.369                  3,252                         0.263
Variable
                                                                                       :




independent
 Variables
                     —0.557      —0.93)            —0. 108                 —1.93           —0. 2)9       —1.39         . 066
                      1.14)      (0.818)            (1.32)                 (0.9601         (3.265)       )).V)        (2.

                      0.399       0.362              0.377                  2.17            0.126         3.633       —1.69
 —)
                     (1.01)      (3.874)            (1.43)                 (1.32)          (3. 178)      (1.1511      '2.68)

                     -.Ci64      —0.6)3            —)   .099               —2.57            0.0287       —1.'7        —2.79
                     (1.065)     (3.650)            (1.071)                (0.756)         (0.232)       (1.23)           2.19)

902P                 17.7         3.940           —68.8                    —3.72            2.53         —6.90        —0.919
                     (7.94)      (3.65)           141.))                   (6.67)          (2.25)        (2.41)      22.6)
CS1I5JES8P           —4.90
                     (5.28)
                                 —1.35
                                 (4.84)
                                                    11.02
                                                    (6.33)
                                                                           —(.55
                                                                           (5.06)
                                                                                           —0.1)3
                                                                                           (0.9)7)
                                                                                                          5.90
                                                                                                         (6.62)      ).
                                                                                                                      03.5


9E00                  1.48       —0.073            —0.672                  —0.   229        0.633)76     —0.00676     —0.79
                     (1.09)      (3.053)            (3. 194)               (3.129)         (7.00606551   (3.03196)        (191

DRiFT                —0.20882    —0.0018             3.36992                0.00265    I
                                                                                           —6.36760       3.0)76          '.0637
                     (0.0157)    (0.01)9)           (3.3191)               3.0)29)         (0.00216)     (3.3)99)     00,04390

Intercept            —2.67        3.765              4.55                   2.1)           —0.477         3."          7.0'
                     (1.98)      (0.739)            (2.07)                 (1.451          (0.1891       (1.04)       '7.63)

'.0 —.               —0.485      —0.984             -a3.629                —1.33           —3.0640       —2.43        —4.30
             —       (6.744)     (0.416)            (0.834)                (0.651)         (3.0888)      ('0.193)     '1.63)

Dorbin—Watson         2.07        1.20                  1.30                2.32            2.09          1. '6           1.12
    statistic
V                     3.238       0.297              3.608                  3.42)           0.446         0.695           0.600


See notes to TabLe 4.
                                                                    —34—




                                                                  table    7



                                    Regression Equations Explaining total PD!, Sy investIng Country
                                        "Exemption'   Countries                               Foreign Tan CredIt Countr)xs
                                                                               West
Country                 Canada          France         Netherlands             3erany         Italy         Japan        K)rgdoe

Sample                   1960—81        198287           196081                196281         1962—81       1960—87       960—57
Period

Mean of
Dependent                0.282           0.112            0.581                 0.203          0.0144        3.331
Variable
independent
 Var tables

n                   -    —0.165         —0. 751          —0.276                —2.03          —0.166        —1.32         9.056
                         (1.00)         (3.083)          (1.49)                (0.965)        (0.163)       (1.15)        Jo.)
v                        0.0646          0.568            1.52                  2.06           0.148         0.394       —li25
                         (1.32)         (0.804)          (1.64)                (1.03)         (0.176)       (1.13)       (1.1

n                        0.462          —0.618           —1.55                 —1.76           0.0274       -1.34
    -2
                         (1.24)         (0.621)          (1.21)                (0.759)        (0.130)       (1.32)
REOP                     26.4             1.10          —105                    1.63           2.65         —3.13        —0.579
                         (9.24)         (3.49)          (46.4)                 (6.70)          1.23)        (2.37)      (93.6)
050SEN?                 —10.4           —2.63             9.67                 —4.15          -0.341         3.53
                         (6.15)         (4.60)           (7.16)                (5.08)         (3.905)       (6.56)      ).n)
REXC                      1.78          —0.0960          —0.755                —0.104          0.000128     —3.00073     —3.03
                         (1.26)         (0.0503)         (0.219)               (0.130)        (0.0000647)   (0.30183)    G.-55)

DRIFt                    —0.0215        —0.00299         —0.0068                0.00119   I
                                                                                              —0.00385      —0.00688      0.0554
                         (0.0183)       (0.0114)         (0.0215)              (0.0128)       10.30214)     (0.3195)     '0.01:9)
Interrept                —3.75           0.888            1.32                  1.03          —0.461         0.18         1.))
                         (2.31)          (0.618)         (2.33)                (1.46)         (0.187)       (1.32)        Sm)

n0n           4n          0.361          -0.801          -0.302                -1.72           3.0101       -2.76        --.30
         —1        —2
                         (0.865)         (0.398)         (0.943)               (0.654)        (0.0817)      (0. 583)     1.':)
Our bin—watson
     statistic            2.02            2.04            1.22                  1.60           2.10          1.84
2                         0.135          0.182            0.613                 0.375          0.360         OSlO


See 8atsa ta table 4.
                                                    —35—


                                               Table S

                     Regression equations xplaining Total FDI in Manufacturing,
                                         Sy Investing Country

                              "xemption" Countries             Foreign Tax Credit Countries

                                                                                  United
Country                      Canada      Netherlands               Japan          Kingdom

Sample
Period                       1960—87       1960—87                 1960—87        1960S7

Mean of                                                    I




Dependent                     0.160         0.152                   0.0514         0.267
Variable

Independent
 Variables
-r                            '.129         0.356                   0.105          0.462
                             (0.477)       (0.874)                 (0.312)        (1.15)
1                             0.0419       —0.232                  —0.231         —0.723
     —1
                             (0.546)       (1.01)                  (0.343)        (1.36)

r                            —0.674        —0.173                  —0.207         —1.71
     —2
                             (0.444)       (0.773)                 (0.254)        (1. 18)


RGDP                          9.57         —1.19                  —10.3             0.0639
                             (3.31)        (1.80)                  (9.7)          (10.31)

USUNEMP                      —2.84          2.71                    0.192          2.26
                             (2.20)        (4.99)                  (1.0)          (5.07)

REXC                          0.542        —0.00171                —0.0687        —1.69
                             (0. 453)      (0.00139)               (0.0459)       (0.675)

DRIFT                        —0.00707       0.00322                 0.000990       0.0301
                             (0.00656)     (0.0148)                (0.00451)      (0.0187)

Irttercept                   —1.21          1.02                    0.839           1.65
                             (0.827)       (0.779)                 (0.489)        (1.64)


1÷1                           0.103        —0.369                  —0.333         —1.47
              1+1
          —         —2
                                                                                  (0.744)
                             (0.310)       (0.444)                 (0.198)

Durbirt—Watsort
      statistic               2.14          1.96                    1.46            0.711

                              0.197         0.169                   0.452           0.466


See totes to Table 4.
                                                      Table 9

         Regression Equations Exolaining ketained Earnings Using Hose Country Tan Rates, by    Investing Countr"
                                                                              ?oreon Tan CredIt
                                                       4est                                                    no tod
                       Canada        Franne          Germany                Italy              .anan         <load vs

Sasnle                1965—86       1962—97          1962—87                1062—87           1970—87          usa_ga
Period


Denendent              0.0468       —0.00561          0.0114               —0.00985            0. IV)
Variable

Independent
 Variables

                       0.370         0.213           —0.0421                 0.0296            0.009
                       1.00)        (0.166)          (0.31))                (0.0550)          (1.08)
                      —0.242        —0.0230           0.119                 0.0227            —0.   135      .0, $3
                      (0.874)       (0.154)          (0.333)                (0.052))          (0.983)              701

                      —0.205        —0.0527          —1.04                   0.0542            0.098         —0.0160
                      (0.795)       (0.122)          (0.442)                (0.0546)          (1.0°)
                      —0.00594       0.0577           2.37          I      -0.106             -6.17           00704$
                      (0.916)       (0.114)          (1.14)                (0.0612)           (3.09)         °0.1011

T—1                    0.291         0.0793          —0.658                —0.0403              ".00          0.0586
                      (0.632)       (0,102)          (0.804)                (0.0729)          (8.06)         0.01621

                      —0.560         0.0195           0.433                 0.0761             4.70
                      (0.693)       (0.13!)          (0.86))                (0.0533)          (6)1)          (0. 1080

219'Sflt              —0.07          0.464            1.72                  —0.0907            0. 118
                      (3.11)        (0.373)          (1.03)                 (0.102)           (0.09)         / 0.3001

ROOF                  16.6          —0.0211          —1.32          1        0.720          6.00
                      (9.95)        (0.937)          (3.87)                 (0.632)       (10.5)              0.40'

0 50 REM P            —5.66         —1.07            —0.301                 —0.427        —13.0
                      (4.85)        (0.883)          (1.96)                 (0.394)           (9.90)         (0.00
EEOC                   0.323        —0.0281          —0.0191                —0.0000549         0.00181       —7.18
                      (0.740)        (.0101)         (0.0707)               (0.0000206)       (0.0016))      00.100)

DRIFT                 —0.00396       0.0000356        0.0115                —0.00150)         —0.0200         0. 006 09
                      (0.0183)      (0.00253)        (0.00641)              (0.00160)         (0.0244)       (0.7000)0

Internept             —1.76          0.0904          —0.626                 —0.0225           —0.06            0.187
                      (1.43)        (0.154)          (0.644)                (0.0652)          (2.40)         (.0.00_I

                       0.836         0.148           —0.963                  0.107             0.891
                      (1.12)        (0.0855)         (0.427)                (0.0302)          (1.09)
TOT                   —0.263         0.157            0.15                  —0.0704            5.65
                      (1.66)        (0.207)          (0.397)                (0.0610)          (6.87)
Oarbin—Watsnn
     statistin         2.46          1.25             1.69                   1.52               1.10

j2                     0.361         0.737            0.273                  0.573            —0.145


See nntea to Table 4.
                                                                    Table 10

    Pegression Equaclons Oxplaining Transfer, if Finds Using .6ome Councrv Tax Dana. Sy tnvesnng Cauncrv
                                     nempnion" CountrIes                                  ari        Tax CredIt Count,),,

Country                   Canada           France           Sermartv                   Italy            Japafl         Klngdot


Period                     965—96           1962—87          962—87                    1962—87          1972—97         962—97



Dependent                  0.269            0.   13          0.292                      0.0233           0.391          0,57
Variable

[ndependenc
    Varlable,
-                         —1.70            —(.42            —(.63                      —0.369            0.667         —0.19
                          (1.o)            ((.03)           (3.897)
                                                                               :
                                                                                       (0.187)          (4.50)

                          -0.170            0.363            1.93                       0.130           —0.239         -3.91
                          (1.48)           (0.9651          (0.949)                    (0.179)          (2.82)         '2.92)
        =                 -0.235           -0.520            1.39                       0.222           -0.0543         0.    US
    ——                    (1.35)           (0.769)          (1.26)                     (0.186)          (3.12)

                           0.246            0.253           —6.76                      —0.389           16.6            2.25
                          (1.56)           (0.716)          (3.25)                     (0.208)         (24.6)          (1.92)

                            2.24           —0.0640          —1.54                       0.123          —(7.2            2.69
                          (1.07)           (0.639)          (2.29)                     (0.248)         (23.0)          (1.71)

                           0.707          —0.816            4.79                       —0.0671          26.1            1.53
    —
        2
                          (1.18)          (0.866)          (2.47)                      (0.161)         (18.6)          (2.98)

DLFSTAI                   —5.82            —2.17            —7.58                  I
                                                                                       _35                ).42          2.02
                          (5.28)            (2.35)          (2.95)                     (0.347)          (7.39)         (3.9)
ROOP                      40.1        .    —0.286           21.7                        5.56           —32.1          —37.9
                          (16.7)            (5.89)         (11.0)                      (2.15)          (30.1)         (23.6)

USUNE.MF                  —11.0            —1.98            —9.87                      —1.56            26.7           (2.0
                           (8.24)           (5.55)          (5.60)                     (1.34)          (26.4)          (9.64)

REXC                        1.64           —0.0910           0.261                      0.000259        —0.0104       -3.08
                           (1.26)           (0.0633)        (0.201)                    (0.0000701)      (0.00472)       (1.53)

DRIFT                      —0.00936         —0.00668        —0.0331                    —0.0106           0.0196         0.2326
                           (0.310)          (0.0159)        (0.0183)               I   (0.00344)        (0.0697)       (0.2479)

Intercept                  —4.79             1.49           —1.43                      —0.636            9.37           -9.59
                           (2.43)           (0.969)         (1.84)                     (0.222)          (6.86)         (3.93)

                           —1.95            —1.08            1.69                      —0.00784          0.374         —3.69
                     --    (1.27)           (0.537)         (1.22)                     (0.103)          (4.55)         (1.66)

TnT             xl          3.19            —0.627          —3.61                      —0.333           (5.5            5.59
            —        —2
                           (2.66)           (1.30)          (2.56)                     (0.208)         (18.8)          ('.32)
Durbin—8atsxn
        oracisric           2.09             1.96            2.26                       2.44              1.76              2.-s

                            0.304            0.0816          0.549                      0.463            0.512              2.260


See nones ro Table 4.
                                                                     —38—




                                                                   table 31
              Regression Equation. Exp)alning total FDU Using Rome Country Tax Data, By InvestIng Country
                                   Essmptinn' Countries                          jjn tax Credit Countries
                                                             Jest                                         Cnicxd
Country                  Canada            Franc.          Danany             Italy          lapin        K)vgdon

Sample
Period                   3965—86           1962—87         3962—87             3962—97       3972—87      3942—87

Mean of
Ce p ends nt              0.0316           0.312            0.203              0.0)44         0.596        0.799
Variable
Independent
    Variables
                         —0.829           —1.20            —1.67              —0.539          0.906        0.299
                         (2. 10)           (1.01)          (0.982)            (0.172)        (5.88)       70.28)

                         —0.239             0.840           2.05               0.163         —0.374       —4.
                         (1.83)            (0.928)         (1.04)             (0.164)        (2.42)

r_2                      —0.0302          —0.572            0.349              0.275          0.735        •0. 0744
                         (1.66)            (0.740)         (1.38)             (0.17))        (2.69)        2.941

t                         0.232             0.3)1          —4.39              —0.495         10.5
                         (1.92)            (0.689)         (3.55)             (0.191)       (21.1)        (2.
t-)                       2.53             0.0153          —2.30               0.0828       —10.2          2.76
                         (1.32)            (0.614)         (2.51)             (0.228)       (19.8)        (1.54)
t-2                       0.147          —0.797            5.22                0.00902       20.8          1.72
                         (1.45)          (0.833)          (2.70)              (0.166)       (16.0)        (2.32)
I   IFS TAT              —7.88            —1.70            —5.86              —0.653          5.83         1.75
                         (6.52)           (2.26)           (3.23)             (0.318)        (6.35)       (3. 75)

R0DP                     56.8             —0.307           10.4                6.30         —26.3        —38.7
                        (20.6)             (5.67)         (12.1)              (1.97)        (25.9)       729...)
US USE                 —16.6              —3.06           —10.2               —3.99          13.3         7V. 3
                        (10.2)             (5.34)          (6.13)             (1.23)        (24.4)       (10...)
RtxC                      1.97            —0.119            0.242              0.000105      —0.00863    —3.52
                         (1.55)            (0.0611)        (0.220)            (0.0000643)    (0.00406)    71.4—)

DRIFT                    —0.0133          —0.0664          —0.0235            —0.0 123       —0.00340      2.0 3 88
                         (0. 0 583)       (0.0153)         (0.0200)           (0.00499)      (0.0600)     (0.25)))
intercept                —6.53              1.58           —2.05              —0.660          6.31         9.09
                         (2.99)            (0.932)         (2.01)             (0.203)        (5.90)       (4.)))
                         —1. 12           —0.931            0.723              0.0987         1.27        —3.77
                         (0. 716)          (0.517)         (1.33)             (0.0942)       (3.92)       (1.-a)
T°t_1 #T_2                2.93            —0.470           —1.47              —0.403         21.)          5.63
                         (3.53)            (1.25)          (2.80)             (0.190)       (16.2)        (1.94)
Durbin—Iiegaes
     .tatttix             2.34              3.96            2.16               2.43           2.36         1.7)

                          0.393            0.0547           0.422              0.464          0.661        3.750


Sq. nete tx Table 4.
                                                —39—




                                        FIGURE 1

TOTAL FDI, RETAINED EARNINGS AND TRANSFERS AS A PERCENT OF U.S. GNP, 19S3-87

         1.0


                             FDI
         0.8                        of Fuais



         0.6



         0.4



         0.2



         0.0



        -0.2
               1952   1957   1962   1967       1972    1977   1982   1987

                                       YEAR
                                              —40--




                                          FIGURE2
FL)! to the U.S. and to the Rest of the World from Seven Countries ($billions), 1962-83




           1962        1966        1970       1974        1978        1982

                                           YEAR
                                       —41—




                                 FIGURE3
FDIin the US. as a Fraction o( Woddwlde FDI of Seven CountrI, 1962-S3




      1962    1965    1968    1971     1974    1977    1980   1983


                                  YEAR
                                                 —42—

                                       FIGURE 4A

                          FDI from Canada   as a Percent   o( U.S. GNP

      0.12


      0.10


      0.0


      0.06

      0.04

U
      0.02
a..
      0.00

      -0.02

      -0.04

      -0.06



            1952   1957      1962    1967       1972       1977     1982   1987

                                        YEAR


                                     FIGURE 4B
                   FDI from Canada as a Percent o( Total FDI in the U.S.




  z    30
  U




          1952     1957      1962    1967      1972        1977     1982   1987

                                            YEAR
                                                  —43—

                                        FIGURE SA
                       FW from France a a Percent of U.S. GNP
    0.07




    0.05




    0.03




    0.01




    -0.01

           1962     1966       1970      1974      1978      1982      1986

                                          YEAR


                                        FIGURE SB
                   FDI from Frpnce as a Percent of Totil FDI in the U.S.
       12




       10




Z          6




a          4




            1962     1966      1970      1974       1978      1982         1986

                                          YEAR
                                                —44—


                                       FIGURE 6A

                         FDI from Italy as a Percent of U.S. GNP




z
ç   o.ooz




           1962   1966        1970      1974       1978      1982          1986

                                         YEAR


                                        FIGURE 6B

                  FDI from Italy as a Peccant of Total FDI In
                                                           the      U.S.




       0

z
      -2




      -4




      -6




      -8




                                         YEAR
                                                =45-.

                                         FIGURE 7A
                          FDI from Japan u a Percent of U.S. GNP

     0.18

                           JAPAN


     0.14




     0.10


z
     0.06

0.


     0.02




            1960   1964       1968     1972     1976    1980       1984   1988


                                         YEAR


                                         FIGURE 78
                   FDI from Japan as a Percent of Totil FDI in the US.

      30



      10



      -10



Z     -30


      -50
0.


      -70



      -90




     -110


     -130
            1960   1964       1968     1972     1976    1980       1984   1988

                                         YEAR
                                                        —46—

                                                FIGURE 8A

                         FDI from the Nethiands u a Percent of US.            GNP
      0.20




      0.16




 I-   0.12
 z

 a.
      0.08




      0.04




      0.00
             1952     1956    1960     1964     1968   1972    1976    1980    1984     1988

                                                 YEAR

                                               FIGURE SB
                    FDI from the Nethertanda U a Percent of Total FDI in the US

       32



       28



       24


I-
z      20



a.     16



       12




         1952          1957     1962          1967     1972     1977     1982         1987

                                                YEAR
                                            —47—
                                     FIGURE 9A

               FW from the UnftedKingdom as a Petvent 01 US. GNP
    0.5
                       Thv

    0.4



z   0.3




    0.2




    0.1




    0.0
       1952     1957     1962     1967     1972    1977     1982     1987

                                         YEAR


                                     FIGURE 9B

          FDI from the Uniled Kingdom as a Perceit o( TOtII FDI in the US.

    100




    80




    60
z

a   40




    20




                1957     1962     1967     1972    1977     1982     1987

                                         YEAR
                                                —48—

                                     FIGURE 1OA

                     FDI from Warn Germany &i a Percent of U.S. GNP

     0.09




     0.07




     0.03
I-
z

     0.03




     0.01




     -0.01
            1962     1966     1970      1974      1978      1982      1986


                                        YEAR


                                     FIGURE lOB

               FDI from Weet Germany aa a Percent of Total FDI In the U.S.

     26


     22


     18


     14


     10


      6



      2


      -2



       1962        1966      1970      1974      1978      1982     1986

                                      YEAR
                                         —49—




                      APPENDTX:   DATA DEFTNITIOJS AND SOURCES

 1.   Foreign Direct Investment. Taken from several issues of the Survey of
      Current usiness. The most recent citation is August, 1988: "Foreign
      Direct Investment in the United States: Detail for Position and Balance
      of Payment Flows," Tables 12—19.

2.    U.S. Marginal Effective Corporate Tax Rates N).   Auerbch and Hines
      (1988), Table 1, Column 1. The 1987 tax rate is obtained by thultiplying
      their 1986 figure by the ratio of the post—tax—reform and pre—tax—reform
      effective tax rates on capital in Fullerton and Karayannis (1987), Tables
      TV.5 and P1.6, Column 3.

3.    Foreign Marginal Effective Tax Rates (T). For France, Italy, the U.K. and
      West Germany, these are calculated from separate series on the effective
      tax rate equipment and structures provided by Julian Alworth. The overall
      effective tax rate is equal to      /(L—t )) + (a t5/(1.t5flh/ta /Utç)
      + a5/(1—t)J, where tE and t5 are te effctive tx rates on equpment
      and structures, respectively, and ar and a5 are the fraction of the capi-
      tal stock in equipment and structurs, respectively. This formula is taken
      from King and Fullerton (1984).   The value of aE is set to be 0.585, and
      as to 0.415. This corresponds to the fraction of capital stock in equip-
      ment and structures, respectively, in manufacturing found by King and
      Fullerton for both the United Kingdom and West Germany, the only two
      European countries they investigate.

      For Japan, the tax-rate series is taken from Tajika and Yui (1988), Table
      3, Column 4.  These calculations include the effect of personal taxes.
      However, the personal tax parameters are either small in magnitude (the
      capital gains tax is zero) or unimportant (the tax on dIvidends is pre-
      sumed to affect only the cost of capital financed by new share issues,
      which constitutes only 3.6% of total finance). The values for 1985 through
      1987 are set equal to the 1984 rate.

      For Canada, the tax rate series up to 1981 is from oadway, Bruce and Mintz
      (1987), Table 3.3, Column 10.  Comparable values for 1982 through 1987 were
      provided by Jack Mintz.

A.    U.S. and Foreign Statutory Corporate Tax Rates. U.S. rate taken from
      Pechman (1987), Table A—8.  Foreign rates taken from sane sources as above.
      U.S. rate is federal only.

5.    Relative GDP (RGDP).   Up to 1985, real CUP for each country is calculated
      by multiplying real CUP per capita in current international prices by the
      population.   The real CUP per capita and population measures are taken
      from the supplement in diskette to Summers and Heston (1988). Real GDP
      for 1986 for each country is calculated as the 1985 CUP caluclated as above
      multiplied by one plus the rate of real growth as reported in OECD Main
      Economic tndicators (1988) pp. 37—41.   1987 real GDP is calculated in a
      similar manner.
                                      —50—



6.   U.S. Unemployment Rate (USUNEM?). U.S. unemployment rate for males 20
     years and over taken from Economic Report of the President, 1988, Table
     —39.

7.   Foreign Unemployment Rate (FUNEM?). For each country, it is the unemploy-
     ment rate for males ages 25 to 54 taken from OECD, Department of Economics
     and Statistics, Labor Force Statistics, (1966—1986), pp. 472—501 (and var-
     ious back issues).  The overall foreign unemployment rate is a weighted
     average of these rates, using 1975 real GD?'s as the weights.

8.   Real Exchange Rate (REXC).   For each country, it is the product of the no-
     minal exchange rate (foreign currency/USS) and the ratio of GD? deflators
     (US GD? deflator/foreign GD? deflator).   1987 nominal exchange rates taken
     from OECD Main Economic Indicators, October 1988, p. 30.   1987 GD? defla—
     tors are calculated using the percentage change in GD? deflators from 1986
     to 1987 in OECD Quarterly National Accounts (1st quarter 1988).   The 1987
     GD? deflator for the Netherlands was calculated using the percentage change
     in the C?I from OECD Main Economic Indicators, October 1988, p. 140.   GDP
     deflators up to 1986 are from OECD National Accounts (1960—1986), Chart 31,
     pp. 138—9.   Nominal exchange rates up to 1986 are taken from the same
     source, Chart 2, pp. 150—1.

     The overall real exchange rate is calculated by setting real exchange rates
     in 1975 levels to one and then weighting the change from 1975 real exchange   -


     rate levels by their respective shares of real GD? in 1975.
                                         —51—




                                      REFERENCES



Alworth, Julian, The Financtal Decisions of Multinationals, Oxford, Basil
     Blackwell, 1988.
Auerbach, Alan and Jatnes Hines, "Investment Tax Incentives and Frequent Tax
    Reforms', American Economic Review, Vol. 78, No. 2, May 1988, pp. 211—216.

Soadway, Robin, Neil Bruce and Jack Minz, 'The Economic Impact of Capitil In-
    come Taxes in Canada,' in Taxes on Capital Income in Canada: Analysis
    and Policy, 1987.
Soakin, Michael J. and William C. Gale,         New Results on the Effects of Tax
     Policy on the International Location of Investment," in Martin Feldstein
     (ed.), The Effects of Taxation on Capital Accumulation, Chicago, Univer-
     sity of Chicago Press, 1987.
Caves, Richard, Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis, Cambridge,
    Cambridge University Press, 1982.
Dunnirg, John H. (ed.), Multinational nterprises, Economic Structure and
    Itternational Coinpetiiveness, Clichester, John Wiley & Sons, 985.
Feldstein, Martin S., "Inflation, Tax Rules and Investment:    Some conometric
     Evidence,   Econometrica, Vol. 50, No., July 1982, pp. S25—862.
Feldstein, Martin S. and Joosung Jun, "The Effect of Tax Rules on Nonresiden-
     tial Fixed Tnvestment Some Prelitninary Evidence from the 1980's,' in
     Martin Feldstein (ed.), The Effects of Taxation on Capital Accumulation,
     Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1987, pp. 101—162.
Fullerton, Don and Marios Karayannis, "The Taxation of Income from Capital in
     the United States, 1980—19S6," National Bureau of Economic Research Work-
     ing Paper No. 2478, December 1987.

Gersovitz, Mark, "The Effects of Domestic Taxes on Foreign Private Investment,
    in David Newbery and Nicholas Stern (eds.), The Theory of Taxation for
    Developing Countries, New York, Oxford University Press, 1987.
Hartman, David G., "Tax Policy and Foreign Direct Investment," Journal f
     lic Economics, Vol. 26, No.  ,   1985, pp. 107—121.

{artman, David G., "Tax Policy and Foreign Direct Investment ir the United
     States," National Tax Journal, Vol. 37, No. 4, December 1984, pp. 475—
     488.

King, Mervyn A. and Don Fullerton (eds.), The Taxation of Income from Capital,
     Chicago and London, University of Chicago Press, 1984.

ewlon, Timothy Scott, Tax Policy and the Multinational Firms Financial Policy
     and Investment Decisions, unpublished Pt.D. dissertation, Princeton Uni-
     versity, 1987.
                                          —52—




Organization for Economic Co—operation and Development, Department of Econotn—
     ics and Stattsticg, Main Economic Indicators, October 1988.
Organization for Economic Co—operation and Development, Department of Econom-
     ics and Statistics, National Accounts, Main Aggregates, 1960—1986, Paris,
     1988.

Organization for Economic Co—operation and Development , Department   of Econotn—
     ics and Statistics, Quarterly National Accounts, 1st quarter, 1988.

Organization for Economic Co—operation and Development, International
     ment and u1t1na1onal Enterprises, Recent Trends In International Direct
     Investment, Paris, 1987.

Organization for Economic Co—operation and Development, Department of Econom-
     ics and Statistics, Labour Force Statistics, 1987 and various back issues.

Organization for Economic Co—operation and Development, Department of Econom-
     ics and Statistics, Balance of Payments of OECD Countries, 1963—t982,
     Paris, 1984.

Pechman, Joseph, Federal Tax   Policy,   Washington D.C., The Brookings Institu-
     tion, 1987.

Pugel, Thomas, "The United States,' in John H. Dunning (ed)., Multtnational
     Enterprises, Economic Structure and International Competitiveness,
     Clichester, John Wiley & Sons, 1985.

Summers, Robert and Alan Reston, "A New Set of International Comparisons c,f
     Real Product and Prices for 130 Countries, 1950—1985," International
     Association for Research in Income and Wealth, March 1988.

Tajika, Eiji and Yuji Yui, "Cost of Capital and Effec.tive Tax Rate: A Cotn—
     parison of U.S. and Japanese Manufacturing Industries,' Hitotsubashi
     Journal of Economics, Vol. 29, No. 2, December 1988, pp. 181—200.

U.S. Departnent of Cofnmerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, "Foreign Direct in-
     vestment in the United States Detail for Position and Balance of Pay-
     ment Flows, 1987," Survey of Current Business, August 1988 (Volute 6,
     nutuber 8) and various back issues.

U.S. 3epartment of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Survey of Current
     Business, various issues.

United States Government Printing Office, Economic Report of the President,
     February 1988.

Young, Kan H., "The Effects of Taxes and Rates of Return on Foreign Direct
     Investment in the United States," National Tax Journal, Vol. 41, No.      1,

     March 1988, pp. 109—121.
