NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LABOR SUPPLY FLEXIBILITY AND PORTFOLIO CHOICE

Zvi Bodie

William Samuelson

Working Paper No. 3043

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1989

We wish to thank Robert C. Merton, Paul A. Samuelson, and Steven Shavell for
many helpful comments. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3043
July 1989

LABOR SUPPLY FLEXIBILITY AND PORTFOLIO CHOICE

ABSTRACT

This paper develops a model showing that people who have
flexibility in choosing how much to work will prefer to invest
substantially more of their money in risky assets than if they
had no such flexibility. Viewed in this way, labor supply
flexibilty offers insurance against adverse investment outcomes.
The model provides support for the conventional wisdom that the
young can tolerate more risk in their investment portfolios than
the old.
The model has other implications for the study of household
financial behavior over the life cycle. It implies that
households will take account of the value of labor supply
flexibility in deciding how much to invest in their own human
capital and when to retire. At the macro level it implies that
people will have a labor supply response to shocks in the
financial markets.

Zvi Bodie
School of Management
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
(617)353-4160

William Samuelson
School of Management
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
(617)353-3631

i. Introduction
Conventional wisdom suggests that fluctuations in investment

income influence the amount an individual may choose to work. We
have all heard stories about the successful investor who retires

at age 40 after having made a "killing" in the stock market. On
the other hand, a hapless investor may be forced to delay
retirement or take an extra job because an investment turned
sour.

The purpose of this paper is to explore the interaction
between labor supply and portfolio decisions -- a subject which

has received little attention in the economics and finance

literature. Finance theorists have studied the effect of human
capital on portfolio choice but have taken the quantity of labor

as given rather than as a choice variable.' Labor economists, on
the other hand, have either treated the portfolio mix as given or

ignored it altogether in their models of labor market behavior.'
While for many purposes it makes sense to compartmentalize

these decisions, the interactions btween them can be
significant. Our analysis shows that an individual who has

'See Mayers (1972) and Williams (1978].

'See Killingsworth (1983] for an extensive survey of life
cycle labor supply models.
1

flexibility in choosing how much or how long to work later in
life will prefer to invest substantially more of his money in

risky assets than if he had no such flexibility. Viewed in this
way, labor supply flexibilty is a kind of insurance against
adverse investment outcomes.

An important corollary to this finding is that the
interaction between investment and labor decisions depends

strongly on the individual's stage in the life cycle. According
to practitioners' conventional wisdom, the young can tolerate

more risk in their investment portfolios than the old. Indeed,
guides to personal investing usually advise that as one
approaches retirement, investments should shift from riskier
assets like common stocks to more conservative fixed-income

securities. This conventional wisdom is well accepted but often
for the wrong reasons.3

This contention finds support in our analysis. The young
have a greater opportunity to insure against adverse portfolio

outcomes through their future work effort. The main asset of
young workers is their future earning power. For most young
people, huaan capital is many times as great as non—human wealth
held in the form of bank accounts, real estate, and securities.

Flexibility in labor supply, therefore, plays a much greater role
in the portfolio decisions of the young than of the old.

3See Samue]son [1989).
2

The interaction of labor supply and portfolio choice has

potentially important macroeconomic implications. With highly
flexible labor supply, we would expect to observe stabilizing
labor market responses to price shocks in securities markets.
For example, we would expect to see an increase in labor supply
in the aftermath of the October 1987 stock market crash.

The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we
present a simple two—period model of individual labor supply and

asset allocation. The model confirms that the ability to adjust
labor supply after investment outcomes are known increases the

amount a rational consumer/investor invests in risky assets. In
the next section, we extend the model to a multiperiod setting to

explore labor supply and portfolio choice over the life cycle. A
concluding section considers the empirical implications of our
model and discusses possible directions for future research.

2. A Two-Period Model.

Our purpose is to construct and analyze the simplest model
that can capture the effect of cx post

labor/leisure

choice on

investment decisions. Accordingly, the timing of the model
involves only two stages.

In the first stage, th. individual determines his current

investment decision.4 In the second stage, the rate of return on

4He presumably is also working, but the model abstracts from
any labor decisions at this point. That is, we presume that he
has already made his optimal labor decision for this time period.
3

his investment is realized. Given his resulting wealth, he may
then adjust his labor supply choice, increasing his labor
earnings at the sacrifice of leisure or vice—versa.

For the moment, we abstract from additional time periods and

from consumption and savings decisions. Thus, the individual's
sole objective is to maximize his final period utility, which
depends on his realized wealth and leisure.

The precise formulation of the individual's problem is as

follows. In the first period, a risk—averse individual invests
his wealth in two assets: a risk-free asset and a risky asset.
Let r and z denote the realized returns of the respective assets,
W0 denote his initial wealth, and x the fraction of his wealth
invested in the risky asset.

In addition to his investment income, the individual

receives labor income from working in the second period. He
allocates his time between work hours H and leisure hours L,
subject to the (normalized) constraint, L + H

1. Thus, his

labor earnings are WHH — W1(l—L), where W11 denotes the maximum

wage income that the individual could earn if he consumed no
leisure (L

0). It is useful to think of W! as the value of the

individual's human capital, (all or some of which he may choose

to take as leisure). This human capital is denominated in terms
of the single consumption good and therefore embodies an
assumption about the relative price of leisure.

Since, by assumption, there are no bequests, the individual
spends all his accumulated wealth in the second (and final)
4

period. He spends part of it on the single consumption good, C,

and part on leisure. Thus spending on the consumption good is
given by:

C =

[1 + xz +

= (1 +

r

= W(z) —

(1—x)r]W0 + W(l—L)

+ x(z—r)]W0 +

W9

-

WL
(1)

WRL

The last line treats the consumption/leisure choice in the
standard way: the individual allocates his total wealth,
W(z) =

[1 +

r

+ x(z—r))W0 +

W, between leisure ("purchased" at

price W) and consumption (the numeraire good).
The individual's objective is to maximize the expected value
of his cardinal utility function, the arguments of which are

consumption and leisure. That is, he maximizes E[U(C,L)]
subject to the budget constraint (1). Here, U is a concave

function with second partial derivatives satisfying U < 0 and
ULL

<O•

Two versions of the probl.a are of particular interest. In
the ex ante version, the individual chooses x and L at the

outset. Whatever the actual performanc. of his investment, the
individual is committed to the fixed employment decision he

entered into initially. In the cx post version, the individual
chooses L after he observes the realized return z and, of course,
his investment wealth.

These two versions are represented as follows:

5

Max E(U(C(Z),L)))

it. (1)

(Vi)

s.t. (1)
argmax U(C,L)

(V2)

x, L

Max E(U(C(z),L(Z)]

x

L(z)

The notation, C(z), makes explicit the dependence of

consumption on the realized investment return z. Note that in
version two, the optimal consumption/leisure choice takes place
under certainty —-

that

is, after the investment uncertainty has

been resolved.

The paper's main hypothesis is:

Hi: The individual's investment in the risky asset will be
greater in V2 than in Vi.

Roughly speaking, the individual invests more in the risky asset
in V2 because his ability to earn discretionary labor income
serves as a kind of insurance against bad investment outcomes.

Our task is to examine the circumstances under which the stated
result holds.

To investigate this hypothesis, we start with the simplest
possible setting, described by the following assumption.
Al. The risky asset has only two possible return realizations, z1
and z2, occuring with probabilities p1 and PZ, where P1 + P2 =

Remark. For the investment problem to be non—trivial, the
returns of the risky asset must n.ithsr dominate nor be dominated

by the return of the risk—free asset. Thus, we assume:

r2—z2—r>Oandr1—z1—r<O.
In addition, to be attractive to the risk averse investor, the
expected return of the risky asset must exceed the risk-free
6

return: p1r1 +

> 0.

p2r2

Equations 1
version 1, while

and

2 list the first-order conditions for

equations 3 and 4 list the first-order

conditions for version 2.
VL =

pl[_WHUC(Cl,L*)+UL(Cl,L*)]+pz(_WIIUC(Cz,L*)+UL(Cz,L*)] = 0

x* such that: V = p1r1Uc(C1,L*)
VL1 =

(1)

+ p2r2TJc(C2,L*) = 0

(2)

WHUC(Cl,Ll)+UL(Cl,Lj) = 0;

VL2 = —WHUC(Cz,Lz)+UL(Cz,Lz) = 0

x' such that: V = p1r1U(C1,L1)

(3)

+ p2r2U(C2,L2) =

0.

(4)

In the equations above, V denotes the individual's expected

utility, subscripts x, C, and L denote partial derivatives, and

C and L1 denote consumption and leisure when the return is z.
The first-order condition in (2) implies the well-known
result that a risk-averse individual always makes a positive
(perhaps very small) investment in the risky asset provided the

expected excess return is positive. (Note that C1 =
Since p1r1 + p2r2 >

0, it follows that V >

0

at x =

C2

0.

at x = 0.
Restoring

the first-order condition requires raising x* above zero.)

By carefully examining the first-order conditions, we can
demonstrate the general result that labor flexibility induces the
individual to invest more in the risky asset: x' >

x.

The proof

is in the appendix.

Proposition One. Given Al, the individual's investment in the
risky asset is strictly greater when labor supply is flexible
(and labor is actually varied ex post) than when it is fixed.
7

Remark. A useful way to highlight the intuition behind this
result is to appeal to the well-known case of additive separable

utility. Suppose utility is of the form: U =

g(c)

+

h(L),

where

g and h are concave in their respective arguments. Since the
cross partial U is zero, it follows that leisure is a normal
good. Thus, the individual increases his consumption of leisure
(reduces his working hours) upon a favorable wealth realization

from his investment. The opposite outcome occurs for an
unfavorable realization. To put this another way, the individual
treats his discretionary labor income as a partial substitute for

his investment income. Consequently, the individual invests a
greater amount in the risky asset under flexible labor supply
than under fixed supply (that is, Proposition One holds).
Four examples illustrate the implications of Proposition
One.

Example 1. U(C,L) = V[g(C) +

rL],

where V and g are concave

functions. Assuming an interior optimum, the individual adjusts
his leisure to exactly offset fluctuations in consumption that

might result from fluctuations in investment income. That is,
C(z)

C*, for all z. The investor in effect enjoys perfect

insurance. He adjusts L according to L

(W(z) — C*)/Wa.

result of Proposition One, it follows that x' >

As a

x.

If the function V is linear (so that the individual is risk
neutral with respect to fluctuations in leisure), the investor

will place the maximum amount in th. risky asset. By contrast,
under fixed labor supply, he will limit investment in the risky
8

asset due to risk aversion (since g is concave).

Example 2. U(C,L)

V(C + h(L)), where V and h are increasing

and concave functions. This is the converse case to Example 1.
It follows that L(z)

L* for all z. That is, the individual's

optimal choice of leisure is invariant to the investment outcome.
Consequently, labor flexibility serves no insurance function and

provides no advantage. The solutions to Vi and V2 are identical
in all respects and so x* =

x'.

Thus, this case offers an

obvious counterexample to Proposition One. That is, the
individual must actually exercise labor supply flexibility ex
post in order for x' to exceed x*.

Example 3. U(C,L) = log(C) + rlog(L).
In the version 1 solution, labor supply is fixed at L*.
From the first—order condition in (2), one finds:
x*W0 —

((p1r1 + p2r2)/(—r1r2))((W0(i+r) + WH(l_L*)],

or more compactly:

(5)

x*W0 — •WT, where

• — ((p1r1 + p2r2)/(-rr2)] and W — W0(1+r) + W,(l-L*).
The result in (5) has an appealing interpretation. The
dollar investment in the risky asset is proportional to WT, the

future value of the individualts total wealth (current wealth

invested at the risk—free rate plus future labor earnings). The
proportionality factor •

is

a function of the expected excess

return on the risky asset (the numerator) and a measure of
variance (the denominator).
9

As one would expect, a higher mean or lower variance

increases the investment in the risky asset. If one rewrites (5)
as x* =

[l

+ r + WH(l -

L*)/W0], one sees that the proportion of

current wealth invested in the risky asset increases with the
level of human capital.

For logarithmic utility and flexible labor supply, one finds
that:

L(z) =

tF/(l+F)]W(7)/Wg

(6)

that is, leisure consumed is just proportional to realized total

wealth,

W(z), and inversely proportional to Wil (the price of

leisure). In turn, the indirect utility function takes the form

kLog(W(z)),

where k is a constant that depends on I' and WH.

Since the indirect utility functions for Vi and V2 have the

same form, so too do the solutions for x. The explicit solution
for x' is:
x'W0 =

((p1r1

+ p2r2)/(—r1r2)][W0(l+r) + Wli)

(5')

Though similar in form, equations (5) and (5') differ in a

key respect. With flexible labor supply, the "full" or "maximal"
value of the individual's human capital, W1, is included in total

wealth. By contrast, with labor supply fixed ex ante, the
individual's total wealth includes only his actual earnings,

W9(l—L*). Consequently, x' > x for all possible parameter
values.

Note that for the flexible labor supply case L depends

linearly on realized wealth (equation 6). It follows that
investment returns and labor income are perfectly negatively
10

correlated. The individual, in effect, uses his labor supply to
provide himself insurance against investment risk.

Example 4. U(C,L) = CL3/a.

Here, a and B are restricted to be

of the same sign and must satisfy a + B <
L(z)

1.

One finds that:

[(B/(a+13)]W(z)/WB.

It will be convenient to define:
0(a) = [ (—p1r1) -(1)_ (p2r2)

Then,

and

3/ (r2(pr2)

1—r1 (—p1r1) 2-)

one finds,
x* = Ø(a)[W0(l+r) + W(]._L*)]

(7)

x' = O(a+B)[W0(1+r) + We).

(8)

Remarks. i) Together, the log and power (isoelastic) functions
comprise the class of utility functions having constant relative

risk aversion (CRRA). For this class, the individual's optimal
investment in the risky asset is given by (7) or (8).

the parameters a and B satisfy a — 1 — RRAC and B

(Note that

1 — RRAL,

where RRAC and RRAL are the coefficients of relative risk

aversion for consumption and leisure. In the log case, we have
RRAC

RRAI —

1, so that a —

B —

0.)

individual's

ii) For the CRRA class, the

is proportional to total wealth --

given

optimal investment

by the respective

bracketed terms in (7) and (8). For log utility, the "potential
earnings effect" ——

the

gap between W1(l—L*) and W! --

is

the

sole difference between x* and x'. For isoelastic utility, x*
and x' differ not only because of the wealth effect, but also due

to the difference between •(a+B) and 0(a). For reference, we
11

note that

is an increasing function.

Wage Uncertainty. So far our analysis has assumed a known future
value for labor income. It is natural to ask how uncertainty
about Wfl affects the propensity to invest in the risky asset. In
order to focus solely on the "uncertainty effect," we adopt the
following assumptions:
A2. i)

W is a random variable with the same expected value as
in the certainty case.

ii)

z and WH are independent random variables.

Remark. Since capital and labor are complementary factors of
production, it is likely that their returns are positively

correlated rather than uncorrelated. Moreover, many employees
own stock in their employer's firm. For them, there may even be
a higher correlation between their labor income and the return on

the risky asset. It is clear that this positive correlation will

reduce the individual's demand for the risky asset, both in the
fixed and flexible labor supply cases. We ignore this positive
correlation, however, in ord.r to focus on th. effect of
flexibility in labor supply on portfolio choice.

Under assumption A.2, 1st x** and x'' denote the
individual's optimal investment proportions under fixed and

flexible labor supply respectively. One can demonstrate the
following result.

12

Proposition Two. Suppose the investor's utility function
displays constant relative risk aversion with respect to its

arguments. The introduction of wage uncertainty lowers optimal
investment in the risky asset regardless of whether labor supply

is fixed or flexible (that is, x** < x* and x'' <

x').

Nonetheless, the proportion invested in the risky asset is
greater in the case of flexible labor supply -xl' >

that

is,

x**.
The proof rests on establishing that the first order term V

is concave in W. For instance, in the flexible labor case, a
straightforward (but tedious) calculation confirms that V1 is

concave (evaluated at L(z) and x') for all parameter values. By
definition, x' is optimal in the certainty case-- that is,
V1(E[W11]) = 0 at x'. By Jensen's inequality and the concavity of
VI,

it follows that E[V1(W1)) < V1(E(W8])

0 at x'. Thus, the

optimal investment proportion must be lowered to restore the
first—order condition, i.e. x'' <

x'.

The argument for fixed labor supply is similar (V2 is

concave in W!) but contains one additional element. It is easy
to check that the first-order condition VL is convex in W8.

Thus, by Jensen's inequality, the introduction of a mean
preserving spread in W1 raises the optimal consumption of

leisure, L** >

L*.

Since V1 is decreasing in L, the optimal

proportion invested in the risky asset must be lowered, x <

13

x*.

Finally, straightforward computation establishes that
x'' >

x.

The difference between x'' and x** is less than the

difference between x' and x*, but there remains a difference.

Remark. In general, one can construct utility functions such
convex in WH.

that the V1 and VL are concave

Thus, the

unambiguous results obtained for the CRBA class need not hold for
an arbitrarily chosen utility function.

3. A Life Cycle Nodel.

In this section we use the lifetime consumption and
portfolio choice model of Samuelson [1969] and Merton [1969,
1971] to explore some of the implications of the interaction
between portfolio choice and labor supply over the life cycle.
Specifically, we are interested in testing the truth of

the conventional wisdom that the young can tolerate more risk in
their investment portfolios than the old.
Merton (1971) has analyzed optimal portfolio and saving
decisions in a life-cycl, model where there is continuous trading

and asset prices follow diffusion processes. This model can be
directly applied to the pr.s.nt problem after extending it

slightly to embrace two goods, consumption and leisure. As
before, we limit att.ntion to the case of two assets: one
riskiess and one risky.

The individual's problem is to choose (at each point in time
during the life-cycle) the proportion of wealth invested in the
risky asset, x(t), his current rat. of consumption, c(t), and his
14

current leisure, L(t). His objective is to maximize his
discounted lifetime expected utility given by:

V —

E[fTeJtu(c(t),L(t))dt
0

where 6 is his rate of time preference.
One can apply the Mertonian framework and (under specific
assumptions) derive closed form, analytic solutions for the

individual's optimal portfolio and consumption choices. Toward
this end, we limit our attention to utility functions which

display constant relative risk aversion. For this family, it is
well-known that optimal investment behavior over the life cycle
is "myopic" -—

at

any point in time, the investor always invests

the same proportion of his total wealth in the risky asset.
Indeed, the life-cycle investment rule is nearly identical
to the behavior in the simple two period model presented earlier.
Take the case of logarithmic utility: U —

log(C)

+

rlog(L),

as an

example. When labor supply is fixed, the optimal proportion of
wealth to invest in the risky asset at time t is:
—

(1 +
(a—f'
a

(1—L*))

(9)

W

where a and a2 are the instantaneous sean and variance of the
rate of return on the risky asset, W is current financial wealth,

and L* is th. optimal amount of leisure chosen by the inv.stor at
the start of his career.
Note the close similarity between equations 9 and 5.

In the

continuous time model, the present value of future labor income
is computed as:
15

W!(t)

Y(1 —

r

where Y is the continuous stream of labor income, and T is the
last year of labor income.

From equation 9, one notes that as human capital is expended
over the course of the life cycle, the fraction of financial

wealth invested in the risky asset declines. It follows that x*
reaches its lowest value at the end of the individualts working
life, when W11 is zero.

When there is labor supply flexibility, the problem is
formally the same as a model in which there are two consumption

goods. The amount invested in the risky asset is independent of
how the individual chooses to divide his total consumption budget
between the first consumption good and leisure (the second

consumption good). The optimal proportion to invest in the risky
asset is:

— (p—i) (1 +
W
a

(10)

A comparison of (9) and (10) shows that the proportion invested
in the risky aseet is unaabiguously greater with flexible labor

supply than with fixed labor supply. Note that as the individual
grows older and W1 declines, the difference between x* and x'
becomes smaller.

This

implies that flexibility in labor supply

is more important in the portfolio decisions of the young than of
the old.

16

A concrete example is a useful way to display exact life—

cycle investment and saving dynamics. At age 31, an individual
has $100,000 of financial wealth and has the opportunity to earn
maximum labor income of $60,000 per year (if he were to consume

no leisure). He can work until age 71. For the time being we
abstract from his retirement decision altogether.5 That is, his
planning problem ends at age 71, when he plans to have zero

financial wealth. (One may think of him as working until he dies
or having retirement income provided by other means.)

Table 1 and Figure 1 summarize the individual's optimal
life-cycle behavior in the case of logarithmic utility,

U = Log(C) + .5Log(L), and for real asset returns:
r =

.03, a = .09,

and a2

.12. Labor is flexible in Part a of

the table; it is fixed in Parts b and c. In Part b, the
individual's leisure is fixed at L

.55, matching the expected

leisure in the flexible labor case. In Part c, leisure is fixed

at L .33, the cx ante optimal value.

Our objective
flexibility during the
choosing when to retire
Research
flexibility.
rstirsa.nt decision as

is to focus on the advantages of labor
Obviously,
individual's working life.

is another way of exercising labor supply
in progress by the authors analyzes the
an optimal stopping problem. Since this
latter approach is very different from our current concerns, it is
omitted here.
17

Table 1. Life Cycle Portfolio Choice and Consumption of Goods
and Leisure
Proportion
in Risky
Asset
X

a)

b)

Flexible
Age 31
Age 41
Age 51
Age 61

Fixed (L
Age 31
Age 41
Age 51
Age 61

7.5
3.7
2.3

1.6
= .55)
3.6
2.5
1.8
1.4

C) Fixed (L* = .333)
5.1
Age 31
3.0
41
Age
2.1
Age 51
1.5
Age 6].

ASSTJMPTIONS:

NOTE:

Human Financial Consumption Leisure

Capital Wealth
WB

W

C

L
.55

249
225

65.9
65.9
65.9
65.9

407
234

100
135
154
129

48.2
48.2
48.2
48.2

.55
.55
.55
.55

931
791
601
346

100
156
191
166

68.1
68.1
68.1
68.1

.33
.33
.33
.33

1398
1187
902
518

630
535

100
188

.55
.55
.55

U — log(C) + .5log(L);
r = .03, a = .09, and a2
.12.
Maximum labor income is $60,000 per year, and
initial financial wealth $100,000.

All variables ar. in thousands of dollars except the
proportion invested in risky assets which is a multiple
of financial wealth.

18

INVESTMENT IN RISKY ASSET
0VR TI-E LIFE CYCLE
8

I
-J

6—

51

o

4—

C

C

32-

I
50

40

30

AGE

a

FLEXIBLE

+

L

•

3

70

60

0

L *

55

Figure 1. Investment in the Risky Asset as a Multiple of
Financial Wealth
ASSUMPTIONS:

U = log(C) +
r = .03, a =

.5log(L);
.09,

and a2 =

19

.12.

The table's lead column shows the individual's optimal
investment proportion as a multiple of his current financial

wealth.6 Observe that under either labor supply regime, the
values of x are well in excess of one ——

that

is, the individual

is borrowing at the risk-free rate to finance his investment in

the risky asset. As the example illustrates, the individual's
degree of leverage is greatest early in the life cycle and when
labor supply is flexible.

Casual empiricism suggests that young workers do tend to

have highly leveraged portfolios. The major asset held by the

young is residential real estate financed in large part with
mortgage loans. The model also predicts that households with
greater labo flexibility will tend to have riskier investment
portfolios. This hypothesis is a subject for future research.
The other columns show expected values of the key wealth and

consumption variables.7 The table's second column tracks the
individual's human capital ——

the

present value of his future

labor earnings-- over the life cycle. This component of wealth
is non—stochastic. Under flexible labor, human capital embodies
the individual's maximum labor income

6

($60,000

per annum), before

is straightforward to confirm that for the given asset

returns, the agent optimally invests 50% of his current total
wealth (W + W!) in the risky asset. Table l's lead column shows

the corresponding proportion of the individual's financial wealth
(W) going to the risky asset.

Analytic expressions for the expected investment and
consumption behavior can be found in Merton (1969 and 1971).
Extending these results in the case of flexible labor supply (i.e.
two consumption goods) is straightforward.
20

income is withdrawn to purchas. the consumption good and leisure.

In the case of fixed labor, human capital measures the present
discounted value of the individual's actual yearly earnings,

(l-L)W. As emphasized earlier, this is the key difference

between the fixed and flexible cases. In the former, investments
in the risky asset are based on actual human capital; in the
latter, they are based on maximum, potential human capital.
The table's third column shows the expected value of
financial wealth (a stochastic variable) over the life cycle.

Note that the (average) growth in financial wealth is much
greater under flexible labor than under fixed (for either L = .55
or L =

.33).

This is a direct result of the greater investment

in the risky asset when labor is flexible.

The table's final two columns show the life—cycle pattern of

consumption and leisure. For convenience, we have assumed a
particular rate of time preference: 6

.06. This knife-edge

value insures that the individual's expected consumption and
leisure behavior is constant over the life cycle.

In the

flexible labor case, the combination of labor income and
investment income support an expected annual consumption flow of

$65,900 and expected leisure of .55. By contrast, when labor and
leisure are fixed (at L —

.55),

th. supportable steady-state

consumption stream is only $48,200 per year.

Since the agent invests 50% of his total wealth in the
risky asset, the overall expected return on his (total) wealth is
E(z) — (.5)(3%) + (.5)(9%) — 6%. Choosing a matching rate of time
preference insures a level consumption stream on average.
21

It is important to recognize that Table l's consumption and

leisure entries (since they are expected values) exaggerate the
utility differences between the fixed and flexible cases.
Fortunately, exact analytic expressions for the individual's

lifetime expected utility can be readily developed. A natural
way to express the welfare cost associated with fixed labor
supply is to compute the proportional increase in lifetime total
wealth (defined as the present value of maximum labor income plus
financial wealth at age 31) necessary to leave the individual as
well off under fixed labor as under flexible.

For Part b, the proportional increase in wealth is 12%.

This is to say that on top of his initial .fetime total wealth
($1,498,000), the individual would need an additional $175,000 to

bring him the same level of utility as he'd enjoy with flexible

labor. In Part c, the individual makes an ex ante optimal
leisure choice, L* =

.33.

Here, one computes the compensating

differential to be $133,000 (9% of lifetime total wealth).
It is interesting to observe that the individual's optimal
ex ante choice of leisure (L* =

.33) is considerably smaller than
.55) chosen in the case of

the average amount of leisure (L

flexible labor. It is straightforward to carry out the requisite
optimization in each case to obtain closed—form expressions for
decision variables of interest.

The simplest expressions emerge when initial financial

wealth is zero. In this case, the optimal ex ante choice of
leisure is simply L* =

r/(l+r).

Leisure is determined once and
22

for all (as if it were a Nstockw variable).

Here, L* depends

only on the individual's utility trade-off, not on any aspects of

security returns.9 In turn, the individual's lifetime
consumption stream is (l-L*)S =

tl/(l+rfls,

where S is the level

of consumption supportable by the flow of future labor income, Y,
in combination with optimal investment behavior.

By contrast, in the case of flexible labor supply leisure is

determined optimally as a flow variable. Again, let S denote the
level of total spending (on consumption and leisure) supported by

the (maximum) flow of labor income Y. It is easy to check that
(on average) a fraction r/[(l+r)Y] of this spending is on
leisure, implying that L' =

[r/(l+r)][S/Y].

(Recall that L' is

the expected fraction of time consumed as leisure; actual leisure

choice varies with investment performance.) As long as the risky
asset's expected return exceeds the risk-free return, the
sustainable flow of total consumption exceeds the flow of labor
earnings: S > Y.

Consequently,

L' is greater than L*. In turn,

expected spending on the consumption good is given by [l/(l+r)]S
—-

identical

to expected consumption in the case of fixed labor

supply. (In the exampl. above, if initial financial wealth is
zero instead of $100,000, one finds L*

.33, L'

.51, and the

annual rate of consumption is $61,500 under either fixed or
flexible labor.)

In the case of logarithmic utility, the individual's
expected lifetime utility (under optimal decisions) is proportional
to log((1-L)W) + Flog(L). Thus, L* depends only on I', measuring
the trade-off between the stocks of wealth and leisure.
23

Surnmarv. The

analysis of this section shows that the results

from the life—cycle model closely resemble those of the simpler

two-period model. For the class of utility functions displaying
constant relative risk aversion, flexible labor supply generates
a strong investment effect, x' >

x*,

—— a far greater proportion

of assets is invested in the risky asset. In the life—cycle
model, there is also a compounding effect: with flexible labor,
larger initial investments in the risky asset lead to more rapid
accumulation of wealth on average, leading to still greater risky
investments. The difference in investment behavior between the
fixed and flexible labor cases is greatest early in the life—
cycle when the individual's stock of human capital is greatest.
Finally, the welfare advantage of labor flexibility is
significant for typical numerical examples.1°

4. SummarY and Conclusion.

The model developed in this paper suggests that labor supply
flexibility can play an important role in household asset

allocation. Based on this model we expect to find that in a

10

Life—cycle behavior for utility functions of the form,

U(C,L) =

CaL3/a,
logarithmic case.
degree

closely
The
sole difference is an effect

resembles that displayed for the

of risk aversion. For utility

owing to the
functions more risk averse

than the logarithmic (a and fi negative), the difference in
investment behavior and welfare between the flexible and fixed
—1, the
cases is diminished. For example, with a = -2 and B
necessary compensating differentials in wealth fall to 2% and 3%
when labor is fixed ex ante respectively at L* and L' (the expected
value under flexible leisure). For utility functions more risk
positive), the differences
tolerant than the logarithmic (a and
between the fixed and flexible cases are magnified.
24

cross-section of households the proportion of assets held in
risky investments will increase with the degree of labor supply

flexibility. No empirical study of household financial behavior
of which we are aware has tried to test this hypothesis.
How can we measure labor supply flexibility for this

purpose? First, it is probably true that households with more
than one adult have more flexibility than single people. So
family status is a potential measure of flexibility. Second,

occupation is another potential indicator of flexibility. Many
occupations offer opportunities for working extra hours, taking
extra jobs, or delaying retirement.

Our life cycle model suggests that age is another important

determinant of household portfolio behavior. A well-specified
empirical model would have to take age into account.

Labor supply flexibility is valuable. In future research we

intend to measure just how valuable. People can increase their
labor supply flexibility by investing in education and training

(in an effort to make their skills more transferable). Thus the
value of this flexibility is crucial for determining the optimal

investment in human capital. Most studies of investment in humar
capital ignore this insurance motive.

25

REFERENCES

KillingwOrth, Mark R., Labor
Cambridge, U.K., 1983.

Sulv, Cambridge University Press,

David, "Non-Marketable Assets and Capital
Mayers,
Equilibrium Under Uncertainty," in M. Jensen

Market
(ed.), Studies
in the Theory of Capital Markets, New York: Praeger, 1972.

Merton, Robert C., "Lifetime Portfolio Selection Under
Uncertainty: The Continuous Time Case," Review of Economics
and Statistics, 51, August 1969, 247—57.

"Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a
_________________
Continuous—Time Model," Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 3,
No. 4, December 1971, 373—413.
Samuelson, Paul A., "Lifetime Portfolio Selection by Dynamic
Stochastic Programming," Review of Economics and Statistics,
51, August 1969, 239—46.
,

"The Judgment of Economic Science on Rational

Portfolio Management: Indexing, Timing, and Long-Horizon
Effects," Journal of Portfolio Management, forthcoming 1989.
Williams, Joseph, "Risk, Human Capital, and the Investor's
Portfolio," Journal of Business, Vol. 51, No. 1, 1978, 65—
89.

26

APPENDIX

Proof

of Proposition One: x' >

Step 1)

x*.

In the flexible case, we first identify the
individual's leisure choice in response to fluctuations

in wealth. To do this. take the total differential of
the first-order condition in (3) with respect to W and
L and rearrange to obtain:

dL/dW = [W1U -

UCL

]/ [ (We) 2tJ -

2WHUCL

+

The denominator is simply VLL (the second—order
condition) and is, of course, negative. For the
moment, consider the case that the numerator is also
negative, so that dL/dW > 0 --

that

is, leisure is a

normal good.

Step 2)

L.

Confirm that L1 < L* <

To see this, evaluate VL in

(1) first at L (where it is positive) and then at L2

(where it is negative). Thus, the optimal ex ante
choice of leisure lies between the ex post leisure
decisions.

Step

3)

Show that x' >

x*.

To see this, evaluate V1 in (2) and

(4) at x*, the ex ante optimal level of investment in

the risky asset. By definition, at x*, V1
27

0 in (2).

By comparison, in (4) we find that because of ex post

labor flexibility, V > 0 at x*. The argument is
straightforward. If the higher return (z2) is
realized, the individual's marginal utility of
consumption (the second term in 4) is greater at L2

than at L*. The derivative of this term with respect
to L is pZr2[—WHUCC +

U]

>

0.

(The bracketed term is

identical, except for sign, to the numerator of dL/dW

in step 1. Since leisure is

normal good, the

bracketed term is positive.) Thus, the increase in
leisure from L* to L2 raises the second term in (4).

If the lower return is realized, marginal utility (the

first term in 4) increases as well. Here, the

derivative with respect to L is p1r1[-WU +
since r1 < 0.

UCL]

<

0,

Thus, the decrease from L* to L1

increases the first term. Therefore, we have shown
that V1 >

0, at x* in expression (4). To restore the

first-order condition, the investment in the risky

asset must be increased. Consequently, x' >

Step 4)

x*.

If leisure is an inferior good, repeat steps 2 and 3
changing the direction of the inequalities where
appropriate: L1 >

L*

> L2.

Next, examine the effect of

flexible leisure on V1 in (4) evaluated at x*. Again,
one finds that, term by term, marginal utility is

increased. (Note that relative to the normal case, the
28

signs of the derivative are reversed but So are the

changes in leisure.) Again we find x' > x*, investment
in the risky asset increases due to labor

flexibility."

' The interested reader may wish to test this result with an

(.5C + kC2 + L — •5L2]A, where $ is in the
example. Let U(C,L)
unit interval. When k is in the positive neighborhood of zero,
leisure is an inferior good. The combination of negative U and

inferior leisure results in x' > x.
29

