NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ALCOHOL ADVERTISING BANS AND ALCOHOL ABUSE:
AN INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVE

Henry Saffer

Working Paper No. 3052

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1989

I would like to thank Michael Grossman and Frank Chaloupka for helpful comments
on an earlier draft of this paper. This project was supported by a grant from
the J.M. Foundation to the National Bureau of Economic Research and by Grant
Number NSS 1 SO7 RR05995-Ol from the Biomedical Research Support Grant Program,
Division of Research Resources, NIH, PHS, DHHS to the National Bureau of
Economic Research. This paper has not undergone the review accorded official
NBER publications; in particular it has not been submitted for approval to the
Board of Directors. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Health
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3052
July 1989

ALCOHOL ADVERTISING BANS AND ALCOHOL ABUSE: AN INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVE

ABSTRACT

The purpose of this paper is to empirically examine the effect

on alcohol abuse of banning broadcast advertising of alcoholic
beverages. The effect of a ban cannot be studied using data from
one country because the adoption of new advertising bans is an
infrequent event and requires many years for adjustment. However,
an international data set can be used since there is considerable
variation in the use of advertising bans across countries. The data
used in this study are a pooled time series from 17 countries for
the period 1970 to 1983. The empirical measures of alcohol abuse

are alcohol consumption, liver cirrhosis mortality rates, and
highway fatality rates. The cultural factors which influence
alcohol use are measured by sets of country dummy variables. The

empirical results show that countries with bans on spirits
advertising have about 10 percent lower alcohol consumption and
motor vehicle fatality rates than countries with no bans. The

results also show that countries with bans on beer and wine
advertising have about 23 percent lower alcohol consumption and
motor vehicle fatality rates than countries with only bans on
spirits advertising.

Henry Saffer
Department of Management Science
Kean College
Union, NJ 07083
and
NBER
269 Mercer St.
New York, NY 10003

1

I. Introduction

Participants in several recent meetings of the World Health
Organization have expressed concern over the worldwide increase in

alcohol marketing efforts. The reason for this concern is the
presumption that the increase in alcohol marketing efforts will

lead to an increase in alcohol consumption and alcohol abuse.
Broadcast advertising is a major component of alcohol marketing.
According to Cavanagh and Clair1nonte (1985) alcohol advertising
expenditures in the United States were about one billion dollars

in 1980. These expenditures represent about two percent of all
advertising expenditures in the United States and about one half
of all alcohol advertising in the world. Although expenditures on
alcohol advertising are substantial, the effect of this advertising

on alcohol abuse remains a controversial subject.

The central issue in the debate over alcohol advertising is
whether this advertising affects only brand choice or affects both

brand choice and overall alcohol consumption. A number of
econometric studies of alcohol advertising expenditures find little

or no effect of advertising on total alcohol consumption. Studies

of advertising expenditures include Coinanor and Wilson (1974),
Grabowski (1978), McGuiness (1980), and Ornstein and Levy (1983).

Smart (1988) reviews several other studies, including both
econometric and experimental studies, and finds little evidence of

any effect of alcohol advertising. Simpson et. al. (1985) also
review the literature on alcohol advertising and conclude that

2

there is no evidence of any effect of alcohol advertising on
aggregate alcohol demand.

One problem with prior empirical studies of alcohol
advertising expenditures is the use of data measuring relatively
small variations in alcohol advertising. This type of data may be

useful for measuring the effects of alcohol advertising on brand
choice but can not be extrapolated to measure the effect of alcohol

advertising on total alcohol consumption. An empirical strategy

designed to test the determinants of brand choice is not
appropriate for problems involving total alcohol consumption since

these choices are fundamentally different.
Total alcohol consumption decisions are guided by perceptions

of traditionally acceptable patterns of consumption. Traditional
patterns of consumption are important because alcohol is an unusual

consumer good. Alcohol is unusual in that its consumption has an

important and historic role in many social customs, while it is

understood to also have potentially adverse health effects.
According to Strickland (1983), drinking behavior is learned by
observing the behavior of family and peers, and is reenforced by
advertising portrayals. The perception of traditionally acceptable
patterns of alcohol consumption is a result of accumulated exposure

to positive and negative information about alcohol. Changes in
current advertising exposure can have only a limited influence on

an individual's cumulative information about acceptable usage.

Small variations in alcohol advertising expenditures might,

3

therefore, effect brand choice decisions but not effect total
alcohol consumption decisions.
Continuous exposure to alcohol advertising over a long period

could influence cumulative information about acceptable usage
patterns and thus effect total alcohol consumption. An alcohol

advertising ban is an ideal empirical indicator of cumulative
information about alcohol. This suggests that a cross sectional or

time series study of advertising bans is an appropriate empirical
strategy for testing the effect of alcohol advertising on alcohol
abuse. Prior studies of alcohol advertising bans include Smart and
Cutler (1976) and Ogborrie and Smart (1980). These studies examine

the effect of advertising bans in British Columbia and Manitoba,

respectively. The ban in British Columbia included all alcohol
advertising but lasted only one year. The ban in Manitoba included

only beer advertising and was analyzed using an eight year time
series. Both studies concluded that these advertising bans had no

effect on alcohol consumption. Alternatively, these results may
indicate that in a single province or country study a long time

period is necessary before there is any observable change in
alcohol consumption.
The purpose of this paper is to empirically examine the effect

on alcohol abuse of banning broadcast advertising of alcoholic

beverages. The focus on an advertising ban is particularly
important because a ban is a likely choice of public policy for the

control of alcohol advertising. The data set used in this study is

a pooled time series of data from 17 countries. The independent

4

variables include measures which indicate whether alcohol
advertising is allowed or banned. An international data set is the

only way to measure the effect of a ban on alcohol advertising.

Data from one country cannot be used since changes in alcohol
advertising bans within countries are rare and the imposition of
a ban requires an extended period for consumption to adjust. There
is, however, considerable variation in the use of advertising bans
across countries.

II. Empirical Framework

Consumer demand theory provides the conceptual framework for

the empirical models. To develop the demand for alcohol, assume
that an individual's utility depends on the consumption of alcohol,
the consumption of other goods, and taste.' Maximizing this utility

function subject to an income constraint yields a demand for
alcohol function. The theory predicts that the price of alcohol
will have a negative effect on alcohol consumption and that income

will have an uncertain effect on alcohol consumption. Alcohol

'Consumers actually buy specific brands of beer, wine, and
spirits rather than alcohol. This could be modeled as a three stage
process with alcohol selected in the first stage, beer, wine, and
spirits selected in the second stage, and specific brands selected
in the third stage. According to Walsh (1982), in the second stage

this process imposes the constraint that the marginal rates of
substitution between the three alcoholic beverages are independent

of expenditures on non-alcohol goods. In the third stage, this

process imposes the constraint that the marginal rates of
substitution between specific brands of each type of beverage are
independent of expenditures on other types of alcoholic beverages.

This model emphasizes the distinction between the consumer's
decisions about overall alcohol consumption and decisions about
specific brands.

5

advertising enters the individual's demand curve as a determinant

of taste. Aggregation of this demand function over individuals
results in an empirically testable demand for alcohol function.
Since the purpose of this paper is to measure the effects on
alcohol abuse of a ban on alcohol advertising, empirical measures

of abusive consumption of alcohol are necessary. Bruun et al.
(1975) conclude that data which measures mean alcohol consumption

in a population group is proportional to the level of abusive
alcohol consumption in that population. However, Duffy and Cohen

(1978) conclude that there is significant variation in the
distributions of alcohol consumption across populations. This type
of variation would make mean alcohol consumption a biased indicator

of abusive alcohol consumption.
Because the validity of mean alcohol consumption as a measure
of alcohol abuse is unresolved, the liver cirrhosis mortality rate

and the motor vehicle fatality rate are also used as empirical
measures of alcohol abuse. In a summary of clinical studies of

liver cirrhosis, Cook and Tauchen (1982) conclude that the
probability of death from liver cirrhosis is directly related to

lifetime alcohol consumption and body weight. Current liver
cirrhosis mortality rates reflect both current levels of abusive
consumption and the trend in drinking in the past decade or two.
In a summary of studies on motor vehicle accidents, Donelson (1988)

concludes that approximately 50 percent of all fatal motor vehicle

accidents in the United States involved alcohol. Donelson also

6

concludes that the probability of a fatal motor vehicle accident
increases exponentially with alcohol consumption.

Neither mean alcohol consumption, the liver cirrhosis
mortality rate nor the motor vehicle fatality rate is a perfect

measure of abusive alcohol consumption. However, a consistent
statistical relationship between alcohol advertising bans and each

outcome measure would be evidence of a behavioral relationship
between alcohol advertising and alcohol abuse.
Since three dependent variables are used to measure the effect

on alcohol abuse of banning alcohol advertisements, three separate

equations must be estimated. To estimate the effects of alcohol
advertisements on liver cirrhosis mortality rates and motor vehicle

fatality rates, two probability functions are assumed. These

equations relate the probability of death to an individual's
alcohol consumption and a vector of other variables.2 Substitution

of the alcohol demand equation into each probability equation

yields reduced form probability equations. Each reduced form
relates the probability of death to the variables that determine
alcohol demand.

III. Data

The data set used in this study is a time series of cross

sections consisting of 17 countries for the years 1970 through

2These equations can be called production functions because
they define the relationship between inputs of alcohol consumption,
and other conditions, and the output of mortality rates.

7

1983. The 17 countries are members of the Organization for Economic

Cooperation and Development (OECD). The OECD countries were chosen

because they have attempted to maintain a data base of comparable

economic and social data since 1960. The member countries of the

OECD are also the most developed free market countries in the
world. The data set was limited to 17 countries because of the
availability of data. The data set begins with 1970 and ends in
1983. Table 1 contains summary definitions and mean values for all
the variables.

The first dependent variable used in the regressions is per

capita annual consumption of pure alcohol in liters. These data

come from the International Survey of Alcohol Beverage Control
Polices published by the Brewers Association of Canada (BAC). The
variable is computed by adding together the per capita consumption

of pure alcohol in beer, wine and spirits. The data are based on
different assumptions, by year and country, about the percent of
alcohol in each beverage.

The other dependent variables are the liver cirrhosis
mortality rate and motor vehicle fatality rate. The liver cirrhosis

mortality rate was computed by dividing the annual number of liver

3Price and income are reported in units of national currency
and must be standardized using purchasing power parities. The OECD
reports purchasing power parities for the member countries based
on 1980 survey data. Although reliability diminishes with distance
from the sample year, purchasing power parities can be estimated
for earlier years using inflation rates. The first year of the data
set used in this study is 1970 since 1970 is as far back as the
OECD estimates purchasing power parities. The last year of the data
set is 1983 due to the time lag in reporting data.

8

cirrhosis deaths by population. Similarly, the motor vehicle
fatality rate was computed by dividing the annual number of motor
vehicle fatalities by population. Liver cirrhosis deaths and motor

vehicle fatalities are reported in the United Nations (UN)
Demographic Yearbook. The population data were taken from the OECD
National_Accounts.
The dependent variables have been transformed into logarithmic

specifications. The alcohol consumption variable was transformed
into the natural logarithm of consumption. This functional form is

often used in demand studies. Because of aggregation, these
regressions are weighted by n112, where n is the population of the
country. Since the liver cirrhosis mortality rate and motor vehicle
fatality rate have restricted ranges, a logistic specification will

conform to the data more closely than a linear specification. The
logistic specification is most easily achieved by transforming both

rates to ln(M/1-M), where M is the rate and ln is the natural
logarithm. Maddala (1983) shows that the appropriate weight for
this transformation is: [nM(1-M)J1.

In defining the empirical measure of advertising bans, two

generalities in the laws emerge.

First,

all advertising

restrictions group beer and wine into one category with spirits

4cirrhosjs deaths of people under thirty are generally not

caused by alcohol abuse. However, cirrhosis deaths are not
available by age. Since total cirrhosis deaths are used to compute
the cirrhosis death rate, total population is used as the divisor.
Also, only about 50 percent of highway fatalities involve alcohol.
However, total highway fatality data are used since there are no
objective estimates of the number of highway fatalities involving
alcohol.

9

treated as a separate category. This restriction applies to all
countries included in this study. There is no country in the data

set which allows spirits advertising but prohibits beer and wine

advertising. This reflects the widely held opinion that spirits

consumption is potentially more dangerous than beer or wine
consumption. Second, bans on alcohol advertising are the same for
both television and radio, with print media treated as a separate
category.5

Two dichotomous alcohol advertising ban variables have been
defined. One variable measures bans on spirits advertising and the

other measures bans on beer and wine advertising. The spirits
advertising ban variable is equal to one if a country has a ban on

broadcast advertising of spirits but allows beer and wine
advertising and is otherwise equal to one. The beer and wine
advertising ban variable is equal to one if a country has a ban on

broadcast advertising of beer and wine and is equal to zero

51n the United Kingdom spirits advertisements are not
televised but may be broadcast on radio. The Brewers Association
of Canada also reports that, in Austria, advertisements for spirits
are allowed on the radio but not on television. Since television
is the more important advertising media, and since only one spirits
ban variable is empirically feasible, the U. K. and Austria have

been coded as banning broadcast advertising of spirits. In
addition, Portugal and Spain have restrictions limiting the times
that alcohol advertising can be broadcast. Spain also has increased
costs for alcohol advertising. In Scandinavia, light beer is not
included in alcohol advertising restrictions. In Denmark there is
no commercial advertising of any kind on radio or television. The
beer and wine category includes all alcoholic beverages with 23

percent or less alcohol, and spirits is everything above 23
percent. Advertising bans include both voluntary and mandatory
prohibition of all advertisements by alcohol beverage category.

10

otherwise. Every country that has this ban also bans spirits
advertisements. These data come primarily from the International
Survey of Alcohol Beverage Control Polices.

The alcohol price was computed by dividing private final
alcohol expenditures by pure alcohol consumption in liters. The
data were divided by the gross domestic product deflator using 1975

as the base year. The data were converted to United States dollars

by dividing by the purchasing power parity. Alcohol expenditures,
the deflator and purchasing power parities were take from the OECD
National Accounts. Alcohol consumption data comes from the Brewers
Association of Canada.6

Real income was computed by first dividing gross domestic
product by population. This was then divided by the gross domestic

product deflator and the purchasing power parity. The data are in
thousands of U.S. dollars and come from the OECD National Accounts.

The disadvantage of an international data set is the
difficulty in measuring the other determinants of consumption that

occur across countries. For example, cultural differences, or
sentiment, may effect alcohol consumption across countries even

after observable phenomena, such as price and income, are
controlled. Unfortunately, quantitative information measuring all

the factors influencing alcohol consumption across countries does

6This price variable has two problems. First, the price
variable may be correlated with the equation error term if alcohol

consumption is measured with error. Second, changes in the
percentages of alcohol consumed in the form of beer, wine and
spirits will result in changes in the price variable even when the
underlying beverage prices are constant.

11

not exist. The omission of these variables could result in biased
estimates of the effects of advertising bans.
One method of approximating the influence of omitted sentiment

is the inclusion of a dichotomous variable for countries were

alcoholic beverage production is a major industry. In these
countries attitudes towards alcohol beverages are likely to be more

favorable and consumption may be higher. The alcohol sentiment

variable was defined as equal to one for France and Italy and
otherwise equal to zero. France and Italy were chosen because per
capita alcohol production is considerably above average in both of
these countries.
A fixed effects model is a second method of approximating the

influence of omitted alcohol control policies. In a fixed effects
model a series of country dummy variables replace the independent

variables. According to Johnston (1984), this type of model can
account for differences in sentiment across countries.7
The total alcohol demand equations also includes a measure of

tourism. This variable is included because several studies have
shown that tourism has a positive influence on alcohol consumption.

Tourism is measured by the number of tourist arrivals divided by
population. The tourist data come from the UN Statistical Yearbook.

The liver cirrhosis mortality equations also includes a
measure of supply and demand for health services. This variable is

the general mortality rate. Higher general mortality rates are

See Johnson page 405.

12

associated with lower equilibrium levels of health services. This
variable should have a positive relationship to cirrhosis mortality

rates. The variable is measured as total mortality from all causes

divided by population in thousands. The data come from the UN
Demographic Yearbook.
The motor vehicle fatality equations also includes a variable

for kilometers of roads. The road variable is measured in
kilometers per thousand people and is included as a measure of
distances traveled. Several studies have shown that motor vehicle

fatalities are related to distances traveled. The road kilometer

data was taken primarily from the OECD Statistical Trends in
Transport.

IV. Results
Table 2 presents a set of mean values for alcohol consumption,

liver cirrhosis mortality rates, motor vehicle fatality rates for
1970 and 1983. These means have been computed for each category of
advertising ban. The data are, respectively, for the first and last

years of the data set.

While the data in Table 2 are only descriptive, they suggest

that alcohol advertising bans can affect alcohol abuse. In 1970
two countries, and in 1983 four countries, banned all broadcast
advertisements of alcohol. This group had the lowest values for
all three measures of alcohol abuse in both time periods. In 1970,

and in 1983, seven countries banned broadcast advertisements of

spirits but allow beer and wine advertisements. For both time

13

periods this group has lower values for the three measures of

alcohol abuse than those countries which have no bans on
broadcasting alcohol advertisements •8

The data in table 2 also illustrates the time trend of the
three measures of alcohol abuse.9 Per capita alcohol consumption

increased in all three advertising categories between 1970 and
1983. However, the countries with the more restrictive advertising

policies had the lowest increases in consumption. Liver cirrhosis

mortality rates did not change significantly during the sample
period. However, motor vehicle fatality rates decreased over the

sample period. The countries with the most restrictive alcohol
advertising policies had the largest decreases in motor vehicle
fatality rates.

Table 3 presents the regression results from a set of fixed
effects models. These models include only time dummy variables for

the years 1970 through 1982 and 16 country dummies. Sweden is the
omitted country. The advertising ban variables cannot be included
in these models because they are highly collinear with the country

dummies. These models cannot explicitly distinguish between the

8Between 1970 and 1983 three countries changed their laws on
broadcast advertising of alcoholic beverages. Spain changed from
having no bans to banning spirits advertisements. Finland changed
from having no bans to banning all alcohol advertisements. Norway
changed from banning only spirits to banning all broadcast alcohol
advertisements.
9This table is only illustrative of time trend because there
is no control for changes in advertising bans that occurred over

the time period. However, a regression model can make this
distinction.

14

effects of alcohol advertising bans, other alcohol policies, and
alcohol sentiment.
Although any conclusions drawn from the coefficients in Table
3 must be qualified, the results reveal considerable international

variation in per capita alcohol consumption, liver cirrhosis
mortality rates and motor vehicle fatality rates. The countries in

Table 3 are grouped in accordance with their alcohol advertising

policy. Since Sweden is the omitted country, the coefficient of

each included country represents that country's level of the
dependent variable relative to Sweden. For each of the three
dependent variables, the average coefficient for the countries

which ban all broadcast advertising of alcoholic beverages is
smaller than the average for the countries with a spirits ban.
Similarly, the average coefficient for the countries with a spirits
ban is smaller than the average coefficient for the countries which

have no bans on broadcast advertising of alcohol. The mean values

are computed with the insignificant values set equal to zero and

are reported in Table 3 in the rows labeled group means. These
results again suggest that countries with more restrictive alcohol

advertising policy have lower levels of alcohol abuse.

Panel A of Table 4 presents the estimation results from
another series of fixed effects models. These fixed effects models

use only the advertising ban variables and time dummy variables.
The purpose of estimating these fixed effects models is to provide
an alternative to the independent variable specifications in Panel

B of Table 4. The first three models also include the alcohol

15

sentiment variable. The coefficients of the advertising ban
variables are negative and significant in 10 out 12 cases. These
fixed effects models again suggest a negative relationship between

alcohol advertising bans and alcohol abuse.

The results from six independent variable regression models
are presented in Panel B of Table 4. Each regression model includes

the two advertising bans, price, income, equation specific control

variables, and time dummies. The first three regressions also
include the alcohol sentiment variable. Both the beer and wine
advertising ban and the spirits advertising ban have negative and

significant coefficients in the alcohol demand and motor vehicle

fatality regressions. However,

in the cirrhosis mortality

regressions only the spirits ban is significant in the
specification which excludes alcohol sentinent.

The remaining independent variables in the models in panel B

of Table 4 are generally significant and conform to a priori
expectations. The real price of alcohol is negative in all models.

Price is significant in the alcohol demand and liver cirrhosis
regressions but not in the motor vehicle fatality regressions. Real

income has no a priori expectation but is positive in the alcohol

demand and motor vehicle regressions and negative in the liver
cirrhosis regressions. The real income coefficients are, however,
only marginally significant. Tourism, general mortality, and road

kilometers, with one exception, are all positive and significant
as expected.

16

The first three regressions in both panels of Table 4 include

the alcohol sentiment variable. Alcohol sentiment is positive and

significant in the alcohol demand and liver cirrhosis equations.

In these two equations, the inclusion of alcohol sentiment
increases the R2 and changes the magnitude and significance of all

the independent variable coefficients. In panel A, the magnitudes
of the advertising ban variables are generally lower when alcohol

sentiment is included. In panel B, the price coefficient in the
alcohol demand equation and the liver cirrhosis equation decreases

when alcohol sentiment is included. These changes are important
because they show that when sentiment is omitted the effect of the
included policy variables may have an upward bias.

The regression results also can be used to estimate the
reduction in alcohol abuse in countries with advertising bans
relative to those without bans. Since the dependent variables are
in logarithmic form, the coefficient of an advertising ban variable

can be interpreted as the percentage change occurring when the
advertising ban variable equals one.10 The coefficients from the
independent variable models which include alcohol sentiment were
used for these estimates. These regressions were used because they

are the most inclusive specifications. The regressions indicate

that countries with bans on spirits advertising have about 10
percent lower alcohol consumption and motor vehicle fatality rates

than countries with no bans. The results also show that countries

'0These percentages were computed using the method described
by Halvorsen and Palmquist (1980).

17

with bans on beer and wine advertising have about 23 percent lower
alcohol consumption and motor vehicle fatality rates than countries

with only bans on spirits advertising.
The results also indicate that the three measures of alcohol

abuse have distinctly different relationships to advertising and
pricing policies and diverging time patterns. The data show that

alcohol consumption is related to advertising bans and alcohol

price. Liver cirrhosis mortality rates are less consistently
related to alcohol advertising bans, but are clearly related to
alcohol price. The data also show that motor vehicle fatality rates

are related to advertising bans but less clearly related to price.

Over the sample period per capita alcohol consumption increased
while liver cirrhosis mortality rates remained steady and motor

vehicle fatality rates fell. These results suggest that the
relationship between alcohol consumption and alcohol abuse is
dependent on other factors such as alcohol control policy.

V. Conclusions
Although there have been a number of econometric studies of

alcohol advertising policy, there are few prior studies of the
effect of a ban on broadcast advertising of alcoholic beverages.

Advertising bans are, however, a likely choice of public policy

for the control of alcohol advertising. The adoption of an
advertising ban is an infrequent event and many years following
the institution of an advertising ban are required to allow for

adjustment. This leaves data from any one country without

18

sufficient empirical variation to measure the effect of a ban.
There is, however, considerable variation in the use of advertising

bans across countries. The data used in this study is, therefore,
a pooled time series for 14 years over 17 countries.

The empirical results presented in this paper indicate that
the countries which have adopted advertising bans have lower levels

of alcohol abuse. Alcohol abuse is measured by per. capita alcohol

consumption, liver cirrhosis mortality rates, and motor vehicle

fatality rates. The results show advertising bans have a
significant effect in reducing all three measures of alcohol abuse.

19

Definitions

I

*

Definition and Mean

Variable

A dichotomous variable which is equal to one if a country
has a ban on broadcast advertising of beer and wine and
Is equal to zero otherwise. (Every country thai. has this
ban also bans spirits advertisements.) p=O.llt.

Beer and Wine
Ad Ban

A dichotomous variable which is equol ti I)II if t a:nijtut n,
has a ban on broadcast adveti ising of spirits. bitt ii Iws
and is equt I I
beer and wine advert. snrertts

Spill Is

Al

Table

and Means of Variables

!lit

otherwise. p0.39.
Per Cap i l.a

Consumption itt

Consumption
Pure Alcohol

of

per cap i ta

1 i ters

of pure

•r

1 coitu

from

I

beer, wine and spirits. =9.65.

Liver Cirrhosis
Mortality Rate

Annual fatalities from liver cirrhosis divided by

Motor
Vehicle
Fatality Rate

Annual fatalities from motor vehicle accidents divided

Real Price of a

Total expenditure on alcoholic beverages divided by pure
alcohol consumption in liters. The variable was adjusted

Liter of Pure

population. p=O.OO2.

by population. p=0.0O2.

by dividing by the GDP deflator and converted to U.S.
dollars by dividing by the Purchasing Power Parity.

Alcohol

p=13 .85

Real Income

National income divided by GDP deflator and converted to
thousands of U.S. dollars by dividing by the Purchasing
Power Parity. p=5.33.

Alcohol

Sentiment

A di chotonrous
.118.

Tourism

Number of tourist

General

Mortality front all

Mortality
Road
Kilometers

Rate

var i able

equal to one for' France ;ttid

fit

Iy

arrivals divided by popt.ilat Hill 1I).(i
causes,

per

thousand populitttott.

ij=9.92.

Kilometers of roads divided by population. plG. 50.

A1l data are for the 17

countries for the years

1970 through 1983. The 17

are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France.

countries
Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands. Norway. Portugal. Spain, Sweden. the
United Kingdom, and the United States.

20

Table 2

Mean Values in 1970 and 1983

Broadcast
Advertising
Ban

Alcoho I
Demand

Number
of

Countries

Liver
Cirrhosis
Mortality
Ratp

Motor
Vehicle
Fatality
Rate

Means for 1970
2

6.34

9

21

SpIrits
advertising
banned

7

7.98

14

22

No bans on
alcohol
advertising

8

9.48

16

25

All alcohol
advertising
banned

4

6.56

8

11

SpirIts

7

9.79

15

18

6

12.03

18

21

All alcohol
advert is ing

banned

advert ising

banned

No bans on
a lcoho.l

advert ising

Alcohol demand is measured In liters of pure alcohol per person
per year; liver cirrhosis mortality rates and motor vehice
fatality rates are deaths per hundred thousand people per year.

21

Table 3
Dummy Variable Models*
Alcohol
Demand

Norway

Liver
Cirrhosis
Mortality
Rate

Motor
Vehicle
Fatality
Rate

Countries banning all alcohol advertising in 1983
-. .165
—. 794
.

(I.32)

Fin'and

-.026
(.51)

Denmark

GROUP MEAN
Canada

(t.32)
-.666
(5.42)

-.045

.417
(8.21)
.017

(.51)

-.488

(.88>
.2h'-

L.36)
.284
(3.64)
.184

Countries banning spirits advertising in 1983
.322
.004
572

Ireland

Austria

(8.84)
.174
(2.95)
.633
(13.96)

IJnired Kingdom .140
(4.16)
united States
.290
(9.08)

France

1.03

(7.23)
1.043
(36.54)
-

.965

(15.17)
.263
(4.84)
1.051

(9.97)
282
(3.16)
.811
(12.72)

.054

—

(.96)
528
(9. 99)

.478
(8.73)
163

63)

(19. 10)

789

73)

.730
(12.94)

(2 .85)

.483

135

405

30 .

Spain
22 .

GROUP MEAN

(.07)

—1.178

Countries with no bans on alcohol advertising n 1RA
.782
1 .065
78
Portugal
12 . 69
(18.29)
17.45)

.455

Autra1ia

(11 .54)

540

Belgium
Eta ly
r.

ux

embour g

Nether lands

(12.71)
793
(23.62)
1 .

Squared

.121

(20.44)

906

(6.49)
.310

(5.27)

83)

(9.91)
.598

(7 .

GROUP MEAN

00

.04

(16.55)
215
(3.10)

.647
.97

-

.813

.98

* The t—ratios are in parentheses. All equations
variables for the years 1970 through 1982 and an

f4 /
10.82)
645

0.29)
.412
(7 .

52)

• 7913

(4 52
275

(4.35)
.594
.89

include dummy

intercept

term.

22

Table

4

Regression Results*
Motor

Alcohol Liver

Motor

Alcohol Liver

Demand Cirrhosis Vehicle Demand Cirrhosis Vehicle
Mortality Fatality
Mortality Fatality

:388

—.588

Panel A
—.368

--.05

(5.52)

(3.45)

(4.01)

(.86)

(4.31)

(:.Y8}

146

—.197

290

(5.00) (3.96)

.021
(.64)

— .415
(6.23)

(.83)

.711

—.019

(16.61) (14,63)

(.54)

Beer and Wine

An Ban

Spirits
AdBan

—.

Alcohol
Sentiment

.521

Panel
Beer and Wine —.403
Spirits

AdBan

(6.04)

—.112
(4.04)
—

.014

-.

(6.93)

—1.012

.23

.19

—.344

.24

.59

.66

8—Squared

AdBan

Rate

Rate

Rate

Rate

(4.26)

(3.51)

— .011
(.18)

—.099
(2.67)

—.181

—.144

—.108

(2.01)

(2.94)

.076

— .005
(1.47)

-

.046

—

.003

(4.49)
—

.029

-

(.75)

(8.50)

(9.30)

Real
Income

.014

—.033

(1.77) (1.71)

.019
(1.61)

.003
(0.27)

(.25)

.527

(16.00) (10.18)

.055
(2.37)

-.023
(1.14)

.00

.008
(4.49)
.79

.166
(1.44)

.294
(5.49)

Road
Kilometers

R—Squared

—.006

(4.14)

.063
(1.78)

.322
(8,86)

General
Mortality
Rate

—.382

.207
(.97)

(6.24)

Tourism

.23

B

—.391

(5.92)

.442

.026

.172
(.98)

Real
PrIce

Alcohol
Sentiment

-.3S0

.70

.40

(4.56)
.54

.56

.39

The t—ratios are in parentheses. All equations include dummy
variables for the years 1970 through 1982, and an intercept.
*

23

References

Bruun, K. et al., Alcohol Control. Policies in a Public Health
Perspective, The Finnish Foundation for Alcohol Studies, vol 25,
1975.

Cavanagh, J. and Clairmonte, F., Alcoholic Beverages, St. Martin's
Press; New York, 1985.

Conianor, W., and Wilson, T., Advertising and Market Power,
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1974.

Cook P. and Tauchen G., "The Effect of Liquor Taxes on Heavy
Drinking", The Bell Journal of Economics, vol. 13, no. 2, Autumn
1982.

Donelson, A., "The Alcohol-Crash Problem", in Social Control of
the Drinking Driver, eds. M. Laurence, J. Snortum, and F. Zimring,
University of Chicago Press:Chicago, 1988.
Duffy, J. and Cohen, G., "Total Alcohol Consumption and Excessive
Drinking", British Journal of Addiction, vol. 73, 1978.

Grabowski, H. "The Effects of Advertising on the Iritraindustry
Shifts in Demand", Explorations in Economic Research, 4, 675—701
winter/spring 1977—1978.

Halvorsen iL, and Palmquist R., "The Interpretation of Dummy
Variables in Semulogarithmic Equations", American Economic Review,
vol. 70, no. 3, 474—475, 1980.

Johnston J., Econometric Methods, third ed., McGraw-Hill Book
Company: New York, 1984.

Maddala, G.S. Limited Dependent and gualitative Variables in
Econometrics.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press,
1983.

McGuiness, T. "An Econometric Analysis of Total Demand for
Alcoholic Beverages in the U.K. 1965-1975", Journal of Industrial
Economics, 29, 85—105, l980.

Ogborne, A., and Smart, R., Will Restrictions on Alcohol
Advertising Reduce Alcohol Consumption?", British Journal of
Addiction, 75, 293—296 1980.

Ornstein, S. and Hanssens, D., "Alcohol Control Laws and the
Consumption of Distilled Spirits and Beer", Journal of Consumer
Research, 12, 200—213, 1985.

24

simpson, H., BeirnesS, D., Mayhew, 0, and Donelson, A., " Alcohol
$peciic CQfltrçlS: Implications for Road Safety", Ottawa: Traffic
Injury Research Foundation of Canada, 1985.

Smart, R., "Does Alcohol Advertising Affect Overall Consumption?
A Review of Empirical Studies", Journal of Studies on Alcohol, vol.
49, no. 4, 1988.

Smart, R. and Cutler R., "The Alcohol Advertising Ban in British
Columbia: Problems and Effects on Beverage Consumption", British
Journa1of AddiCtiOfl, 71, 13—21 1976.

Strickland 0. "Social Learning and Deviant Behavior: A Specific

Test of a General Theory:A Comment and Critique", American
sociological Review, vol. 47, Feb. 1982.

Walsh B., "The Demand for Alcohol in the UK: A Comment", The
Journal of Industrial Economics, vol. 30, no. 4, June 1982.

25

Data Sources

Addiction Research Foundation, Statistics on Alcohol and Drug Use
in Canada and other Countries, Volume I and II, Toronto, Canada
1984.

Brewers Association of Canada, International Survey of Alcoholic

Beverage Taxation and Control Policies, Toronto Canada, 6th
edition, 1986.

Davies P. and Walsh D., Alcohol Control in Europe, Croom Helm:
London, 1983.

Dunn S., International Handbook of Advertising, McGraw Hill, New
York, 1964.
Dunn S. and Lorimor E., International Advertising and Marketing,
Grid Publishing Inc., Columbus Ohio, 1979.
International Advertising Association, edited by Neelankavil J.,
Restrictions on Advertising by Media and Selected Products in 16
Countries of Europe, 1985.

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Measuring
Health Care 1960—1983, Geneva Switzerland, 1985.
,

National

Accounts Volume I and II, Geneva, Switzerland,

1970 to 1983.
,

Statistical

Trends in Transport 1965-1983, Geneva,

Switzerland, 1986.

Standard Directory of Worldwide Marketing, National Register
Publishing Co., Wilinette, Ii., 1987.

United Nations, Demographic Yearbook, New York, 1971 to 1984.
,

,

Statistical

Yearbook, New York, 1971 to 1984.

Yearbook of Industrial Statistics, volume II, New York,

1971 to 1984.

