                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        WHY ARE STABILIZATIONS DELAYED?




                                Alberta Alesina

                                 Allan Drazen




                            Working Paper No. 3053




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  Auguat 1989




We wiah to thank Stephan Haggard, Elhahan Helpman, Peter Kenen, Barry Nalebuff,
Jeff Sacha, and seminar participants in Princeton and Yale for very uaeful
comments. Aleaina'a research was aupported by the National Science Foundation,
grant no. SES-8821441.   Drazen's research was supported by the National Science
Foundation, grant no. SES-87O6808.   This paper is part of NBER's research
program  in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics.  Any opinions expressed
are those of the author not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER   Working Paper #3053
                                              August 1989


                               WHY ARE STABILIZATIONS DELAYED?


                                         ABSTRACTS



      When a stabilization has significant distributional implications (as in

the   case of tax increases to eliminate a large budget deficit)            different

socio-economic groups will attempt to shift the burden of stabilization onto

other groups.      The process leading      to a stabilization becomes a       war of

attrition',    with each group       finding it rational to attempt to wait the

others out.     Stabilization occurs only when one group concedes and is forced

to bear a disproportionate share of the burden of fiscal adjustment.

      We   solve   for   the    expected time of     stabilization in a     model of

'rational" delay based on a war of attrition and present comparative statics

results    relating the expected time of stabilization to several political and

economic variables.       We also motivate this approach and its           results   by

comparison to historical episodes.




       Alberto Alesma                         Allan Drazen
       Department of Economics                Department of Economics
       Harvard University                     Princeton University
       Cambridge, MA 02138                    Princeton, NJ 08540
I. Introduction
       Countries often follow policies for extended periods of time which are recognized to be
infeasible in the long run. For instance, large deficits implying an explosive path of

government debt and accelerating inflation are allowed to continue even though it is apparent
that such deficits will have to be eliminated sooner or later. A puzzling question is why these
countries do not stabilize immediately, once it becomes apparent that current policies are

unsustainable and a that change in policy will have to be adopted eventually. Delays in
stabilization are particularly inefficient if the longer a country waits the more costly is the

policy adjustmentneeded to stabilize, and if the period of instabilitybefore the policy change is
characterized by economic inefficiencies,such as high and variable inflation.
       The literature on the pre—stabilizationdynamics implied by an anticipated future
stabilization (for example, Sargent and Wallace [1981], Drazen and Helpman [1987,19891)
assumes that the timing of the future policy change is exogenous.     Since in these models the

long—run infeasibility of current policy is known from   the beginning, what   is   missing is an
explanation of why the infeasible policy is not abandoned immediately. Explanations of the

timing of stabilization based on irrationality,such as waiting to stabilize until "things get
really bad", are unconvincing: since the deterioration in the fiscal position can be forseen, the
argument turns on certain countries being more irrational than others. Explanations which
give a key role to exogenous shocks leave unxeplained both why countries do not stabilize as
soon as unfavorable shocks occur and why stabilizations that are undertaken often don't seem
to coincide with significant observable changes in external circumstances.

'In Sargent and Wallace (1981) and Drazen and Helpman (1987) the timing of stabilization is
deterministic and exogenous; in Drazen and Helpman (1989) the timing is stochastic, but the
distribution of the time of stabilization is exogenous.
                                                 —2—




       This paper argues that the timing of stabilizations and, in particular, their

postponement cannot be understood in models in which the policymaker is viewed as a social
planner maximizing the welfare of a representative individual, On the contrary, heterogeneity
in the population is crucial in explaining delays in stabilization Our basic idea is that under
certain circumstances the process leading to a stabilization can be described as a "war of
attrition" between different socio—economic groups with conflicting distributional objectives.
This means, first, that delays in stabilization arise due to a political stalemate over

distribution, and, second, that stabilization occurs when a political consolidation leads to a
resolution of the distributional conflict.
       More specifically, when it   is   agreed that stabilization requires a change in fiscal policy to
eliminatebudget deficits and growing government debt, there may be disagreement about how
the burden of the policy change is to be shared. When socio—economic groups perceive the
possibility of shifting this burden elsewhere, each group may attempt to wait the others out.
This war of attrition ends and a stabilization is enacted when certain groups "concede" and
allow their political opponents to decide on the allocation of the burden of fiscal adjustment.

Concession may occur via legislative agreement, electoral outcomes, or (as is often observed)

ceding power of decree to policymakers.
       We present   a simple model of delayed stabilization due to a war of attrition and derive
the expected time of stabilization as a function of characteristics of the economy, including

parameters meant to capture, in a very rough way, the degree of political polarization. For
example, the more uneven is the expected allocation of the costs of stabilizationwhen it occurs,
the later is the expected date of a stabilization.    Hence,   if unequal distribution of the burden   of

taxation is an indicator of political polarization, more politically polarized countries    will
                                               —3—




experience longer periods of instability.2 More institutionaladaptation to the distortions
associated with instability also implies later expected stabilization, while partial attempts to
control the deficit prior to a full stabilization may make the expected time of full stabilization

either earlier or later. We further show that if it is the poor who suffer most from the
distortions associated with high government deficits and debt, they may bear the largest share
of the costs of stabilization. We also discuss the relation   of the distribution of income to the

timing of stabilizationand show conditions for a more unequal distributionto imply either an
earlier or a later expected date of stabilization.
       Our approach is related to the literatureon dynamic games between a monetary and a

fiscal authority with conflicting objectives (Sargent [1986], Tabellini [1986,1987], Loewy [1988]).
In that literature a "war of attrition" is played between the two branches of government: an
unsustainable combination of monetary and fiscal policies is in place until one side concedes.
Our shift in emphasis to a game between interest groups has several justifications. First, the
assumption that the monetary authority is independent of the fiscal authorityis unrealistic for
most countries with serious problems of economic instability. Second, the difference in the

objective functions of different branches of government may be related to their representing
different constituencies; here we tackle issues of heterogeneity directly.4 Finally, by explicitly

modelling distributional conflicts, we can derive results relating the timing of stabilization to



2The effects of political instability on the path of government debt is studied in a different
framework by Alesina and Tabellini (1987,1989),Tabellini and Alesina (1989), and Persson and
Svensson (1989).
31n contrast, a model with heterogeneity, but with a social planner or benevolent government
would predict that the burden of costs of stabilization would be more equitably distributed.
4Rogoff (1985) has suggested that it may be optimal to appoint a Central Banker with
preferences wiuch do not coincide with social preferences. In this case, however, the Central
Bank's preferences would be known by the public, while a war of attrition requires uncertainty
about an opponent's characteristics.
                                               —4—




economic and political characteristics of different economies.
       The paper   is   organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes some regularities observed in a
number of stabilizations which suggest using a war of attrition as a model. Section 3 presents a

specific stylized model of the process leading to a stabilization based on the empirical
observations and shows how delays result from individually rational behavior. Section 4

presents comparative static results on how the expected date of stabilization is affected by

changes in the economy's characteristics. The final section presents conclusions and suggests
extensions.


II. Delayed Stabilization as a War of Attrition
       No single model can explain every episode of delay in enacting a macroeconomic

stabilization. Historical evidence suggests, however, that in a large number of hyperinfiations,
it was disagreement over allocating the burden of fiscal change which delayed the adoption      of a

new policy. We begin by noting common features of the stabilization process across several

episodes, features which suggest modelling stabilization as a war of attrition.
       1. There is agreement over    the need for a fiscal change, but a political stalemate over
how  the burden of higher taxes or expenditure cuts should be allocated. In the politicaldebate
over stabilization, this distributional question is central.

       Sharp disagreements over over allocating the burden of paying for the war were common
in the belligerent countries after World War I (Alesina [1988], Eichengreen [1989]). For

example, in France, Germany, and Italy, the political battle over monetary and fiscal policy
was not over the need for reducing large budget deficits, but over which groups should bear the

higher taxes to achieve that end. Parties of the right favored proportional income and indirect
taxes; parties of the left favored capital levies and more progressive income taxes (Haig [1929).
                                               —5—




Maier [1975]). Though Britain after the war also faced a problems of fiscal stabilization, the
dominant position of the Conservatives led to a rapid stabilization by means which favored the

Conservatives' traditionalconstituencies. Once the need for sharply restrictiveaggregate
demand policies to end the Israeli inflation was widely accepted,5 there was still a stalemate
over distribution: specifically, there was an unwillingnessby labor to accept sharp drops in

employment and real wages.


       2. When stabilization occurs it coincides   with a political consolidation. Often, one side
becomes politically dominant. The burden of stabilization is sometimes quite unequal, with the

politically weaker groups bearing a larger burden. Often this means the lower classes, with
successful stabilizations being regressive.

       The successful stabilizations in France (1926) and Italy (1922—24) coincided with a clear
consolidation of power by the right. In both cases, the burden fell disproportionately on the

working class (Haig [1929], Maier [1975]).
       The German stabilization     of November 1923 followed a new    EnablingAct giving the
new Stresemann government power to cut through legislative deadlocks and quickly adopt

fiscal measures by decree. Though the government which took power in August was a "Grand

Coalition" of the right and the left, by autumn "the far right was more dangerous and powerful
than the socialist left" and government policy reflected the perceived need to appease

conservative interest groups (Maier [1975], pp.    384—6).

       The Israeli stabilizationalso occurred with a National Unity government in power more

importantly, what distinguished the     Jul   program from earlier failed attempts was the heavier



In the early 1980's there was substantial     disagreement over whether high inflation was due to
fiscal problems, or   to "bubbles" or other factors suggesting a direct attack on expectations.
                                               —6—




burden   it would place on labor. On the other side, the failure of Argentina to stabilize in the
face of endemic inflation has gone hand in hand with continued political polarization and

instability and the failure of any group to consolidate its power effectively (Dornbusch and
DePablo[1988]).


         3. Successful stabilizations are usually preceded by several failed   attempts; often a
orevious program appears Quite similar to the successful one.
         In a war of attrition the cost of waiting means that the passage of time will imply
concession on the same terms that a player earlier found "unacceptable". The components of
the successful Poincare stabilization of 1926 are quite similar to his program of 1924. Several
unsuccessful attempts in Germany appear quite similar ex ante to the November 1923 program

(Dornbusch [1988]). Many aspects of the July 1985 stabilization in Israel bad been previously
proposed, but rejected by the government.


         To summarize, the central role of conflict over how the burden of stabilization is to lie

shared; the importance of political consolidation in the adoption of a program; and the fact that
programs which were previously rejected ate agreed to after the passage of time suggests
modelling delayed stabilization as arising from a war of attrition between different
socio—economic groups.

       In the basic war of attrition model from biology, two animals are fighting over a prize.
Fighting is costly, and the fight ends when one animal drops out, with the other gaining the
prize. Suppose that the two contestants are not identical, either in the costs of remaining n
the fight or in the utility they assign to the prize. Suppose further that each contestant's value
of these is known only to himself, his opponent knowing only the distribution of these values.
                                                  —7—




       The individual's problem is to choose a stopping time based on his type, that is, the
value of his costs and payoffs, on the distribution of his opponent's possible type, and on the

knowledge  that his opponent is solving the same choice problem. That is, he chooses a time to
concede if his opponent has not already conceded. In equilibrium the time of concession is
determined by the condition that at the optimal time, the cost of remaining in the fight
another instant of time is Just equal to the expected gain from remaining, namely the

probability that the rival drops out at that instant multiplied by the gain if the rival concedes.
At the beginning of the contest the gain to remaining exceeds the gain to dropping out, as there

is   some probability that one's opponent is of a type that drops out early. The passage of time
with no concession on his part conveys the information that this is not the case, until one's own

concession occurs according to the above criterion.

         For a war of attrition between heterogeneous individuals to give expected finite delay in
concession under incomplete information, two obvious features   are important. First, there
must be a cost to remaining in the fight, that is to not conceding. Second, the payoff to the
winner must exceed that to the loser. In the next section we show how stabilizations may be
modelled with these features in mind.


II. The Model
         We consider an economy as in Drazen and Helpman (1987,1989)in which the

government     is   running a positive deficit (inclusive of debt service) implying growing
government     debt. Stabilization Consists    of an increase in taxes which brings   the deficit to zero,
so that government debt is constant. We assume that prior to an agreement on how to



6Since we are considering an economy with constant output. this is equivalent to a rising
debt—to—GNP ratio.
                                              —8—




share the burden of higher taxes, the government is limited to highly inefficient and

distortionary methods of public finance.7 In particular, monetization of deficits, with the
associated costs of high and variable inflation, is often a main source of government revenue

prior to a fiscal stabilization. The level of distortionary financing, and hence the welfare loss
associated with it, rises with the level of government debt. These welfare losses may differ
across socio—econornic groups: for example the poor may have far less access to assets which

protect them against inflation.€
       A second type of cost   to continuing in a war of attrition is more directly political. For a
group to prevent the burden of a stabilization being placed on it, it must mobilize and use
resources for lobbying activities to influence the outcome of the legislative or electoral jrocess.
Different groups may differ in their political influence and therefore in the level of effort needed
to continue fighting the war of attrition. We develop the model stressing the first

interpretationof pre—stabilizationcosts, but will return to political interpretations   in   the
concluding section.
       The benefit of stabilization derives from the move away from highly distortionary
methods of financing government expenditures. In this respect, stabilization benefits

everybody. The differential benefits reflect the fact that the increase in nondistortionary taxes
is unequally distributed.
       Concession in our model is the agreement by one side to bear a disproportionate share of


TCukierman, Edwards , and Tabellini (1989), for example, argue that unstable LDC's often
exhibit highly inefficient fiscal systems in which it is extremely difficult to raise standard
income taxes, leading to reliance on inflation and very wasteful forms of taxation.
Tbe view that the utility loss from living in an unstabilized economy flows from the use of
distortionary financing of part of the government deficit raises an obvious question: why not
simply accumulate debt until an agreemwnt can be reached on levying less distortionary taxes?
We suggest there may be constraints on the rate of growth of the debt, especially if it is
external, but do not model this here.
                                                 —9—




the tax increase necessary to effect a stabilization. Interpreted literally, the notion of
concession which ends the war of attrition is not observed. However, as the examples in the

previnus section illustrate, effective concession may be reflected in a formal agreement between
the various sides, as in the Israeli case; in the the formation of a new government which is given
extraordinary powers, as in the French or German cases; or in the outcome of elections in which
one side gains a clear majority, and opposing groups decide not to block their program any

longer.9
       More formally, consider a small open economy which issues external debt to cover any
deficits not covered by printing money. The economy is composed of a number of

heterogeneous interest groups which differ from one another in the welfare loss they suffer from
the distortions associated with the pre—stabilizationmethods of government             finance. We will

first specify government behavior, then the maximizing behavior of interest groups. This
characterizes the war of attrition leading to a stabilization. From this process we can derive an

endogenous distribution of time of stabilization.
       Until  t = 0 the government budget is balanced, with external government debt
constant at level      0. At t = 0 a shock hits reducing available tax revenues. From t = 0
                  b0
until the date of stabilization   a fraction of the deficit   1—   y is   covered by issuing debt and a
fraction       by distortionary taxation. (Though the economy is non—monetary, a major type of

distortionary taxation is inflation arising from printing money.) What is importantfor us is
not that   '           that it is positive.
               is fixed, but                     Calling g0 the level of expenditures after      t = 0,
debt b(t) evolves according to




9Elections may give one side a clear mandate not because its opponents have conceded on their
distributional objectives, but because a majority of voters see that side as more competent to
handle an economic crisis.
                                                — 10 —




(1)                b(t) = (1—')(rb(t) + g0)


where r is the world interest rate, assumed to be constant. This may be solved to yield



(2)                b(t) = b0e(1_7)rt + e(1_7)Tt          —
                                                             1).


Defining       b0 +       , taxes before a stabilization are

(3)                T(t)   = (rb(t) + g0) =       eTt.
         A stabilization consists of an increase in taxes sufficient to prevent   further growth in the
debt. Hence taxes to be levied at the date of stabilization T are


                   r(T) = rb(T) +


where        is the level of expenditures after a stabilization. If we assume for simplicity that
      = g0, we have from (2)

(4)                r(T) = re(1_T.


         An agreement to stabilize is an agreement on how the taxes T(T) are to be apportioned
between different interest groups. For simplicity assume there are only two groups (an

assumption easily generalized). The "stabilizer" assumes a fraction       a>      1/2   of the tax burden
                                                         —11   —




at T, the "non—stabilizer"a fraction               1 —        a itself is not bargained on: it is a
                                                         a. The fraction

given parametermeant to capture the degree of polarization in the society. A value of a close
to one represents a high degree of polarization or a lack of political cohesiveness.
        Taxes after a stabilization are assumed to be non—distortionary. What is important is
that they are   1       d.istortionary   than taxes before a stabilization.        In fact,   if taxes after a
stabilizationwere equally distortionary, there would in general be no incentive to concede, that
is, to stabilize.

        Infinitely—lived groups may differ from one another in two respects. One is their flow
endowment of income            y.   The second is the utility loss they suffer due to distortionary taxes.
Let us index group i's loss by                       0 is drawn from        a distribution F(), with lower and
                                         0, where
upper bounds        9   and    .   What is critical is that
                                                                0    is known only to     the group itself, other
groups knowing only the distribution F(0). The results on delayed stabilization are consistent
with a functional relation between                 and                 as       cannot   be inferred. (For example
                                               y          0, as long        0
with uncertaintyabout the marginal utility of income.) For simplicity we assume that the

utility loss from distortionary taxes,           K, is linear in the level of taxes, namely'°


                        K(t) = Ojr(t)

        The flow utility of group          i   is linear in consumption and is of the form


                               =     —    —
                        u(t)
'°\Ve could adopt a more general specification for
                                                                   K, such as
         K(t) = O(,())l+m with m> 0.
The qualitativefeatures of our results do not change with this more general specification. The
differenceswill be emphasized below.
                                               — 12 —




where c is consumption. (Subtracting         y is simply a normalization.)   After a stabilization
= 0,   as taxes after   a stabilization are assumed to be non—distortionary. We suppress the     I


subscripton the function u. If      is independent of y, distribution of income does not         affect

the timing of stabilization. We consider the alternative case in section IV.
         The objective              to madmize expected present discounted utility by choice
                          of each group is

of a time path of consumption and a date to concede and agree to bear the share a of taxes if
the other group has not already conceded. Let us denote flow utility before a stabilization by
uD(t) and the lifetime utility of the stabilizer and the non—stabilizer from the date of
stabilization onward by vS(T) and VN(T) respectively. Lifetime utility of the stabilizer and
the non—stabilizer if stabilization occurs at time T may then     be written as


                                T
                            =                  + e_rTVJ(T)       j = S,N.
                   U1(T)        J0 u(x)ed.x


Expected utility as of time zero as a function of one's chosen concession time     T1
                                                                                        is the sum of

UN(T) multiplied by the probability of one's opponent conceding at T for all T <           T1
                                                                                                and

US(Ti) multiplied by the probability of one's opponent not having conceded by T. If we
denote by 11(T) the distribution of an opponent's optimal time of concession (this is of course

endogenous and will be derived below) and by h(T) the associated density function, expected
utility as a function of    T   is



                                                     1T.
                   EU(T.)
                       1
                             = (1- H(T.))U5(T) +
                                         1       1
                                                           UN(x)h(x)dx
                                                      — 13 —




                          =            H(T)) [JTiuD(X)e_rxdx + e_rTi vS(T)J
                                   —
                              (1


                              +
                                  J:= uD(z)e_dz + e_TXVN(x)]h(x)dx
The time path of consumption and                   are chosen to maximize (8).
                                              T1
       With linear utility any consumption path satisfying the intertemporalbudget constraint
with equality gives equal utility. Denote by D, cS, and cN consumption before a

stabilization, after   a stabilization for the "stabilizer", and after a stabilization for the
'non—stabilizer" respectively. Assuming that each of the two groups pays one—half of taxes
before a stabilization, we have the lifetime budget constraints


                   rT
                                                                =
(9)               j cU(x)e)Cdx + J c(x)e                   dx

                        J(y —           (x))edx+ JT( e(1_T)e_tx —




(10)                                      +                     =
                  JTcD(x)e_rxdx               JzcN(x)e_lx
                                  —
                                          x))edx +       J(     —
                                                                    (l_)r1_7T)edx.

The following consumption path is then clearly feasible



(ha)              cD(t)    = y — re(1_t                             0< t < T
(hib)             cS(t)   = y — ai&e(1T                                t T
                                              — 14 —




(lic)            cN(t)      =   —
                                    (l_a)re(1_'T               t   T 11


Flow utility before a stabilization is then



(12)              u?(t)
                            = — re(1_7)rt —
                        =
                            —'r( + Oi)&e(1_7t

which is the income effect of taxes plus the welfare loss arising from taxes being distortionary.
                                                                       on the total level of
(Note that we assume that the distortionary cost to each group depends
distortionary taxes.)
      With constant consumption after a stabilization, discounted utility      (j =     N,S) is

simply constant flow utility for each group divided by r. Using (11) and (6) (with      K = 0)
oneimmediatelyobtains



 (13)             v'(T) — VS(T) = (2n —

 which is the present discounted value of the excess taxes   that the stabilizer must pay relative
 to the non—stabilizer.
                                                                       time for a group with cost
        We are now ready to determine      T, the optimal concession
 0.22 Since we do not know the distribution H(T), we cannot use (8) directly. However, by

 showing that       is monotunic in O, we can derive the relation between H(T) and the known

                                                                         at each point; it is only
 "Formally, a solution does not require consumption to be non—negative            from remaining
 required that at each point at which an individual does not concede, the utilityfunction the
 is higher than the utility from dropping out. With a standard concave utility
 solution would have the propertyof no concession requiring non—negative consumption.
 l2This derivation of the symmetric equilibrium follows Bliss and Nalebuff (1984).
                                                  — 15 —




F(0), namely(1—H[T(0)])        = F(0). We thereforefirst establish


LEMMA     1:   The optimal concession time for group i is monotonicaliy decreasing in   O,   that is

T(81) < a'.
        Proof: See Appendix.



        We now want to find a symmetric equilibrium where each group's concession behavior is
described by a monotonically increasing function T(0). The idea here is to show that there
exists a Nash equilibrium where if all other groups are behaving according to T(O) group         i
finds it optimal to concede according to T(0), and to characterize T(0).'3 Having done that,
the expected time of stabilization    is   the expected minimum T, with the expectation taken over
F(0).


PROPOSITION         1:   There exists a symmetric Nash equilibrium with each group's optimal
behavior described by a concession function T(0), where T(0) is implicitly defined by



                   T'(0)=—44           (2       —1)/r
                          ru)               +     -


and the boundary condition




'3There may also be assymetric equilibria (that is, where groups behave according to different
T(O)) even though each group's 0 is known to be drawn from the same distribution F(0). We
do not investigate them and restrict our attention to the symmetric equilibrium. Of course, if
different groups' endowments are perceived to be drawn from different distributions, each group
                      T(0). See, for example, Fudenberg and Tirole (1987).
will have a different
                                            — 16 —




(15)             T()=O.

Proof: See Appendix



       To understand the nature of the optimal strategy, we may write (14)    as



(16)             [f3i]2a_ (o+.a)
The right hand side is the cost of waiting another instant to concede. The left—hand side is the

expected gain to waiting another instant to concede, which is the product of the conditional
probability that one's opponent concedes (the hazard rate, in brackets) multiplied by the gain
if the other group concedes. Concession occurs when the (group—specific) cost of waiting just
equals the expected benfit from waiting. This is a standardresult in the war of attrition.
       Equation (16) is also useful in understanding the evolution of the war of attrition from
the viewpoint of one side. Consider a group with 9 >    .    At timezero there is some

probability that it's opponent has 9 =      and will concede immediately. Formally, with fiV)

> 0, the left—hand side of (16) is infinite, so the group does not concede. If no one concedes     at

time zero, both sides know their opponent is not type    .   At the "next" instant the
                              and so on, so as time passes each side learns that   its opponent is
next—highest type concedes,
not of cost above a certain level. When the conditional probability of an opponent's concession
in the next instant (based on what the group has learned about his highest possible cost) is

 such that (16) just holds, its time to "throw in the towel."
        Given concession times as a function of 9, the expected date of stabilization    is   then the
                                             — 17 —




expected minimum T.     the expectation taken over F(9). With n players the probability that
a given 9 is the maximum (so that T(9) is the minimum) is its density f(O) multiplied by
the probability that no other 9 is higher, namely (F(O))°1, multiplied by n. With n 2,
the expected value of minimum T, that is, the expected time of stabilization TSE, is thus



                 TSE    =
                            2J 9 T(x)F(x)f(x)dx.

As long as all participantsin   the process initially believe that someone else has may have a

higher 9, stabilization does not occur immediately. The cumulative distribution of
stabilization times T is therefore one minus the probability that every group has a 0 lower
than the value consistent with stabilization at     T. With two groups this is



                 S(T)   =1      (F(TI))2

where 9(T) is defined by T(O)         T.

       Two observations are useful in helping to explain the key role of heterogeneity.

Consider first what the model would imply if all groups were identical, that is, if we considered
a representative agent model.    If we interpretthis as there being a single agent, he knows with
probability one that he will be the stabilizer. Since uD is negative, equation (8) implies that
expected utility is maximized by choosing                  to zero, that is, by stabilizing
                                              T     equal

immediately. Intuitively, if an individual knows        that he will end up bearing the cost of a
stabilization, a cost to waiting implies that it   is   optimal to act immediately.

      Heterogeneity alone is not sufficient, however, to explain why stabilization is postponed.
There must also be uncertainty about the cost to waiting of other groups. If it is known to ai
                                              — 18 —




that   a group has higher costs than anyone else, optimal behavior will imply that this group
concedes immediately. Intuitively, stabilization      is   postponed because each interest group
believes in the possibility that another group will give up first. As time passes and this

expectation is not realized, one group finally concedes.
         It is also interesting to compare the sense in which stabilization becomes "inevitable"
.here to the sense used in Sargent and Wallace (1981) and Drazen and Helpman (1987.1989). In

those papers a positive deficit (exclusive of debt service) implies that government debt is

growing faster than the rate of interest, so that     its present value is not going to   zero.   The
failure of this transversality condition to hold, and hence the long—run infeasibility of the path,
is   what makes stabilization inevitable. In our model the war of attrition ends in finite time
with a stabilization, even if the path of the debt is technically feasible, that is, even if it grows
less fast than the rate of interest. Hence our approach indicates why countries whose policies


                                                      '
are technically feasible (present discounted value of the debt goes to zero) will eventually
stabilize if current policies involve welfare loss.


IV. Comparative Statics
         We can now ask how various changes in the parameters or distributions affect the

 expected time of a stabilization. Our goal is to see if observable characteristics of economies
 explain why some countries stabilize sooner than others. We present these results in a number
 of propositions, and explain each result intuitively. Proofs are in the appendix.


 PROPOSITION 2: Higher Distortionarv Taxes or Monetization
 When the utility loss from distortionary taxation is proportional to the level of taxes, financing


 '4Nalebuff(1982) discusses the war of attrition with a fixed endpoint.
                                                   — 19 —




                                                                        taxation (a higher       -) implies
a   greater fraction of the pre—stabilization deficit via distortionary
an earlier date of stabilization.


          This result may seem initially surprising, for it says that an attempt to control the

growth of government indebtedness may actually hasten the date of stabilization.
                                                                                      A higher y

on the one hand implies a greater distortion for a given deficit, inducing players to concede
earlier. However, making more of an effort to reduce the deficit implies that government debt
                                                                      also grow less fast. The
grows less fast and hence the distortions which induce stabilization
reason the first effect dominates is that our proportional specification in (5) implies that both
the gain from being the non—stabilizer and the loss from no stabilization are proportional to the
size of the debt, so that a slower growth of the debt does not in itself change their relative
                                                                           the cost of living in the
magnitudes. '5 Higher monetization, for example, has the effect of raising
unstabilized economy relative to the gain from having another group stabilize at each point in

unLe. This result is consistent with         the idea that is is easier to stabilize hyperinflations than
irsflationswhich are "only" high.


PROPOSITION 3: Higher Costs of Distortions
An increase in the costs associated with living in an unstabilized economy, for an unchanged

    distribution of   9,   will move the expected date of a stabilization forward.




    lsWhen the utility loss from distortionary taxation rises more than proportionally with theIt
    level of taxes (as in footnote 10). the effect of slower growth of the deficit may dominate.
    can be shown (details are available) that low 0 groups will concede later, so that if it happens
    that both groups have low 0, increased y will mean a later date of stabilization.
                                              — 20 —




       Countries with institutions that lessen the utility loss from distortionary financing of

government expenditures (such as indexation) will, other things equal, be expected to postpone
stabilization longer. The caveat here is that increased indexation may induce greater

monetization or higher prices for a given level of monetization. This appears relevant for the
Israeli case.
       If the utility loss is an increasing (perhaps convex) function of inflation, a sharp
acceleration of inflation will lead to a stabilization. This would explain the timing of the
French and German stabilizations.


PROPOSITION 4: Lower Political Cohesion
If a = 1/2 stabilizationoccursimmediately;the largeris a above 1/2, the later is the
expected date of stabilization.


       The difference in the shares of the burden of stabilization, a, could be interpreted as

representing the degree of political cohesion in the society. Countries with      a    close to 1/2 can

be characterized   as having high political cohesion   in that the burden of stabilization   is   shared
relatively equally, while those where the burden is very unequal, so that      a is close to one, are
more polarized or less cohesive. When the relative burden of a stabilization      is   very unequally
distributed,the gain to waiting in the hope that one's opponent will concede is larger. Hence
each group holds out longer.
       This intuitive result suggests a relationship between certain measures of political

stability and macroeconomic outcomes. Roubini and Sachs (l989a,b) argue that governments
composed of large, short—lived, and uncohesive coalitions are associated with large budget
deficits. They construct an index of political cohesion and stability in the government and
                                             —21   —




show a strong correlation between that index and budget deficits after 1973 in several industrial

countries. One explanation of this finding consistent with our model concerns reaching
decisions within the coalition. Large coalitions of politically diverse parties find it particularly
hard to reach agreement on    how allocate tax increases or expenditure cuts among the

constituencies represented by coalition partners. In the absence of such agreement, deficits

grow.
         It should be emphasized, however, that empirical correlations between political and
economic instability do not establish causation in one direction. Though we emphasize a causal
link from political to economic instability, there may of course be causal kinks in the opposite

direction. 26
         Greater dispersion in the distribution of income or resources can affect the timing of
stabilizationif a group's cost 9 is a function of its income. Since delayed stabilization requires
relative cost be unknown to other groups, this means that relative positions in the income
distribution must be unknown. We find such an assumption somewhat problematic. An
increase in income inequality may itself make relative positions apparent,leading to an

immediate stabilization.
         if one is willing to accept uncertaintyabout relative income, naive intution    suggests
that a   mean—preserving spread in the distribution    of income will lead to an ea:..er date of

stabilization, since it means some group will have a higher cost and thus conceá earlier. Such
reasoning is incomplete, for it ignores the change in behavior (that is, in the func.   n
                                                                                       1(0))
induced by the change in the distribution of costs. The fatter upper tail for costs, means that
each group perceives a higher likelihood that its opponents' costs have increased. his



'6For a recent insightful study of economic determinants of political instability,See Londegran
and Poole (1989).
                                             — 22 —




perception wou.ld lead it to hold out longer. When will this latter effect dominate, so that a
greater dispersion in income could lead to later expected stabilization?


PROPOSITION 5: Income Dispersion and Longer Delays in Stabilizing
If the utility loss due to distortionary taxes is a decreasing, convex function of income, and
income is unobservable, a mean—preservingspread in the distribution of income G(y) that

keeps the expected minimum of the y's constant implies a later expected date of stabilization.


       Note that if 9' (y) < 0, it is the "poor" who stabilize, since the "rich" suffer from the
distortions arising from budget deficits less and thus can hold out longer. The crucial

assumption of uncertainty about income is perhaps more reasonable under the second
interpretationof costs in section II, namely as   resources   that must be devoted to the political
process to avoid bearing a disproportionate share of the burden of stabilization.    y   would then

be resources available forpolitical purposes. With uncertainty both about the relative political
skills of groups and about what fraction of their resources they are willing to devote to the

political struggle, assuming uncertainty about relative "income" seems more defensible.
       An empirical finding consistent with Proposition 5 is presented by Berg and Sachs

(1988), who find a strong empirical relation between the degree of income inequality and the
frequency of debt rescheduling. Countries with a more unequal income distribution have
experienced more difficulties in servicing their external debt. Although this evidence is not
directly related to the timing of stabilization policies, it is consistent with the idea that
countries with more income inequality will, at a given level of debt, find it more difficult to

adopt policies necessary to insure solvency and   service the debt.
                                              — 23 —




IV. Extensions -
        We havepresenteda modelshowinghow delayedstabilization can be explained in a
model of rational heterogeneous agents. In contrast, the same model with a rational

representative individual would yield immediate stabilization. Since we summarized many of
the results in the introductory section, we c9nclude first   by discussing some generalizations and
second by touching on some issues which the model did not address but which are important in

explaining stabilization.
        First, we used the example of tax increases made necessary by budget deficits inducing a
war of attrition because it is particularly relevant for hyperinflations. Our argument is far

more general. Any policy change with strong distributional consequences can give rise to a war
of attrition.

        Second, for simplicity we considered a case where there was no change in external

circumstances following the original shock. More generally, once a war of attrition has been
going on, a change in the environment (including aid or intervention from abroad) may lead to
a change in agents' behavior and rapid concession by one side. Even (or especially) when this

change is forseen, the war of attrition is crucial in the delay of stabilization until the external
change.
       A third generalization is a more precise formalization of the political process leading   to
stabilization. In particular, this would lead to a more satisfactory characterization of the

political costs involved in sheltering oneself from bearing the burden of stabilization. As in the
model above, such costs may increase with the size of the outstandingdebt: as the difference
between payoffs to winners and losers rise, as a result of the growing level of the debt, each side
should be willing to expend more time and resources in activities such as lobbying to induces its
rivals to concede. Since different groups differ in their political influence or access to resources,
                                              —24—




such direct political costs will be central to the timing of concession. We did not model this
                                                                                          to
formally, since the simplicity of our model depended on costs being simply proportional
current taxes, an assumption which appears difficult to justify for political costs. Nonetheless
we think political costs are no less important than costs of distortions in the war of attrition.
       A political model also suggests alternativeinterpretations of some of our results. For

example, in Proposition 3, the effect of a shift in   U could   be   interpretedas follows. Countries
with political institutions which make it relatively more difficult for opposing groups to "veto"
stabilizationprograms not ot their liking will stabilize sooner.
        Finally, let us note some issues we did not discuss. First, delays in successful
stabilization are related to the issue of failed stabilization and hence to what determines the

probability of success. Sargent (1982,1984) identified "credibility" as a crucial ingredient of
success, where a "credible" stabilization is program is one in which a "strong" policymaker is
firmly committed to the plan and is not likely to give in to pressure to abandon fiscal
 responsibility and revert to inflationary finance. If the public is uncertain about the degree of
 commitment of the policymaker to fiscal responsibility, success is seen to be less likely.17

 Dornbusch (1988) criticizes this notion of credibility because of a lack of predictive power,
                                                                                        As
 arguing that successful and unsuccessful programs often appear quite similar ex ante.
                                                                                    his
 examples, be refers to Poincare's successful 1926 stabilization in comparison with
 unsuccessful 1924 attempt, and to the several unsuccessful attempts in Germany prior to the
 November 1923 program.
        In our model Sargent's notion of credibility plays no role. Instead our model suggests

 that stabilizations   need not be associated either with a sharp change in external circomstances.



 'TBackus and Driffill (1985), Barro (1986), and Tabellini(1988?         study dynamic   games in which
 the public is uncertain about whether a policymaker is "strong'         or "weak".
                                                —   25 —




nor with the program being implemented looking sharply different than what had previously

been proposed.    A   program which was unsuccessful at one point in time may later be successful
(thus "credible" in Sargent's words) simply due to the passage of time. In the war of attrition,
passage of time and the accumulation of costs leads one group to give in and make a previously
rejected program economically and politically feasible.
       Second, in reality successful stabilizations are not one—shot affairs. One component of

success is designing how the adjustment process should be spread out over time. Our notion of

timing was in the timing of the beginning of a successful program, not of the timing of its
stages once   it has begun.   On a basic level, these could be separated,   with this paper addressing
the question of why significant policy changes, multistage     or otherwise, are delayed. In fact,

since stabilization takes time, programs often appear successful for a period of time, only to

subsequently fail. Hence, the issue of delayed stabilization should ideally be considered
simultaneously with issues of both partial and multistage stabilizations.
       Finally, we have not explicitly considered importantpolitical events such as elections.
The timing    of elections may be   related to the timing of stabilizations. An electoral result
favorable to one side may make it far more difficult for their opponents to block their programs
and shelter themselves from the costs of stabilization. Thus, one might expect successful
stabilizations following elections with a clear winner. In the terminology of our model, a clear
electoral result may be an important signal of the distribution of the relative strength of
different groups. Future research should model this relationship more explicitly
                                                   A—i




                                                 APPENDIX
Proof of Lemma 1
Differentiating (8) with respect to      T1
                                               one obtains

(Al)                      = eTi                      —
                                                         vS(Ti)) +
                                     [h(TxvN(Ti)
                                                s      dVS(T.)
                          (1 — H(T1))(u(T1) — rV (Ti) + dT )]

Using the definitions of   vN(T), vS(T), and u(t) (Al) becomes
(A2)               =eTi {h(T1)(2a_i)e(_'rTi             +

                      (1 — H(T)) [yr( — — O&e(1_7)1Ti]]
Differentiating with respect to 8 we obtain

(A3)
                                 —
                                     (1 — H(T1))e(_7)tTi         <
Equation (A3) meansthat when others are acting optimally,               dEtJ/dT is decreasing in      O.

Optimal concession time     T is thereforemonotonically           decreasing in    8.
Proof of Proposition 1 (This proof closely follows Bliss and Nalebuff             [1984])

       Suppose the other interest group is acting according to T(8),          the optimal concession
time for a group with utility cost      8.    Choosing a time   T    as above would     be equivalent to

choosing a value      and conceding at time         T = T( 9k).     Equation (8) becomes,after the

change in variables


(A4)               EU(O,8) = F(Oi))            uD(x)e_rT(x)T(x)dx       + e_rT(Oi)VS(T())]

                      +                                         + e_rT(VN(T(x))]f(x)dx.
                          x=O.   [JuD(z)e_rTT(z)dz
                                   x
                                                      A—2




Differentiating with respect to 9 and setting the resulting expression equal to zero we obtain
(where we drop the i subscript)
                dEU =
                                                     vN(Tj))] +
                                                 —
(A5);
                       f(O)[(/S(T(9))

                            F(9)(u (0,9) — ryS       + .T_)T'(G) = 0.
winch becomes after substitutions

(A6)                 ii1 =   —
                                 f(9)(2a —1)— F(0h'r(9 +          —
                                                                      a)T'(O)   = 0.
                     ao
Now by the definition of T(0) as the optimal time of concession               for a group with cost       9, 9 = 0

when    9   is chosen optimally. The first—order condition (A6) evaluated at 0 =             9     implies (14).
(Substituting      T'(0) evaluated at    0 from (14) into (A6) one sees         that the second order
condition   is   satisfied, since (A6) then implies that sign dEU/d9 = sign (9— 9).) To derive the
initial boundary condition note first that for any value of           0   ,   the gain to having    the
opponent concede is positive. Therefore as long as          f()   is nonzero, groups with 9 <             will not
concede immediately. This in turn implies that a group with 0 =                   (that is, that   knows it has

                                          will find it optimal to concede immediately. Thus
the highest possible cost of waiting)                                                                     T() =

Proof of Proposition 2
A higher fraction     of pre—stabilizationdeficits financed by taxation corresponds to a higher
value of    y.   Comparing the optimal time of concession as a function of 0 for            y>     y, we have
                                    (2a — l)/r
                     T'(0)=_.43 (0 + -
(A7)
                     T'(9) =            (2cr   —1)/r
                                      y(9+-a)
Since       —       is the same in both cases,   the initial boundary condition is the same for              and
                                                         A—3




      that is,   T(V)   = T() = 0. Inspection       of (A7) indicates    that T'(8) > T'(8) for all values    of

                                                                                    .
-y,

8.    Combining these two results, we have that T(O)                > T(8) for U <    Equation (17) then

implies that TSE         > j.SE
Proof of Proposition 3
A multiplicative shift in 8         has an identical effect to an increase in       'y   in Proposition 2. By an
                                                                       and hence TSE will
argument analogous to the one used in that proof, T(O) will shift down
fall.
Proof of Proposition        4

           When       a = 1/2, vS = vN.        Since there are costs to not conceding, it is optimal to

 concede immediately. To prove the second part of the proposition, the same argument as in

 Proposition 2 shows that T() = T() = 0 for a> a. Since the right—hand
                                                                             side of (14)

 increases with an increase in a, T'(8) > T'(O) for all valuesof 0. Using the same reasoning
 as in Proposition       2, we have that T(O)      > T(O) for 8 <       . Equation(17) thenimplies that
 TSE >      jSE
 Proof of Proposition 5

                 8=
 Suppose                    with 8' <    0,   where a group's income       y   is unobservable. Let G(y,o) be

 the distribution       of income with bounds            and   ,   where increases in      correspond to a more

 disperse income distribution. Increasing             o' correspondsto      a mean—preservingspread of income
 if for some y
                          0 for y
            G(y,)                    y

            G(y,o)0         fory>y
  The expected minimum          value of      y can be   written as



  (A8)                   E(ymin)
                                    = 2JY(l — G(x,))g(x,u)xdx.
                                                                  A—4




which by integration by parts equals                    I   (1   —
                                                                     G(x,o))2dx. Constant expected y            implies


(A9)                 —                  = 0.
                 j (1 G(x,o))G a(x,o)dx

(A9) and (17) in the text imply
                                             ry
                 TSE(a) =                          —
(AlO)                                   2j T(x,a)(1 G(x,a))g(x,a)dx.

        Repeated integration by parts implies that (AlO) can be written as

        TSE(a) =     2c_11)'                 —                              1
                                                                                            dx
                                j       (1        G(x,a))g(x,a)


          = 2a—      ir     —
                                1/2                                              2          1
               r7     LO( +                   —    a   +JRl—G(x,a))                  0(x)   +     —   a' 0'(x)dx].

If the change in a does not affect the lower bound                              and if             0, we have


        _____ ——
        dTSE(a)
          da
                     —
                            r
                          ____
                          2a — 1

                                        J(i
                                                   —
                                                       G(x,a))G a(x,a
                                                                          0(x) +
                                                                                      1
                                                                                          1 —     )2
                                                                                                 a 0'(x)dx]

                         2a—        1             0'(y)
                 -                                                                                    =0.
                                                                 a)2J(l_G(x,a))Ga(x,a)
                           T7
                                        REFERENCES

Alesina, A., "The End of Large Public Debts," in F. Giavazzi and L. Spaventa, eds. Surviving
      with a High Public Debt Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 1988.
         and G. Tabethni, "ExternalDebt, Capital Flight, and Political Risk," working
      paper, 1989 (forthcoming Journal of International Economics).
         and            , "A Positive Theory of Fiscal Deficits and Government Debt," NBER
      Working Paper.
Backus, D. and J. Driffihl, "Inflation and Reputation," American Economic Review 75 (1985),
      530—38.

Barro R., "Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy with Incomplete Information," Journal of
      Monetary Economics 17 (1986), 1—20.

Berg, A. and J. Sachs, "The Debt Crisis: Structural Explanations of Country Performance,"
       NBER Working Paper 2607, 1988.

Bliss, C. and B. Nalebuff, "Dragon—Slaying and Ballroom Dancing: The Private Supply of a
       Public Good," Journal of Public Economics25 (1984), 1—12.

Cukierrnan, A., S. Edwards, and G. Tabellini, "Political Instability and Inflation in LDC's,"
       working paper, 1989.
Dornbusch R., "Notes on Credibility and Stabilization," NBER Working Paper 2790, 1988.
          and J.C. DePablo, "Argentine Debt and Macroeconomic Instability," NBER
       Working Paper 2378, 1987.
           and S. Fischer, "Stopping Hyperinflations Past and Present,"Weltwirtschaftliches
       Archiv 122 (1986), 1—46.

Drazen, A. and E. Helpman, "Stabilization with Exchange Rate Management," Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 52 (1987), 835—55.
          and           , "Inflationary Consequences of Anticipated Macroeconomic Policies,"
       working paper, 1989 (forthcoming Review of Economic Studies).
Eichengreen, B., "The Capital Levy in Theory and Practice," working paper, 1989.
Fudenberg, D. and J. Tirole, "A Theory of Exit in Duopoly," Econometrica 1986
Haig, R., The Public Finance of Postwar France, Columbia University Press: New York, 1929.
Helpman, E. and L. Leiderman, "Stabilization in High Inflation Countries: Analytical
     Foundations and Recent Experience," Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public
       Qic 28 (1988), 9—84.
Loewy, M., "Reaganomics and Credibility Revisited," Economic Inquiry 1988.

Londegran J. and K. Poole, "Economic Determinants of Coup d'Etat," working paper, 1988.
Maier, C., Recasting Bourgeois Europe: Stabilization in France. Germany. and Italy in the
       Decade After World War I, Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ, 1975.

Na.lebuff,   B., Prizes and Incentives, D.Phil. Thesis, Nuffield College,   1982.
Persson T. and L. Svensson, "Checks and Balances on the Government Budget," in E.
       Helpman, A. Razin, and E. Sadka, eds., Economic Effects of the Government Budget,
       MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, (1988).

Roubini, N. and 3. Sachs, "Political and Economic Determinants of Budget Deficits in the
      Industrial Democracies," working paper, 1988 (a).
           and          , "GovernmentSpendingandBudget Deficits in the Industrial
        Economies," working paper, 1988 (b).
Sargent, T., "The Ends of Four Big Inflations," in R. Hall, ed., Inflation, University of Chicago
      Press (for NBER): Chicago, 1982.

          "Stopping Moderate Inflations: The Methods of Poincare and Thatcher," in R.
       Dornbusch and H. Simonsen, eds., Inflation. Debt, and Indexation, MIT Press:
       Cambridge, MA, (1984).
            "Reaganomics and Credibility," in T. Sargent, ed. Rational Expectations and
       Inflation, Harper and Row: New York, 1986.
          and N. Wallace, "Some Unpleasant Monetarist               Federal Reserve Bank
       of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 5 (1981), 1—17. Arithmetic,"
Tabellini, G., "Money, Debt, and Deficits in a Dynamic Game," Journal of Economic Dviiamics
       and Control (1986).

           "Central Bank Reputation and the Monetization of Deficits," Economic Inquity
       (1987).
         and A. Alesina, "Voting on the Budget Deficit," working paper, 1989 (forthcoming,
       American Economic Review).
