NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSISTENT VALUATION AND COST OF CAPITAL EXPRESSIONS
WITH CORPORATE AND PERSONAL TAXES

Robert A. Taggart, Jr.

Working Paper No. 3074

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1989

I am grateful to Ivan Brick, Robert Dammon, Alan J. Daskin, James Miles,
Lawrence Fisher, Abraham Ravid, Richard Ruback, Gordon Sick, Joseph Yagil and
participants in the finance workshops at Boston University, the University of
Delaware and Rutgers University of helpful comments on an earlier draft. I am,
of course, responsible for any remaining errors. This paper is part of NBER's
research programs in Taxation and Financial Markets and Monetary Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3074
August 1989

CONSISTENT VALUATION AND COST OF CAPITAL EXPRESSIONS
WITH CORPORATE AND PERSONAL TAXES

ABSTRACT

This paper examines three valuation methods, each of which should lead to
the same value for a given asset. These are the Adjusted Present Value,
Adjusted Discount Rate and Flows to Equity methods. To achieve identical
valuations, however, the different methods must be implemented with cost of
capital expressions that embody a consistent set of assumptions about (1) the
tax regime and (2) the time pattern and riskiness of debt tax shields.
Valuation and cost of capital expressions that have been proposed in the
literature are grouped and contrasted according to these assumptions. It is
also shown that the familiar weighted average cost of capital can be consistent
with any such set of assumptions, as long as the correct expression is used to
estimate the relationship between the levered and unlevered cost of equity.

Robert A. Taggart, Jr.
Boston College
School of Management
Fultori Hall

Chestnut Hill, MA 02167

The interaction between financing and investment is a classic problem in the
valuation of firms and assets. If financing affects value, then an accurate estimate of

value must take the financing mix into account. Recognition of this problem has in turn
spawned a variety of methods for estimating asset value and the cost of capital, most of

them focusing on the tax effects of financing.
This paper examines three basic valuation methods, each of which should lead to
the same value for a given asset. These are the Adjusted Present Value, Adjusted Discount
Rate and Flows to Equity methods. However, each method relies on a different cost of

capital measure and incorporates the tax effects of financing in a different way. To

achieve identical results, therefore, the different methods must be implemented with
cost of capital expressions that embody a consistent set of assumptions.

The purpose of this paper is to group the different cost of capital expressions that
have appeared in the literature according to consistent sets of assumptions. Specifically,

it is shown that existing cost of capital formulas can be separated into six groups,
depending on which of two tax regimes is assumed and which of three assumptions is

made about the riskiness and time pattern of debt tax shields.' As long as the analyst

works within one of these six groups, consistent results will be achieved using any of the
three valuation methods.
The three valuation methods are described in more detail in Section I. Section Il

considers valuation with corporate but no personal taxes. The case in which a perpetual

firm has a known, constant amount of debt outstanding is considered first, since this is
the case that has been most frequently analyzed in the literature, It is then contrasted

with the case in which future debt levels are uncertain. In Section III, personal taxes are

introduced, and the equilibrium relationships between after-tax market rates of return
are described. Cost of capital expressions are then derived under three different

2

assumptions about the risk of future debt tax shields. The results are summarized, and
conclusions are drawn in Section IV.

l.Three Valuation Methods

The three basic approaches to the valuation of companies or corporate assets each

seek to discount after-corporate-tax cash flows at pre-investor-tax discount rates. The
first of these is Myers'(l 974) Adjusted Present Value, or APV method, the essence of
which is to estimate value in two steps. First, a base-case value, under the assumption
of 100% equity financing, is computed and then the costs and benefits of the actual
financing package are added separately. The base-case value is calculated by discounting

the asset's expected after-corporate-tax operating cash flows, C,,, for each period n at an

all-equity, or unlevered discount rate, r.2 The appropriate discount rate for any
additional terms, which involve financing costs or benefits, remains to be determined
below, but in most applications the cost of debt has been used.
The second approach is the Adjusted Discount Rate, or ADR method. Here, expected

operating cash flows, C,,, are discounted at a rate that reflects the asset's financing
combination. Both the APV and ADA methods thus discount the same cash flows, but they

adjust for financing in different ways. Under the APV method, the adjustment occurs in
one or more separate discounted cash flow terms, while under the ADR method, the

adjustment occurs entirely in the rate that is used to discount the operating cash flow

stream.
The third approach is the Flows to Equity, or FTE method. Here, the equity value
rather than the total value of the asset is calculated by discounting cash flows to the
equityholders at a cost of equity capital. The cash flows are calculated by subtracting any

after-corporate-tax financing charges, such as interest or lease payments, from the
all-equity cash flows, C,,, and thus they represent actual cash flows to shareholders. By

3

contrast, the cash flows used under the other two methods are hypothetical cash flows

that the shareholders would receive if the asset were entirely equity-financed.
Under different circumstances, it might be more convenient to choose one of these

valuation methods over the others.3 Nevertheless, all three are based on the same

underlying theory of the valuation process, and if properly used, all three should yield
identical results. We turn next to the issue of which cost of capital expressions are
needed to ensure consistency across valuation methods.

A limitation of the analysis, which should be noted at the outset, is that all debt is
assumed free of default risk. This assumption is made in part to maintain comparability
with the bulk of the literature and in part to avoid unnecessary complexity. It does

imply, however, that tax factors are the only effect of capital structure to be
incorporated, while factors such as bankruptcy, agency and information costs are
ignored. Some of the consequences of risky debt have been analyzed by Conine (1980),

Myers and Ruback (1988), Sick (1988), and Yagil (1982).

II. Valuation With Coroorate But No Personal Taxes
A. The Case of Constant. PerDetual Debt

The most familiar cost of capital expressions have been derived under the

following assumptions: (1) corporations pay taxes at the rate T; (2) there are no
personal taxes; (3) the amount of corporate debt financing is known and constant

forever; (4) the firm's debt is free of default risk, so its cost of debt is rfD, the
required rate of return on riskless debt; and (5) the firm's expected operating cash
flows are constant forever, so that C — C for each period n. All of the notation used in
this case and in the remainder of the paper is summarized in Table I.
Under these assumptions, the cost of capital and valuation expressions shown in

Panel A of Table II have been derived numerous times in the literature (e.g., Hamada

(1969), Modigliani and Miller (1963), Rubinstein (1973), Taggart (1977)) and

4

have been shown to give consistent results (Ashton and Atkins (1978), Chambers,

Harris and Pringle (1982), Lewellen and Emery (1986), Myers (1974)). Equation
(Al) embodies the Adjusted Present Value idea, in which the base-case value, C/r, is

adjusted for the present value of the debt tax shield, TD. If, for example, C — 100, r =

.2, D — 200 and T .34, V 568. The same value can be obtained under the Adjusted
Discount Rate method by discounting C using either of the expressions for r. With DN
—

.352, Equation (A3), sometimes referred to as the MM formula, yields r*

.176, and

C/r — 568. Alternatively, if tfD — .10, equation (A4) can be used to give rE = .236.
This value can in turn be used with Equation (A2), the weighted average cost of capital,

to give r = .176 and V 568. The cost of equity can also be estimated using the capital
asset pricing model (CAPM) approach, as in (A5). If we assume rm

is consistent with r

.15, then

= 2.0

.20. Equation (AS) then implies L 2.72, and from (A5), rE

.236. Finally, under the Flows to Equity approach, equity value can be estimated directly
by discounting the cash flows to the equityholders at the cost of equity, rE. The cash flows

to equityholders are equal to (C - rfD(l -Ta) D) the after-tax operating cash flows
minus the after-tax debt service. Discounting these cash flows, which equal 86.8 per
year, at rE gives E — 368.

The example illustrates that each of the three valuation methods yields consistent
results using the cost of capital expressions in Panel A. The list of assumptions needed to

ensure consistency is, of course, quite restrictive. In particular, since the operating
cash flow stream is a level perpetuity and the amount of debt outstanding is constant,

firm value also remains constant through time. This implies that the debt-to-value ratio
is also constant, and thus it is immaterial whether debt is specified in dollar terms, as

in (Al), or in ratio terms, as in (A2), (A3), (A4) and (A6). For an asset with a finite
life, on the other hand, this distinction becomes important, since debt can no longer be
constant both in dollar terms and as a fraction of asset value. This is the case considered

by Miles and EzzelI (1980,1985).

5

B. The Mites-Ezzell Analysis

Miles and Ezzell (1980) started with the premise that the firm maintains a

constant debt-to-value ratio. If current firm value is observable, the current debt level
is known arid, In the absence of default risk, the Interest tax shield at the end of the first

period is also known with certainty, since it is based on the current debt level. Thus it is

justifiable to discount the first period's interest tax shield at rfD, the risk-free debt
rate. Miles and Ezzell argued, however, that future firm values, and hence future debt

levels, are currently uncertain. If the firm maintains a constant debt-to-value ratio,
future firm value will be perfectly correlated with the value of the operating cash flow
stream. Therefore, they reasoned, all interest tax shields beyond the first period should
be discounted at r, the unlevered cost of capital.

Based on this reasoning, Miles and Ezzell (1980,1985) derived the set of
valuation and cost of capital expressions that appear in Panel C of Table II. Unlike the set

of expressions in Panel A, the Miles-Ezzell expressions give consistent results for both
perpetual and finite-lived assets. However, because of their different assumption about

the risk of debt tax shields, these results will, In general, differ from those derived
from Panel A, even in the perpetuity case.

Consider the numerical example of Section HA., in which C-i 00 (forever), r —

.20, T — .34, ON — .352, r0 .10, r .15 and

2.0. Using the Adjusted

Discount Rate method and Equation (C3) gives r — .187 and V — 534.9. Or, using (C4)

and (C2), tE — .253 and again r* — .187. Or, using (C 6) and (C5), L — 3.05 and again
rE — .253. Thus the expressions in Panel C yield results that are internally consistent
but different from those derived from Panel A.5 For the perpetuity case, the same

results would be obtained from both panels only if all cash flows were riskiess.
The essential distinction between the Miles-Ezzell approach and the approach
embodied in Panel A is the assumed time pattern and riskiness of the debt tax shields.

Under the Miles-Ezzell approach, the debt-to-value ratio is held constant, so the risk of

6

the debt tax shields depends on the risk of firm value itself. Miles and Ezzell argue that

this risk is captured by r, the unlevered cost of capital. However, in the special case
where the expected operating cash flow stream is a level perpetuity, the individual cash

flows are risky but firm value is not. Each period's cash flow realization provides no
new information about future firm value. Thus the approach in Panel A, which treats the
dollar amount of debt as fixed and the interest tax shields from this debt as riskiess, may

seem more natural in this special case. In contrast, Miles-Ezzell is the more natural
approach when each period's cash flow realization resolves some uncertainty about

future firm value. In that case, future firm value is uncertain, and if a constant debtto-value ratio is to be maintained, the actual amounts of debt and hence the future

interest tax shields become known only as this uncertainty is resolved.
Another point that emerges from contrasting Panels A and C is the role of the
weighted average cost of capital, which can be used under either valuation regime. In

effect, the market's valuation of debt tax shields Is captured in the cost of equity, rE. If

the cost of equity is estimated in a way that correctly reflects investors' assumptions
about the risk of the debt tax shields, whatever those assumptions may be, the weighted

average cost of capital will yield a valid adjusted discount rate.

Ill. Valuation With Corporate and Personal Taxes

A. After-Tax Rate of Return Relationships
When personal taxes are introduced, greater care must be taken in specifying

investors' required returns. Required rates of return are often analyzed on a pre-tax
basis, since these are more easily observable than after-tax returns. Nevertheless, it is

after-tax returns that ultimately interest investors, and these will drive the
equilibrium return relationships. It is useful to note at the outset, in fact, two such
relationships that govern the pricing of debt and equity securities in this tax regime.

7

In the remainder of this section, it is assumed that all investors pay taxes on

income from debt securities at the rate T and on income from equity securities at the
rate TPE.6 For simplicity, it is assumed that all investors are subject to the same tax

rates. In equilibrium, debt and equity securities of comparable risk must offer
investors identical after-tax returns, since otherwise, investors would be motivated to

rearrange their portfolios. In particular, suppose we have a risk-free debt security

offering a pre-tax return per period of rfD and a risk-free equity security offering a
pre-tax return per period of nE.7 These returns will be set in the market so that:

rfD( 1 - T) rfE( 1 - TPE).

(1)

More generally, a tax-adjusted Capital Asset Pricing Model can be derived, as in

Brennan (1970) and Gordon and Malkiel (1981), which characterizes the equilibrium

after-tax returns on securities of both different risk and different tax treatment.
Suppose, for example, that all risky assets are in the form of equity and that the

expected pre-tax return to investors from the overall market portfolio of equities is rm.
Let 1Ej denote investors' pre-tax return on firm i's equity. It can then be shown that, in
equilibrium ,8

rEJ(l - TPE) - rfD(l - T) — j[rm(1 TPE) - rfD(l - Ip)]
where

(2)

is the usual measure of systematic risk. Using (1), the after-tax CAPM can

also be expressed more simply as

rEJ — tIE + j(rm - tIE).

(3)

8

B. Valuation Under the APV Aporoach

Consider first the Adjusted Present Value approach to corporate valuation in this

tax regime. For the sake of generality, we analyze a finite-lived asset, treating
perpetuities later as a special case. Starting at the end of the valuation horizon and

working backward toward the present, suppose that the firm will pay a liquidating
dMdend to its shareholders at time N. This dividend consists of the after-corporate-tax
operating cash flow, CN, minus the after-corporate-tax payment of interest and

principal on its beginning-of-period debt, DN.i. Since the personal tax on equity income
is levied against dividends plus capital 9iD.a. the beginning-of-period equity value,
EN.l, serves as a personal tax shield.

If we follow the certainty-equivalent approach, as used by Sick (1988), letting
CEQN denote the pre-personal-tax certainty-equivalent of CN, then the value of the
firm's equity and debt at N-i can be expressed as:

EN..l — I

DN..l

+rfE(l .TPE)[

EQ-r(1 -Tc)DN1-DN.1)(l-TpE)+TpEEN1]

(4)

(5)

1 +rfD(i T)[rfD(1-TP)DN.l+DN.l]

Noting from (i) that the two discount rates must be the same in equilibrium, we

can combine (4) and (5) to determine VN..l EN1 + DN1:

VN1((iTPE) + rfE(1-TPE)) a

CEQN1(1-TPE) + r,o(1-Tp)[1 -

(1-T )(1-T E)

]D1.

(6)

9
The expression In square brackets will be recognized as Millers (1977) GL, the net tax
advantage to corporate debt. DMding both sides of (6) by (1 - TPE)(l + rfE) and using

(1) then yields
_______ + rfEGLDNI

VN1 — 1

(7)

1 + rf E

+ rf E

We can iterate backward in similar fashion, but first an assumption must be made about

whether future debt levels are certain or uncertain. If we assume, as has typically been
done under the APV approach, that all future debt levels are known, it can be shown that

for any period t9

v—

'S'
n.I+1

rfTD1

+

+ nE)'1 (1 +

(8)

n.tt+1

The first term in (8) represents the firm's base-case value, or the value it
would have if it were entirely equity-financed, while the second term represents the net
tax benefit from corporate debt. In cases for which risk-adjusted discount rates are

appropriate, (8) can also be written in the more familiar form1 0

n.t+1

+ r)'

+

rGD1
h_.(1
+ rfE)
nt+1

(9)

In either form, it is important to notice that the second term, the tax benefit

from debt, involves the risk-free equity rate, not the risk-free debt rate. This term is
best thought of as the present value of an annual financing subsidy. As in Brealey and

Myers (1988), for example, the value of a financing subsidy can be calculated as the

10
present value of the annual difference between unsubsidized and subsidized debt service

charges (after corporate taxes), discounted at the unsubsidized market rate (also after-

corporate-tax). In similar fashions if we let S represent the second term in (9), then
from Table 1 can be used to write S as:

(1) plus the definition of

- rfD(l - Tc)}Dn.i
S— .7

1

n.t+ 1

(1 + rfE)

.

(10)

In words, a firm could in principle choose between two types of risk-free securities. It
could issue risk-free equity at the rate rfE, or it could issue debt at the tax-subsidized

rate rfD(l - T)• The net advantage to debt is simply the present value of this
opportunity cost saving.1 1
It should also be noted that the APV approach does not require the assumption that

all future debt levels are known. If they are subject to some uncertainty, DNI in (8)
can simply be replaced by the certainty-equivalent debt level. More generally, if the

debt itself is subject to default risk, Sick (1988) has shown that the numerator of the
second set of terms in (8) can be replaced with the certainty-equivalent interest
payments on the risky debt. Alternatively, if we assume a constant debt-to-value ratio,

as in Miles and Ezzell (1980) or Myers and Ruback (1988), future debt tax shields
take on the risk characteristics of the firm as a whole. While the APV method is often
associated with the assumption of riskless interest tax shields, then, the basic approach
can easily accommodate more general assumptions.

11

C. The Adjusted Discount Rate Approach

The Adjusted Discount Rate method seeks a discount rate, r, such that, at any
time t,
N

cn

Vt
n=I+1

(11)

(1 + r)

The specific form of r* depends on what assumption we make about the time pattern and

risk of future debt tax shields.
We can derive one ADA expression for the overall cost of capital by first writing

(7) as
CN

VN.i — 1

rfEGLDN..1

(12)

+ r + 1 + nE

If we further assume, as Miles and Ezzell did, that the ratio of debt to firm value is a

constant, (D/V), we can express (12) as

VN1 —

.

(1 + r)(1 + rfE(l - GL(r)))

(13)

(1 + rfE)
We can then iterate backward. For example, VN2 is equal to the sum of the values as of

time N-2 of three terms: CN.l, the net tax advantage of interest paid at time N-i , and
VN1. This raises the question, however, of what discount rate to apply to VN..l. Under

12

the Miles and Ezzell argument, the unlevered cost of capital, r, should be used, in which

case backward iteration of (13) yields, for any time t:
N

cn

V

(1 +rfE)

.

(14)

J

The expression in square brackets in the denominator plays the role of one plus the

adjusted discount rate. Setting the term in square brackets equal to (1 + r) and solving

for r* gives:

r

(DV1 + r
r-rfEGLIy,(l +

rfE)

(15)

which is the analogue to Miles and Ezzelrs cost of capital expression, generalized to
include both corporate and personal taxes. Note that, as in the APV approach discussed

above, it is the risk-free equity rate, not the risk-free debt rate that appears in the
expression.

The preceding analysis, which is summarized in Equations (Dl) and (D3) of
Table II, is based on the assumption that the nearest interest tax shield is risk-free

while all other future tax shields are risky. A second formulation for r* can be derived
if we assume instead that all future interest tax shields are risk-free. As in the regime
that includes only corporate taxes, there is no general Adjusted Discount Rate expression

that is applicable for finite asset lives under this assumption alone. However, if we add
the assumption that the operating cash flow stream is a level perpetuity, the Adjusted

Present Value expression in (9) reduces to Equation (Bi) in Table II. Equation (Bi) can
in turn be solved to yield the Adjusted Discount Rate formula in Equation (B3) which is

13

the analogue to the MM formula (A3) when personal as well as corporate taxes are

relevant.
A third formulation for r results if we go to the opposite extreme and assume
that all future interest tax shields, Including the nearest one, are risky. In this case, the
second term in (12) is discounted at r, rather than rfE, and the backward iteration
process results in Equations (Fl) and (F3) in Table 11.12 Myers and Ruback (1988)
use a continuous capital structure rebalancing assumption to justify discounting all
interest tax shields at r, and they derive an adjusted discount rate that is algebraically

equivalent to (F3). Sick (1988) has also shown that (F3) is the limiting case of (03)
as we move to continuous-time discounting.

Finally, we can derive a fourth formulation for r by starting with a riskadjusted discount version of (4):

EN.l —

CN - rfD(l-TC)DN1 - 0N-1

1 + rE

.

(16)

Multiplying through by (1 + rE) and solving for VN..l — EN..l + D..1 gives

V1

N-1

.

DNI

(17)

I + rE(V)+ rfD(1-TC)(V)
If the financing ratios are constant, we can iterate backward in similar fashion to obtain

the value of the firm at any time t:
N

V1.

I
n.t+1

cn
E

0

+ rE+ rto(l-T)

.

(18)

14

This shows that the weighted average cost of capital is still a valid risk-adjusted
discount rate when there are both corporate and personal taxes. Furthermore, the

development of (18) did not rest on any specific assumption about the risk of interest
tax shields, and hence it is consistent with any of the three assumptions made above. The
weighted average cost of capital thus appears in each of Panels B, D and F in Table II (see

(B2), (D2) and (F2)).
D. The Flows to Equity Approach

An estimate of the cost of equity is needed to implement the Flows to Equity

method. The relationship between the levered and unlevered cost of equity in turn
depends on the valuation of the interest tax shields. Hence, each of the three assumptions

used in the preceding section leads to a different relationship. The three relationships

are found by setting (B2) equal to (B3), (D2) equal to (03) and (F2) equal to (F3),
respectively, and solving for rE. The resulting expressions are shown in Table II as

(B4), (D4) and (F4).13 In general, the less risky the interest tax shields are perceived
to be by investors, the smaller is the required premium for financial leverage and the
less steeply sloped is the relationship between rE and (DIE). Hence Equation (B4) has
the flattest slope and (F4) the steepest.

Alternatively, the cost of equity could be estimated using the CAPM, as in (B5),

(D5) and (F5). It Is important to note, however, that an after-tax CAPM must be used,
not the pre-tax CAPM that appears in (A5), (C5) and (E5). This is because all of the
valuation relationships, starting with (5), are based on investor cash flows and rates of

return after all taxes. Writing the after-tax CAPM equation for a levered firm
(rE

rfE + L(rm-rfE)) and an unlevered firm (r — rfE + u(rm-rfE)), and

substituting in (B4), (04) and (F4), respectively, gives the relationship between
levered and unlevered betas for each of the three assumptions about the risk of interest

tax shields. These are shown in Equations (B6), (D6) and (F6). As in the relationships

15
between rE and r, the levered beta increases more steeply with the debt-equity ratio the

riskier are the interest tax shields.
E. The Key to Consistent Valuation

The results of Sections ILB, C and D all lead in the same direction. Starting with
any of the three valuation methods, we branch out into Panels B, D or F depending on

whether future debt tax shields are assumed to be (1) riskless in perpetuity, (2) risky

after the first future period, or (3) risky for all future periods. Given the tax regime,
the choice of one of these three assumptions fixes the relationships between the

unlevered cost of capital, r, the overall cost of capital, r*, and the cost of equity, rE.
Hence, each of the three valuation methods will produce identical results as long as we

use cost of capital expressions from a given panel in Table II. If expressions from
different panels are used simultaneously, on the other hand, these will embody

conflicting assumptions about (1) the tax regime and (2) the time pattern and riskiness
of future debt tax shields. In that event, inconsistent valuations will arise.
F. A Numencal Example

The assumed parameter values in Table Ill can be used to construct a numerical

example. The valuation horizon in this example is limited to 10 periods, and both
corporate and personal taxes are assumed to affect corporate valuation.

Suppose we assume that the Miles-Ezzell (1980) analysis best reflects the
riskiness of interest tax shields. In that case, the set of equations in Panel D of Table II

should be used. Using Equation (D3), r* — .1408. Discounting 10 periods worth of

after-corporate-tax operating cash flows at this rate then gives an estimate of total firm
value of 520.03. Alternatively, (D4) could be used to estimate rE — .19064, and when
this value of rE is substituted into the weighted average cost of capital (D2), the result

is r* — .1408. Or if (06) is used to estimate a levered beta of 1.6533, (D5) gives an
estimate for rE of .19064. Thus, the cost of capital expressions in Panel D give

internally consistent results.

16
Different approaches to valuation can also be tried. Under the Flows to Equity

method, the period-by-period cash flows to the equityholders must be calculated, and

this requires a schedule of after-corporate-tax debt service charges. If the Adjusted
Discount Rate approach is used to calculate a period-by-period schedule of firm values,

as in column (2) of Table IV, each period t's debt is just .4V, as shown in column (3).
Given rfl) and T, the after-tax debt service can be calculated as In column (4), and this
gives the cash flows to equityholders shown in column (5). Discounting the flows in

column (5) at rE — .19064 gives an estimate of the firm's initial equity value of
312.01. Adding this to the initial debt value of 208.01 then gives and estimate of total

firm value at time 0 of 520.02.
Finally, the Adjusted Present Value approach, as embodied in Equation (Dl),
could have been used. This requires a schedule of effective interest tax shields

(r1EGLD), as calculated in column (6) of Table IV. Then, iterating backward using

Equation (Dl) successively, the time 0 value of the firm is estimated to be 520.03.
Hence the three major approaches to valuation also give consistent results, as long as
they are implemented using consistent cost of capital expressions and consistent
assumptions about the time pattern of outstanding debt.
G. Spedal Cases

The preceding discussion shows how the analyst can achieve consistent valuation

by choosing the appropriate panel in Table II and working within that panel. It does not,
unfortunately, say how the appropriate panel should be chosen, nor how the inputs
needed to work within that panel should be estimated. It should be relatively easy to

determine whether the level perpetuity case of Panels A and B is appropriate, but as
Hamada and Scholes (1985) point out, it may not be obvious which of the two tax

regimes is the more relevant. Moreover, if personal taxes are included in the analysis,
unobservable magnitudes such as the net tax gain to leverage, GL, and the risk-free

17
eqUIty rate, rfE, must be estimated to move from one cost of capital expression to

another.1 4

Two special cases, which allow these implementation problems to be avoided, are

worth noting. The first of these occurs when all debt tax shields are discounted at r
(Panels E and F of Table II) and the firm adopts a capital structure characterized by

(E/\') — u and (D/V) — (1-u)• In that event, Myers and Ruback (1988) have shown
that when a cost of equity, calculated from (E5) and (E6) or from (F5) and (F6), is
substituted into the weighted average cost of capital (E2 or F2), the result is:

— rfD(l-u)(l-TC) + urm.

(19)

The important point to note is that, with the assumed capital structure, the overall cost
of capital is the same, regardless of which tax regime holds true. Thus (19) can provide
a useful cost of capital expression when the analyst is uncertain as to which tax regime

more accurately reflects the reality of the corporate and personal tax codes.
The second special case arises when all cash flows are riskiess. Ruback (1986)
has shown under very general conditions that the market value of a set of nskless cash

flows received by a corporation is equal to the present value of the after-corporate-tax

cash flow stream discounted at the after-corporate-tax riskiess interest rate. This
follows by an arbitrage argument from the observation that such a stream can support

100 percent of its own value in debt financing. That the current results are consistent
with this analysis can be seen from Table Il. In the case in which there are only

corporate taxes, an all-equity-financed riskiess cash flow stream would have an

unlevered cost of capital r — rfD. When (D/V) — 1, then, all of the expressions for r*

(A2, A3, C2, C3, E2, E3) reduce to r* — rfD(l.TC). When there are both corporate and
personal taxes, r — rfE for a riskless, unlevered stream, and when (DN) — 1,

18
Equations (B3), (D3) and (F3) reduce to ra — rfE(l-GL), while Equations (B2), (D2)
and (F2) reduce to rh — rfD(l-TC). However, from (1) and the definition of
rfE(l -GL) — rfD(l -Ta). Hence, all of the cases treated in Table II collapse to the same
overall cost of capital when cash flows are riskiess.

IV. Summary and Conclusions

This paper has attempted to unity some disparate strands from the corporate

valuation and cost of capital literature. That literature has proposed several different
approaches to valuation, has wrestled with the issue of how best to account for taxinduced interactions between financing and investment and has analyzed the distinctions

between the perpetuity and finite-life cases. However, the different approaches and
different cases have not all been considered simultaneously in an environment that
allows for different tax rates on corporate income, personal income from bonds and

personal income from equity.
When these approaches to corporate valuation are analyzed with an eye toward
the conditions necessary to ensure consistency among them, the following conclusions
emerge:

1. Many of the valuation and cost of capital expressions that have appeared in the

literature differ along two dimensions. The first of these is the assumed tax regime, and
the second is the assumed time pattern and riskiness of future interest tax shields.
2. Once the analyst has chosen these two assumptions, the cost of capital

expressions within any given panel of Table II, used in conjunction with any of the three

basic valuation methods, will yield identical estimates of firm value. Mixing expressions
across panels, however, implies inconsistent assumptions about the tax regime or the

riskiness of interest tax shields and will not yield internally consistent results.
3. If one moves horizontally in Table II, from a tax regime that allows for only
corporate taxes to one that includes both corporate and personal taxes, the analogous

19
valuation and cost of capital expressions differ in two ways. First, T, the corporate tax
rate, is replaced by GL, the net tax advantage to corporate debt. Second, r0, the risk-

free debt rate, is replaced by FfE, the risk-free equity rate.15 In particular, this
implies that an after-tax CAPM must be used in conjunction with any adjusted beta
expression (such as B6, D6, F6) when personal taxes are relevant.
4. The weighted average cost of capital is robust to changes in both the tax regime

and in the perceived risk of interest tax shields. This is because the relationship between
the levered cost of equity, rE, and the unlevered cost, r, changes to reflect both tax

factors and tax shield risk, leaving the weighted average formula intact. To correctly
estimate the weighted average starting from scratch, however, the analyst must use the
correct relationship between r and rE. A special case of the weighted average cost of

capital, proposed by Myers and Ruback (1988), does not require specific knowledge of

the relationship between r and rE, but does require a specific capital structure
assumption.

20
Table I

Summary of Notation

E

— market value of equity

D

market value of debt

V

— E + D — total market value of firm

rm

= equilibrium expected return on market portfolio of equity securities

rE

cost of equity for an individual firm

nE

cost of risk-free equity

rf D

— cost of risk-free debt

r

— unlevered, or all-equity, cost of capital

r*

— adjusted, or overall, cost of capital

T — personal tax rate on income from bonds
T — effective personal tax rate on income from equity

T

— corporate tax rate

I

- (1-Tc)(1-TPE)1 — effective tax advantage of corporate debt
"1
' 1p1' J
L
— expected value of period n after-corporate-tax operating cash flow, C,

C8 — certainty-equivalent of Ô
— beta, or systematic risk, of an unlevered firm
— beta of otherwise equivalent levered firm

21
Table II
Summary of Cost of Capital Expressions
Each panel is based on a different set of assumptions about

(1) the tax regime and (2) the time pattern and riskiness of debt tax shields
Panel A: Perpetuity Case; Corporate Taxes Panel B: Perpetuity Case; Corporate and
Only; Debt Tax Shields Certain
Personal Taxes; Debt Tax Shields Certain

(B1)V+GLD

(A1)V=%-+TD

(B2) r* — rE()+ rfD(1.TC)()

(A2) r*

rE()+ rto(1-Tc)()
(A3) r — r(1 -T()
r + (r-rto)(1-T)

(A4) rE

(A5) rE — rfD +
(AG)

(B3) r — r(1 -GL())
(B4) rE

(rm - rfD)

(B5) rE

D

(Dl)

V.

(02) r*

r* = rE()+ rfo(1.Tc)@)
-

nE + (rm - rfE)

Panel D: Finite or Perpetual Ufe; Corporate
and Personal Taxes; First Debt Tax Shield
Certain; Others Uncertain

D

C +V41 rfDTC()Vt
(Cl) V —
+
'
1
+ r
(1 +rfD)

(C3) r = r

(r-rfE)(1-GL)

(B6) LU(1+(13L))

LU(1+(1TC))

Panel C: Finite or Perpetual Ufe;
Corporate Taxes Only; First Debt Tax
Shield Certain, Others Uncertain

(C2)

r +

C + V1 rfEGL()V
+
1 + rf E
1 + r

rE()+ rfD(1-TC)()

(D3) r* — r - rIEGL(lr)V)

rtoi(11()

(C4) rE — r+[r.rfD1+Tc(:D)))

(D4) rE =

(C5) rE

(D5) rE

rfD + (rm - rfD)

D[1 +rfD(l -T) "j
(C6) !L = U(1+E1
1 +rfD

)

(D6) L =

r+[r.rfE1+GL(L!E))]
rfE + 3(rm-rfE)

Df1 +rfE(I
1

+rfE

22
Table II (Cont.)
Summary of Cost of Capital Expressions

Panel E: Finite or Perpetual Life;
Corporate Taxes Only; All Debt Tax
Shields Uncertain

C + rfDTC()Vt + vt+l

i+r

(El) V.
(E2) r*

rE()÷ rto(l-Tc))

(E3) r — r - rfDTC(V)
(E4) rE — r + (r-rfD)

D

Panel F: Finite or Perpetual Ufe; Corporate
and Personal Taxes; All Debt Tax Shields
Uncertain

(Fl) V

C + rfEGL()V + V1

i+r

(F2) r* — rE()+ rfD(1-TC)()
(F3) r — r - rfEGL()
(F4) rE — r + (r-rfE)

(E5) rE — rfo + 3(rm -rID)

(F5) rE — nE +

(E6) L — (i 4)

(F6) L (i 4)

D

23

Table

Ill

Numerical Example
Based on assumed parameter values, the equations in Panel D, Table II,
are used to show that all valuation methods produce identical results

A. Assumed Parameter Values

N — 10 periods

rID — .10

C .100

rm

T

't.15

—.28
DIV — 0.4

TPE — .18
— .34

B.

Derived Values

GL — .2483, from definition in Table I

r

— .15, from (D5))

rfE — .0878,
r
V

from (1)

— .1408, from (03) or from (D2), ii (04) is used to estimate rE
— 520.03, from discounting C at r
— 1.6533, from (06))

rE — .1906, from (04) or from (D5)
E

— 312.01, from discounting equity cash flows at rE

24

Table IV

Numerical Example:
Period-by-Period Schedule of Value and Debt
Based on the assumed parameter values from Table Ill, period-by-period firm values
are derived by discounting the remaining operating cash flows at the overall cost of
capital. The debt ratio is 40 percent in each period.

(1)
Period

(2)

Firm Value

(3)

Debt

(4)
A.T. Debt
Service

(5)
Equity Cash
Flow

(6)

Effective
Tax Shield

0

520.03

208.01

1

493.24

197.30

24.44

75.56

4.54

2

462.68

185.07

25.25

74.75

4.30

3

427.81

171.12

26.16

73.84

4.04

4

388.04

155.22

27.20

72.80

3.73

5

342.67

137.07

28.39

71.61

3.38

6

29091

116.36

29.75

70.25

2.99

7

231.86

92.74

31 .30

68.70

2.54

8

164.50

65.80

33.07

66.94

2.02

9

87.66

35.06

35.08

64.92

1.43

37.38

62.62

0.76

10

25

Footnotes

1. Nearly all of the cost of capital expressions in this paper have been derived

elsewhere, so the primary aim is to synthesize existing results rather than derive new
ones. See Ashton and Atkins (1978), Conine (1980), Hamada (1969), Miles and Ezzell

(1980,1985), Modigliarii and Miller (1963), Myers (1974) and Taggart (1977) for
the case in which there are corporate but no personal taxes. Brealey and Myers (1988),

Chambers, Harris and Pringle (1982), Ezzell and Kelly (1984), Hamada and Scholes

(1985), Lewellen and Emery (1986), Myers and Ruback (1988), Sick (1988) and
Yagil (1982) consider the case in which there are both corporate and personal taxes,
but don't analyze consistency conditions among all the different valuation methods

considered here. The approach in the current paper most closely resembles that of Sick

(1988).
2. C represents the expected after-tax cash flow the company would have gotten in

period n if it had been entirely equity-financed. Note that financing charges, such as
interest or debt repayment, are not deducted from C.

3. For example, the Adjusted Present Value method does not rely on the assumption of

constant financing proportions, so it can be easier to implement when the financing mix
is changing. APV also offers a relatively straightforward way to take subsidized financing
into account. The ADA method is easy to use when the asset to be valued is similar in

terms of both business risk and financing characteristics to another asset for which the
required rate of return is known. The FTE method is useful when the available cash flow
information gives net income figures but doesn't distinguish between cash operating
expenses and financing charges.

26
4. Not all five listed assumptions are necessary to establish the validity of each

expression in Panel A of Table ii individually. However, it is necessary to make all five
assumptions if each of the expressions is to be valid simultaneously.

5. The reader might object that to retain comparability with the example in Section ll.A,

the initial condition should be D 200, rather than D/V — .352. In that event, Equation

(Cl) can be used, setting V1 — Vt — V, to derive V 537.1 and DIV .372. Thus the
results still differ from the ones obtained using Panel A.

6. As in Miller (1977), TPE should be interpreted as an effective tax rate. In actual fact,
the pattern of taxable equity income will be determined by the patterns of dividend
payments and of gain or loss realizations. TPE is the uniform annual tax rate that would
produce tax payments having the same present value as the pattern of actual tax
payments on equity income.

7. In a CAPM context, rfE can be thought of as the equilibrium pre-tax return on a zero-

beta equity portfolio. Alternatively, one could imagine an entirely equity-financed firm
with riskless assets. Such a firm's cost of equity would be rfE. For the analysis that

follows, it is not necessary that a specific, riskless equity security exist as long as one
can be created synthetically.

8. A relatively simple proof can be constructed using the same steps found in Rubinstein

(1973), but with end-of-period investor wealth calculated after all taxes.

9. To establish (8), it should be noted that in period N-2 and all prior periods, the
expressions for the values of debt and equity take the form

27

Dk,— [rfD(l-TP)DN..2 + DN2] ,and EN.,
l+rfE(l.TPE)
[(CEQN..l-rfD(I-TC)DN2 - (DN 2-DN I))(l.-TPE) - TPE(EN i-EN2) + EN1]
1 +rfE(l -TpE)
Simplifying, using (7), and iterating backward yields (8).

10. The assumptions needed to justify multiperiod risk-adjusted discounting are

discussed in Fama (1977), Myers and Turnbull (1977) and Sick (1988). They revolve
around the nature of the cash flow process over time.

11. In the case considered in most textbooks, in which personal taxes are ignored, S is

interpreted as a stream of interest tax shields discounted at the pre-tax debt rate.
However, any such expression for S can be written in two ways:

—

n.I+1

(l+rfD)fl

-j
',"[rfD
n.t+1

rrD(1-Tc)]Dn.i
(1+r10)

Moreover, if T = TPE = 0 in (1), r10 is equal to rfE, the required return on risk-free
equity. Thus (10) can be thought of as a natural generalization of the case that includes
only corporate taxes.

12. For completeness, analogous equations for the case in which there are corporate but
no personal taxes are shown in Panel E.

28
13. Yagil's (1982) expression for the relationship between rE and r, derived for the
case of riskiess interest tax shields, is different from (B4), because he defines rE in

after-personal-tax terms.

14. Empirical studies, such as Masulis' (1983) work on exchange offers, afford one
possib'e avenue for estimating GL. High-grade preferred stock might be used to estimate

rfE, although the picture is clouded by the effect of the intercorporate dividend

exclusion. Another possibility is a constructed series of zero-beta equity returns, as in
Black and Scholes (1974). Alternatively, equation (1) plus the definition of
I can be combined to yield rfE(l -GL)

in Table

rfD(l -T) which can in turn be used to estimate

rfE If the analyst is willing to rely on an estimate of GL.

15. Although not written in that form in Table Il, these two rules are also valid for the
weight average cost of capital (B2, D2, F2). That is because, as shown in footnote 14,

rfE(l-GL)

rfD(l-TC)

29
References

D. J. Ashton and D.R. Atkins, "Interactions in Corporate Financing and Investment

Decisions: A Further Comment." Journal of Finance 33(December 1978), pp.

1447-53.

Roger P. Bey and J. Markham Coffins, "The Relationship Between Before- and After-Tax

Yields on Financial Assets." The Financial Review 23 (August 1988), pp. 313-

331.

Fischer Black and Myron S. Scholes, "The Effects of Dividend Yield and Dividend Policy

on Common Stock Prices and Returns." Journal of Financial Economics 1(May

1974), pp. 1-21.

Richard A. Brealey and Stewart C. Myers, Principles of Corporate Finance (New York:

McGraw-Hill), 3rd. ed., 1988.

Michael J. Brennan, "Taxes, Market Valuation and Corporate Financial Policy." Nationa'

Tax Journal 23(December 1970), pp. 417-427.

Donald R. Chambers, Robert S. Harris and John J. Pringle, "Treatment of Financing Mix
in Analyzing Investment Opportunities." Financial Manaaement 11 (Summer

1982), pp. 24-41.

Thomas E. Conine, Jr., "Corporate Debt and Corporate Taxes: An Extension." Journal ot

Finance 35(September 1980), pp. 1033-37.

30
John R. Ezzell and William A. Kelly, Jr., "An APV Analysis of Capital Budgeting Under

Inflation." Financial Manaaemeflt 13 (Autumn 1984), pp. 49-54.

Eugene Fama, "Risk-Adjusted Discount Rates and Capital Budgeting Under Uncertainty."

Journal of Financial Economics 5 (August 1977), pp. 3-24.

Roger H. Gordon and Burton G. Malkiel, "Corporation Finance". In H.J. Aaron and J. A.
Pechman, eds. How Taxes Affect Economic Behavior (Washington, D.C.: Brookings

Institution), 1981.

Robert S. Hamada, "Portfolio Analysis, Market Equilibrium and Corporation Finance".

Journal of Finance 24 (March 1969), pp. 13-31.

Robert S. Hamada and Myron S. Scholes, "Taxes and Corporate Financial Management". In

Edward I. Altman and Marti G. Subrahmanyam, eds. Recent Advances in Corporate

Finance (Homewood IL: Richard D. Irwin), 1985.

Wilbur G. Lewellen and Douglas A. Emery, "Corporate Debt Management and the Value of

the Firm." Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 21(December 1986),

pp. 415-26.

Ronald W. Masulis, "The Impact of Capital Structure Change on Firm Value: Some

Estimates." Journal of Finance 38(March 1983), pp. 107-26.

James Miles and John R. Ezzell, "The Weighted Average Cost of Capital, Perfect Capital

Markets and Project Life: A Clarification." Journal of Financial and Quantitative

Analysis 15 (September 1980), pp. 719-730.

31

__________________ "Reformulating Tax Shield Valuation: A Note". Journal of

Finance 40 (December 1985), pp. 1485-92.

Merton H. Miller, "Debt and Taxes." Journal of Finance 32 (May 1977), PP. 261 -276.

Franco Modigliani and Merton H. Miller, "Corporate Income Taxes and the Cost of Capital:

A Correction." American Economic Review 53 (June 1963), pp. 433-443.

Stewart C. Myers, "Interactions of Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions--

Implications for Capital Budgeting." Journal of Finance 29 (March 1974), pp.

1-25.

Stewart C. Myers and Richard S. Ruback, "Discounting Rules for Risky Assets". Harvard
Business School Working Paper, November 1988.

Stewart C. Myers and Stuart M. Turnbull, "Capital Budgeting and the Capital Asset
Pricing Model: Good News and Bad News." Journal of Finance 32 (May 1977), pp.

321 -332.

Richard S. Ruback, "Calculating the Market Value of Risk-Free Cash Flows." Journal of

Financial Economics 15 (March 1986), pp. 323-339.

Mark E. Rubinstein, "A Mean-Variance Synthesis of Corporate Financial Theory."

Journal of Finance 28 (March 1973), pp. 167-182.

32
Gordon A. Sick, "Tax-Adjusted Discount Rates." University of Calgary Working Paper,

1988.

Gordon A. Sick, "A Certainty-Equivalent Approach to Capital Budgeting." Financial

Manaaement 15 (Winter 1986), pp. 23-32.

Robert A. Taggart, Jr., "Capital Budgeting and the Financing Decision: An Exposition."

Financial Manacement 6 (Summer 1977), pp. 59-64.

Joseph Yagil, "On Valuation, Beta and the Cost of Equity Capital." Journal of Financial and

Quantitative Analysis 17 (September 1982), pp. 441-448.

