NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ISRAEL'S CRISIS AND ECONOMIC REFORM:
A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE

Michael Bruno

Working Paper No. 3075

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1989

This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3075
August 1989

ISRAEL'S CRISIS AND ECONOMIC REFORM:
A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE

ABSTRACT
This article analyses the roots of the deep crisis that has afflicted the
Israeli economy since 1973 and the attempt at economic reform and recovery
since 1985. All of these are discussed against the background of the long-term
evolution in Israel's structure and growth process. At the center of the
analysis lie the implications of an oversized government and especially the
devastating effects on growth and inflation of the large and persistent public
sector deficit on top of the growing tax and public expenditure levels. The
norm of "living beyond one's means" at the public sector level has also
severely affected the norms of behavior of the private, household as well as
business, sectors.
Since 1985 there have been signs of recovery originating from the
balancing of the budget and the relative stabilization of the currency. Labour
and capital markets are gradually becoming more flexible and real interest
rates are coming down. Even so, inflation rates are not yet down to
international levels, continued budget balance is not assured and excessive
wage increases have substantially diminished profit rates and investments in
the business sector. Structural problems, rooted in economic mismanagement of
the crisis years, are surfacing.
Resumption of a sustained growth process requires persistent budget
balance and a substantial additional reduction in public expenditure and tax
levels. Structural reforms, only barely started, have to be persistently
followed in the labour and capital markets, in the fiscal system, and in the
further opening up of commodity and financial markets to competition from both
home and abroad.

Michael Bruno
Bank of Israel
P.O. Box 780
Jerusalem
Israel

1. Introduction

The Israeli economy, like Israeli society, has always provided a
fascinating area of esearch.

Although the state was burr in l748.

economic structure had been laid down at least 25 vears earlier.
Within just a few decades, a thriving, modern and diversifeu ecorcnv
which was
crew up here on the basis of the first small economic oase

established by the N20s.

From the early twenties, the uisnuv. trim

country's Jewish population, rose from only 80,000 to 600,000 in 1948 a
7.5—fold increase), while the gross national product crew 25 times o.er
the same period.

In the first twenty five years since independence,1c48

to 1972, the country's population quadrupled, while its GNP increased
10—fold.

Thus, in the space of 50 years, the population grew 30 times,

while its economic activity increased by a factor of 250. truly
astonishing figures when compared to any other country.

1

This

There IS

article is based on a lecture given in March 1989 as part of a

special public lecture series held by the Israel National Academy of
Sciences during the country's 40th anniversary of independence. A Hebrew
version appeared in the Economic Quarterly, July 1989. I am crateful

to

members of the Bank of Israel Research Department (mentioned individually
in the appendix) for part of the data used in the article.

I would like

to thank Maggie Eisenstaedt of the Maurice Falk Institute for Economic

Research in Israel for the diagrams (except for No. 11) and Soroon
Shifman for the English translation of this article from the Hebrew
version.

Finally, my grateful acknowledgements are due to Avi Ben-

Bassat, Yaakov Lavi, Mordechai Fraenkel, David Klein and Amos Rubin for
their useful comments on a previous draft.
a The year 1922 can be taken as a reasonable starting point.

It was at

least, the first year for which we have properly defined economic
indicators, compiled and analyzed by the late Robert Szereszewski, who
fell in action during the Six Day War (the study appeared posthumousl.in
1968)

-2—

orobably no other economy in the world where, in the course of half
acentury (from 1922 to 1972), per cpita GNP rose from just

15'!.

to one

half of the corresponding U.S. figure, and reached a level equivalent to
three quarters of the average prevailing in Western Europe.

But 1973 was marked by an unprecedented crisis.

Economic growth

virtually came to a halt, the balance of payments deficit rose to

alarming proportions and, worst of all,

Israel began to eaer-1ence

nflatin on a scale which only the generation of our parents had known,

albeit more briefly and more intensively, in Europe during the l920s.
The Yom Kippur War of that year heralded a decade and mare of economic
stagnation.

This period, sometimes known as the lost decade, was a

time of deep economic and social crisis in every sense of the word,
affecting nt only the countrys economic structure, but also norms of
socio—economic behavior.

fter 12 years, the stabilization plan of 1985, may be heralding the

beginning of a turning point. There have been considerable achievements

on the stabilization front.

However, with respect to structural

adjustment, the economy resembles a bruised and battered war veteran, on

the road to recovery, but still not quite rehabilitated.

Only after

another five or ten years (perhaps on the State's 50th anniversary) we
may be able to say if this was a real turning—point with regard to long
term growth.

Bearing these facts in mind, we shall ask a series of questions
grouped around two sets of issues:
1.

What were the nature and causes of the economic crisis Israel had

experienced since 1973?

its

Was it mainly the result of international

origins lie closer home?

This question has

already been the subject of considerable research.

Here I would refer

developments or did

to a series of research papers written at the Maurice Falk Institute
during the height of the crisis, in 1982—84. Nonetheless, it would be
interesting to take a fresh look at the diagnose of the crisis from the

See The Israeli Economy: Maturing Through Crises, edited by V. Ben—

Porath, Harvard University Press, 1986.

ll of the articles in this

publication, most of which will be mentioned subequently, are very
relevant to the present discussion.

—3—

vantage point of the first stages of recovery. In order to chart the road

to further recovery an in—depth understanding of the roots of the crisis
is required.
2.

In what sense, if at all, did the economy show signs of real recovery

during the past four years?

Economic developments since 1987 and

particularly during the States 40th anniversary year. 1988, were notable
for the extent of structural economic problems which have surfaced.

In

view of the more recent developments, what is the chance of achievina
steady economic growth within a reasonable period of time, while securing

increased price stability and at the same time adapting to the trends
towards greater integration especially in The New Europe of ic'927

What

economic reforms are necessary in order to achieve these targets?

In the following pages we will try and answer these questions, using

past long—term and especially the more recent economic developments as a
background.

2 Growth, Productivity and Inflation over the years 1960—86
We start by examining the development and composition

of business

sector GDP——the contributions of factors of production, capital and
labor, and the 'unexplained residual, total productivity, which captures
the effects of changes in factor quality and utilization, as well as any

other elements that might help explain why output should have grown
faster than factor input.

For this purpose, we will use the

analyt ical

framework which was first applied by Dr. . L. Gaathon' to the Israeli
economy.

Figure 1 shows the average business sector GDP growth rate since

1950 by sub—periods.tm

(The height of the rectangle describes the

average rate of growth, while its width corresponds to the relative

length of the period ).

The

two periods, 1950—60 and 1961—72, are

characterized by a very fast rate of GDP growth. This growth is composed

of a significant labor force contribution deriving from successl.ve waves

See A. L. Gaathon (1971); see ala 3. Metzer

(1986) and M. 5yrquin

(1986).

The figures on which the rates of growth are based are contained in
Table 2 in the appendix.

-4—

of immigrat ion, as well as the substantial capital investment which

Some 30 percent of
accompanied the growth process and made it possible.
the growth in the GDP can be attributed to each of these two factors of

production. Overall productivity accounts for the 40 percent unexplained

The 25 years prior to the birth of the State were, by

residual.

large,

and

characterized by the same growth patterns. [see Syrkins figures

(1986)].

Fig. 1 highlights the dramatic fall in the growth rate after 1973,

from some 10 percent to an average of 3—4 percent up till 19814 and 1.
This drop is even sharper when the period

percent in the years 19 82—84.

1961—67 (which includes the recession of 1965—67) is taken out of the

second rectangle in

Between the Six Day and Yom Kippur Wars,

Fig. 2.

1967—72. when the contr ibution of large—scale immigration to the labor

force was augmented

by an inflow of workers from the administered

territories, business sector GDP grew at an average annual rate of 12
percent

(

),

before

declining

to just a quarter of this figure after

1973. The diagram also reveals several other notable features.
Firstly, there was a very significant decline in the contribution of

The growth rate of the business sector

labor to GDF growth after 1973.

employment dropped from appr oximately 4 percent a year to only one
percent (see Table 1 in the app endix).

This phenomenon can only partly

in immigration after 1973.

be explained by the decline

No less

influential in reducing business sector employment was the increasingly

large entry of new members of the labor force into the public service
sector.

By the very nature of their employment, these workers make no

direct contribution to business sector GDP.

Secondly, there was a

sharp drop in the residual productivity

element whose contribution fell from 4 percent in the years of rapid

growth to only 0.6 percent during the years 1973—81, while it fell even
These

more (to the point of negative productivity growth) in 1982—84.

reductions in productivity growth are all the more noticeable considering

that, surprisingly enough, capital stock continued to grow rapidly even

after 1973 (see the middle segment of the rectangles in Fig. 1).

The

growth in capital stock can be attributed to the unprecedented government

subsidization of investments,

whereby half of investment

finance

—5

consisted of a government grant.t At least part of these investments

were made in unprofitable activities and led to the accumulation of
substantial, unutilized capital stock, financed at highly negative real
ir.terest rates.

The eventual need to replace this credit by more

realistically (and later, excessively) priced market credit resulted in

financial imbroglios from which the economy is still suffering today.

See, for example, a recent article on the moshav economy by Sussman,
Kislev and Lerman (1989)..

The continued large growth in capital stack

concurrent with progressively declining productivity shows that there was
a substantial waste of resources, illustrating only too well the argument
that large—scale subsidization of investment does not necessarily lead to
viable economic growth.
Fig. I

also shows the rise in output after 1984.

During 1985—87,

business sector product grew by an annual average of nearly 6 percent,
The

more than half of which derived from increased productivity.
cumulative

productivity growth in these three years exceeded the

accumulated growth in productivity during the entire 12 years of the
recession, as can be roughly gauged by comparing the appropriate areas of

the rectangles in Fig. 2.

If we also consider the slow-down recorded

during 1988 and take an overall view of the four years 1985—88, this
recovery will appear less impressive, but no less exceptional.

It is

still too early to say whether this growth in economic activity was a
one—time achievement, which was to a large extent fueled by the continued

fast rise in private consumption, as we will see below, or if it
signalled the beginning of genuine renewed growth.

At a later stage, we

will discuss the conditions necessary for ensuring that the average
growth rate of 1985—87 will henceforth continue, and be accompanied by
renewed investment.

The direct contribution to the business sector GDP

of the capital stock in 1995—88 was marginal, as is shown in the figure,
reflecting the reduced rate of investment throughout the economy.

This

effect will also be discussed later.

Mo st of it is ex—post subsidization derived from the availability of
huge, unlinked development loans at a time of rising inflation —

Litvi n and Meridor (1982).

see

—6—

The year

1973, as we have noted, marked an unprecedented and

extremely grave juncture for the economy, which plunged into a long.
drawn—out crisis. Since that year also saw the world economy sink into a
recession, we should once again ask to what extent Israel's economic woes

can be attributed

to external factors, or whether they resulted from

policy which failed to properly respond to the international crisis and

adjust the structure of the economy to the new economic environment.

Fig. 2 provides a comparison of developments in the Israeli eco nomy
between 1960-87, the rest of the industrialized world' 5 (OECD

and semi—industrialized economies •

to which Israe 1

ec onomies)

belonged

in the

1960s,' in terms of inflation. GDF and per capita GDP.

that during the rapid grow th years
(1960—73), the Israeli economy developed significantly faster t han the
Fig. 2 highlights the fact

two groups, in terms of GDP and GDF per employee, while its i nflat

ion

rate was only slightly higher than that prevailing in the indust rialized
As the figures in Fig. 2 show, the industrial countr ies were hit
world.

by the inflation and recession of the 1970s

i

semi — ndus t r i a ii zed

economies suffered from inflation, but not from impeded growth), but to a

lesser extent than Israel.

-,

The

This difference became acute in the early

left—hand rectangle of each grouping in Fig. 2. represents all of

the QECD economies, while the right—hand one describes the semi—
industrialized economies.

In the absence of sequential data on the

latter for each period, a sample of ten was used for the years 1981-a?

[for further details see Bruno (1986)).

For 1981—87, these are the

economies defined by the IMF as manufacturing exporters.

Korea,

Singapore and Yugoslavia appear in both groups, while the second group
A
includes Hong Kong. Taiwan, Hungary. Rumania, India and Turkey.
partial comparison shows that the difference between the two groups in

terms

of

average

developments

over

time was not significant.

Accordingly, the right—hand rectangle can be regarded as a representative
point of comparison.

—7l9SOs, when GOP per employee fell and inflation rose sharply in Israel
while the latter was declining elsewhere.a

After the implementation of the economic stabilization program in
1985, Israel's relative position, as regards inflation as well as its

GDP growth rate, improved considerably (inflation, however, remained

substantially higher than in the average of the

other

country

Fig. 2 highlights the persistently high growth rate of the
groupings).
semi—industrialized countries with which Israel had so proudly compared

itself in the l960s. It is still not certain whether Israel's 5.7
percent average growth rate indicated in the diagram will be maintained
in the years to come.

Two conclusions can thus be drawn from Fig. 2.

Firstly, Israel's economy deteriorated significantly more than other
countries during the years of the world crisis, particularly when the
from

industrialized countries had already begun to recover
recession." Secondly, even though

there

has

been

a

the

relative

improvement in recent years, Israel still lags behind these countries,
as regards bath inflation and the growth rate.

A more detailed analysis of the performance of the industrial
economies indicates that while all of them suffered from continued
unemployment and inflation (stagflation) resulting from the oil and

other raw material price shocks, they managed to adjust, albeit to
The most
varying degress of success, through appropriate policies.
successful country in this respect was Japan, which had and still has
very high fuel and raw material import requirements. Vet by conducting
proper fiscal and wage policies, Japan not only succeeded in extricating

itself within a few years from the the severe recession it entered in

1973—74, but also managed to revolutionize its industrial production
processes, ensure that failing industries were closed down and generally

In

this context it is important to point out that the semi—
industrialized groups represerted here does not include the high—

"

inflation Latin American countries (Argentina, Brazil and Mexico).

A previous article (Bruno, 1986) provides a detailed study of the
effects of the external shocks and Israel's failure, in comparison to
other countries, to run a suitable structural adjustment policy.

—8turned the situation to its own benefit. Smaller European countries such

as ustrIa and Finland are other positive examples. Israels failure to
extricate

from the world recession, not to mention its

itself

embroilment in an even worse crisis must, therefore, be attributed to
the lack of a suitably respo nsive economic policy, rather than to Pu rely

external factors. Israeis

situation was, of course. agcravated

b v

lam Kippur War and the resul ting heavy defense burden. Yet this

the

a lone

cannot exolain the depth as well as the duration of the crisis.

There were two major manifestations of the failure to adapt to the
changing environment.

One was the under lying failure, mainly of the

government, but also in th e business and household sectors, to balance
incomes and outlays — a cons tant attempt to live beyond ones means. The

second element, which is not totally unrelated to the first, was the

payment of excessive real wages relative to labor productivity, which
led to a sharp progressive fall in the rate—of—return on capital in
business

sector.

the

We start by discussing the most important issue: the

evolvement of the public sectors income and expenditure system.

3. The cumulative damace resultinQ from an uncontrolled public service
sector

Fig. 3 presents the main data on public sector income

and

expenditure as a percentage of the gross national product for the sub—

periods extending from 1960 to l988.' Expenditure has been divided
into four main groups (left—hand rectangle in each pair): 1. Civilian

consumption and transfers (including services, and transfers to non-

profit institutions and households).
(including

2. Investment and subsidies

subsidies on basic commodities>.

3. Interest on the

government debt. 4. Defense expenditures.
Income (represented by the right—hand rectangle in each

pair)

is

divided into two sources domestic total gross tax revenues and direct

'' Here,

the public sector includes the

central government, local

authorities, the .3ewish Agency and the Bank of Israel.

The data up to

1983 are based on Meridor (1985). The summary data for the whole period
appear in Appendix Table 3.

—9—

transfers from abroad. The gap between the two rectangles in each pair
in Fig. 3 represents the public sector deficit as percentage of GNP.

It is interesting to note the substantial rise in the size of the
overall public sector deficit even while the economy was still growing.
From a state of rear balance during the first half of the 1960s (as was
also the case in the 1950s), the economy went into a deficit equivalent

to 12.6 oercent of the GNP in the "Golden Age' between the Six Day and

Yom Kippur wars (1967—72>. During this period, there was a rise in
civilian

consumption, investment and subsidies and, particularly,

defense expenditures. At the time, the economy did not require any
significant increase in tax rates as rapid growth made easy borrowing
possible both domestically and abroad (see the subsequent discussion on

the development of the internal and external debt). The government was

also able to borrow substantial amounts from the Rank of Israel, and
thereby print money in an economy which was characterized by relative
stability and a growing demand for real balances.

Thus, the first seeds of trouble were sown as far back as the boom
period between the two wars. This was an expansionary period dominatd by
a

'we can do anything psychological mood.

It was thus possible to

increase every sector of government spending and 'wave every flag" at

once —
welfare.

the flags of defense, development and, in particular, of social
Towards the late sixties and early seventies (when the War of

Attrition ended and a local version of a 'black panther movement became
prominent) welfare issues once again became the focus of economic policy

debate, at a time when there was no real balance of payments constraint

problem and the only gradually emerging sign of trouble was some
domestic imbalance in the economy (mainly showing in excess demand for

labor).

At this time an extensive national insurance transfer

system was introduced (mainly in the form of child allowances, as well

The flag—waving analogy is taken from the controversy surrounding
the approach of the then Defense Minister, Moshe Dayan, who claimed that

we cannot wave all the flags at once. In his view, top priority still

had to be given to defense, even when compared to pressing social
issues.

- 10

-

as other welfare allocations), and increased health and education
budqets. The prevailing attitude among relevant circles, (with many
economists and present company included), was that with such a thriving

economy (business sector GDP grew in the inter—war years by an average
of 12 percent per annum), greatly incrpased exports and no real threat

to the balance of payments, the time was ripe for redistributing the
national cake for the benefit of the underprivileged sectors of soctety.

The impetus given to social expenditure should have been stopped after
the onset of the crisis but it was not.

Table 3 in the appendix shows that the growth
expenditure, so prominent in Fig. 3 —

derived

in

social

totally from an increase

in transfers from 5 percent of GNP in 1960—66 to 9 percent in 1967—72,
16 percent after the start of the recession in 1973 and even more in the
years 1995—88.

There was an even higher relative growth in the various

types of subsidies, mainly those allocated through cheap investment
finance, the significance of which we have already discussed. With the

concurrent growth in the interest rate on the excessive internal and
external debt, and the further growth in defense expenditures (which
were now financed by increased U.S. aid), government spending reached an
all time high of 76 percent average of )3NP in the years 1973_Bit. At the

same time, gross taxation grew by a substantial 9 percent to reach 48
percent of ShIP. [Net taxation, after allowing for transfers, grew at a
much lower rate.

However, it is gross taxation that affects negative

Despite increased foreign aid disbursements, the
growth incentives.)
overall public—sector deficit rose to an unprecedented 17.3 percent of

GNP during the recession. This average figure applied, with only minor
variations, for an entire 12—year period. While isolated attempts were

made to curtail the budget (in 1976 and 1979), the excessive public

expenditure, accompanied as it was by very low growth, can only be

described as short—sighted, irresponsible behavior on the part of
successive, over—indulgent governments.

Fig 3 marks the sharp drop in the deficit from the crisis period

of 1973—84 to the post—stabilization period of 1985—88, whereby the
budget became almost balanced. (The average deficit during 1985—88 was
one percent, a level similar to that prevailing in the years 1960—66).

11

In 1988, it rose aga in, to between 3—14 percent, generating risks which
we will discuss below.

10 percentage point

The fall in the deficit was marked by a sharp,
drop

in expenditure (most of it was taken from

defense and subsidies, while interest expenditures continued to rise),

and a slight rise in taxation, which reached a record level of over 50
percent of GNP. Such a high tax rate does not, of course, stimulate
growth, as it discoura ges the incentive to work, save or invest.
To conclude, the above—mentioned figures show that with the upsurge

of the 1970s crisi s, the government failed to change its order of
priorities in response to changing circumstances, whether these were

external (raw material price shocks and the ensuing world recession) or
internal

increased

(heavily

defense

population and labor force growth rate).

expenditure, and a reduced
The only part of the budget

which was cut after 1973, and which may well have caused long—term
damage, was direct government investment i n infrastructure (see Table 3
in the appendix).

The harmful implications of the large deficit, and the very size of

the public sector, have manifested themselves in a number of areas,
which will be detailed below, and particularly in a rapid increase in

the external

and internal debt. The growth in the external debt led to

persistent bal ance—of—payments problems and to the need for price level

adjustments —

lubricated

devaluations and Subsidy cuts — which, given the well—

and accomodative wage—price—money supply mechanism, led to

sustained shi fts in inflation rates.
contributed to the

crowding—out of the private sector from the capital

discouraged private finance of investment and growth.

market, and
the same time,

freedom of

The growth in the internal debt

the

Pt

increased internal debt limited the degrees of
public

sector also

prevented the movement of the increasing labour force into

the private

monetary

policy.

The expansionary

sec tor.

It is

also important to point out the nature of government

involvement in the income redistribution process.

In the course of the

crisis pen od, rather than support own human and tangible capital
formation,

commodity

government intervention increasingly took the form of direct

subsidization, extension of welfare and child allowances and

— 12 —

other forms of support that are not conducive to self—relxance.

This

came as a political and social response to the demand to increase the

share of the national cake among the underprivileged, with no effort
being made to condition such support by incentives to work harder and
It may be assumed that this factor also contributed to

produce more.

the fall in the growth rate which we have already mentioned.

Finally,

irresponsible budgetary policy by the government also affected similar
behavior on part of the individual, both as producer and consumer. Thts

will be discussed further below

We will now go into more detail on some of the topics already
of these concerns the contribution of the
first
mentioned. The
cumulative high public deficit to the increasi ng external and internal
debt.

Fig. 4

highlights the growth of the external debt from a mere

20 percent of the GNP before 1967, to between 40 and 50 percent on the

eve of the crisis. At that time, the profitability of capital formation
justified its finance by foreign borrowing.

But the same argument no

longer applied to the doubling of the ratio between the external debt
and 1BhP during the subsequent decade (more on this below).

We have no

detailed figures on the internal debt before 1970, but its rise is even
more striking than that of the external debt. From 50 percent of GNP in
1970,

it increased to almost 140 percent at the height of the crisis.

before the implementation of the stabi

1 izati on

program (by which time

the combined external and internal debt amou nted to more than double the

1BhP!). Most of private savings of economic agents, both households and
companies,

was

thus

primarily

mob i

Ii zed

to finance a massive

accumulation of government bonds rather than direct capital formation.
Among reasonably well—ordered economies public debt accumulation of
such magnitude is unprecedented. It is true that during World War II
Britain, f or examp le, accumulated an internal debt equivalent to 200 of
1BhP. But

it was not indexed (by contrast to the Israeli internal debt,

all of whi ch is i ndex—linked) and was eroded during the inflation of the

post—war
surpluses,

years. After
the

years of budget—balancing and even budget

British economy may reach zero debt within the

foreseeable future.
Fig. 4 also illustrates the reversal of these trends that occurred
after 1995, as a direct result of the balancing of the budget and of the

— 13 —

balance of payments respectively.' The progressive reduction of the
internal debt to GNP ratio projected to 1989-93 in Fig. 1 depends on a
renewed balancing of the budget from 1990. the necessary conditions for
which will discussed later. If these conditions hold and SNP once again

grows, at an annual rate of 5—6 percent, the external debt ratio will

fall by 1992 to its level at the end of the 196O, while the irternal
debt will take another 10-15 years to decline to 50 percent of GNP. An
ongcinq reduction in the internal government debt component is the main

prerequisite for the reforms which are necessary in the capital and

money markets.

Apart from the size of the government deficit, which

affects

the

cle and cost of the debt, the mere size of government expenditure is a
very tgnficant factor. On the

one hand, such level of expenditure

requires a high level of taxation, whi ch hampers g rowth.

On the other

hand, government expenditure on factor inputs has a direct impact on the
amount of resources available to the pr ivate sector
We will now examine the empi ovment aspect of the large expansion of

the public sector Fig. 5). The

lower

curve in Fig.5 describes the

unemployment rate as a percentage of the labor force since 1960. Apart
from the temporary sharp rise at the ti me of the 1966—67 recession, the

unemployment rate in Israel has been much lower than in Europe.

This

was particularly true during the 1970s (when it was 3—'+ percent compared
to 8—11 percent in Western Europe ). Oni y in the early 1980s did Israeli

unemployment start to rise to

between 5—6 percent.' As previously

mentioned, this low level cannot possibly be explained

by any higher

Part of the external debt reduction relative to GNP, it should be

noted, is connected with the change from debt to grant financing of
defense purchases as well as the fall in the value of the dollar.
13

It

could be claimed that the level of the internal debt noted rere

represents a lower limit. This qualification is based on the risk that
the government may at some future stage be forced once again to turn a

private debt into a public debt

as the result, for example, of

actuarial deficits in private sector penson funds).
The

slight

rise

only

stablizat ion program of 1985,

in unemployment after the economic
at a time when the budget deficit was

- 1'.

—

rate of employment in the business sector (in which, as stated, there
was a dramatic fall-off in new employment after 1973. as happened in
Europe at the same time).

The reason can be quite clearly found in

concurrent, substantial rise in public sector employment, from 20—22
percent of the total workforce in the early seventies, to 28-30 percent

by the end of that decade, as can be seen from the middle curve in
Fig.5. The upper curve15 combines the percentage of employees in the

pubiic sector and in the financial sector;

it also increased very

significantly as a direct by—product of high inflation, but declined
thereat ter.'

The gap between the upper curve and a 100 percent level

(not shown in the figure) represents the percentage of employees in the

non—financial business sector, which, as stated, fell substantially and
only began to rise again after 1983—84.

slashed, is proof that the restrained budget did not have any Keynesian
denand—reducing effect but, on the contrary, led to increased aggregate

supplyl On the other hand, the unemployment rate in 1988 and 1989 rose

quite substantially as a result of previous excessive rises in real
wages, an unusual increase in labour force participation rates, and as
part of the considerable restructuring and labour shedding that has been
underway in the business sector.

The percentages of employees in the two upper curves of Fig.5 have
been calculated on the basis of total employment in the economy and not
the total labor force, as is the case with the unemployment rate curve.

This discrepancy only marginally affects any comparisons which are made
between relative employment and unemployment figures.

See the figures in Table 5 of the appendix. These should be taken
as mimimum indicators of employment in public and financial services.

During the period in question, there were additional employees in the
business sector who were involved mainly in "public services" (such as
internal defense) or "financial management" instead of production, and

therefore these too should have been placed in separate employment

category. A highly important issue not

discussed

here

is

the

categorization of the relative contribution of that part of the business

sector involved in production for defense purposes. See Berglas (1986)
and Halperin (1987).

- 15

-

The striking changes in the distribution

of employment are even

more poignant when incremental shares of the various sectors in
employment are calculated. Between 1958 and 1972, which were years of

normal growth, the non—financial business sector absorbed 73 percent of
the increase in the overall number of employees in the economy, with the

public and financial sector taking up the

remaining 27 percent. This

situation was almost completely reversed between 1973 and 1981, when the
share of the non—financial business sector fell by a third to 37 percent

(that is,

73

percent

of the total additi ons to the number of employees

was in the public and financial sector).'' Between 1985 and 1787 this

trend was once more dramatically rever sed and the business sector
absorbed 90 percent üf additional labor, while the public sector — which
',ardly grew at all —

took only 10 percent. But in 1988, public sector

employment began to rise again, concurrent with a growth in expenditure

and the deficit, it is to be hoped that

this was only a temporary

development.

To conclude this chapter, we can see that every aspect of public
sector policy —
force,

with

distorted

regard to high taxation, misallocation of the labor
subsidization

of

investment

governments own investment in infrastructure)

—

(while

reducing

effectively

hampered

sound economic growth. Before we begin to discuss one of the worst
should be
results of the over—grown public sector — inflation —

it

stressed that the government's lack of restraint had

a

direct

behavioural impact on the response of economic units in the p r

ivate

sector. The effects were particularly noticeable in the excessive rise

in the standard

of living, which became quite

unconnected to the

dramatic downturn in the economy after 1973 • Throughout the ent ire

period of rapid

growth until the crisis of 1973, private consumpt ion

usually rose at a rate lower than the growth in per capita GNP. This was

particularly true for the time of rapid growth

between the tempor ary

recession of the mid—sixties and the onset of the 1973 crisis, that
the years 195—7E when per capita GNP grew at an annual rate of

V The

is,

respective figures for the entire period from 1973 to 198i were

+8 and 52 percent, respectively.

— 16 —

percent, while per

capita

of 3.6 percent.la

Subsequently, from 1973 to

living continued

to rise almost unabated, at an annual rate of 3.0

private consumption rose at by an annual level
1982,

the standard of

percent, while the average growth in per capita GNP fell to just 1.1

oercent. As will

be mentioned later, the manufacturing sector was also

characterized by

the penchant for "living

beyond one's

means".

4. Aspects of the high inflation process and its termination
Much has been said about the nature of inflation during

the 1970s

and l9BOs, and about the various features of the July 1 985 economic
stabilization program. There is no point in repeating all of this here,

but we will

briefly review a few aspects of the inflationary process

which are relevant to our present discussion.''
The main source of inflation was the cont inued government deficit

mentioned in the previous chapter.

essential condition for the outbreak of
However,

"original sin" was the

This
i

nflation in the 1970s.

the link between the budget deficit and inflation is not the

conventional text—book one,

Since there was no time series correlation

between the size of the deficit and the

rate of inflation (see the

articles mentioned in footnote 19).

The high level of the deficit

remained more or less stable for over 15 years, while inflation rose in

i8

The

difference between

these two figures in previous periods was

smaller. Between 1950-55, for example, per capita GNP

percent and from

rose by 4.6

1955—65 by 5.8 percent, wh ile per capita consumption

increased by 4.2 and 5.2 percent respectively. These figures

Barkai (1988) and
consumption after

Klinov (1986). The cant inued

rapid

appear in
growth

in

1973 can be partly exp lamed by the slow-down in

immigration and the fall in demand for housing

which made

it possible

to divert private resources from investment to consumption

'

For

a detailed analysis of the high infla tion process in Israel see

the articles by Liv iatan and Piterman (1986), Bruno (1986

and Fischer (1996)

all contained in V. Ben—Porath (ed., 1986). For an

analysis of the eomponents of the stabilization program,
(1985)

and Bruno
see Bruno

— 17 —

steowise fashion (see Fig. 6).

Fart of the reason for this progressive

acceleration can be found in the connection between the budget deficit
and the balance of payments deficit, and the government response in the
form of devaluations and subsidy cuts.

The transformation of price

level shocks into accelerating rates of inflation has less to do with
"the original sin" than with "adaption to living with the sin itself".

We here refer to the accomodative monetary process and the exchanee
rate—prices—wage—money linkage system which were part of the economy's

attempt to protect itself from the cost of inflation.

But it is

precisely the linkage system and monetary acomodation which enhanced
rapid price increases. Eventually these factors eliminate the existence

of a stable monetary anchor within the economy and allow the inflation
orocess to diverge even while the budget deficit remains more or

less

stable.

A classic example of so—called immunization against inflation is
the attempt to constantly adjust the exchange rate and devalue in line

with the prevailing rate of inflation.

This adjustment process was

perfected with the policy of creeping devaluation (crawling peg) adopted
in June 1975.

Apart from a short period of a freely floating exchange

rate (after the "economic turnaround"

of

October

1977),

this

characterized the exchange rate regime for the subsequent decade, until
July 1985. The advantage of this regime lies in its ability to maintain
a more or less stable real exchange rate for exports.

In the course of

time, this advantage became quite apparent. The export sector, in fact,

was protected as an isolated enclave throughout the whole period of the
crisis.

Thus, export revenues grew at an average annual rate of 12

percent during the two decades from 1965 to 1984.

Further evidence of

the effect of this protective exchange rate adjustment policy was the
growing

share of industrial exports as a percentage of overall

manufacturing output, from 20 percent in 1965 to 37 percent in 1975 and

52 percent in 1984.
a'>

(In 1986, this share stood at 56 percent L.a'

These estimates appear in the chapter on the manufacturing sector

in respective Bank of Israel Annual Reports and are based on input—
output analysis.

Nevertheless, the real cost of continuous exchange rate adjustment at a
time of a high budget deficit was the complete loss of a monetary anchor

which also led to huge cumulative aggregate output and product ivty
losses.

Analysis of the inflationary process indicates there were two
important land marks in the loss of the monetary anchor and the upsurge
of inflationary expectations.
peg

One was in June 1975. p,ihen the cra'dinq

was introducec, [on the relevance of this date to the shift in the

expectation—formation
(1985)).

process, see Gottlieb, Melnick and Piterman

The second turning point was the introduction of the Patam

(foreign currency denominated) bank deposits as a close substitute for

regular domestic money at the time of the October 1971

economic

turnaround' [for more on this, see Bruno and Fischer (1986)). These two

events help to explain how 'the gene was helped out of the bottle' —

inflation

rates leapt up after 1979 and 1983 in response to the price

shocks caused by the devaluations of i977 and October 1983.

The 1tter

date was the time of the bank—share crisis and the failure of the
"5 percent-by—5 percent" attempt to reduce inflation by gradually
lowering the rate of devaluation. The first step-devaluation made by the

National Unity Government in September 19814 also led

to

a jump in

inflation (see the peak of the inflation curve in Fig.6).

A two—pronged attack, on "the original sin" of the budget deficit
and "the adaption to living with the sin" formed the two pillars of the
July 1985 economic stabilization program. The success of the program lay

in a totally balanced budget and the synchronized sharp reduction,
within a social oonsensus agreement, of the rate of increase in prices,
wages, credit and the exchange rate. Stabilization of the exchange rate,

first against the dollar and then against a basket of trade—weighted

currencies (since August 1986) provided the main anchor for price
stability (conditional on wage stability — a weak point in the program
which will be discussed later).

Looking back, there is no doubt about the program's success, both

in terms of internal stabilization of the currency and in renewed
external financial credibility. When inflation was slashed, however, it
was left at a level of 15—18 percent a year.

Although relatively low,

- 19

this

-

rate is still very high compared to that prevailing amonq Israels

trading

partners. The

January

1987 devaluation, necessitated by

excessive wage rises, led to a temporary blip in the inflation curve
(see point 87:1 in Fig.6). The aggregate 13.5 percent devaluation of
December 1988 and January 1989 will have caused anotrier temporary blip

not 5howfl here)

in the curve. These two devaluations were carried

cut in conjunction with a social contract between the government, the

Hitadrut and the employers. At the time of writing (mid—1989) it is
still too early to say whether the hopes for an additiorial drop in
triflation to a yearly level of 10—12 percent towards the end of 1989
will be realized.

A prerequisite for sustained growth in Israel

is a further

reduction of inflation to the level prevailing among Israel's trading
The preconditions necessary for reducing inflation — a
partners.

balanced budget and maximum wage restraint — are
increasing the growth rate.

al so essential far

Failing to achieve either

of these two

conditions will threaten growth, the balance of payments, the ability of
industries to compete on export markets and overall economic stability.

What is more, it will be impossible to maintain stable macro—economic
policies and there will be need for recurrent anti—inflationary measures

of the type that dampen economic activity or else the need to boast
economic activity in a way that hampers price stability (i.e. stop—go
policies).

Reduced uncertainty and stable macro-economic policies are

themselves a precondition for achieving both stability and growth
objectives.

5. The path to renewed steady growth

The previous section detailed the very rea1 progress that has been

made in the direction of greater

internal

and external

currency

Consumer price indexes not included in the graph for the first
quarter of 1989 (compared to each previous month) were +.7, 1.7 and 0.5

percent for January, February and March respectively. The ability to
devalue in a manner which would raise the level of prices but not boost
the rate of inflation dependS, among other things, on a renewed cost-ofliving wage agreement.

-20 -

stability

after 12 years of continuous turmoil, even though the comolete

stability target has not yet been achieved.

Reducing inflation

resembles the medical achievement of drastically reducing the patients
fever.

But the question remains as to whether the surgery itself has

been successful.

In other words, is the economy on the way to real

Have the structural changes that are npcesary for putting

recovery?

the economy on the road to steady arowth been made?

In this section we

will discuss a number of structural changes that have taken place.
bearing in mind that so far, these have been far less impressive thar
the effort made to reduce inflation.

The period 1985—87 was marked by an upsurge in economic activity
and a substantial rise in productivity, but, as we will mention later,
since the middle of 1987 output has flattened off. There are increasing

signs that the 1986—7 boom may have been a temporary though favorable
output response to the lowered rate of inflation.

This was primarily

stimulated by a substantial increase in domestic demand caused by an

excessive rise in real net wage incomes and in private consumption.
while the basic structural problems of the economy remained unsolved.

The resumption of sustainable growth in the business sector, as
distinct from a temporary boost to economic activity, depends on a
:ontinual release of resources from the public sector, in manpower

reserves becoming available, on keeping wage rises in line with
increasing productivity and on reducing the overall tax burden.

An

important indicator of sustainable growth is the level of new capital
formation taking place so as to ensure that capacity at least keeps pace

For some time, output can draw up on unutilized
with output growth.
capacity, but ultimately, the surest guarantee of renewed growth is a

suitable flow of investment spured by the producers
incentives and not by excessive

own profit

government support, as was

the case in the 1970s.

We will start by discussing savings and investment behavior over

the volume of

time, and then examine the two main determinants of
investment

—

the cost of capital and its profitability

Fig. 7 shows

that gross domestic jnvestment declined from 27—28 percent of GNP

It

would be useful to divide gross investment and the growth in

-21 —

during

1960—72 and the early years of the crisis (197'.—79) to 22

percent in l98O—8'. In the subsequent four years (1985—88), there has
been a further decline of some +

percentage points. Note that the ageing

of capital stock, part of which is now obsolete, indicates the existence

of an even more serious problem in terms of net investment (after
discards). This should be even more disturbing in .'iew of the fact that

technological innovation usually gets embodied in new tangible capital

formation. P rough estimate of the gross investment necessary for
capital stock to keep pace with a 5—6 percent growth in business sector

GDP suggests that within the space of a few years, investment must be
raised from its current level of 18.5 percent to at least 21—23 percent
of GNF.
L.Jhat

is holding back increased investment today? In the past, it

could be argued that limitations on domestic saving and on foreign
borrowing were the effective limits on investment. The tip of the arrow

in the right—hand bar of each period described in Fig.7 indicates the
volume of total saving, divided up into private and public saving, as a

percentage of GNP.e4 The figure shows that from 1960 right through to

capital stock by their principal destinations —

dwellings

and producer

durables — something which is missing here. Nevertheless, the general

trend in gross domestic investment is a good illustration of the problem
beinq discussed. Nlayshar (1986) provides a detailed analysis of savings
and investment developments until 1983.

Investment in the first six years after 1973 was promoted by
massive and

excessive public finance and, as will be seen, it was not

accompanied by any rise in profitability. During this period, the real

interest on development loans was negative, amounting to —17 percent!

[see Lityin—Meridor (1983)]. From 1979 onwards, most of the subsidy
embodied in unindexed loans loans was abolished. It can be assumed that

this change only became effective after

1981

because

of

the

administrative time—lag of preyiously approved projects in the pipeline.

The length of the arrow represents the volume of public saving. Its

direction is first positive and subsequently negative, in the crisis
periods (1974—79, 1979—84).

—22 -

198.

investment exceeded domestic saving, that is, part of the gross

investment was financed by imported capital. [Let us remember that by

national accounting definitions, the difference

between

domestic

investment and total saving is equivalent to the difference between
total imports and exports plus unilateral transfers from abroad (the
current account).] But since the stabilization program, total saving has

grown slightly (private saving declined, but so dtd government
dissaving), while gross investment fell to less than total saving that
is, there was a surplus on the current account). In other words, neither
the volume of total saving nor the availability of overseas finance were

effective limitations on investment. Let us, therefore, move on to
discuss the cost of finance and investment profitability.

Figures on the real yield—to—maturity of government bonds can serve

as an indicator of long—term real interest rate developments. Fig. B
shows a marked increase in the yield after the 1983 bank shares crisis
and until the start of the stabilization program in

1985 (because

of

reduced public confidence in the government's abili ty to repay). Since
the start of the program, the yield has fallen sharoly, to the levels

prevailing in the mid—1970s. There was a similar fall in the issuing
cost of government bonds, from approximately 6 percent

to 3.5 percent

today. After the reform in the capital. market in early 1987, private
issues on the capital market increased. Concurrently, issuing costs fell
from some 8 percent, as of 1986,

to less than 6 percent today. The

figures for 1986—88 are contained in Table 8 of the appendix.et While
short term credit costs mainly affect working capital

inventories and

current production, it is sometimes asserted that the unlinked shekel
interest rate, particularly the rate on overdraft facilities, affects

demand for investments.m7 Fig. 9 also points to a significant fall in

' This

is a mirror image of the steep rise in private consumpt ion

(which grew by an average of over 5 percent a year per capita), over and

above disposable income. The rise in consumption explains the large, if
temporary, increase in economic activity during 1985—87.
at A detailed review of the preliminary effects of the reform in the
capital market can be found in A. Ben—Bassat (1989).
See Lavi (1988).

—23 —

this

marginal rate (the highest charged). The distance between the

nominal interest curve in the graph and the inflation curve provides an

estimate of the real interest rate. During the first months of the
stabilization program, the latter grew enormously, to as much as 10
percent a month but subseqently dropped and, except fr a short period

in early 1987 (when it rose after the January 1987 devaluation),
continued

to fall, from 33—39 percent in 1986—87 to 19 percent in the

last quarter f 1988. Interest on fixed—term credit, however, and
particularly average interest on short—term credit (including both
directed and foreign—currency linked credit) fell to much lower levels,
to

10 and 6 percent respectively in the last quarter of 1988 (see the

figures in Table 9 of the appendix). During the first half of 1989 these
interest rates have fallen further.

Even if it can be argued that certain interest rates are still
higher than is desirable for the long run, it is hard to argue that the

cost of capital could be an effective hindrance to the resumption of
capital formation.

We note, however, that it is the balanced budget

that allowed both long and short term interest to be cut. The budget
deficit increased in 1988 and there is a danger of it rising further in

1989. This would increase government borrowing and might bring about a

renewed rise in 1ong—trm Interest rates. Thus,

if

the

oresent

expansionary monetary policy is to be maintained and short—term interest
is to be cut, a ba lanced budget is essential.

Let us now look at business sector profitability. This measure is
derived from the na tional accounts value added estimates by deducting

returns to labor

(including the imputed return to labor of the self-

employed); the residual is divided by the capital stock of the business

sector. The upper

part of Fig. 10 illustrates the share of labor as a

percentage of bus mess sector GDP.
1967—72, the share

gradually after

In the rapid growth period of

of labor fell dramatically, but began to rise
1 975,

and, apart from temporary falls in 1981—82 and

198L1—95, continued to do so until after 1988 (to a rate approximating 85

percent of GDP). The distributive share of labor also measures the ratio
of the wage rate to GDP per employed person. A significant growth in the

wage component of GDP usually indicates an excessive rise in wages

over

productivity. During the years of rising inflation l97579, this

-2'. -

resulted

from the workers desire to over-insure themselves against the

effects of inflation. In the period since the stabilization orogram.

when business sector wages rose by 20 percent while productivity
increased by only 10 percent.

This resulted from a combtnation of wage

arrangements which had not been adjusted to the lower rate of inflation,

institutional constraints (the cost—of-living aqreement. the minimum
wage law, wage linkage between employees in both failing and profitable
enterprises), and producers' readiness to accede to wage demands in the

mistaken) hope that they would be bailed out by government policies
such as frequent devaluations.

Dividing the product share of capi tal

(the comolement of

the

product share of labor) by the capital-output ratio (capital stock /GDP)
yields the gross rate of return on capital

as

can be seen,

fell

it

steeply along with the excessive rise in wage s. During the Golden Age'
to

of 1967—72, the latter stood at 15—19 percent, but subsequently fel 1

the lowest ever level of just 6 percent in 1988. The average level of
profitability should be taken as only a rough guide as it is an average
of both ailing and profitable industries. Note too that the denominator
of the rate—of—return, gross capital stock

may be upward biased, with

effective capital being smaller (because of unpro fitable investments

made in the l970s, that should be written off so that in some
industries, capacity may never may be fully utilized).

Actually what

profitability expected

on incremental

matters

is

the

marginal

investment, which may be considerably higher than actual average
profitability. A major cause for concern and certainly the main reason
for the paucity of investment even after the stabilizati on program lies

in the high share of labor and the low share of capita1 (the residual)

in the past few years. Immediately after the stabil ization program
began, the business sector's relative tax burden grew, leading to even

smaller net earnings. Demand for investment is also

liable to be

affected by uncertainty over future earnings, which in turn is governed
by numerous factors — such

as expectations regarding

the extent of

economic stability, future economic policy and the general political
climate.

What is the chance that gross profitability will henceforth

rise

or, in other words, is there a chance that wages will at

least

-25

temporarily rise more slowly than p roduct lvi ty, as happened on more thar

one occasion during the years of rapid growth ? In 1988 the increase in
real wages certainly began to level off, while the first quarter of 1989

saw a fall in real wages following the devaluation and its

s ter i Ii za t ion

from the cost—of—i iving agreement. There are also signs of a change
n the rules of t he cane in the labor mar ket: less importance is now
placed on nationwide wage agreements with

greater flex ibility being

shown at tne industr y and enterprise level; there is less insistence on
wage linkage (linkinq groups of workers in

the private

sector with

cost—of—liv ing agreements

public sector wage agreements, for example

have been moderated and adjusted to lower inf lation; and f inaily, there

have been striking

cases where nominal

wage rates

in trouble—hit

industries have been cut (Koor, for example). Particularly important too
is the willingness to dismiss workers in the course of res tructuring as

at Israel Aircraft

Industries, The Shipyar ds and Solel Boneh (a major

cont racting firm owned by the Histadruth).

with

Rising unemployment along

the other factors mentioned have recent ly helped to halt excessive

wage rises in the business sector.'

Recent experience such as, for example, in the British economy,
shows that changes in the rules of the game in the labor market very
much depend on the government's determination to change conventional
attitudes, even at the price of higher unemployment. Successive Israeli

governments have always felt obliged to maintain full employment and
guarantee security of tenure. This is partly a result of the trauma of

According to the new cost—of—living agreement which came into
effect on April 1st, 1999, no compensation will be given to wages for
monthly inflation rates below 0.5 percent, while increments amounting to

85 percent of any price rise in excess of 0.5 percent will be paid twice
a year.

The moderating

effect1 however, can only be partial, sknce in a

period of structural change, there can be unemployment in one industry,
occupation or sector

concurrent with labor shortage elsewhere.

A wage

rise resulting from a shortage in one place is not usually balanced out
by a concurrent fall in wages somewhere else.

-26 -

the 1965—66 recession, when unemployment rose above 10 percent. One of
the ootential threats to the July 1985 stabilization program was the
fear that unemployment would grow to above 8—9 oercent. If one is going

to persist in implementing structural chanqes in the economy, it may
become necessary to accept an unemployment rate of around 7-B percent
for some time ahead.

The main danger of an excessive wage increase is tn the oubiic

sector, wnere the threat of large—scale dismissals is almost non-

existent. s public sector wages have lagged behind those n the
business sector since the stabilization proqram, there is a danger that

tnej may now pick up again. Should this happen, the effect of the
factors that have moderated wage rises in the business sector may also

be weakened. Here again the outcome hinges on the handling of public
sector policy. The imposition of riqid rules there will also have an
impact on the business sector.>

.

What reforms are needed?

So far, we have mentioned two prerequisites for resumed growth and

a further disinflation. These are a balanced budget, to be achieved by
trimming the relative size of the public sector, and moderation of wage

rises to a level below the growth in productivity. In the former area
there was some degree of success during the first three years after the

stabilization program, but the future of budgetary restraint is now at
risk. On the wage front and in the labor market we may now be observing

the first signs of progress. These two conditions are both necessary,
but are not sufficient. The main reason behind the crisis of the l970s.

Considering

that

public

sec tor

are relatively low,

wages

particularly among senior ranks, and in view of

considerable disguised

unemployment, wage rises in the publIc sector should be coupled with a
parallel increase in efficiency, i.e. dismissi ng workers on the basis

of Clause B of the public sector wage agreement, a clause which has
scarcely been acted on till now. Recent reform proposals by the Sussnan

Commission (on public sector wages)

would adjust wage scales in the

right direction, but do not in themsel yes deal with the problem of
persistent excess employment in the pub lic sector.

-27 -

as

we have seen, was the failure to adapt to the far—reaching external

changes, both on the government level and among individual producers and

consumers. Real economic recovery demands behavorial changes in both
sectors, including in the nature of their interdependence.
condition

for

renewed

economic

growth

is

the

necessary
consistent

implementation of structural reforms in the main areas of economic
activity where the government is heavily involved.'
.l. Government involvement; its extent and operation

Iluch has been said about the importance of wiping out the budget

deficit. s stated, a balanced budget is not enough to bring about a
steady reduction in the governments relative weight in the economy,
which is among the highest in the world (over 50 percent of GNP, see

Fig. 3). The division of labor between the government and private
economic agents must be altered. Fundamental structural changes should

be initiated and government services greatly reduced wherever the
government has no clear advantage over the

private sector, and the

government service provided is not run according to economic principles.

Blatant examples f this situation can be found in health
hospitalization insurance, but they are also
education.'

to

be

found

and
in

The government must concentrate only on areas in which

there may be market failures and where it has a natural economic
advantage, such as the development of physical infrastructure for
transport

services,

basic

research,

R8.D, higher education and

development areas. At the same time, the government should rid itself of

Further details are contained in the program submitted to the
Government by the Bank of Israel in January, when new economic policy
measures were adopted. See A Plan for the Resumption of Growth and the

Lowering of Inflation, Bank of Israel, Jerusalem, December 1988,
Hebrew) (henceforth referred to as the Bank of Israel plan). Similar
proposals have been put forward by Neubach Sadka, and Razin (1988).

In this respect, the recent decision not to charge a minimal fee
for visits to a doctor and not to charge high school education fees are

the exact opposite of reduced government support. part from this,
radical organizational changes are necessary in the health sector in
order to increase efficiency.

-28 -

direct holdings in enterprises and from excessive interference in
business management. Only reduced government activity will make it
possible to decrease the overall tax burden, which runs counter to the

main incentives to growth — the desire to work, save and invest. With
respect to taxation, it is also necessary to implement reforms which may

not decrease the average tax burden, but which do reduce marginal tax
rates while increasing the tax base (Sheshinski Commission proposals).

The government must also review its social welfare activities and

move from forms of asststance which do nothing to encourage personal
responsibility (such as subsidies, child allowances and unconditional
unemployment benefits) to helping those who help themselves. An example

is the

proposal to replace payments to parents of large families with

direct financial assistance to discharged soldiers in the formation of
physical and human capital (like the "Threshold Fund" suggested as far

back as the 1970s by this writer, as well as by others). The partial

government assistance provided to problem enterprises as part of a
recovery and debt rescheduling program also falls into the category of
helping those who help themselves'. Such aid is conditional on a clear

proof that an enterprise or economic unit (Koor industries and the
has developed a plan based on strict

kibbutz movement, for example)

self—discipline and that it has the ability to recover fully within a
few years. Clearly, such government assistance can only be provided if
it does not transcend limits in the overall state budget, where avoiding

a deficit is, as stated, the main prerequisite for economic recovery.
In Fig. 11, the forecast for 1989—92 presupposes an average drop of

approximately one percent a year in the ratio of expenditure and
taxation to GNP between 1989—92.
6.2. Reforms in the money and capital markets.

Excessive government intervention in the money and capital markets

was one of the reasons for the lack of growth in the 1970s. Several of

'

For

the

budget

to

be

balanced

as

soon as 1990, a

substantial, immediate cut is necessary. Public sector consumption in
1989, except for defense imports, must remain constant, while in 1990—92
it can then grow at an annual rate of not more than 1.7 percent. See the
Bank of Israel Program, December 1988,

— 29

the reforms initiated in

But there is

fruit.

-

these markets during 1985—87 are now bearing
still a need for the reduction of budgetary and

other involvement by the government.

The effectiveness of reform in

this area depends on a balanced budget, together w i

th

increased

competitition in the banking system in order to bring down the interestrate spread.

Selling government—held bank shares, after ensuring equal

voting rights, to business orqanizations and individuals w ill provide an
opportunity to

improve the structure of the banking

system.

The

subsidization of banking services to the government should be gradually

abolished, together with the direct subsidization of pension fund
The banks must be exposed to competition, both
interest rates.
externally (by capital imports) and internally (e.g. by

developing a

short—tern commercial bill market in the stock exchange)

These are but

a few examples from a long list of structural correct'.ons, including
changes in taxation, which will increase competition in

the money and

capital markets, reduce the interest rate spread and reestablish the
capital market as the main channel for financing caoital formation.
6.3. Improving the price mechanism and the opening up the economy

Apart from wage flexibility, discussed in the previous section,
further measures are needed to moderate the rigid price mechanisms which

stand in the way of reducing inflation to Western levels. A whole range
of administrative restrictions which still either ban or curtail imports
must be abolished in order to further expose local production to greater

competition from abroad. Existing restrictions hinder competition

in

domestic markets, thereby lessening the effect of the exchange rate as a
be
means of stabilizing prices. Effective exchange rates should

completely unified towards full integration in the world market. There
is also a need for more closely controlling domestic

monopolies which

do not face competition from imports.

Another area requiring a more liberal

stance is the flow of

capital, providing that inflation actually does fall and control over
Greater flexibility in this field
monetary policy can be maintained.

will help reduce interest rate spreads and

1

iberalize the commodity

market, in view of the drastic changes which are expected in the world
market during the next few years, with special reference to Europe by
1992.

- 30

-

7. Concluding Remarks
Fig. 12 gives an overall view of major economic developments in
terms of inflation, the civilian import surplus as a percentage of BNP,

and the growth rate of business sector SDP from 1965, through the years
of

crisis

and until the partial recovery from it since 1Q85.

Particularly striking is the sharp fall in the growth rate of business

sector SDP in 1988, only part of which was foreseen during the second
half of 1987 [point a. in the diagram indicates the 1988 National Budget

forecast made in September 1987]. Part of the fall — some

1.5—2

percentage points — can be attributed to the intifada, which began in
December 1987 [point b. in the diagram]. The remainder derived from
other factors connected with the government's reluctance to take major

policy decisions during an election year (devaluation and various
reforms were held back, for example) and with unexpected structural
difficulties. The forecast figures for A989 to 1992 are conditional on

the implementation of budgetary cuts and a suitable wage policy,
together with the previously mentioned reforms. Only if these conditions

are met is there likely to be a fall in inflation to the average level

prevailing in the West (5—8 percent a year), a drop in the civilian
import surplus to 6 percent of GNP -

unilateral transfers —

and

to be covered by grants and other

gradually increased business sector GDP

growth to the target rate of 6 percent a year.

These forecasts are strictly conditional. All the reforms in the
areas mentioned (the budget, wages etc.) demand, first and foremost, a
fundamental rethinking of the role of government. They also recjuire a

radical change in the way the private sector operates. Lessons of the
past indicate the need to break away from the amorphous system of mutual

guarantees that has characterized relations between the government and

the private sector, within the business sector and within large
conglomerates. Examples of the latter are to be found in the Kibbutz and

Moshav movements and in the F-1istadrut enterprises. The fundamental
weakness of a system of mutual reliance is its avoidance of clear—cut
personal

and

corporate responsibility for sins of omission and

commission by producers or consumers that are part of such larger
economic systems.

— 31 —

The

crisis and the ensuing recovery have made it necessary to

fresnly review the basis of Irael socto—economic system. There is
need to redefine the nature of societys responsibilities towards its

weaker sub-groups. Is there any contradiction between the increased
competition and efficiency which create greater wealth, and the concern

over a more equitable divison of this wealth? Heightened concern over
rair

shares

of the increased national wealth produced in the lOs. it

should be remembered, actually led to the contraction of growth since

then and impaired the efficiency with which output and wealth were
produced. This, in turn, has impaired the ability to further reallocate
significant slices of the national cake.

To avoid repeating such mistakes, one needs to reCetermine the

minimum amount of infrastructure and health, education and welfare
services which the government should provide whether un
?ot) to various sectors of the population. Confinement to

I ver sally

this

or

minimum

will allow market forces to act more freely and provide mon e opp ortuni ti

for own—financing by the individual, ultimately leadi ng to greater
efficiency. In other words, it will increase the size of

the

national

cake, which shrunk so noteably during the years of the crisis.
Which socio—economlc model is best—suited for Israel to aspire to?
Since 19B5, it has been lucky enough to excape the divisi ye and unstable

But is
model that ha been observed in many Latin American countries.
there a tendency to follow the U.S. pattern, where maximum free
enterprise is the rule or of Britain during the past few

years, or of

semi—industrialized countries such as Singapore and South Korea? Dr are

Israelis more inclined to emulate European countries such as Sweden,
Finland or Austria, where free competition exists side by

side with a

considerably greater degree of worker participation and a clear concern

for social objectives? In this respect, there is a lack

of any well

thought cut new long—term strategy, and there is apparent ly no redefined
national consensus on the long—term socio—economic goals. Although. as

a 1950s
in Europe, Israel has witnessed some retreat from the concept of
and l9oOs-style welfare state, this withdrawal is only partial

and the

ensuing vacuum has not yet been filled

Despite the lack of

a well—defined and accepted socio—econOmic

model on which it could

be based, much of the 1985 stabilizatiOn

— 32 —

social consensus
program's success derived from the achievement of a
over such key issues as balancing the budget and changes in the cost—of—
living agreement. A similar consensus seems to exist on the general

direction of the necessary structural reforms. Even t
goal

the long—term

is not clearly defined, only few would deny the need for a drastic

is
Yet
it
reduction in the current level of government intervention.
far from certain whether the government and the public at large fully

understand that sustained growth and internal economic stability depend
resolute, single—minded policy implementation, which may have it;
on

sacrifices in the short run and only bears fruit after a considerable
time. In this respect, the recently growing tendency, much encouraged by

major representatives of the business sector, to regard

"growth

incentives" as ad hoc, micro—economic measures offering short—term
benefits, gives cause for concern. Rather than constituting the

threads

of a new macro—economic fabric suited to the needs of the 1990s and the
21st century, these are really just a series of stop—gap measures, whose
cost is far from negligible, in the style of 1950s and 1960s government
micro— intervention. It is not so easy to explain to producers and the

public at large that real growth hinges on creation of the right macroeconomic environment, which may be easy to define but is hard to create,

as are the attempts to reduce taxation and interest rates (which are
themselves ultimately dependent on a balanced budget). The same applies
to macro—economic reforms manifested in such obvious "micro" forms as a
more flexible price and wage system. But if such conditions are actually
brought about, they will undoubtedly lead to economic growth, without

the need for any other micro—economic incentives, which rather than
ironing out structu ral distortions, usually only perpetuate them. There

is no better proof of this than the sad experience of the 1970s and the
early l9BOs.

The government has done much to enhance its public credibility by

the measures it has taken since July 1985. Now, it needs to continue
along the same path unswervingly, even if the country has apparently
extricated itself from the former dire economic straits (and apparently

is the operative word). Only time will judge whether government policy
since July 1985 has led to a genuine turnabout in the restructuring of
the economy and the renewed opportunities for growth.

- 33

—

REFERENCES

Ban< of Israel (1988). A Plan for the

Resumption

of Growth and the

Loeririq cf Inflation. Jerusalem. Hebrew)

Barkal, Ham

'The Economy Smnce the Six

(1988).

Quarter1 (Hebrew). No. 138. November).
Ben—Bassat. Avraham iS8). Capital Market R1orm

Day ('Jar.

Economic

in Israel -—Goals

First Results." (Research Department Discussion Paper.

and

Jerusa 1 err:

Bank of Israel.

(1986. The_Israeli_EconoiMntflrO

Ben—Porath, oram, ed.

ises. Cambridge. M ass., and London: Harvard Univest/ Press.
In Ycram Bmn—Pjrath.
'Defense and the Economy.
Berqias, Eitar (i8).
ed. (qvi. Pp. 173—91

"Economic Stabilization: The Emergency Plan in

Bruno. Michael l9S5).
its

Early

(No. 126;

Economic Quarterly (Hebrew), 31

Phase,'

October), 207-B23.

'Extrnal Shocks and Domestic Response: Macro—

Bruno, Michael (1986).

Economic Performance, 1965—1982.'

In Yoram Ben—Porath. ed. (nv).

Pp. E76—301.

"Sharp Disinflation Strategy: Israel 1985,'

Bruno, Michael (1986>.

Economic Policy. 2 (April ), 380—408.
Brurio, Michael, and Stanley Fischer (1986).

Shocks and Accommodation.

"The Inflationary Process:
Pp. 371-

In Voram Ben—Porath. ed. (qv).

37'+.

Economic Productivity in Israel.

Gaathon. A. L. (1971).

New York:

Praeger.

Gottlieb, Daniel,

Rafi

Melnick,

and

'Inflationary Expectations in Israel:

Sylvia

A

1985)

Piterman
Multiple

mi catcrs

Approach," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,

3( No.

April), 112—117.

"Does Military Technology Affect

Economic

Growth." Unpublished paper; Falk Institute.
Changes in the Industrial Structure."
Klinov, Ruth (1986).

In Yoram

Halperin, Ariel (1987).

Ben—Porath, ed. (qv).

Lay:, Yaacov (1988).

Pp. ll9-13.

'1 he

Effect of te Interest Rate on Co numpt ion,

and Business Investment in the IsraelI

E con am v.

(Paper presented at the Sapir Forum on Economic Policy;

Hebrew)

Private Savinq

— 34 —

Litvln, Un,

The Grant Equivalent of
and Leora Menidor (1993).
Subsidized Investment in Israel. Bank of Israel Economic Review,
No. 54 (April), 5—30.

Liviatan, Nissan. and Sylvia Piterman (l986.
and Balanceof—Paymeflts Crises, 1973—1984.

Accelerating inflation

In

ram Ber-Porath. ed.

;qv). PP. 320—346.

Mayshar, Joram (1986).

Investment Patterns.' In Vorain Ben—Porath. ed.

ov). Pp. 1C1118.
Neridor,

Israel:

Leora (Rubin)

(1985).

'Financing Government ExpenditurE—

1960—1983.' Unpublished Ph.D. thesis submitted to the Hebre',.

University of Jerusalem. (Hebrew with English summary).

Metzer. Jacob (1986.

'The Slowdown of Economic Growth: A Passing

Phase or the End of the Big Spurt?

In Yoram Ben—Porath. ed. )gv).

Pp. 75—100.

Morawetz, David 1975).

(Discussion

Paper No.

Capital Utilization in

753.) Jerusalem:

Israeli Industry.
- ______

Falk Institute.

N4eubach, Amnon, Efraim Sadka, and Ass3f Razin (1998).

Economic 3rowth

——Looking Toward the 1990s. Tel Aviv: Maaniv Books. (Hebrew).

Syrpuin, Moshe (1q86).

Economic Growth and Structural Chanqe: An

International Perspective.'

In

Yoram

Ben—Porath.

ed. qv)

Pp. 42-74.

Szereszewski, Robert, (1968).

Essays on the Structure of the Jewish

Economy in Palestine and Israel. Jerusalem: Falk Institute.
?usman, P., V. Kislev, and Z. Lerrnan (1989).

Loans to the Moshavim

(Research Paper No. 8904.; Rehovot:
-—Lessons from Experience.
Center for Agricultural Economic Research, The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem. (Hebrew).

— 35 —

and Productivity in Israel
Table 1. Business Sector GOP. Factor Input,
1950—1988

(annual percentage growth)

185-B9

1961-72

1977-81

1982-8'+

1995-87

11.2

9.7

3..

1.9

5.7

3.3

2.7

0.6

1.3

1.5

1.0

Labor input

3.2

2.8

2.2

1.1

0.9

0.9

Capital input

'..2

0.6

—0.5

3.3

2.5

1950—60

GDP

Total productivity

the rate of growth of each factor by
Factor tnput calculated by weighting
(approximatelY 75 percent for labor and 25
its share in business sector GDP
weights). Total productivity is calculated as
percent for capital, with variable
weighted growth rate of factor inputs.
a residual: GDP growth rate
Metzer (1986), on the basis of GaathonS
SOURCE: 1950-91: Syrquin (1986) and
method (1971).
1Q82—8., 1985—87: Bank of Israel

Annual Report 1987, p. 18.

1985-88: EstimateS of the Bank of Israel Research Department (YaacOb
Lavi), January 1989.

— 36 —

Table 2. Inflation and Economic Growth: International Comparison. 1960—1987

1974—80

1981-84

1985-87

9.2(5.5)

3.3(2.2)

3.5(0.1)

5.'(3.5)

6.7(2.7)

6.0(3.0)

6.0(3.9)

e.6(5.2

'+.7(3.6)

2.6(2.0)

2.2(1.8)

3.0)1.4)

1960—73

A. Rate of GOP growth (per employed person
Israel

Semi—industrialized

countries

countries

Industrial

B. Annual rate of inflation
Israel

Semi—industrial
Industrial

countries
countries

7.4

57.8

19.2

19.2

6.3

18.5

10.3

6.7

4.7

10.8

6.8

3.1

SOURCE (A): 1960-80: Bruno (1986).
1981—87: Israel——Bank of Israel Annual Report, p. 22; Industrial

countries (OECD total) and semi—industrialized countries
(exporters af industrial goods)-—IMF World Economic
Outlook. 1988, pp. 111, 115—117.
SOURCE (B): 1960—80: Bruno (1986).
1981—87: Israel——Consumer price index data, Central Bureau of

Statistics; Other countries——IMF World Economic Outlook,

pp. 120, 123.

- 37

Table 3. Public Sector Expenditures and Their Financing. 1960—1987
(percentage of GNP)

1985-87

1967—72

1973-84

55.3

76.)

55.ô

11.8

11.3

11.6

11.0

Transfers

5.4

9.1

16.0

17.4

Public sector investments

4.9

5.4

4.1

3.1

3.4

5.6

12.9

5.1

Real interest payments

1.6

2.9

5.7

10.5

Defense expenditures

9.7

21.1

25.7

18.6

32.6

38.6

47.7

50.o

3.0

4.1

11.0

13.9

1.3

12.6

17.3

1.1

1960-66

1. Total public sector expenditures
Public civilian consumption

Subsidies (plus indirectly
on credit)

3. Total revenues

Taxes and income from property
Unilateral transfers from abroad

4. Total deficit

SOURCE: Bank of Israel calculations for 1960-83. See L. Meridor (1985).
Note: In Fig. 3, civilian consumption and transfers have been grouped together.
as have investments and subsidies.

— 38 —

Table 4. The External and Internal Debt as a Percentage of GNP.
1964-1992

External debt

Year

Irternal debt

23.3
22.4
24.8
24.7
31.2
37.0

---

1970

42.0

55.6

1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
(981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987

47.7
41.7

66.3

38.8

77.8

44.0

92.3
97.5

1965
1966
1967

198
1969

53.5
61.1
60.5
67.1
63.8

57.8
60.5
66.9

68.6
80.2

84.3
67.9
57.4
47.3

1988
Plan
1989
1990

44.4
39.4
35.4

1991
1992

31.7

---

64.8

103.9
110.6
120.6
122.4
121.3
123.5

120.8
123.4
132.5
136.7
124.8
112.9
119.7

119.5
113.9
109.4
104.8

Debt at year end.

Net internal debt (at average prices).

SOURCE: Research Department of the Bank of Israel (D. Gottlieb.
1989—92—-Bank of

Israel

plan, December 1988.

- 39 -

Table 5. Sectoral Composition of Employment, 1960—1988
(thousands)

Non—financial
Public services business sector*
1960
1981

1962

1963
1944
1965

1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988

144.6
159.9
156.7
166.4

175.0
186.0
190.6
188.7

203.7
214.7
229.7
240.6
251.9
269.0
284.8
300.2
308.5
321.0
348.2
360.0
366.0
379.2
385.2
390.5
396.1
402.9
405.9
404.2
418.7

Industry

547.4
576.2
620.2
831.3
667.1
680.8
671.0
630.3
694.3
717.7
717.1
750.9
807.8
843.3
835.8
829.3
836.8
848.0
874.1
894.2
893.7
901.6
915.3
953.2
971.1
974.1
995.4
1,045.7
1,079.0

147.2
161.1
176.9
184.2
196.4
202.2
206.4
184.9
214.8
223.8
232.6
241.7
254.4
281.2
287.1
283.4
283.8

288.2
297.5
312.3
306.2
307.7
305.2
315.6
323.9
325.5
339.1
348.2
338.2

Financial
Sector
.

ota1
Em1oyment

.

..
..
..
..

..
.

797.
842.1
868.9

.

..

819.1
898.1

.

932.4

..

.

25.7
29.1
30.6
34.4
36.9
40.4
39.4
45.3
51.0
53.4
56.6
61.5
63.3
67.7

a5.
64.5
64.2
62.7
64.8

972.5
1,020.6
1.090.3
1,146.7
1.157.'

1.184.5
1,214.2
1,273.3
1,307.8

.31o.3
1,342.3

1,33.8
1.-11.5
1.'33.i
1,441.5

1.45.6
1,512.5
1,562.5

*Includes the financial sector until 1970.
SOURCE: Research Department of the Bank of israel;
Statistics Labour Force Survey.

based on Central Bureau of

— L4o —

Table 7. Total Savings. Gross Domestic Savings, and the Balance—of Payments
Current Account1. 1960—1989

(percent of GNP at current prices according to the official exchange rate>

1974—79

22.6

20.3

18.0

20.5

(20.6)

(28.0)

(23.9)

(16.91

( 2.0>

(—7.7)

(—5.9)

1. Total saving

a.

Private

b. Public
2. Fixed investment

185—88

1990-84

1960—72

[.9
27.6j

21.8

25.4

27.2

18.1

18.5

22.2

[ 1.7

1.B

0.4

0.4

4. Net current account (123>e —5.0

—6.9

—4.2

2.0

3.

Change in inventories

There is a break in the series at 1980, after which the public/private
breakdown conforms to the 1988 SNA. The two series were chained in 1980.
Advance payments for defense imports have been calculated as actual imports
and have been included in defense imports.

SOURCE: Research Department of the Bank of Israel (Yaacob Lavi).

—

—

Table 8. Real Interest Rates (ex—post) on Credit And Asset Holdings of the
Public, from 1986—1988

(percent per annum)

Asset holdings of the public

Lix year

Indexed

Short—term credit to the public

Private
bond

one month
treasury

irde'ed

government

Overdraft

Term

facilities

credit

Total'

1986

33.4

16.6

8.2

7.9

-0.9

6.0

1987

38.5

20.1

18.8

6.7

2.5

4.8

1988

25.4

14.5

13.8

6.2

-2.4

4.0

I

29.0

15.2

14.7

6.7

-2.8

4.3

II

24.3

13.1

13.1

6.4

—5.1

4.2

III

29.8

19.7

21.5

5.8

1.0

4.1

IV

18.7

10.1

6.2

5.8

-2.5

3.5

1988

issues"

bills

bonds

— Including directed credit and foreign—currency linked credit not detailed in
the table.

Including a 1.6 percent imputed issuing cost. The 1986 figure is the average
for July to December.

SOURCE: Table VIII—2 in the Bank of Israel Annual Report 1988 (Hebrew edition).

— 142 —

Table 10. Business Sector GOP and the Gross Share of Labor and Capital 1961-1988
(current pric

GDP

Loan
subsidy

1+2

labor

Gross
capital
stock

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Returns
to

Returns to
labor
percent

Gross
rate of
return tc
capital

(6)

(7)

14.0
11.2
11.4
11.3
10.6

Thousands of NIS
1961

369.1

1962
1963
1944
1965
1968
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980

440.9
526.0

272.6
333.6
399.5
462.6
588.4
629.9
640.5
706.7
746.3
938.2

605.2
720.0
757.6
788.8
964.0
1,120.3
1,286.8

1,122.1
1,392

1,614

2.101
2,585
3.627
5,297
6,647
9,603
15,575
27,699

490
626
815
1,848

5,540
7,137
10,229
16,390
29,547

1,756
2,350
3,260
4,695
6,831
11,302
21,576

3,913
7,529

71,254
177,210

49,456
120,700

243

47,341

1981 169,681

Millions

of NIS
374.6
935.5
4,720.1
16,954.4

12,046.1
16,272.7
24,306.0
43,301.9
78,766.2

3.9
75.7
76.0
76.4
78.7
83.1
81.2
73.3
66.6
72.9
69.5
66.3
67.9
64.8
61.9
70.6
71.1
72.6
77.9

180,044.7
427,322.8

73.4
71.1
74.4
79.4
74.3
74.3

698.4
956.8
1,110.B
1,256.8
1,433.8
1,603.5
1,725.5
1,902.5

2,128.0
2,491.0
3,081.0
3,951.8
5,299.6
7,987.0

8.0
8.6
13.5
17.6
14.0
18.0
17.9
15.6
16.0
16.7
12.0
11.4
9.9

7.8

5.9
11.5

133.1
483.4

389.1
965.1
4,853.2
17,437.8

278.8
743.2
3,507.4
12,598.9

972.2
2,372.5
12,295.5
46,750.6

628.3
683.5

26,351.7
33,206.0

20,369.2
27,026.1

71,783.9
89,177.0

79.2
83.1

7.5

1987

25,725.5
32,522.5

1988

38,910.0

513.0

39,423.0

32,790.4 103,187.3

84.3

5.9

45,966
50,992
55,873

37,940
41,315
44,825

123,530
130,815
138,815

82.5
81.0
80.2

6.5

61,299

48,680

147,945

79.4

8.5

1982
1983
1984
1985
1986

14.5

29.6

8.1
5.9

9.3
6.2

Plan'
1989
1990
1991
1992

7.4

8.0

Percent of capital stock.

SOURCE: Research Department of the Bank of Israel, 1989—92 data based on Bank of
Israel

plan. December 1988.

(J1

(0

rs

a)

CD

-s

c)
a)
-s

CD
—I

-a

-'I

-s

-a
CD
a)

0

0)

UI

-L
(0

0

% Annual increase

0

-L

C

p3

—

C)

O'O—

(Do

o1
Oo.

(On)

'0
0--I
OP)

cI)
(Dm

(DC)
CflO

(0'—'

rn0

ZI-O

'-'-C

-.01

-u

-n
-s

4-

Ag 2: Inflation and Growth: International Comparison, 1960-1987
•-------

200

--

OECD
Israel

SQ

ICs

I
—

0

7//i

____ ,i,I

1985-87

Growth

10 —

S Per ernpoyee

8—

I

6
4

I

2

0

1960-73

1974-80

1981-84

1985-87

— 47 —

Fig 3: Public—Sector Expenditures and Their Financing, 1960—1988

-----—

——
60 --—--—Public—Sector Expenditures
70 —

Delense

Investment & s.jbsidies
Cv,Iion consmptOr'

60

a-

z0
0
C

0

40

C-

30

20

10

0

1960-66

1967-72

1973-84

1985-88

-

-

Ag 4: Israel's kternaI and External Debt as Percent of GNP
140

120

100

80
i
60
40

20

0

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

-

-

Figure 5. Employment and Unemployment Rate,

1960—1992

35 -

30

Public and financial sectors

-

Public sector

15 -

10 j

Unemployment

——

-L.__.__./'
0

i

60

1965

1970

I

I

I

I

1975

1980

I•
1985

1990

SOURCE: Employment—Appendix Table 5.

Unemployment rate—1960—88, CBS, labour force surveys data.
1989—92, contingent forecast of the Bank of Israel's December 1988
program.

—

Fig 6:

—

Israeli CP1 Inflation

(t'flnuaJ % - q.iartec to carespondng iartec)
500

400

300
1•

C-)

200

100

0
66:1

68:1

70:1

72:1

74:1

76:1

781

801

82'.l

84:1

86:1

88:1

— L9

Fig 7: National Savrig (Private and Public) and Gross Domestic Investment

30-

vestment

Priv. say.
I

25 —

Public say.

a,

0

0

16-

10

5—

0——
1960-72

1974—79

1980-84

1985-88

GD

O)

U'

L.l

GD

GD

I".)

a'

(7'

z
0
(0 z

(0 C

(I) m
-1

z0

w0
0m

Zm
-10)

m

m

0
Oii

0

'1

()

U

— 51

—

Figure 9. The Marginal Interest Rate and the Consumer Price Index

(monthly rate of change)

30
25

iI
/J

CPI

r J\'

/

I

/

ire-

15

Interest rate

\

I

\I\I

-J \

/

N

—— — ——

:

1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

— 52

Fig 10: Share of Labour in Prockict and Rate of Return to Capital, 196 1—1988

goShare of labour
(bu*ess sector)

::••

—

orf return

0

v

i

1961

I

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

©

©

©

L')

,I.
0

lIIIIIIlIIItIII!_tII !

©

.

_i.L'

0
©

0)

©

0,
>(

CD

0
1

-4.

(D

ol

(a

V

CD

r"

0

.4.

-S
-S

-n

'.5'

— 54

—

Fiq 12. Inflation, Trade Deficit and Growth, 1965—1992
400i)

Inflation

0

I

Q)

II

0•'

0
C
0

........

half of year
2nd half of year

1st

—

I

-.-.-.....-.

200—

I.-

Q)

El

II

00-

.

I.'

I

p

•

77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 9 92
p

65—72 73 74 75 76
Avg.

C-

24
22
20

0
0

Civilian Trade Deficit (goods and services)
(Export — civilian import)

18

160 14C 120 101)

a-

86—

4—
2

0

65—7273

74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 35 8 87 88 69 90 51

9

Avg.

-c

0 8

0
1)

6

0
C

0

0
0
C
C

4
2
0
2

65—72 73

74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 85 87 88 39 90 51

92

