                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             3*14K MONItORING AND INVESTMENT: EVIDENCE FROM THE
       CHASCING STRUCTURE OF JAPANESE CORPORATE BANXING RELATIONSHIPS




                                 Takeo Moshi
                                Anti   Kashyap

                              David Scharfstein




                           Working Paper No. 3079




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  August 1989




Prepared for the conference on Information, Capital Markets, and Investment at
the National Bureau of Economic Research, May 5-6, 1989. We thank Glenn
Hubbard for useful conversations on numerous occasions. We are also grateful
to Yasushi Hamao, Takatoshi Ito, John McMillan, Jim Poterba, and conference
participants for helpful comments and Masako Niwa, William Kan, and Andrew
Wiedlin for valuable research assistance. The data were generously provided by
the Nikkei Data Bank Bureau. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors not those of the Board of Governors, their staff, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #3079
                                       August 1989


        6A1411 MONITORING AND INVESTMENT: EVIDENCE FROM THE CHANGING
            STRUCTURE OF JAPANESE CORPORATE BANKING RELATIONSHIPS

                                   AnmCT
     During this decade the structure of corporate finance in Japan has

changed dramatically. Japanese firms that once used bank debt as their prime

source of financing now rely more heavily on the public capital markets. This

trend was facilitated by the substantial deregulation of the Japanese capital

markets. In an earlier paper (Moshi, Kashyap. and Scharfstein 1988). we

demonstrated that investment by firms with close bank relationships appears to

be less liquidity constrained than investment by firms without close bank

ties. We interpreted this finding as evidence that bank ties tend to mitigate

information problems in the capital market. This paper tracks the investment

behavior of firms that have recently weakened their bank ties in favor of

greater reliance on the bond market. The results suggest that these firms are

now more liquidity constrained. The paper concludes with a discussion of why

firms would loosen their bank ties in light of these liquidity costs.




Takeo Hoshi             Anil Kashyap             David Scharfstein
Graduate School of      Federal Reserve Board    MIT Sloan School of
International           Mail Stop 61             Management
Relations and           Washington, DC 20551     E52-373
Pacific Studies                                  Cambridge, MA 02139
University of California
La Jolla, CA 92093-0062
I. Introduction

     Economists typically view banks as intermediaries that serve to

channel funds from individual investors to firms with productive

investment opportunities. This commonly held view, however, is difficult

to reconcile with the assumption of frictionless capital markets: in

frictionless markets, firms would raise capital directly from individual

investors and avoid the costs of intermediationJ

     This paper offers empirical evidence on the benefits of

intermediation. Our explanation for the existence of financial

intermediaries derives from the view that there may be important

capital-market frictions created by information problems between firms

and investors. We view banks and other financial intermediaries as

institutions designed in part to circumvent these capital-market

imperfections. Specifically, banks serve as corporate monitors who pay

the costs of becoming informed about their client firms and who try to

ensure that the managers of these firms take efficient actions.

     This view of the role of banks is not new. Schumpeter (1939) argued

informally along these lines and Diamond (1984) has constructed a formal

model that captures these and related ideas. Diamond shows that

delegating   the task of monitoring to a financial intermediary minimizes
monitoring costs. The alternative -- issuing   securities like public debt

and equity - - may be inefficient either because monitoring costs ate

needlessly duplicated among individual security holders, or because

monitoring is a public good which no one has an incentive to provide. Of

course, this raises a potentially troubling question: Who ensures that

banks monitor the firms in which they invest? Diamond shows that bank

diversification plays a key role in ensuring that banks indeed monitor

their client firms. His is the first model that takes full account of
                                             2


monitoring costs and shows that financial intermediation can be the most

efficient monitoring mechanism. Ramakrishnan and Thakor (1984) and

Williamson (1986) make similar points.

       Our goat in this paper is to analyze empirically the role of banks

in monitoring firms when there are information problems in the capital

market. The focus of our study is the Japanese economy where

historically banks have played a much more important role in financing

investment than in the U.S.2 However, in the past decade the importance

of bank financing in Japan has declined dramatically. While bank

borrowing comprised 84 percent of all external financing between 1971 and

1975, it was only 57 percent in the 1981-1985 period. In large part.

this resulted from considerable deregulation of Japanese capital markets

-   - enabling   firms to raise capital directly from financial markets in the

form of bonds and other debt-linked instruments. The result has been a

substantial disintermediation of the Japanese financial system.

       These regulatory changes offers us an excellent opportunity to

study the role of financial intermediation. Our research strategy is to

examine the investment behavior of a panel of firms before and after

deregulation. In the period before deregulation all of the firms in our

sample had close ties to a bank or set of banks. After deregulation,

some of these finns loosened their ties to banks and relied more heavily

on direct capital-market financing. Another set maintained their close

banking ties. Our goal is to see whether the investment behavior of

firms that have maintained their bank relationships exhibit the features

of a bank-monitored fin. Moreover, we wish to detect changes in the

investment behavior of firms that have loosened their bank ties: Do they
                                                3


exhibit behavior that reflects the fact that they were monitored before

deregulation, but not monitored after deregulation?

      Of course    the   crucial   step in this analysis is   identifying

investment     behavior that distinguishes between firms that are monitored
and   those that are not.      In   this regard we build on our earlier work in

Hoshi, Kashyap, and Scharfstein (1988) which also examined the

relationship between liquidity and investment for firms with different

degrees of bank affiliation. We argued in that paper that essentially

all models that posit some sort of information problem in the capital

market predict that liquidity should be positively related to investment.

This prediction arises, for example, in Myers and Majiuf (1984). In

their     model, managers are privately informed about the value of
investment.      This means that equity will sometimes be underpriced.

Managers will therefore be reluctant to issue equity to finance

investment: indeed, they may turn down positive net present value

investments that they would otherwise accept if they had the internal

funds to finance the investment. This model generates the prediction

that, all else equal, more liquid firms should invest more. One             can

derive     similar predictions from models that assume different information

asymmetries and moral-hazard problems.

        Bank   monitoring   is one way of overcoming these information

problems.        If banks lend a large fraction of a firm's debt as well as'

own   a   portion of its equity (as they do in Japan), then they have strong

incentives to become informed about the firm         and   its investment

opportunities. It is also in their interest to ensure that managers make

efficient business decisions. In this case, the theory would predict

that there should be little relationship between investment and liquidity
                                             4

for bank monitored firms. If fins need funds to finance investment they

can go directly to their informed bank to raise the money. Provided the

project is valuable, the bank should be willing to provide the capital.

     To explore these ideas, we start with a sample of firms all of

which had close bank ties before deregulation. Investment by these

firms is not sensitive to their liquidity during the 1977-1982 period.

We identify 1.983 as the first year in which the effects of deregulation

were fully felt. By that time, there is a set of firms that have

significantly reduced their bank borrowing and increased their direct

capital-market financing. These firms exhibit a strong sensitivity of

investment to cash flow in the later period, whereas their investment did

not depend on liquidity in the earlier period. By contrast, the firms

that maintained bank ties show no sensitivity of investment to cash flow

in both periods - -   before   and after deregulation.

     These results complement our earlier work (Hoshi, Kashyap, and

Scharfstein (1988)) which compared the investment behavior of this

sample   of firms to the investment behavior of fins without close
banking   ties   during   the period 1977-1982. In that paper we found that

the investment of the latter set of firms was quite sensitive to

liquidity whereas it was not so for firms with close bank ties. The most

interesting aspect of this paper is that we explore the investment

behavior of the sa set of firms over different periods. In some

respects, it is more compelling to establish that, for the same firm,

liquidity is more important as it weakens its banking ties.

     These results raise the natural question of why a firm would choose

to weaken its bank ties and incur this cost. Obviously, the answer must

be that there are compensating benefits from rasing funds directly from
                                              S


the capital market or costs of maintaining bank ties. These costs and

benefits, while potentially important, are poorly understood and

difficult to quantify. The Conclusion includes some conjectures about

what these costs and benefits may be. The more limited goal of this

paper is to establish the facts about what happened to investment

behavior as a result of deregulation.

      The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next

section reviews the regulatory changes in Japan that have enabled firms

to issue directly placed securities. We trace the changes in aggregate

financing patterns between 1971 and 1985. We then present financing

statistics for the firms in our panel. These results are consistent with

the aggregate changes. Section 3 presents our main empirical evidence.

In that section we also entertain other explanations for our findings.

Finally. Section 4 contains concluding remarks. It also includes some

speculative comments about the factors that might explain why some firms

have shifted to direct financing and others have not.


2.   Deregulation and   Changes in Japanese   Corporate Finance
      Until   recently bank debt was the predominant form of financing for

Japanese firms. In large part this was due to regulations that made it

difficult or even impossible to raise funds directly from securities

markets. During the early 1980s a series of regulatory reforms were

implemented that increased significantly the financing options of

Japanese corporations. The result has been a dramatic transformation in

the structure of Japanese corporate finance. This section reviews those

regulatory reforms and presents aggregate- and micro-level evidence on

their impact on financing patterns.
                                             6


     The Japanese government's security-market regulations reduced both

the supply and demand for corporate debt. First, on the supply side, the

government required all domestically issued bonds to be fully secured

against a fin's assets. It is widely believed that Japanese managers

were reluctant to issue secured debt. The Nihon Keizai Shimbun-sha

(1987) cites the administrative cost of establishing collateral as one

the most important reasons for the stagnant growth of domestic straight

bond issues. There were no prohibitions against unsecured bank debt.

According to Yoshihara (1987, p. 130), as of March 1981, less than 40

percent of all lending done by banks required collateral. These

regulations therefore encourage bank financing.

     A second supply-side regulation required firms to receive

government permission to issue bonds in foreign markets. Unlike

domestic bonds, these bonds could be unsecured. Nevertheless, foreign

bonds were infrequently used because the government -           - for   a complicated

set of reasons -- appears to have been reluctant to grant permission to

issue these bonds.

     Finally - -   and   perhaps most importantly - -   there   were interest-rate

ceilings that reduced the demand for bonds. Holders of corporate bonds

thus earned below-market yields. For example, Shimura (1978) reports

that the difference between the subscribers' yield and the market yield

of corporate bonds was as high as one percentage point in the late L960s.

While there were also interest rate ceilings on bank debt, it is widely

believed that banks were able to get around these restrictions by

requiring firms to hold non-interest bearing accounts at the bank. (See,

for example, Aoki (1984), pp. 20-21.)
                                         7

    The result, as one would expect, is that bank borrowing was the
primary source of external funds for most firms. Nasu (1987) reports

that from 1976-1980, 80 percent of manufacturing firms external funds

came through borrowing from financial institutions.

     The move towards deregulation was initiated in the government bond

market. Until 1977, there was essentially no secondary market for

government bonds. Instead, the Ministry of Finance put pressure on the

banks to hold these low-yielding bonds. During a time in which

government debt was quite low, this was acceptable to the banks. High

growth helped sustain such practices because the Bank of Japan could (and

actually did) monetize the bonds without fear of inflationary

consequences. But as the government deficit grew and growth slowed after

the first oil shock, this policy became more costly to the banks. They

began to put pressure on the government to loosen its interest-rate

restrictions. The government finally agreed to do so and by June 1978

the Ministry of Finance began selling bonds through public auctions.

Relaxation of interest rate-ceilings in the corporate bond market soon

followed   as it became apparent that the demand for corporate bonds would
have been destroyed by the liberalization of the government bond market.
As evidence of this change, the mean difference between the subscribers'

yield and the market yield in the 1980-1988 period was -54 basis points,

whereas it was 32 basis points between 1973 and 1979. Interest-rate

ceilings still exist, but they are adjusted frequently in line with

market conditions) In addition, the interest rates on convertible bonds

are not regulated (Shinkai, p. 288).
                                                     8

        The government's second major reform was the loosening of its

restrictions on foreign bond issues. Following the passage of the

Foreign Exchange Law Reform of 1960, firms were no longer required to

have government permission before issuing bonds on overseas markets;

instead    they    were   only   required   to notify the government that    they

intended    to make such an issue.4 According to the Ministry of Finance.

by 1983 Japanese firms raised almost half their capital in overseas

securities markets.

        A third important        reform was the    government's legalization   of
warrant    bonds    in June,     1981.   These   bands   come with an option to buy

shares at a specified price during a certain period. This option was

initially non-detachable, but became detachable after December 1985. The

Ministry of Finance reports that by 1986 over 20 percent of all new funds

were raised using warrant bonds.

        Finally, in January 1983 the government phased in new regulations

allowing firms to issue non-collateralized bonds. Before then, only

Toyota Motors and Matsushita Electric were permitted to issue unsecured

bonds in domestic securities markets. In January 1983, an additional

nine firms were permitted to issue unsecured straight debt and 23 more
firms were allowed unsecured convertible bonds. In several stages over
the subsequent four years. these privileges were gradually expanded; by
February 1987, 180 firms could issue unsecured straight bonds and 330
firms   could issue unsecured domestic convertible bonds.

       Together these reforms facilitated a pronounced shift in the

aggregate financing patterns away from (indirect) bank borrowing and

towards (direct) bond financing. Table 2.1 reproduces Nasu's (1987)

statistics on financing patterns since 1971. As the table shows, between
                                             9

1981 and 1985. the aggregate percentage of external funds raised by bank

borrowing was 57 percent, which was down from 80 percent in the preceding

five-year period. In contrast, the percentage due to bond financing rose

from 2 percent between 1976 and 1980 to 22 percent between 1981 and 1985.

The percentage of external funds raised through equity issues also

increased slightly from 12 percent between 1976 and 1980, to 16 percent

between 1981 and 1985.

     The remainder of this section examines whether these general

patterns also hold for a particular set of manufacturing firms. The

firms in question represent a subset of the Japanese manufacturing firms

that have been continuously listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange since

1965. (Since the data are described at length in Hoshi, icashyap and

Scharfstein (1988), we omit an extended description of the data.5) This

particular subset comprises 121 non-financial firms that we previously

classified as having a close affiliation to a single bank in the 1972-

1982 period. The question we ask is whether these firms that already had

well-established banking relationships have followed the general movement

away from bank borrowing. In the next section, we examine whether any

such moves have affected their investment behavior.

     To address this first question, we supplemented the balance sheet

data that we have previously used with detailed data on borrowing

patterns. These data are available from the publication Keiretsu no

Kenkvu,   which   is also one of the original sources underlying the

identification of these firms as having a strong bank relationship from

1972 to 1982. Our     strategy   in collecting the data was to pick two years

that would permit a comparison of the borrowing patterns before and after

the reforms discussed above. We chose 1977 as the early year for two
                                         10

reasons:   it is well before any of the important regulatory changes and it

is the first year for which we had the stock price data needed to compute

Tobin's q (which we need later in analyzing investment). We compare the

corporate financing patterns in 1977 to those in 1986, the most recent

year for which data are available.6 While post-1986 data would be

helpful, it is not necessary; by then many of the key regulatory changes

that havcenabled fins to reduce their dependence on bank financing were

already in place.

     In collecting the data we found that 12 of the 121. firms either did

not have complete data in Keiretsu no Kenkvu, or had switched largest

lenders by 1986. These firms no longer satisfy our definition of a firm

with a close bank relationship. For the remaining 109 firms, Table 2.2

compares data on some key variables in 1977 and 1986.

     The   first observation is that for these firms the ten years between
1977 and 1986 have been ones of steady growth. The real capital stock
increased   by 50 percent over this period. Judging from the recent data,

the growth of the capital stock appears to be continuing: in 1977, the

median value of Tobin's q was 1.32, while the median rate of investment

(relative to the capital stock) was .07; in 1986. these numbers were 1.68

and .19, respectively.7'8 Thus, the period we are analyzing is one in

which there was considerable investment, and financing needs were likely

to have been important.

     The change in the debt-equity ratio during this period is perhaps

the most striking piece of evidence from Table 2.2; in 1977, the ratio

was 1.26; by 1986 it had fallen to .37. These numbers primarily reflect

the steep rise in the Japanese stock market. During this ten year period

the aggregate equity value of these fins rose by more than fourfold, an
                                           1.1


annual growth rate of over 15 percent. While equity values have soared,
there has been a much smaller increase in debt financing; the median

nominal market value of debt rose only three percent, amounting to a real

decline of about 11 percent.

      The aggregate shift away from bank borrowing towards bond financing

that was mentioned earlier is also evident for these fins. Table 2.2

shows that the book value of bank borrowing has fallen in real terms,

with the median value falling by 24 percent and the mean falling by 11

percent. In addition, long-term bank borrowing was a much smaller

fraction of all long-ten liabilities, falling from 66 percent in 1977

percent to 31. percent in 1986.

      One historically important source of bank financing are banks

affiliated with a firm's keiretsu or industrial group. These groups are

loose affiliations of fins (many of which have trading relationships

with each other) centered around a core group of banks and other

financial intermediaries. The 109 firms in our sample can all be

considered members of one of the six largest industrial groups during the

1972-1982 period. It is widely believed that for these firms group

financing was the most important source of capital.9

       There   are a number of important differences between borrowing from a
group bank and borrowing from other banks. First, group banks are     likely

to   hold more debt in these firms than other banks and hence have stronger

incentives to monitor them. In 1977, in our sample, group banks held on

average 24 percent of all bank debt. In addition, group banks also tend

to hold more equity in their client firms; this too gives them more

powerful incentives to monitor. Moreover, group banks have in the past

been active at helping member fins in financial distress; other banks
                                       12

often defer to the group banks, expecting them to take the lead in

organizing any financial workouts for distressed firms (Sheard (1985)).

Finally. former bank executives are often placed in top managerial

positions at these fins. This may facilitate the flow of information

the bank and its client firms.

     Table 2.2 reveals that firms have become much less dependent on

group financial institutions for their financing. The book value of

borrowing from group financial institutions has dropped substantially,

with the median falling 33 percent in real terms and the mean 4 percent.

Interestingly, this change has mirrored changes in the amount of total

bank borrowing. As the table shows, while the overall level of group

borrowing has fallen, as a fraction of total bank borrowing this form of

borrowing has remained roughly constant.

     So far we have focused on the changes in the level of bank and

group borrowing, Of course, these changes could in principle reflect a

decline in the financing needs of Japanese corporations. To give us a

more meaningful measure of the change in the composition of financing, we

control for the change in firms' financing needs by normalizing the

borrowing numbers by the market value of the firms' debt and by the

market value of their depreciable assets)0

     These ratios reinforce the view that both bank and group borrowing

have become less important funding sources. Relative to total debt, both

types of borrowing show modest declines- -by five percent in terms of all

bank borrowing and by 21 percent in terms of group borrowing. However,

these declines come on top of the previously mentioned downward trend in

debt financing, so that they understate the movement away from bank

financing. For this reason, the ratios that compare the borrowing
                                       13

numbers to the capital stock are better measures of these level effects;

relative to the capital stock both borrowing measures fell by over 40

percent from 1977 to 1986.

     Table 2.2 also indicates that along with the shift away from bank

financing there has been a move towards bond financing. The median book

value of bond financing rose by over three and a half times in real

terms. As a fraction of long-term liabilities, bonds have risen twofold.

A more detailed look at the bond patterns reveals that most of the

increase in bond financing has come from the issue of convertible bonds.

In 1977 the average amount of outstanding convertible bonds accounted for

30 percent of all bond financing. This percentage and the amount of

outstanding convertible bonds were both roughly constant until the 1983

regulatory changes. Since then, convertible bonds have gained in use, so

that by 1986 their face value was nearly five times the level in 1977.

Even with the rise in straight bond financing. CBs accounted for 60 of

all bond financing in 1986.

     A simple pattern emerges from Table 2.2. The period of steady

growth from 1977 to 1986 accompanied a marked decline in debt-equity

ratios. In particular, the bank borrowing component of debt, the

traditional source of financing, became much less important. This is

reflected in declines in borrowing from both group banks and other banks.

The recent data suggest that when fins need outside financing they are

increasingly turning to the stock market and the newly developed bond

market.

     While this message is consistent with the aggregate evidence

presented earlier, it is somewhat misleading; Table 2.2 masks some

interesting heterogeneity in the data. Not all of the firms have been so
                                            14

aggressive in cutting back on debt financing, nor have all the firms had

such steady growth. In fact, the performance and general financing

patterns of firms that have reduced their dependence on bank financing

are quite different than firms that have maintained their banking

relationships.

     Table 2.3 demonstrates this point by separately showing the

relevant statistics from Table 2.2 for two sets of fins: those for whom

the ratio of group borrowing to total debt has decreased and those for

whom it has increased. The same basic pattern would emerge if we

classified these firms according to changes in the ratio of total bank

borrowing to debt.

     This table brings out two important points.      First, the firms that

have reduced their dependence on group financing (and bank financing,

more generally) have had much higher growth than the finns that have

increased their dependence on group financing.      In 1986, the real capital

stock of the median firm in the former set of firms is over twice its

size in 1977 - -   a   real growth rate of over six percent a year. In

contrast, the real capital stock of the median firm that has increased

its group borrowing has risen by less than one percent per year.11

     The second important difference between the two sets of firms is

their changes in q. Despite the large increase of the capital stock for

the firms that have become less dependent on group financing, their q's

have risen appreciably. The increase in q for these firms is roughly

twice as large as for the other fins.

     These data suggest that decisions regarding the mix of debt

financing are not arbitrary; Diamond (1989) presents a theory of this

choice. This raises an important issue for our paper when we come to
                                             15

compare the investment behavior of the two sets of finns: Are the factors

that determine firms financing choices correlated in some way with their

investment behavior? If so, our results will be biased. After

discussing what we think determines fins financing choices, we argue

and present evidence that this issue probably does not explain our

results.


3.   Financing   Patterns   and Investment

      3.1 Approach
     The objective of this section is to investigate whether the
documented changes in Japanese financing patterns have had an impact on
corporate   investment behavior. M discussed in the Introduction,

essentially all models that posit information problems in the capital

market predict that more liquid firms undertake more investment. We have

argued that close bank relationships are a means of mitigating

information problems; banks with large debt and equity stakes in firms

have strong incentives to monitor them. In contrast, firms without

investors who have large financial stakes at risk are more likely to face

information problems when it comes to raising capital.

      In Hoshi, Kashyap, and Scharfstein (1988) we showed that during the

period when these firms all had close banking relationships, 1977-1982,

liquidity was not a significant determinant of investment. The question

we ask here is whether for the set of firms that have loosened their ties

to banks, liquidity is a more important determinant of investment.

Moreover, does liquidity continue to be unimportant for firms that

maintain close bank ties?
                                        16

    The main empirical obstacle in determining the importance of

liquidity is the possibility that liquidity is correlated with other

variables that affect investment. In particular, if the fundamental

determinants of investment are unobservable, then the liquidity
coefficient in an investment regression will be biased to extent that
liquidity   is correlated with the fundamentals. The standard claim is the

such correlation exists: strong current performance as evidenced by high

liquidity signals that future performance is likely to be good and hence

that investment is worthwhile. Thus, a regression of investment on some

measure of liquidity may simply be picking up the relationship between

current and future performance, inducing an omitted variable bias.

     Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988) take two steps towards

addresking this problem. First, they estimate an equation that contains

both liquidity and an explicit proxy for the value of investment

opportunities. They argue that since q is a forward looking measure of

profitability, it is useful in this regard. We believe that q is an

imperfect measure of investment opportunities12 so that some component of

liquidity still reflects these opportunities. Nevertheless, to the

extent that q does reflect investment opportunities it will reduce the

omitted variable bias of the liquidity coefficient.

     The more innovative approach to this problem is to compare the

effects of liquidity across two sets of firms. Fazzari, Hubbard, and

Petersen identify a set of firm that they believe on a orion grounds are

likely to face information problems in the capital market and identify

another set that are not likely to face such problems.13 They then

estimate the investment equations for these two sets of firms, comparing

the estimated effects of liquidity. Under the null hypothesis of perfect
                                          17

capital markets there should be no difference in the estimated liquidity

coefficients provided the omitted variable bias is the same for the two

sets of firms. Thus, if one is to explain the finding that liquidity is

more important for one set of firms under the null hypothesis, one has

to argue that the omitted variable bias is greater for that set of firms:

either that q is a particularly bad proxy for investment or that

liquidity is particularly good proxy. Below, we discuss two arguments

along these lines, but do not find compelling evidence for them. Absent

such a compelling argument, the findings are consistent with the

existence of liquidity constraints.

     3.2   Regression Equations
     The   evidence we will present is obtained by regressing
investment in depreciable assets (normalized by the stock of depreciable
assets)    on a set of yearly dummies, a tax-corrected version of q for

depreciable assets, cash flow, lagged production and the beginning of

period stock of marketable securities. The last three variables were all

normalized by the stock of depreciable assets and all the data were first

differenced.

     This    regression equation is the same as the one estimated in our
previous    paper. Essentially all of the non-liquidity variables are

included to reduce the possibility that the liquidity variables might be

proxying for unobservable determinants of investment. We briefly discuss

why these variables should reduce this possibility. The yearly dummies

are included to filter out any common macroeconomic shocksJ4 Other firm

or industry-specific shocks are eliminated by first differencing (at the

cost of losing one year of data). Since this transformation induces a

moving-average ten into the residual, all the standard errors reported
                                         18

below are computed using a robust method that allows for first-order

moving average errors (see White (1984)).

     For the reasons given above we include q in the regressions. In

fact, we actually use both beginning- and end-of-period q in all of our

regressions. We include both measures because it is possible that cash

received during the period contains information about investment

opportunities not contained in the beginning-of-period q.    Including the

end-of-period q addresses this problem at the cost of obscuring the

interpretation of the coefficients on         Since these regressions are

not designed to test the q theory of investment, this trade-oil is one we

are willing to make. The results are not affected by the inclusion of

end-of-period q.

     We also include production over the previous year in our

regressions. There are several reasons to include production. The most

important is that the empirical investment literature has repeatedly

shown the existence of an accelerator effect in the data.   Our previous

paper confirms the importance of the effect for these firms. Blundell et

al. (1988), Fazzari et al. (1988) and Whited (1988) establish that the

accelerator effect is important even in models with q for firms in

Britain and the U.S. -   If we were to drop production, it is possible that
the liquidity variable would be proxying for accelerator effects since

production and liquidity are typically correlated. The inclusion of both

variables eliminates this problem. In addition, theoretical arguments

based on the presence of monopolistic competition in the product market

can also be used to justify the inclusion of a production term in the

investment equation (see Schiantarelli and Georgoutous (1987)). We
                                          19

emphasize, however, that these results do not depend on the inclusion of

production.

     Finally, since the focus of the investigation is the sensitivity of

investment to liquidity, we include two   measures of liquidity. The first
variable is current cash flow which is defined as income after tax     plus
depreciation less dividend payments.16 We also include the firms

holding of marketable securities as a proxy for the stock of a firms

liquid assets. These securities are identified by the firms as assets

that can readily be converted into cash. In most years, the median

firm's holdings of these cash-equivalents is as large as the median

atuount of investment.

     3.3 Findings

     As a starting point for our discussion, we estimate the basic

regression for the 109 firms over the 1.978-1982 period - -   specifically,
from April 1978 to March 1983. The results are shown in the first column

of Table 3.1. As would be expected from our previous work, neither cash

flow nor the stock of liquidity is a significant determinant of

investment over this pre-deregulation period. The coefficients of both

variables are precisely estimated and small, which suggests the

interpretation that these variables are not important determinants of

investment.

     As the second column of the table shows, the results are less clear-

cut over the 1983-1986 period. The point estimate of the cash-flow

coefficient is much larger, but it is imprecisely estimated so that at

conventional levels of significance it is indistinguishable from zero.

The seemingly large standard errors suggest that there is substantial

heterogeneity in the data. Below, we establish that this is the case.
                                       20

     It is worth pointing out that, as so much previous work has shown, q

does not appear to be the key variable that determines investment. Also,

production is no longer significant in the later period. Given the

reduced-form nature of the regression, this change is hard to interpret.

    We now consider the natural question raised by the results in Table

3.1: Is the increased sensitivity of investment to cash-flow in the later

period related to the changes in financing patterns that occurred at the

same time? To address this question, we separated the sample into two

sets of firms, those that increased and those that decreased their

reliance on bank financing. As a measure of the strength of a bank

relationship we used the ratio of group borrowing to debt. We focus on

group borrowing rather than total bank borrowing because, as discussed

above, group borrowing is probably associated with more intensive

monitoring. However, it is worth indicating that other measures of the

dependence on bank financing yield similar results.

    We ran the above regressions for the two sets of firms. The first

two columns of Table 3.2 show that for the pre-deregulation period, the

sensitivity of investment to internal funds does not seem to depend on

whether or not firms subsequently changed their group borrowing to total

debt ratio. Put differently, splitting the sample in the 1978 to 1982

period does not reveal a tendency for either class of firms to invest

more when their liquidity is higher.

     Since the two samples are independent, hypothesis tests comparing

individual coefficients between the two sets of firms can be conducted

without being concerned about covariances. As the table shows, the

sampling variation is large enough so that none of the individual

coefficients are statistically different for the two groups. In most
                                        21

cases, the coefficients are also precisely estimated so that such

comparisons are meaningful. The only exception is for the marketable

securities variable, where the coefficient is very difficult to pin down

for the firms that have maintained strong ties to the groups. Overall,

these findings support our previous work: during this period when all of

these firms had close banking ties, liquidity does not drive investment.

     The third column of Table 3.2 demonstrates the first of the two main

findings of the paper: firms that have loosened their ties to group banks

exhibited a marked increase in the effect of liquidity on investment. The

coefficient on cash flow for these firms increased by a factor of five

from .082 to .479 between the pre- and post- deregulation periods; the t-

statistic on cash flow increased from .8 to 3.4. Using a one-sided test,

the post-deregulation coefficient is significantly larger than the pre-

deregulation coefficient at the 5 percent level. The other coefficients

for these firms are mostly unaffected; none are statistically different

across the two periods.

     The paper's second major result, shown in the last column of the

table, is that for firms that have maintained their ties to group banks,

liquidity continues to be unimportant even after deregulation. For these

fins, both before and after the regulatory changes, cash flow is

statistically insignificant with a coefficient that is tightly estimated

and close to zero. The effect of holdings of marketable securities is

hard to pin down in either period, but neither coefficient is

significant. Individual comparisons of the other variables in the

equation also suggest that there are no statistically significant.

differences across the two periods, although the standard errors on

coefficients for beginning-of-period q are rather large.
                                         22

       The analysis suggests that bank relationships rel.ax liquidity

constraints. Before accepting this interpretation of the evidence,

however, we explore an alternative explanation of our results.     As we

discussed above, the characteristics of firms that have loosened their

bank ties differ substantially from those that do not. In particular,

firms that reduced their dependence on banks had higher growth and higher

q's. This suggests that there are some underlying economic forces that

determine corporate borrowing patterns. Diamond (1989) and Hoshi.

Kashyap, and Scharfstein (1989) analyze models along this line. It is

possible that the factors that determine this choice are correlated with

firms' investment behavior.

       One explanation for the result that liquidity is unimportant for

firms that maintain their bank ties is based on the observation that

these firms generally have low q. These firms would not be expected to

invest heavily and their investment opportunities are probably poor. It

might be argued that for these firms neither liquidity nor any other

variable should forecast investment. In contrast, successful firms with

high q tend to use the public capital markets. These firms have better

investment opportunities and one might expect that other variables like

liquidity would predict investment. Hence, in this view, the omitted

variable bias is more severe for the firms that have loosened their bank

tiesand it is not surprising that the estimated effects of liquidity are
larger for these fins. By this reasoning, any selection mechanism that
simultaneously   partitions finns on the basis of q implicitly uncovers an

investment-liquidity   linkage that is driven by these consideration rather
than the selection rule.
                                        23

      To address this alternative explanation, one must show that a

selection rule that explicitly conditions on performance does not explain

the observed differences in the relationship between investment and

liquidity.   Table 3.3 reports the estimated regression equations    after

sorting firms into low and high q groups. The partition is made on the

basis of average q for all assets in 1977.17 To save space, we only

report results for the partition that separates the top one third and

bottom two-thirds of the firms: this amounts to separating firms with q

above and below 1.5. similar results would apply for a partition based

on the median firm. It also does not matter whether we partition based

on q in 1977 or in 1986.

      The table suggests that our main findings are not explained by the

possibility that cash flow contains differential information for high and

low q firms. The first two columns show that for both sets of firms,
liquidity was unimportant in the pre-deregulation period; both the flow
and stock measures of liquidity are tightly estimated and insignificant.
The last two columns show that similar - -   although   somewhat ambiguous -.

results   hold for the post-deregulation period. Over this period, cash

flow is harder to estimate precisely with relatively high standard

errors. None of the coefficients is significant. The coefficients for

the low and high q firms are not significantly different from each other,

although the point estimate for the low q firm is higher. We also

sorted simultaneously by both q and the ratio of group borrowing to

debt. Both low and high q firms that reduced their group borrowing showed

a strong sensitivity of investment to cash flow, whereas both types of

fins that continued to rely on group banks showed much lower sensitivity

of investment to cash flow.
                                             24

      To assess further the importance of this problem, we sorted the

sample   on the basis of whether investment in the post-deregulation period
was above or below     average. In general, this selection nile will be
problematic   since   it implicitly sorts on the basis of the residuals in

investment   equation. But in this case, it is perhaps the cLeanest way to

test whether performance or strength of affiliation is more important in

determining the investment/cash flow linkages. We found that the high

investment firms that maintained their group ties showed no significant

relation between investment and cash flow, while the high investment

firms that moved away showed a very strong and significant relation. The

low   investment firms   showed   a similar pattern although here the strongly
attached   group firms actually had a significantly negative cash flow

coefficient, while the fins that loosened their ties had a positive and

significant coefficient. Hence, group attachment and not stock market

indicators such as q or even realized investment rates seem to be the key

determinant of whether cash flow helps to predict investment.

       Of course, q and observed investment rates are imperfect measures of

a firm's prospects. It is conceivable that a firm's financing patterns

are in fact better indicators. For example, it may be that only firms

with excellent investment opportunities reduce their bank ties so that

for them liquidity is particularly informative about investment

opportunities. Unfortunately, it is impossible determine whether the

financing behavior itself is a better measure of future performance.

Thus, to accept our interpretation of the facts one must believe that q

and investment rates themselves are reasonable measures of future

performance.
                                              25

4. Conclusion

        This   paper presents evidence on the rol.e of banks in monitoring

firms. We argued that bank monitoring mitigates information problems in

the capital market. This is manifested in the investment behavior of

fins with close bank relationships; these fins do not appear to be

liquidity constrained. We started with a sample of firms with close bank

ties and showed that their investment was not sensitive to their

liquidity.       Regulatory reforms created new possibilities to raise money
directly from the capital market. We found that the investment of firms
that chose this new financing option and weakened their bank ties was
much more sensitive to liquidity than firms that continued to borrow

heavily from banks.

        This   analysis raises an obvious question:   If indeed bank   monitoring
overcomes information problems and relaxes liquidity constraints, why did
some firms weaken their bank ties? This question points to the need for

a theory of the choice between bank debt and public debt. Except for

Diamond's (1989) recent theoretical contribution we know very little

about this tradeoff. Diamond argues that young firms        or older ones    that

have done poorly will borrow mainly from banks and older, more successful

firms will use      public   debt. The idea is that successful firms have more

"reputation capital" at stake and hence have more to lose by taking

inefficient actions. These firms do not need to incur the monitoring

costs associated with bank borrowing. By contrast, younger firms have

not yet developed a reputation and older, less successful firms do not

have a good reputation to lose. It is therefore efficient for these

firms    to   incur the costs of bank monitoring.
                                          26

        The results presented here suggest that monitoring and other costs
associated with bank financing must be large. Otherwise, firms would not

have chosen to weaken their bank relationships until they had enough

collateral (both tangible and intangible) to be able to get around

liquidity constraints.     Unfortunately, we can only conjecture what these

costs might be. Beyond direct monitoring costs, three others come to

mind.     The first obvious cost stems from regulations requiring banks to
hold a fraction of their assets in non-interest bearing assets. This

reserve requirement means that the costs of funds to banks exceed those

of individual investors; as a result, they will require a higher gross

rate of return on their investments.18 In addition, bank loans are

generally less liquid than publicly traded debt. The difficulty that

banks face in adjusting their loan portfolio may also mean that they will

require    a higher gross return.
        Finally, a more subtle cost of bank financing may arise from the
different objectives of banks, corporate managers, and shareholders.
Since banks mainly hold debt claims, they receive little of the upside
from    unusually good firm performance. (Of course, to the extent that
they own    equity they will participate in some of the gains.)

Shareholders, in contrast, care only about maximizing the upside. This

conflict may result in excessively conservative investment policies if

banks control corporate investment decisions. It may therefore be

efficient to reduce bank ties to avoid this problem at the expense of

becoming more liquidity constrained. As firms generate more cash from on-

going operations, they may be more willing to make this transition. In

addition, managers may prefer to have more control over operating

decisions than a bank is willing allow. Managers may choose to weaken
                                         27

the firms' bank ties and incur greater financing costs because it gives

them more control despite the fact that it is inefficient to do so. Again

as firms become more liquid, managers may be more willing to incur these

costs.

     We conclude by emphasizing that this empirical analysis (and

MacKie-Mason's in this volume) as well as the theoretical work of

Diau'ond (1999) suggests that there is more to financing decisions than

the choice of a debt-equity ratio. A crucial decision that fins face is

the actual source of financing regardless of whether it is in the form of

debt or equity. The recent changes in Japanese financing arrangements

were particularly useful in addressing this issue.

     Obviously, Japan is not the only country in which this issue is

important: firms operating in the context of other financial systems

face the very same set of questions. And, Japan's is not the only

financial system in the midst of rapid change. Along with the increase

in leverage in the U.S. there have been dramatic changes in who holds

corporate debt and equity. Firms are increasingly relying on private

equity markets for their financing; for many firms much of the equity is

held by management and large institutional investors. This movement away

from passive shareholders with small equity stakes to larger, more active

shareholders may have important consequences for the link between the

financial and   real sides of the firm. In addition, there have been
striking   changes in the structure of debt markets: junk bonds and the

increased reliance on private placement are two recent phenomena. While

firms in Japan have moved towards direct capital-market financing, in

some ways the move in the U.S. has been in the opposite direction.
                                       28

Understanding the forces underlying these changes is one of the important

challenges facing students of corporate finance.
                                         29



                                 References

Aoki,   Masahulco (1984), "Aspects of the Japanese Firm," in K. Aoki (ed.)

The Econozic Analysis   of the JaDanese Firm, North-Holland Elseveir
Science Publishers   B.V.




Blundell, Richard, S. Bond, M. Devereux and F. Schiantarelli (1987),

"Does Q Matter for Investment? Some Evidence from a Panel of UK

Companies," Working Paper no. 87/12, Institute for Fiscal Studies (UK).



Diamond, Douglas (1984), "Financial Intermediation and Delegated

Monitoring," Review of Economic studies, 51, pp. 393-414.



_________ (1989), "Monitoring and Reputation: The Choice Between Bank

Loans and Directly Placed Debt," University of Chicago.



Fazzari, Steven, R.G. Hubbard and B. Petersen (1988), "Investment and

Finance Reconsidered," Brookins Papers on Econo.ic Activity 1988:1, pp.

141-195.



Ramada, Koichi and Alciyoshi Horiuchi (1987), "The Political Economy of

the Financial Market," in   Kozo Yamamura and Yasukichi Yasuba (eds.) Ih
Political Economy of Japan: Voline 1.    The Domestic Transformation. pp.

223-260. stanford University Press; Stanford, CA.



Hodder, James and A. Tschoegl (1985), "Some Aspects of Japanese
                                             30

Corporate Finance," Journal of Financial and Onantitative Analysis, 20,

pp. 1.73-190.




Hoshi, Takeo and     A. Kashyap (1987), Evidence on q for Japanese Firms,"
unprocessed     MIT mimeo.



Hoshi, Takeo, A. Kashyap, and D. Scharfstein (1988), "Corporate

Structure, Liquidity, and Investment: Evidence from Japanese Panel

Data," revised 1989 as Federal Reserve Board Working Paper (FEDS) u 82.



_________ (1989), "Theory and Evidence on the Choice between Bank Debt

and Public Debt," draft in progress.



Keiretsu no Kenkvu (Research on Industrial Groups). Tokyo: Keizai Chosa

Kyokai (annual publication).



MacKie-Mason, Jeffrey (1989), "Do Fins Care Who        Provides   Their

Financing," this volume.



Meyer, John and     E. Kul'   (1957), The Investment Decision (Cambridge:

Harvard   University   Press)




 Ministry   of Finance, Security Bureau Annual Report, Japan (annual
 publication).

 Myers, Stewart and    N. Majl.uf   (1984), "Corporate Financing and Investment
                                         31

Decisions when Firms have Information that Investors Do Not Rave,'

Journal of Financial Economics, pp.   187-221.


Nakatani,   Iwao (1984), "The Economic Role of Financial Corporate

Grouping" in M. Aoki (ed), The Economic Analysis of the Japanese Firm,

North-Holland Elseveir Science Publishers LV.



Nasu, )tasahiko (1987), Cendai Nihon No Kin-vu Kozo (Financial Structure

in Contemporary Japan), (Tokyo: Toyo Keizai Shinpo-sha)



Nihon Keizai Shimbun-sha (1987), Ko-Shasai Hakico Shilo (The Bond Issuing

Market) Nihon Keizai Shimbun-sha; Tokyo, Japan.



Rajnakrishnan, Rain and A. Thakor (1984), 'Information Reliability and a

Theory of Financial Intermediation," Review of Economic Studies pp. 415-

432




Royama, Shoichi (1982), Nihon no Kin'vu System (Japanese Financial

Syste.). Toyo Keizai Shimpo-sha; Tokyo, Japan.



Schiantarelli, Fabio and D. Ceorgoutsos (1987), "Monopolistic

Competition and the Q Theory of Investment," Working Paper 87/11,

Institute for Fiscal Studies (UK).



Schumpeter, Joseph (1939), Business Cycles (New York: McGraw Hill).
                                         32

Shimura, Kaichi (1978). Gendai Nihon   Ito-Sha-sai Ron (Government and

Cornorate   Sonds in ContnDorArV Japan). Tokyo Daigaku Shuppan Kai;

Tokyo.   Japan.



Shinkai, Yotchi (1988), "The Internationalization of Finance in Japan,"

in T. Inoguchi and D.I. Okimoto (eds.), The Political Economy of Japan.

Volume 2: The ChanEing International Context. Stanford University Press;

Stanford, CA.



Suzuki, Yoshio (1974), Cendai Nthon Kin'vu Ron (Money and Banking in

Contemoorary Japan). Toyo Keizai Shimpo-sha; Tokyo,    Japan.


White,   Halbert (1964), "Asymptotic Theory for Econometricians,'

(Orlando: Academic Press).



Whited, Toni (1989), "Debt, Liquidity Constraints, and Corporate

Investment: Evidence from Panel Data," Princeton University.



Williamson, Stephen (1986), "Costly Monitoring, Financial

Intermediation, and Equilibrium Credit Rationing," Journal of Monetary

Economics, 18, pp. 159-179.



Yoshthara, Shozo (1987), pinko torihiki no chishiki (Knowledge

of Bank Transactions), Nthon Keizai Shinbum-sha; Tokyo,

Japan.
                                        33

                             Endootes




1. The costs include administrative expenses in excess of underwriting

fees, reserve requirements which raise the cost of funds to banks, and

the illiquidity of bank loans.

2. See, for example, Ramada and Horiuchi (1987), Royama (1982), Suzuki

(1974).

3. According to Shinkal (1988) these rates are said to "respect' the

market rates."

4. The government can still intervene to block an issue, but such

interventions are very unusual.

5. To simplify the calculations, we restricted the sample to firms with

accounting years ending in March. After imposing this restriction and

removing outliers, we are left with 337 firms- Most of the data on them

comes from the Nikkei Financial Data Tapes.

6. The dates here refer to the end of a fiscal year, so that when we say

1917 it refers to March 1977.

7. Our measure of Tobin's q is the ratio of the market value of debt and

equity (correcting for taxes) to the replacement cost (measured at market

values) of all assets. The construction of q is discussed at length in

Floshi and Kashyap (1987).

3. Throughout this section, we compare the median value for the firms at

two points in time. Even though the median firm is generally different

at each point, for ease of exposition we discuss the comparison as if the

same firm is being studied.

.   See, for example, Hodder and Tschoegl (1985).
                                         34

10. In both these ratios, the denominators are nominal market-value
numbers while the numerator is a nominal book-value number. Given that
most bank borrowing is short term, the book-value numbers for borrowing
should   not be very different from the market-value numbers for borrowing.

Hence these ratios should be straightforward to interpret.

11. Note that we use the debt normalization rather than the asset

normalization. We do this because the asset-based measure is low for

high-asset firms so that one would expect to observe these patterns by

the very nature of the construction.

12. In calculating Tobin's q one must make numerous assumptions that no

doubt introduce measurement error. For example, one must convert book

value measure of asset values into market value measures, a very

imprecise task.

13. They argue that firms with low dividend-payouts are more likely to

face information problems since they seem to prefer retaining their

earnings.

14. since the length of the panel is so short, it is difficult to make

any further corrections for possible serial correlation.

15. End-of-period q is endogenous since it includes the end-of-period

replacement cost in its denominator which in turn includes the

replacement cost for investment made during the year. Accordingly, the

coefficient associated with end-of-period q will be biased towards zero.

16. It is not clear if dividends are discretionary and whether they

belong in a measure of liquidity; however, when we estimate our model

including dividends in our liquidity measure, our results do not change.
                                         35

17. The qs that appear in the regressions pertain only to depreciable

assets, that it is they are constructing by subtracting the replacement

cost of non-depreciable assets from the market value of the firm and

dividing this difference by the replacement cost of depreciable assets.

This measure of q and Tobin's q which is based on all assets are very

highly correlated. (see Iloshi and Kashyap (1987).)

18. Fama (1985) and James (1987) document an interesting fact along

these lines. They show that yields on bank certificates of deposit and

bankers'   acceptances are no different than the yield on comparable
maturity government bonds and commercial paper. Thus, given reserve
requirements and their greater costs of funds they must be losing money
on these securities and earning profits on their other activities,
perhaps corporate-lending activities. To be earning profits in this

activity they must offer a differentiated product: borrowing from a bank

must be different from borrowing directly from the capita]. market, Of

course, this fact does not tell us in what way the two sources of funds

are different.
                          Table 2.1
composition of External Funds Raised by Manufacturing Fins (%)

                         197175       197680        198185

  securities               11.6          14.3           38.2


    Stocks                  7.0          12.1           15.5

    Bonds                   4.6           2.2           22.7


Borrowings from
Financial Institutions     84.0          80.3           56.6


  Notes Discounted         13.7          27.5           0.6

Shortterm Borrowings      31.8          47.0           49.6

 Longterm Borrowings      38.5           5.8            7.6


Other Borrowings            4.4           5.4            5.2




* The data are taken from Table 310 in Masahiko Nasu (1987).
Gendai Nihon no Kinvu Kozo. p. 85.
                                        Table 2.2

                    Group Firms Characteristics in 1977 and 1986
                      Summary   Statistics
                                         for Selected Variables

                                                               Medians Only
                                                        1977              1986

Real Capital Stock- -Depreciable Assets                11239             16867
(measured in millions of 1981 Yen)

Tobin's Q    (for    all assets)                       1.32              1.68

Investment (Real Depreciable Assets)                    .07               .19
 Capital

 Market Value of Debt                                  1.26               .37
Market Value of Equity

Borrowinz from Grout,                                   .31               .29
Total Bank Borrowing

Total   Bank Barrowinz                                  .93               .88
        Total Debt
Borrowin2 from Crouo                                    .28               .22
    Total Debt
    Total Bank Borrowin2                               1.75             1.01
Capital (Depreciable      Assets)

    Borrowint   from Croun                              .51              .30
Capital (Depreciable Assets)
                                                          Medians (Means)
                                                        1977           1986

Nominal Market Value      of Total Debt                18819            19404
                                                      (64988)          (77399)

Nominal Book Value of Bonds                              950             3580
                                                       (6947)          (16703)

Nominal Book Value of Bank Borrowing                   16763            15187
                                                      (57434)          (59189)

Nominal Book Value of Group Borrowing                   5097             4265
                                                      (13759)          (14557)
 All L0n2-Ter.      Borrowin,                           .66              .31
All Long-Term Liabilities                              (.59)            (.38)

            Bonds                                       .09              .18
All Long-Ten Liabilities                               (.11)            (.26)
                                       Table 2.3
              Characteristics Sorted by Movements in Group Borrowing
                                to Total Debt Ratio

                                          The 69 firms                  The 40 firms
                                          where borrowing               where borrowing
                                          fro. Grout               fell frog Grout             ro
                                             Total. Debt                       Total Debt
                                            Medians Only                Medians Only
                                          1211         12li            2111

Real Capital Stock- -Depreciable Assets 10877              20674      15123        16115



Tobin's Q (for all assets)                1.34         1.74           1.24         1.46



Invesent (Real   Depreciable Assets)       .07             .19          .04          .15
  Capital

Borrowing from Grout                       .28             .17          .25          .31
   Total Debt


   Borrowint from Grout                    .53             .17          .50          .53
Capital (Depreciable Assets)
                                                 Medians                      Medians
                                                 (Means)                       (Means)

                                          1211                         1211

Nominal Market Value of Total Debt        16531        17118           24671        20243

                                         (63378)      (81061)         (67766)      (71080)

Nominal Book Value of Bonds                1166            7162          286               0

                                          (7730)      (21470)          (5596)       (8481)

Nominal Book Value of Group Borrowing      4934            2967         5438         7736

                                         (14265)      (13527)         (12890)      (16308)
                        table 3.1
             Investment and Internal Funds
              Before and After Deregulation1

                       All 109 Fins        All 109 Firms

Fiscal Years               197882             198385



Average q                  .002                .010
(Beg. of   period)         (.005)              (.005)


Average q                   .002               .009
(End of Period)            (.005)              (.006)



Cash Plow                  .008                .161
    K                      (.036)              (.149)



Marketable                  .041                .037
Securities                 (.031)              (.040)
    K

Production tl               .019              .009
    K                      (.002)              (.011)




     1Dependent variable is I/K. All regressions include a set of
yearly dunmies and are done using firstdifferenced data. The
standard errors are reported below the coefficient estimates and
they have been corrected for the moving average introduced
by the first differencing.
                                 Table 3.2
                      Investment and Internal Funds
                       Before and After Deregulation
  (controlling    for Movements in "Group Borrowing to Total Debts
                              Ratio")



                         GB/U down   GB/D up     GB/D down   GB/U up
                          69 Firms   40 Firms    69 Firms    40 Fins


Fiscal Years             197882     197882     198385     198385


                         .003       .003        .005        .016
Average q                                        (.008)      (.004)
(Beg.    of period)      (.006)      (.008)


                         .003        .016       .007       .008
Average q
(End of period)          (.006)      (.008)      (.009)      (.005)


Cash Flow                 .082       .064        .479       .049
    K                    (.100)      (.035)      (.140)      (.098)


Marketable                .044        .139        .049       .187
securities               (.029)      (.130)      (.027)      (.102)
    1<




Production                .013        .020       .020        .012
    K                    (.007)      (.002)      (.013)      (.015)




      tDependent variable is I/K. All regressions include a set of
yearly dummies and are done using first-differenced data. The
standard errors are reported below the coefficient estimates and
they have been corrected for the moving average introduced by the
first differencing.
                             Table 3.3
    Investment and Internal Funds Before and1After Deregulation
             (Separating High and Low q Firms)


                       34 Firms     75 Firms         34 Fins     75 Firms
                     q1.5 in 1977 qcl.5   in   '77 q4.5 in '77 qc1.5in'77
Fiscal Years           197882      197882         198385     198385


Average q              .001         .007           .016        .005
(Beg.   of Period)      (.008)       (.008)         (.007)      (.008)

Average q              .002          .008          .004       .012
(End of Period)         (.008)       (.006)         (.007)      (.009)


Cash Flow              .048          .069           .097        .350
    K                   (.047)       (.061)         (.158)      (.205)


Marketable               .038         .059          .033        .064
Securities              (.058)       (.038)          (.066)      .038)



Production               .016         .018          .003       .007
    K                   (.010)       (.002)          (.019)     (.013)




     tDependent variable is I/K. All regressions include a set
of yearly dummies and are done using firstdifferenced data. The
standard errors are reported below the coefficient estimates and they
have been corrected for the moving avenge introduced by the first
differencing.
