NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COLLATERAL, RATIONING AND GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION IN CREDIT MARKETS

William

C. Gale

Working Paper No. 3083

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1989

This paper was prepared for the NBER Conference on Information, Capital
Markets, and Inveatment, Cambridge, MA, Nay 5-6, 1989. I thank David Ruts,
Glenn Hubbard, Michael Waldman, and especially Andrew Weiss for helpful
comments on recent drafts; Doug Bernheim, Michael Boskin, and John Shoven for
coaments on a much earlier draft, Lorraine Grams for expert word processing,
and the John N. Olin Foundation for financial support. This paper is part of
NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author not these of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3083

August 1989
COLLATERAL, RATIONING AND GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION IN CREDIT MARKETS

This

paper analyzes the effects of government intervention in credit

markets when lenders use collateral, interest, and the probability of

granting a loan as potential screening devices. Equilibria with and without
rationing are examined. The principal theme is that credit policies operate
through their effect on the incentive compatibility constraint, which
inhibits high-risk borrowers from mimicking the behavior of low-risk

borrowers. Any policy that loosens (tightens) the constraint raises
(reduces) efficiency.

Most government credit programs explicitly attempt to fund investors
that cannot obtain private financing. In the model presented here, these

subsidies increase the extent of rationing and reduce efficiency. In
contrast, policies that subsidize the nonrationed borrowers, or all

borrowers, are efficiency enhancing, and reduce the extent of rationing.

William C, Gale
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90024-1477

1

1. Introduction
The federal government is the largest single lender in the country. As
of the end of 1988, direct loans outstanding exceeded $222 billion, while
outstanding loan guarantees were approximately $550 billion (Office of Man-

agement and Budget 1989). Federal credit assists borrowers across a wide
variety of sectors, including housing, agriculture, small business1 and
education, in a bewildering array of over 100 programs.1
In order to analyze the effects of these policies, this paper focuses

on two salient characteristics of virtually all credit programs. First,
federal credit is usually intended for those who could not obtain private

financing. For example, "a direct loan is best justified when the federal
objective could not be met with financing from private sources" (Office of

Management and Budget 1988. p. F-IS). Other programs, such as Small
Business Administration loan guaranteee, recuire applicants to prove that
they could not obtain private financing.

Second federal credit is provided on easier terms than comparable

private credit. These tens can include reduced interest or collateral,
longer maturities, grace periods, etc. These provisions are estimated to
reduce the discounted value of borrower payments by amounts that vary widely
across programs, but typically range between 10% and 25% (Office of
Management and Budget 1989).
This paper analyzes the effects of policies with these characteristics

in a modal where rationing arises endogenously.2 The underlying model is

described in Section 2 and is closely related to Rothschild and Stiglitz
(1976) and Besanko arid Thakor (1987). Investors are divided into two

groups, high-risk and low-risk, and have a choice of investing in a safe

project, or borrowing to invest in a risky project. For each group, lenders
specify a probability of issuing a loan, an interest rate, and a collateral
requirement.

Any given amount of collateral is assumed to be worth less to lenders

than to borrowers. This feature implies that the use of collateral will
generate an efficiency loss. In addition, all projects have expected gross
returns greater than their social opportunity cost. Therefore, any amount
of rationing represents an additional efficiency loss. The full information
equilibrium arises when borrower type is known ax ante, and implies no
rationing and no collateral, and is thus efficient.
section 3 analyzes situations where each borrower's type is private

information. Now, lenders must collectively offer sets of contracts that
induce borrowers to self-select into the appropriate contract. In equilibrium, high-risks choose a contract with a relatively high interest rate and

a zero collateral requirement. Low-risks signal their type by choosing to
pay high collateral in exchange for a lower interest rate. As long as lowrisks have sufficient wealth to post as collateral, the equilibrium involves

no rationing. Newertheless, because of the efficiency loss created by the
use of collateral, there is a potential role for government.
The principal result of this section is to show that credit policies
operate through their effects on the incentive compatibility constraint,
which constrains the set of adaissable contracts such that high-risk

borrowers do not apply for the low-risk contract. For example, a guarantee
to low-risk borrowers reduces their interest rate. Since the high-risk

3

contract has not changed, the low-risk collateral requirement must X1}I

in

order to restore incentive compatibility. The increase in collateral means
that guarantees to low-risks reduce efficiency.

In contrast, a guarantee to high-risk borrowers makes the high-risk
loan more attractive, thereby allowing lenders to reduce the collateral

requirement on low-risk loans. Consequently, guarantees to high-risks raise
efficiency. Equal guarantees to both groups have similar negative effects
on the collateral requirement and positive effects on efficiency.

The major results of the paper are presented in Section 4, where it is
assumed that borrower wealth is too low to support the collateral requirement in Section 3.

because the high-risk contract involves no collateral,

it does not change. However, since low-risks can only post a small amount
of collateral, the low-risk contract must somehow be sade less desirable in

order to restore incentive compatibility. The only option is to reduce the
probability of granting a low-risk loan; that is, to introduce rationing of
low-risk borrowers
With the existence of rationing, it ia now possible to analyze credit

policies with the two salient features described above. Suppose the government agrees to offer subaidized credit (either direct or guaranteed loans)
to some proportion of the (low-risk) borrowers who are turned down by the

private market. The key point is that in the absence of any further
changes, these subsidies make the low-risk contract more attractive to high-

risk borrowers. Therefore, some other aspect of the low-risk contract must
become less desirable to restore incentive compatibility, Since the
collateral requirement cannot rise, the only alternative is for the overall
(public and private) probability of obtaining a loan to fall. That is,

increased subsidies to the rationed borrowers aas the extent of rationing.

4

Private lending is crowded out on a more than one-to-one basis. It should
be emphasized that this is an equilibrium response, and is due to the
existence of the incentive compatibility constraint.
Although the subsidies increase the extent of rationing, they raise the

ex ante expected utility of low-risk borrowers. This occurs because the
benefits of the added cheap government loans outweigh the costa of the in-

creased probability of being rationed, Thus, subsidies to low-risks make
the representative low-risk borrower better off cx ante? but actually reduce

the utility of some low-risk borrowers cx post. Since they increase the
extent of rationing, the subsidies to low-risk borrowers reduce overall
efficiency.

In contrast, subsidies to high-risk borrowers loosen the incentive

compatibility constraint. As a consequence, the extent of rationing of lowrisk borrowers falls and efficiency rises.

Section 5 is a short conclusion. The Appendix provides derivation of
the various equilibria and proofs of the propositions.

2, The Basic Model
A. Descrjotjori
The model describes &

competitive

credit market with many investors,

but even more lenders. All agents are assumed to be risk-neutral, thus
eliminating any insurance role for federal credit, and there is no aggregate
risk.

Investors can invest their initial endowment in a safe project that

yields a gross return of Z.4 Alternatively, each investor can borrow $1
and invest that and the initial endowment in a risky project. Investors
fall into two categories, which differ according to the probability of

5

having a risky project succeed, w., and the gross return to that project

if it is successful, R. I assume

>

r,

so that type l's are low-

risk borrowers. Projects that do not succeed yield a gross return of zero.

The expected gross return to all projacts are equaL pt —

k,

i —

1,2,

where k is a constant. Investors have a certain end-of-period endowment
W. I assume the existence of a sufficient enforcement technology such that
Id is acceptable to lenders as collateral. The proportion of borrowers that

are low-risk is given by .

Lenders have an alternstive safe investment that earns p. They offer
loans charscterized by en interest rate Cr),

a collateral requirement

Cc), and a probability of issuing the loan to any particular applicant
Cp). Following sevaral authors,5 I assume there is a cost to collateralization. Specifically, the lenders' valuation of $1 in collateral is given by
$,

0

S fi

< I.

Therefore, 1 -

fi > 0

represents the social cost of

transferring the collateral or realizing its value. Competition among
lenders generates the following zero profit condition on loans to each

group:6

—

5ji + (lri)ci

i —

1,2.

Investors are assumed to be able to apply for only one loan. The expected

utility of an investor in group i applying for a loan contract meant for

group j is
—

PjOri(Ri_rj)_(l_Ri)cj_Z)1

Lenders always know the value of .

In

i,j —

1,2.

the full information

equilibrium described below, lenders also know each borrower's type. In the
asymmetric information equilibria, information on borrower type is
unavailable to banks on an ex ante basis.

6

The Nash equilibrium concept is used throughout this paper. A set of
contracts is a Nash equilibrium if no contract in the set earns negative
profits, and there is no additional contract which, if offered, would sake
positive profits, holding the current set of contracts fixed (Rothschild and
Stiglitz 1976)

B. Full InfGrmation Eouilibrium
Although subsequent analysis will focus on markets with asymmetric
information, the full, information equilibrium is presented first as a

benchmark. Because the types are identifishle ex ante, lenders face two
distinct loan markets, In each suhmarket, optimal contracts maximize

expected borrower utility U1,, given in (2), subject to (1).
Eauilibriua I: The full information equilibrium is characterized hy
(3a)

p — 1,

i —

1,2,

(No rationing)

(3b)

4

— 0,

i —

1,2

(No collateral)

(3c)

r —

s—,

—

1,2,

With full information, all borrowers receive loans. In addition, since
borrowers are indifferent between committing to a dollar of expected
interest payments and a dollar of expected collateral, while lenders prefer
the former, equilibrium involves complete elimination of collateral.

Formally, from (I), the slope of isoprofit curves in r-c space is given by

dr1 ,(lw)$
dci
while the marginal rate of substitution for borrowers of type i is

7

dr1

(lwi)

dci
Indifference curves (U and U') and zero profit curves (II and Iz)
for each group are shown in Figure 1. For each group, p

'C 1

implies that

the isoprofit curve is flatter than the indifference curve. Curves for
high-risk borrowers are steeper than those for low-risk borrowers. The full

information equilibrium is given by contracts 4

and

a2, along with

Suhstituting (3a)-(3c) into (2) yields

tJii_wiRi - p

Since p +

Z

-

Z,

i— 1,2.

is the social opportunity cost of investment, (4) shows that

investments are made (Uii > 0)

if and only if the expected total return

exceeds the expected social cost. Therefore, equilibrium is efficient.

3.

Asyetric Information and Unconstrained Collateral

A. Private Equilibrium
When individual investors' types are private information, lenders must
design sets of loan contracts that generate self-selection of each borrower

type into the appropriate contract. Thus, lenders operate subject to (1)
and a pair of incentive compatibility constraints:

U11 a U12, and

U22

U21,

where U is defined in (2) .

It can be directly verified that the full

information equilibrium is not incentive compatible, because both types
would prafer the low-risk contract,

a2

r

C

Figure 1

Equilibrium with Unconstrained Collateral

Instead, with asymmetric information, collateral is used as a sorting

device! High-risk borrowers have a stronger preference not to post
collateral, because they have a larger probability of having to pay it.
Whether collateral can induce complete separation depends crucially on
¶4,

the level of borrower wealth. This section examines equilibria and

government policy when borrower wealth is sufficiently large to allow

complete separation. Section 4 examines markets characcerired by insufficient wealth.

Epuij.,jhrjsa.fl: When borrower type is privete information, and borrower

wealth is sufficiently large, equilibrium is charecterized by:8
II
p1
II

II

p2 —l

1.

—

'l'2'

w1l-2-w21R1$
l-w

—1c
'l l 1

r_E_
1

,

n2 —

r_E_
2

With imperfect information, high-risk borrowers obtain the same loan
contract, and therefore the same utility, as in the full information

equilibrium. Low-risk borrowers are not rationed, but their loan tens have
changed. Specifically, low-risk borrowars indicate their type by posting
collateral. In return, they pay a lower interest rate than in the full
information equilibrium.
Substituting (Ga)-(6c) into (2) for type l's yields
II

U11 —

-p

-

Z

-

II

(l-w1)(l-)c1

Comparing (4) and (7). low-risk borrowers are worse off relative to the full

information equilibrium by (l-w1)(l-fl)cf'. The magnitude of the welfare

9

loss increases with c1.
The equilibrium with asymmetric information and unconstrained

collateral is shown in Figure 1 as (a1,a2). High-risks obtain a2, as
before. However, any contract offered to low-risks must be incentive

compatible with a. Of all such contracts, ml is the most desirable
contract for type l's that also earns nonnegative profits when extended ro

type l's. The reduction in low-risk borrowers' utility to

from

to a1, Note that (5b) is binding in this

is shown by the shift from
equilibrium.

B, Government Credit
Although there is no rationing in the above model, there is still a
role for government policy due to the efficiency losses created by the use

of collsteral Because all investors receive loans in the private equilibriuni, it seems natural to focus on loan guarantees (rather than direct

loans) in this contextY
Loan guarantees ensure the lender of receiving an amount -y., where

s p.

o

The government can set '1 —

2

-y,

or

choose the y.

separately. In return for the guarantee, the lender passes on any collateral collected to the government. The net cost to the government of a

defaulted loan is -y -

III

flc

III

where c1

is the collateral requirement

in the presence of the guarantee, and is discussed further below. The
government is subject to the same information constraints that private
lenders face.

With the guarantees in place, expected borrower utility is still given
by (2) ,

but the zero profit condition for lenders is now given by
—

+ (l-wp-r

i —

1,2.

10

Eauilibri*n III: When borrower type is private information and W >

equilibrium

cj1.

with loan guarantees is characterized by:
III
p1.

C

1

In
p2 —1,

—1,
—

r'
—
1

(w,-w2)p

l(l2)

-72+

ic2(l-w1)

7,

C

'r1(1-ic2) 1

- —f ,
'i

2

rn
— £_. - ,___1 -2'
2

1 1'

'2

r2

In the preceding private Equilibrium II, banks received act' and 0 in
collateral on loans to type 1 and 2 respectively. It is easy to verify that
if

—

$c

and 2 —

(9a)-(9c) reduce to the private equilibrium (6*)-

(6c). Only higher guarantee rates have real effects.
Using (9b). increases in

III

cause c1

to rise in equilibrium.

This result is contrary to standard intuition, which would suggest that as

riaes, the necessary collatersi should fall. However, as 'l rises,
r1 falls, and the low-risk contract becomes more desirable to high-risk

borrowers. Since (Sb) binds, c1 isust rise to eliminate the possibility of
having high-risks masquerade as low-risks.

This situation is depicted in Figure 2. Increases in

zero profit line for low-risk lending from l to

Ii,.

shift the

Equilibrium

contracts, which are constrained by (5a) and (Sb), shift from (21.02) to
The collateral required at

is greater than 21. Therefore,

the existence of imperfect information reverses the usual intuition

concerning the effect of "i on c1.
Any guarantee to low risks that reduced the collateral requirement

would make them worse off and thus would be rejected in favor of l' This
is illustrated by a guarantee that shifts the zero profit curve to Ij'

Ii'

C

Figure 2

Guarantees to Low—Risk Borrowers

11

from lj and the low-risk contract to Cj'

It is easy to show that all

such guarantees correspond to -y c

Similar arguments show that 411 falls with increases in
shown in Figure 3, a rise in

As

shifts the zero profit line for lending

to high-risk borrowers from 12 to l, which raises low-risk utility to

At

from U2. The equilibrium thus shifts from (a11a2) to (a?+4).

the latter points, k2sh groups are better off and the collateral requirement
has fallen.

Since the use of collateral creates efficiency losses, these results

will have important welfare implications. Substituting (9a)-(9c) into (2)
yields expected utilities:

in
U11

—

—

w2R2

-p

-

-

-

p

1

-

______________

si(l1rz)

(-t1) + (l-ir1)-y2, and

Z +

Increases in l raise U11 even though they raise c1. For any
> flc, low-risk borrowers are better off than in the private equilib-

rium. Increases in

raise both U11 and U22. Thus, both types of

borrowers are better off with guarantees.

Welfare calculations are based on total expected borrowers' utility
minus

expected

government costs of funding the guarantees. Define overall

welfare as
V — #U11 + (l-*)U22 -

(12)

(l-w1)(-y1-$c1)

-

The first two terms represent utility of each borrower type, weighted by
their population proportion; the last two terms represent net expected
government costs of providing guarantees to low-risks and high-risks
10
respectively.

a2

4

C

Figure 3
Guarantees to Rigtt—Risk Borrowers

12

Fromosition 1; When borrower type is private information, and W >

c,

the welfare effects of loan guarantees are as follows:

(13)

av
-

—O

if

<0

if

>0,

>0.

The main result from Proposition I is that the effects of government
intervention depend on how the incentive compatibility constraint, and in
particular the collateral requirement, ia affected.

Equation (13) states that increases in l' holding 2 constant,
reduce welfare, From (10). the guarantee raises U11 by ((l-w1)(r1-r2))/
However, from (12), the marginal cost per low-risk borrower of

raising I is (l-r1).

It is easy to show that the marginal costs exceed

the marginal benefits. This occurs because the rise in

raises c1

which creates an efficiency loss.

The second result states that subaidiztng the high-risk group is

welfare-improving. Using (11) and (12), the governments costs equal the
benefits to high-risk borrowers. Since low-risk borrowers are also made

better off, there is a welfare gain. The rise in

increases the

attractiveness of the high-risk contract, so that low-risk borrowers can be

offered more attractive terms. The fall in c1 allows for an efficiency
gain.

13

Equation (15) states that raising the guarantee rate on all loans is

welfare-improving, From (9b), setting l —

—1

yields c'/3y <0,

so that collateral falls as the overall guarantee rate rises. Therefore,
the net effect of universal guarantees is to weaken the incentive
compatibility constraint and raise welfare.

4. Aryretric Infornatiqn and. Constrained Collateral

A. Private Equilibrium
The effectiveness of collateral as a sorting device depends crucially

on the existence of eufficient end-of-period borrower wealth. For example
if tJ —

0,

collateral cannot be used as a sorting device. More generally,

suppose ti C c, given in (6b); then the low-risk contract offered in
Equilibrium II cannot be fulfilled by borrowers. Lenders, knowing this,
will not offer the contract. Moreover, because (Sb) is binding in

equilibrium, if lenders simply reduced c1 to W, the contracts offered
would not be incentive compatible; both groups would prefer the contract
meant for low-risk borrowers.

Lenders can resolve this problem only by making the Low-risk contract

less attractive to high-risk borrowers. Raising r1 would discourage
low-risk borrowers more than high-risk borrowers, since the latter have a

smaller probability of actually having to pay the higher rate. The only

alternative is to reduce p1. This adjustment will diacouraga.high-risks
more? and restore incentive compatibility. Therefore, when borrower wealth
is insufficient to permit collateral alone to act as a sorting device,

rationing of low-risk borrowere (p1<l) is required to restore equilibrium.
The intuition presented above is summarized in

14

Emi.ilibriua IV When borrower type is private information and W C
the private equilibrium is characterized by

12 13

Iv

IV
p2 —

IV _________________ <
p1 —
1,

w2(R2-r1)-(l-ir2)W-Z

IV

(16b)

c1 —W,

(16c)

rr —

High-risk

IV

c2 —o

- -- flW,
if1

1

r2 —

if1

p
t2

borrowers receive the same contract and utility as in Equilibrium

II, when W >

In contrest, because they cannot post 0ft in collater-

cfE.

al, low-risk borrowers are rationed. Their expected utility is given by

—

(17)

B.

Government Credit
In the presence of rationing the natural government policy to analyze

is characterized by p0.

the probability of obtaining a government-

guaranteed loan given that one can not obtain private credit, and

defined as before. Although the analysis will focus on subsidized loan
guarantees, analogous results can be shown to hold for subsidized direct
loans as well.

The interest rate charged on guaranteed loans gives lenders zero
profits and is given by

G

--•---wi

'

1'

It is assumed that government charges 14 as collateral.14
With this policy, low-risk utility is given by

1311

— 1lXll +

IS

15

The first term on the right side of (19) represents the probability of

obtaining a private loan p. multiplied by X11,

the expected payoff to

low-risk borrowers of obtaining a private loan meant for low-risk borrowers.
The second term represents the probability of obtaining a government-

(l-p1)p0, multiplied by X10, the expected payoff to

guaranteed loan,

then

low-risk borrowers from that loan. If 11 —

—

and there

is no gain to obtaining a government rather than a private loan,

flw,

xll >

If

>

xlG.

The incentive compatibility constraint (5b) is now given by
(20)

U22

p1X21 +

(l-p1)p0X20,

where X21 is the expected payoff to high-risks of taking a private loan
meant for low-risks, and

is the expected payoff to high-risks of

taking a government loan meant for low-risks. (These are given in the
Appendix.)
Fnjiil.ibrfum V: When borrower type is private information, and W C

the equilibrium with loan guarantees is characterized by

v U22PcXzc
21 G2G

(21e)

p1 —

(fib)

c1 — W,

(21a)

rV —

< I,

V

I

W1

pw,
W1

v —

I,

V
c2 —

0,

rV —

t..

2

IT2

These private loans are, of course, supplemented by government-guaranteed
loans to some low-risk borrowers described by (p0, r0, W) .

High-risk

borrowers obtain the same contract and utility as in Equilibria II and IV.

Low-risk utility is given by (19) with appropriate substitutions for V11

and V10.

16

Define the probability of low-risks obtaining any Loan as
(22)

—

l

+

Then a proportion l-p* of low-risks will be rationed.
Proposition 2: When the initial allocation is given by Equilibrium U,

increases in p or

increase the extent of rationing (reduce p*)

Proposition 2 establishes that government subsidies to borrowers who

cannot obtain private financing increases the number of borrowers who canroc

obtain any financing, public or private. That is, private credit is crowded
out on a more than one-to-one baais, Although this result may appear
surprising, it is based on the equilibrium response of lenders to the shift
in the incentive compatibility constraint.

For example, in the equilibrium with W > c, an increase in
raised c1 in order to restore incentive compatibility. Now, however,
collateral is constrained to equal W, which is assumed to be less than c.
As a consequence, increases in

(which reduce r1) requite that p1

fall. From (22), a reduction in Pt, holding p0 constant, reduces p*.
Therefore, raising the guarantee rate to low-risk borrowers increases the
extent of rationing.

Similarly, consider a small increase in PC, holding 11 constant.
If

were held constant, all borrowers would have an increased chance of

obtaining a cheap government loan, which would induce high-risks to

masquerade as low-risks. If p1 fell such that p* were unchanged from
its previous level, high-risks would still prefer masquerading as low-risks

to taking the high-risk contract. To show this, rewrite (20) as
(23)

U22 t p*X21 + (l-p1)p0(X20-X21).

17

Recall that this constraint is binding in Equilibrium V. If

rises and

pt is held constant, (23) is violated. Therefore, in equilibrium,

incentive cosipatibility requires p1 to fall enough to make p* fall in

response to the rise in p. That is, increases in

raise the extent of

rationing.

Although they increase the likelihood of any given low-risk borrower
being rationed, guarantees raise the ax post utility of those who do obtain

government credit, because of the reduced interest rate r on guaranteed
loans. The effects of these guarantees on the ex ante expected utility of
low-risk borrowers and on welfare is given in

Proo_aition 3: When the initial allocation is given by Equilibrium V, the
welfare effects of government intervention are

(24a)

8UV
—> 0,
811

> 0,

(24b)

PG

C 0,

(25a)

c

(25b)

0.

opG
Equations (24a) and (24b) show that guaranteed loans raise the cx ante

expected utility of the tsrgeted group. This occurs even though the overall

probability of obtaining a loan falls. Therefore, the targeted group
prefers to have the policy, even though fewer lower-risk borrowers obtain
credit when the subsidy is in place.

18

Equations (25a) and (25b) show that, as in Proposition 1. guarantees to

low-risk borrowers reduce overall welfare. This occurs because the increase
in rationing represents an overall efficiency loss. Following the approach
taken in Section III, it is straightforward to show that guarantees to the

high-risk group reduce the extent of rationing. Intuitively, these

guarantees make the high-risk contract CU22) more attrsctive, and through
(2la) raise

Because of the reduction in rationing, these guarantees

raise efficiency.

5. Cixoclusion
This paper analyzes the effects of credit subsidies in markets

characterized by adverse selection. The principal result is that the
effects of credit subsidies depend on how eligibility is determined.

Programs that subsidize the unrationed contract will reduce the extent of
rationing and raise overall efficiency. In contrast, progrsnis that target
borrowers who cannot obtain private financing raise the extent of rationing

and reduce efficiency. The distinction is important precisely because most
government credit is designed to provide funds to those who do not receive
private loans. In the model presented. here, such policies raise the extent

of rationing and create inherent tradeoffs among members of the same target
group: fewer of them obtain any type of credit, but those that receive
government loans are better off.

Two

concluding

comments should be made. First, the effects described

above represent equilibrium responses. In particular, they take into
account the need to deter high-risks from pretending to be low-risks. As a
consequence of this incentive compatibility constraint, whenever the
government eases some of the terms on low-risk contracts, the others must be
adversely affected in equilibrium.

19

Second the paper has focused on a fairly standard adverse selection
model, based on Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976). Numerous extensions of that
and other models have shown that the nature of equilibrium can be affected

by incentive effects (Stiglitz and Weiss 1986) project characteristics, the
set of available financial instruments (DeMeza and Webb 1987), alternative

projects (Chan and Thakor 1987) information sharing (Yotsuzuka 1987)

the

shape of the production function (Milde and Riley 1988), and other

characteristics. The effects of credit policies in such alternative models
deserve further exploration.

20

ENDNOTES

1. For discussions of the features and overall effects of federal
credit, see Bosworth, Carron, and Rhyne

(1987)

Gale (1988a) .

or

Office of

Management and Budget (1989).

2. Previous research on federal credit in markets with imperfect
information includes Mankiw (1986) and Gale (1988b), who study models with a
continuum of borrower types, and Gale (1987) and Smith and Stutzet (1988)

who examine models with two types of borrowers. The current paper is based
on Gale (1987, Appendix C). Some of the results are closely related to
independent work by Smith and Stutrer (1988).

3. As described in Section 4, raising the interest rate on the lowrisk loan cannot restore incentive compatibility, because low riska are more
averse to accepting a higher interest rate than high risks are.

4. The initial endowment could also represent a unit of labor supply,

in which case Z would be interpretable as the value of leisure foregone by
investing.

5. See Barro (1976), Besanko and Thakor (1987), Bester (1985), and
Williamson (1987).

6. In order to focus on the role of collateral and rationing as
sorting devices, the paper focuses on separating equilibria. See notes 8
and 13 for a diacuasion of potential pooling equilibria.
7. Besanko and Thatcor (1987), Beater (1985), Chan and Thakor (1987),

Stiglitz and Weiss (1981, 1986) and Wette (1983) analyze the selection
effects induced by collateral.

8. The existence of a separating equilibrium can be ensured by
assuming there is a sufficiently large proportion of high-risk borrowers, or
that the difference between

is large enough. See Rothschild and

21

Stiglitz

(1976) or Besanko and Thakor (1987). There are no pooling

equilibria under the assumptions in this section.

9. Gale (1987) also examines government policies in which low-risk
loans are taxed and high risk loans are subsidized. These policies operate
through the same channels as guarantees and will be ignored here.

10. Therefore, the welfare criterion is total surplus, rather than a
Pareto measure. In addition, (12) assumes that taxes are raised in a lump-

sum manner.
11. It is impossible to make the high-risk contract more attractive to
high-risk borrowers without losing money on high-risk contracts, Due to the
Nash assumption, cross-subsidization of contracts will not occur in this
model, although it could in other contexts. See Stiglitz arid Weiss 1989.

12. Besanko and Thakor (1987) show that under these circumstances (5a)

requires that W 2, (w1-,r2)/(#1(r2R-p) -

Zff2((l-c1)+flw1]).

Loosely

speaking, this requires that Z is small relative to W.
13. In order to rule out a pooling equilibrium at p —

l,

c —

W,

it

is necessary to assume that ft C (w*(l-w1))/(ic1(l-,c*)), where w* —

It may be thought that the allocation in Equilibrium V could he
broken by an offer that raises p1 and r1, holding c at W. Such an
offer would earn positive profits if it attracted only low-risks, However,

from (2), dr/dp —

(k-c-Z)/pw

-

(r-c)/p.

Since this expression is

decreasing in a, any offer that raised p1 and r1 relative to
Equilibrium V would attract both types and thus would not be offered.

14. Reducing the collateral requirement on government loans has the

same qualitative effects as rsising p0 or
15. In order to avoid the prospect of borrowers turning down private
loans to accept publit ones, I assume

>

P0X10.

22

APPEIX

jouilibrium I:

In each submarket, equilibrium contracts maximize expected

borrower utility,

Substitution of (1)

given in (2), subject to (1).

into (2) for each U1 yields
—

max

taking

derivatives yields:

—

so that c — 0,

< 0,

which implies through (1) that 4

8t1

—

In addition

p1w1,

—

1 4—0

which is positive if type

that 4

—

i

investors are applying for loans, implying

1.

Egj4ibrium II: The remaining equilibria follow a common pattern.
Therefore, Equilibrium II is derived in some detail, while the derivations
of Equilibria Ill-V are shorter.
With asymmetric information, equilibrium is obtained by maximizing the
population-weighted average of borrowers' expected utility, given by

+

(l-th)tJ22,

subject to (1), (5a) and (5h). Following Besanko and Thakor (1987), the
strategy employed is initially to ignore (5a) and assume

—

I.

1tter it

will be shown that the optimal solution does satisfy (Sa) and p —

Substituting

(1) into (2) into (A-I) , and. maxiiizing (A-I) subject to (5b)

23

yields the problem:

max Ltt —

(A-fl

p1(r1R1-p-Z-(l-if(1-$)c1)

+

(l-).p2Or2R2-p-Z-(l-w2)(l-)c2) +

'2
p1(if2R2 -

-

?l(l2)20i)$

c

-

Z))

where A is the LaGrange multiplier associated with (5b). Setting p — 1
II

and setting &L /8c1

0

implies

(lwl) (1.fl)ifl

A —

(A-3)

—

2 2(11

if1(1

>

which implies that (Sb) is binding. Using (A-3), it is easy to show that

aL/3c2 < 0, which implies

— 0.

Substituting for c n (Sb) and

solving (Sb) for c1 yields the expression in (6b). Given c ,

Ti

can

be found using (1)

It remains to be shown that (5a) is satisfied_at the solution presented

— 1

above and that

is optimal. To show that (Se) is satisfied, note

that U11 t U12 if
II

(A-4)

-

(l-) c1

It

II

w1(R1-r2 ),

or

r1(r-rf')

Using (1) and (6b) and some algebra, it can be shown that (A-4) holds for

the values given in Proposition 11. U11 > U12 can also be seen by
examining Figure 1.

It is also straightforward to show that oL/&p2 > 0, which implies

p2 — 1.

Finally,

24

—

(A-5)

a2

w1(1-a2)-a2(1-e1)fi

cI -z

22 a1
This can be shown to be positive provided that k -

r1

-

Z

> 0. This

condition captures the idea that high-risks have a higher aversion to posting collateral because they have a larger probability of having to pay it.

That is, the same condition implies, from (2), that dc/dp rises with ir.
Eouilibrium III: Guarantees shift the zero profit condition to (8) from
(I). Otherwise, the maximization follows as in Equilibrium II. That is,
substitute (8) into (2) into (A-l) and maximize subject to (5a), ignoring
(5b) and setting

—

I

for now. The problem is to

max LIII -

1l°l +

1

(l-)p2(r2R2-p-Z+(1-a2)(2-c2) +

-

Setting aL1/&c1 — 0

ir2p

÷

52(151)

"1 l

-

(l-w2)c1

-

z].

implies that A > 0, which implies that (Sb) binds.

Given A > 0, it is easy to show that

— 0.

Solving (Sb) for ct

yields the expression in (9b). Showing that (Ss) is satisfied and that
1 follow in the same way as in Equilibrium II.
Proposition 1.: Expected borrower utilities are given in (10) and (II). The
government cost of providi.ng guarantee 'y is (l-wi)(-rj-flct'1) for each

borrower in group i. The effects ofraising l only or '2 only are

25

are as follows.

described in the text. The effects of raising
If

-v C

18cr,

the only effect of raising

occurs through raising

is welfare improving. When y

so the increase in -i

further

increases introduce opposing welfare effects. However, the net effect is

always welfare-improving Note that, for each high-risk borrower, the

benefits of raising y equal (lw2)&Y2 which equals the cost of
providing guarantees per high-risk borrowers. The velfare effects thus
depend on comparing a14t'/3-v and the coat of providing guarantees to lowrisks,

(1-if1). From (10),

—

(1-n1)

81.111

Therefore, increases in 1

+

,r1(1r2)

(i-nj)

>

(I-nj).

are welfare-improving.

Eouilibriua_IV: The problem is now to maximize (A-2) subject to (1), (Sb)

and a wealth constraint W C

ct'.

— 1

respect to c2 and p2 yields
result implies rr — p/n2.

As before, taking derivatives with

and cr — 0, and the latter

The wealth constraint implies that ct'7 — w.

The zero profits condition determines rt". Only p1 remains to be
determined. Optimizing with respect to p1 implies that A > 0

so that

(Sb) is binding. Solving (Sb) for p1 yields the expression in (16a)
Equilibrium V: The problem is now to maximize (A-2) subject to (1) ,

V C

c,

and (20), and where U11 is given by (19). Values for 4,

4, 4, and 4

(5a)

4,

as derived as in Equilibrium IV. the equilibrium p1 is

determined by solving (20) for

Pronosition 2; Nate that

Z, and

—

—

+ (n2(1-n1)/nj)

-

n2R2

n2p/n1

(-v1-flW) ,

substituting for r using (1) and (18).

-

(n1(I-r2)-if2(l-111)fi/7r1)W

-

where these terms are derived by
and

are derived

26

l

analogously. From (22)

—

because

Pcff2Gifi)(1Jz221

from (21a), U22 C

—

Similarly,

X21.

(l-p)

<

+

(1p)

—

22212021
21

<

G 2&

using (21a) and some algebra.

Proooaition 3: taking derivatives of (19) yields

'4l

F— — i- (X11-p0X10) +
—

(A-6)

p0

'lG

e1)(l-1) {i -

using (Zla). The expression in brackets can be shown to be positive, so
that (A-6) is positive. In eddition,

V

1
aull

—

—

3Pl

(X11-p0X10)

+

(1p1)X10

(x21u22)(x21x10x20x11 >
(X21Pc;Xzc)2

because the term in brackets can be shown to be positive.

To show the welfare effects of changing 1,
in (A-6) Is less than

the

risk borrower. Thus, increases in

hold for p0.

note

that the expression

marginal costs of raising

per low-

reduce efficiency. Similar results

27

REFERENCES
Barro, Robert 3. 1976, "The Loan Market, Collateral, and Rates of Interest,"
Jnsi.rnal of Money. Credit, and Banking, 8 (Nov.), 439-56.

Besanko, David and Anjan V. Thakor 1987, "Collateral and Rationing: Sorting
Equilibria in Monopolistic and Competitive Credit Markets," international.

EconomicReview, ?8:3 (Oct.), 671-89.
Sester, Helmut 1985, "Screening vs. Rationing in Credit Markets With
Imperfect Information," American Economic Review, 75:4 (Sept.), 850-55.

Bosworth, Barry P., Andrew S. Carron, and Elisabeth H. Rhyne 1987,
Economics of Federal Credit Programs, Broolcings institution.

Chan, Yuk-Shee and Anjan V. Thakor 1987, "Collateral and Competitive
Equilibria with Moral Hazard and Private Information," Journal of
Finance, XLIi:2 (June), 345-363.

de Meza, David and David C. Webb 1987, "Too Much Investment: A Problem of
Asymmetric information," Ouarterlj,Journal of Economics, CII:2 (May),
281-92.

Gale, Willism 0. 1987, "Allocational and Welfare Effects of Federal Credit
Programs," Ph.D. Dissertation, Stanford University.

_________ 1988(a), "Economic Effects of Federal Credit Programs," UCLA
Working Paper No. 483 (Revised) Aug.

________ 1988(b),

Federa1 Lending and the Market for Credit," UCLA

Working Paper No. 504, Sept.

Mankiw, N. Gregory 1986, "The Allocation of Credit and Financial Collapse,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Ci:3 (Aug.), 455-7D.
Milde, Helimuth and John 0. Riley 1988, "Signalling in Credit Markets,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, CIII: 1 (February), 101-130.

Office of Management and Budget 1989, Special Analysis F," Special
Analyses: Budact of the United States Government, January.
Rothachild, Michael and Joseph E. Stiglitz 1976, "Equilibrium in Competitive

Insurance Markets: An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information,"
OuarterLy journal of Economics, 90, 629-49.
Smith, Bruce and Michael J. Stutzer 1988, "Credit Rationing and Government

Loan Programs: A Welfare Analysis," Federal Reaerve Bank of Minneapolis
Working Paper To. 395, April.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. , and Andrew Weiss 1981, "Credit Rationing in Markets

With Imperfect Information," American Economic Review, 71 (June),
393-411.

__________ and __________ 1986, "Credit Rationing and Collateral," in Recent

Developmantin Coroorate Finance Jeremy Edwards, Julian Franks, Cohn
Mayer, and Stephen Schaefer (eds.), New York: Cambridge University
Press, pp. 101-35.

__________ and __________ 1989, "Sorting Out the Difference 8etween
Screening and Signalling Models," in Michael Demster, ed. ,

Paoers

in

Coininemoratiomof the Economic Theory Seminar at Oxford University, Oxford

University Press.
Wette, Hildegard 1983, "Collateral in Credit Rationing in Markets with Im-

perfect Information: Note," American Economic Review, 73 (June), 442-45.
Williamson, Stephen D. 1937, "Costly Monitoring, Loan Contracts, and
Equilibrium Credit Retioning," Ouarterlv Journal of Econcmica, CII:l
(Feb.), 135-46.

Yotsuzuka, Toshiki 1987, "Ricardian Equivalence in the Presence of Capital

Market Imperfections," Journal of Monetan Economics, 20 (September),
411-36.

