                                                   NBER Working Paper #3084
                                                   August 1989


                                  EXPLAINING PENSION DYNAMICS


                                              ABSTRACT

       Some contend the US labor market will fail to adapt smoothly to an aging workforce,
whereas others argue that employee pensions can and will play an important role in helping
companies induce desired turnover patterns. This paper undertakes a longitudinal examination of
pension retirement incentives in several dozen plans observed between about 1960to 1980.

        The plans under study instituted many changes over this period, several of which enhanced
the financial payoff to early retirement. These alterations included increases in benefit levels,
reductions in early, normal and mandatory retirement ages, and cuts in the age at which pension
present values peak (with retirement after that age penalized). We also find that simple indicators
of pension plans' structural features (e.g. the plan's early retirement age) do not adequately
summarize the complex financial incentives inherent in pensions, so that most of our attention is
directed to analysis of financial benefit level measures.

        Three major explanations for observed pension outcomes are evaluated empirically. Of
special policy interest is an evaluation of pension responses to changes in Social Security benefit
rules. Additionally, key differences in behavior are discovered between single employer and multi-
employer pension plans. We conclude that pension plan behavior is systematically related to both
labor and product market characteristics, and is responsive to retirement income policy.




        Rebecca A. Luzadis                           Olivia S. Mitchell
        Department of Management                     Dept. of Labor Economics
        Miami University                             ILR-Corne11 University
        Oxford, OH 45056                             Ithaca, NY 14853
        (513) 529-4215                               (607)255-2743
                                                     and
                                                     NBER
                                                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
