                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             FINANCIAL INTEGRATION, LIQUIDITY AND EXCHANGE RATES




                               Vittorio Grilli
                               Nouriel   Roubini




                            Working Paper No. 3088




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  Auguat 1989




We would like to thank William Brainard and Lars Svensson for many helpful
suggestions and the participants to the NBER conference on European Economic
Integration for their comments. This paper ia part of NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Reaearch.
                                     Working Paper #3088
                                     August 1989


           FINANCIAL INTEGRATION, LIQUIDITY AND EXCHANGE RATES


                                ABSTRACT


This paper presents a two-country extension of Lucas' (1988) work
on the effects of cash-in-advance constraints in asset markets on
the pricing of financial assets. The model is one where there
exists some degree of separation between the goods markets and
the asset markets and money is used for transactions in both
markets. The main results of the paper are the following. Firat,
the equilibrium level of the exchange rate depends on the share
of money used for asset transactions: a greater share will
correspond to a more appreciated exchange rate. Second, under
uncertainty, liquidity effects deriving from stochastic shocks to
bond creation lead to an "excess" volatility of nominal and real
exchange rates even when the "fundamental" value of the exchange
rate is constant. Third, capital controls in the form of taxes on
foreign asset acquisitions tend to appreciate the exchange rate.
Fourth, the maturity structure of the public debt affects the
equilibrium exchange rate. In particular, a move towards a longer
maturity structure will tend to depreciate the exchange rate.




  Vittorio Grilli                   Nouriel Roubini
  Economics Department              Economics Department
  Yale University                   Yale University
  P.O. Box 1972 Yale Station        P.O. Box 1972 Yale Station
  New Haven, CT 06520               New Haven, CT 06520
                                   1




1. Introduction.




     The objective of this paper is to analyze the open economy

implications of models in which money is used both for transactions in

the goods markets and for transactions in the asset markets. The model

we present here is a two-country open economy extension of Lucas (1988)

work on the effects of liquidity constraints in asset markets on the

pricing of financial assets. Introducing cash-in-advance constraints in

financial market transactions may be important for a number of reasons.

As suggested by Lucas, a significant proportion of money holdings is

managed by financial intermediaries rather than households. It is,

therefore, important to consider the potential effects on asset prices

of the demand for money by financial intermediaries. Specifically, as

shown by Lucas, in models where money is required for asset

transactions, asset prices will depend not only on their Fisherian

fundamentals but also on the liquidity available in asset markets. In

particular interest rates will show "excess volatility" that is not

related to the volatility of the "fundamental" determinants of asset

prices.

     As will be shown in our paper, in an open economy setting

cash-in-advance constraints in the asset market have important

additional effects. First, the equilibrium exchange rate will depend on

the money demand in the asset markets and the share of money used in

asset transactions. Second, the "excess" volatility of interest rates




   As discussed by Lucas (1988), similar liquidity effects on assets prices are
found in the work of Grossman and Weiss (1983) and Rotemberg (1984).
                                      2




will spill over to the exchange rate market and lead to "excess"

volatility of exchange rates as well. Third, the maturity structure of

public debt will affect the equilibrium exchange rate by changing the

equilibrium share of money used in asset transactions.

     A important predecessor of our paper is the work of Helpman and

Razin (1985) which first introduced the idea of a cash-in-advance

constraint for asset transactions. However, both the specific nature of

the cash-in-advance constraint in the asset market and the analytical

objectives of Helpman and Razin are different from ours. In particular,

Helpman and Razin analyze the case of a debtor country running a current

account deficit which has to accumulate foreign currency in advance in

order to repay its foreign debt. This generates an increase in the

demand for foreign currency and thus a depreciation of the exchange

rate. While in Helpman and Razin, it is the borrower that faces a cash

in advance constraint (at the time of repayment), in our model it is the

lender that faces a cash in advance constraint (at the time she

purchases assets). Moreover, in our model, the current account is always

balanced and thus there is no relation between the current account and

the exchange rate.

     The objectives of our paper are also different from those of

Helpman and Razin. In particular, while we think that modeling the

effects on the equilibrium exchange rate (and its volatility) of cash in

advance constraints in asset market has an interest in its own, the

model also allows us to analyze a number of important policy issues

generated by the recent European Community decision to liberalize

capital controls by 1990. In particular, this framework is well suited

to address two important questions:
                                   3




     1) What will be the effect of this liberalization on the inter-EMS

exchange rates ? Will the capital liberalization make it harder to

maintain fixed exchange rate parities in the EMS area ?

     2) Given the existence of large budget deficits and high public

debt to GDP ratios in a number of EMS countries, will the capital

liberalization make more difficult the financing and management of

public debt ?

     The first set of questions is important because, according to a

popular argument2, capital controls have been important for the

viability of the EMS. It is argued that capital controls in countries

like France, Italy and Ireland have limited the potentially disruptive

effects on the EMS fixed parities of disturbances external to the system

(like movements of the dollar) or internal to the EMS (such as policy

divergences and/or structural asymmetries among the member countries).

This view suggests that the capital liberalization may render more

difficult the goal of exchange rate stability in the EMS area.

     The second set of questions is crucially linked to the first one

because divergences in fiscal policy (and their ensuing monetary and/or

bond financing requirements) are considered by many as one of the most

important sources of potential exchange rate tensions in the EMS. In

this view, restrictions to international capital movements in many EMS

countries have helped the smooth financing of large budget deficits and

have prevented (or limited) fiscal policy divergences in the EMS from

disrupting the inter-EMS exchange rate parities. This view also suggests




2See for example Giavazzi and Pagano (1986), Giavazzi and Giovannini
(1986, 1989).
                                    4




that the liberalization of capital movements might be incompatible with

maintaining stable exchange rates in the EMS area in the absence of a

process of fiscal policy convergence among the member countries.

     Introducing liquidity constraints in asset transactions allows us

to analyze capital controls in a more satisfactory way than existing

studies. Traditionally, in the literature on the effects of foreign

exchange controls (see for example Greenwood and Kimbrough (1987) and

Stockman and Hernandez (1988)), restrictions on foreign exchange rate

transactions are introduced in a way that makes them equivalent to

restrictions on current account transactions rather than capital account

transactions.

     Given the substantial absence of restrictions on current account

transactions in the OECD area and the widespread use of restrictions on

capital account transactions, a study of the effects of capital controls

on exchange rates requires the use of an analytical tool that permits

discrimination between tariffs on goods and taxes on capital movements.

The model that will be presented below has this property.

     The formulation of a model with liquidity constraints on asset

transactions allows us also to develop a more rich and realistic

analysis of the second set of questions advanced above: the effects of

structure of public debt on exchange rates and asset prices. Traditional

cash-in-advance models with liquidity constraints on goods markets are

usually formulated with one-period bonds only: therefore they do not

have any implication for the term structure of interest rates. Even when

multiperiod assets are introduced in these models, the perfect

substitutability among these assets implies that the structure of public

debt and the forms of financing of the budget deficit have no effect on
                                      5




equilibrium interest rates and exchange rates. This theoretical

irrelevance of the structure of the debt for the pricing of financial

assets is at odds with the policy arguments that have been advanced in

favor of a long maturity structure of the debt. In fact, in many EMS

countries (Italy for example) it is argued that a public debt with a

maturity structure biased towards short term bonds may have potentially

disruptive effects on exchange rates. Compared to the above models

characterized by the irrelevance of debt, the theoretical model

presented in this paper has the attractive feature that the equilibrium

level of the exchange rate depends, in a way to be qualified below, on

the maturity structure of the debt.

     The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents a

two-country version of the closed economy model of Lucas (1988) and

solves it for the case of certainty and one period bonds. Section 3

introduces capital controls as taxes on foreign asset transactions and

analyses the effects of these controls on equilibrium exchange rates.

Section 4 considers the relation between debt management, maturity

structure of the debt and exchange rates by extending the menu of assets

to multiperiod bonds. Section 5 solves the model for the case of

uncertainty about the size of the government bond issue and discusses

the effects of liquidity constraints on the volatility of exchange

rates. Section 6 presents some concluding remarks and suggestions for

future research.



2. The Model.

     In this section we present the basic structure of the model that is

a two-country extension of Lucas (1988). In this section we will
                                      6




consider the certainty version of the model by making the assumption of

perfect foresight. In section 5 we will develop the analysis under the

case of uncertainty.

     We consider a two-country world and assume that the representative

agents in both countries have an identical intertemporal utility

function given by:




             U —                                       i— 1,2
                           U(c, c)


where     is the consumption by country 1 (Italy) of the good produced

by country i (i—l,2) and      is the consumption by country 2 (France) of

the good produced by country i, fi   is   a discount factor between zero and

one and the usual assumption on U(.,.) hold.

     The good produced by each country is non-storable and, in order to

concentrate on the liquidity effects, we assume that production in the

two countries is constant at y1 and y2 This assumption allows us to

abstract from potential dynamic effects deriving from consumption

smoothing in the presence of non-constant endowments.

     The transaction technology is the one of a cash-in-advance model

complicated by the assumption that the representative agent faces not

one but two liquidity constraints: one on the purchase of goods and the

other on the purchase of assets. As in Lucas (1988) we assume the

convenient artifact of a three member representative household : each

member has a different task during a period and the household regroups

at the end of the period to pooi goods, assets and information. One

member receives the endowment and sells it to other households. The cash
receipts from this period t endowment can be used only in the next

period. The second member takes a fraction of the household's initial

money holdings (domestic and foreign currency) and uses it to buy

domestic and foreign goods from other households. Domestic (foreign)

goods can be bought only with domestic (foreign) currency. The third

member of the household carries the remaining domestic and foreign

currency cash balances to the securities markets where she buys domestic

and foreign securities. As with the purchase of goods, domestic

(foreign) assets can be bought only with domestic (foreign) cash

balances.

        In this section we assume that there are only two securities,

domestic and foreign one-period government discount bonds       and B
Since the bonds are one-period, net and gross asset transactions

coincide. In section 4 we will extend the menu of available assets.

        At the beginning of period t, therefore, the typical household will

face the constraints:




(2.a) Z q B1                             i—l,2




(2.b) Z q B                              i—l,2



(2.c)            -
                     Z   P Ct            i1,2


(2.d)            -
                     Z    P C            i—l,2



where Z is the amount of money of country j held by the representative

agent of country i for transactions in the asset market at time t;
                                     8




is the total amount of money of country j held by the resident of

country i at time t; q and q are the price of the domestic and foreign

currency prices of the domestic and foreign discount bond;        and     are

the domestic and foreign currency prices of good 1 and 2, respectively.

Equations (2.a) and (2.b) are the cash-in-advance constraints for the

asset markets, and (2.c) and (2.d) are the equivalent cash-in-advance

constraints for the goods markets.

    The agents in the home country also face the beginning of t+l

period budget constraint given by:



      1      —     2          1      11 —            2       22     +
(3) Mit1 + e1 M11 —       [   Z1 -   q   BJ + e1 [Z1
                                                         -




                       ÷ [M -        -:         +
                                                    e1 [M -
                                                                   -
                                                                        p CJ


   A note regarding the timing of the transactions in this case of certainty. At
the beginning of the period, before the households separates, the initial aoney
holdings may be reallocated in the exchange rate market to obtain the desired
quantities of domestic and foreign currency: this is the sense of the budget
constraint (3). After that, the money holdings are allocated in the shares that
will be used in the goods market and the asset market. No further transactions
are needed or made in the exchange rate market during the period: this is the
meaning of the separate constraints (2.a) and (2.b). One could, of course,
assume that the exchange rate market remains open while the financial markets
are open so that foreign currency can be bought and sold while financial
transactions occur. In this case, the relevant liquidity constraint in the asset

market will be given by: Z + Et Z           q                     instead of the
                                                     + E q
separate conditions (2.a) and (2.b). tIowever,it turns out that in this case of
certainty, the two ways of formulating the liquidity constraint give the same
solution to the model. What is important, in the aggregate, is that foreign
bonds can be bought only with foreign currency and domestic bonds with domestic
currency. In the case of uncertainty, that will be discussed in section 5 below,
the timing of the various transactions is more important so that we will be more
specific about the exact timing of the opening and closing of the different
markets.
                                                           9




                                         + Py1 + 4t + et÷l

where             is the nominal exchange rate at time t (defined as units of

domestic currency per unit of foreign currency). If the interest rate

is positive, i.e. q C 1 ,                      both     cash-in-advance constraints will hold

with equality, and thus, we can substitute them into (3) to obtain:



                                                                  1       —           2

(3.a)
                   1             —
                  Mlt+l + e+1 Mlt÷l —
                                           2             1 1
                                                        Py +
                                                                 Z1
                                                                  1 +
                                                                          e1Z1
                                                                                  2




Analogously, for the foreign country:




                                                                                          1
                           1         1              2           2 2           1           2t       2t
                       —                       +   M2t+l —     Py     +   —               1
                                                                                               +   2
                                                                          e+1


          The only function of the government in this model is to engage in

open market operations with government bonds. In particular, each

period the government of country i issues an amount of bonds equal to

  —
          4            . As    a result of this operation the rate of growth of money

between the the beginning of period t and the beginning of period t+l is
      i       i
(i-) x
        As in Lucas and Stokey (1987) and Lucas (1988) it is convenient to

express the nominal variables of the model in terms of the money supply

in which they are denominated. That is:



  We will show below under what conditions this is true.
                                                       10




 j             it                    j             it
                    I




                                                                                                          2
           B3                            P
                                             t                                              —
                                                                                                      M
                                                                                                          t
b3                      j
                        Pt
                                 =                         .
                                                           ,
                                                                            e =e

Using this normalization we can rewrite (3.a) -                                             (3.b)     as:



                                                  1 11                              1                                   2
           1                 2                                              +zlt                              et÷lzlt
(4.a) m1+1+e+im1+i= 1                                                           1           1 +           2                 2 2
                                                       +       (1       -
                                                                                        xj            [l +         (l-q)x]


                    1
                                                  2 22                              2                         1
           2                 1                       py +z2                                 +
                                                                                                              z2
(4.a)      2t+l +            2t÷l —
                    e+1                          q[1+(l- q)x ]                                  e÷1   q[l +        (l-q)x]

        We can now compute the stationary equilibrium of the model in terms

of these normalized variables. Given the complete analogy between the

domestic and the foreign agent maximization problem, we concentrate on

the former:



                                                   1           1            2           2
                                                               1            1                                               e'
P-l      V (4 + e 4)        — max        U (ml                      ,                   21 ) + fi V (4              +
                                                                                                                                 4)
                                 zz2
                                  11                   p                            p




where
                                                        II




                               q
                                    1 p11   1
                                        y +z1                                                   e
                                                                                                    2
          1'          2'
                                                                          +
                                                                                                    (l-q22
               + e   m1 —       1                       1                              2
                               q [1 + (1       -
                                                       q    )    x                    q (1 +             )x I




The first order conditions for the problem are:



                                                            fi    V1 (.)
(5.a)
                       p
                           1               1
                                         q [I +                  (I   -
                                                                          q
                                                                              11x )




                     U2(.,.)                                      V1 (.)              e'
(Sb)                                 —
                                                                              2
                       p
                           2               2
                                         q [1 + (1                    -
                                                                          q       )   x2


and the envelope condition:




                                                                                           U2(.,.)
(6) V1(m+em) —                                                                                   2
                                                   p
                                                       1
                                                                                                pe
Substituting the envelope condition (6) into (5.a) and (5.b) we then

obtain:



                 i
(7)       (l+(l-q)x i
                      ]q i —                                              i —         1,    2




Conditions identical to (7) would be obtained solving the foreign agent

maximization problem.5 Using the equilibrium conditions for the


   It can be observed that conditions (7) imply that, in this certainty case,
the real interest parity condition across the two countries is satisfied. In
fact, the right hand side of (7) is equal to (11(1+6)) where S is common the
rate of time preference in the two countries; while the left hand side is equal
                                                              12




security markets, that is:



(8)
          i
              +           i       — zi       —   xi   q
                                                          i
                                                                       i — 1, 2




we get:




(9)               z
                      i       —
                                         p
                                   l+x 1 - z1
                                                                       i   —   1,    2




which are quadratic equations in                               and         Recalling that               must be

less than one in equilibrium, we obtain:




                                                      [(1 + x)2 -              4 p       i11/2
(10)          z               —
                                    (I + x1) -

                                                                   2
                                                                                                         i   1, 2




We have so far assumed the existence of an interior equilibrium, i.e.

one for which q1 C I .                   Therefore, since qi —                  (z'      /   x'),   we need that

z1 C x1 . From (10) it is easy to see that this is always the case,

given that fi C 1. From (10) we also obtain that




  az                                                      [(l+x1)          -
                                                                               2fl]
                                                                                                    >0
  B xl                                            [(1 +
                                                               i2 - 4
                                                              x )               xl] 12
                                                                                     /




to the product of of (1+ s) (where it is equal to the inflation rate) and
q—(l/(1+i)) where i is the nominal interest rate. Since (l÷ir)/(l+i) is equal to
(i+r) where r is the real interest rate, conditions (7) imply that r1-' r2 — 8,
or the equalization of the real interest rate in the two countries. Also, as
will be shown below, the exchange rate depreciation is equal to the inflation
rate differential between the two countries so that conditions (7) also imply
that the nominal interest parity condition is satisfied.
                                         13




It can also be proved that:



       1.




   3x  i    <1
i.e. a permanent increase in the rate of bond creation xi will increase

the share of money used for asset transactions by less than x. This

result also implies that an increase in the rate of bond creation

will lead to a reduction in the price of bonds and an increase in the

nominal rate of interest.

       From the cash-in-advance constraint in the goods markets, and

observing that in equilibrium mi — mi — 1             ,   we get:




(11)        +
                 m
                         -
                             (4 + z2)   —     1   -       —
                                                                (4 + c)   i — 1, 2




Also, the equilibrium conditions in the goods markets are:



              i    i     i
             c1 + c2 — y                      i — 1, 2



Combining the conditions (11) and (12) we then derive the equilibrium

price levels as:




                     —
                             l-z   1.



                                        i— 1, 2
                              y


i.e. the equilibrium price levels will depend not only on the money

supply and the output level but also on the share of money used for

asset transactions. In particular, since goods prices depend on the
                                                                14




money used in goods transactions, an increase in the share of money used

in asset transactions z1, will reduce the money available for good

market transactions and will therefore reduce the equilibrium price of

goods.

       We have now all the elements necessary to solve for the equilibrium

steady state exchange rate. By goods market arbitrage, it must be:



                21 1
            p        p —ep 2

where p21 is the relative price of good 2 in terms of good 1 which, by

the first order conditions is equal to U2(.,.)/1J1(.,.).                  Therefore:

                         1
                     p              U2
          e----
             p                      U1



and, using (13):



                         (1 -      z1)             y2      U2
(16)      e—                           2               1
                 -       (1    -   z       )       y       U1



From (16) it is straightforward to derive the equilibrium nominal

exchange rate as:



                                           1           1   2
                             (1 - z            )
                                                   Mt                U2
(17)                                       2           2   1
                             (l-z) M y                               U1



If we compare (17) with the expression for the exchange rate of a
                                             15




typical cash-in-advance model, we notice that the crucial difference is


represented by the ratio
                                   11
                                    ) .           The intuition for the effect of
                                   (l-z )
this   ratio on the equilibrium exchange rate is clear: part of the money

supply is held for use in the asset market, and thus, does not enter in

the determination of the goods prices. Given the results above, it is

also clear that:




                                                         >0
                   1
                                              3x2

that   is a larger steady state size of open market operations x1 will

tend to appreciate the exchange rate.



An Exaiiple.

       As we have seen above, in order to trace the liquidity effects of

the exchange rate, we do not need to specify the functional form of the

utility function. In this section, however, we provide a complete

solution to this type of model, and to do so we will assume that the

utility function is given by:



               1       2                 1                  2
(19)       U (c ,      c   )   —
                                   log   c +       a   log ci



As seen above, the liquidity effect (i.e. cash-in-advance constraint in

the security markets) enabled us to derive the total total shares of the

two monies used in this market: z' and z2. However, in this perfect

foresight model, domestic and foreign assets are perfect substitute and

thus, we cannot derive the geographical composition of these shares,
                                                            16




i.e. the values of 4, 4, 4 and 4 . Any combination, in fact, would

be consistent with equilibrium. An intuitively appealing way to obtain

these separate aggregates is to compute asset (cash) holdings in such a

way that the individuals do not need to formally access the foreign

exchange market, since their asset holdings exactly deliver the amount

of cash that they need for goods and asset transactions. Formally this

solution is obtained by imposing separate budget constraints, one for

each currency, i.e.:




                                 q
                                     iii
                                       y
                                         i
               m. —                                                  i— 1, 2
                   1
                                  .
                                  1
                                 q [1 +
                                                1. 1.
                                            (l-q )x

                                            1
                           —                                         j—l   2
                                 q[l + (l-q3)x3]


       Given the functional specification (19) of the utility function, it

it easy to show that the consumption allocations are given by



                                       1.                              i
                                     y                               my
(22)       c           —                        ;       c        —             1 — 1,   2
               1                 l+a                        2        l+a

Moreover, substituting condition (7) into (21), we obtain:



(23)
               1
                       —       fi m1

Substituting               (22) and (23) into the cash-in-advance constraint (2c)

and (2.d) we get:
                                                      17




                                           22
(24.a)
             2   -
                             2          ___
                                         I +a

                                         ap y
                                               22
(24.b)      m2               m                 1 +a


Then, using the equilibrium price levels (13) we get:




                     2
                                        (1 -   z2)
(25.a)
                 ml              (1 +   a)(l    -




                                  a (1 -       z1 )
(25.b)           m2              (1 +   a)(l    -




From (25.a) and (25.b) we can immediately derive m and m using the

fact that        +           — 1. Finally, the 4's are obtained by using (23).
                         m
      The effects of changes in the rate of bond creation on these money

shares can be summarized as following. A permanent increase in the rate

of bond creation in country i (xi) will: a) increase the total share of

currency i held by agents in country i (mi) and reduce the share held by

agents in the other country (mD; b) increase the share of cash holdings

for asset transactions in currency i held by agents in country i (z)

and reduce the share held by agents in the other country (z).



3. Capital Controls and            Exchange Rates.
      As we mentioned in the introduction, the framework used in this

paper allows us to model capital controls in a form that is closer to
                                                    18




actual restrictions on asset transactions than standard cash-in-advance

models. In reality, in most countries capital controls take the form of

a tax on (net) transactions in foreign securities. This can be easily

formalized in our model with the imposition of a tax (r) on the

cash-in-advance constraint relative to foreign asset transactions.

Assuming that country 1 is imposing this tax on the foreign asset

transactions of domestic agents, we get:




(26)
              2
                   (1+ r)
                                   22
          z1

Since we assume that only the home country imposes capital controls, the

only expression in the model that is affected is the home country budget

constraint which, in normalized terms, is given by:



                                              1 11 1
          1
(27) m1+1 + e+1 m1+i —
                          2                                   zlt       +
                                          1                    1    1
                                                   + (1   -
                                                                   x]

                                      e[(l+r) q v
                                      (1 + r) [l +
                                                   (lq)x)
where v is a (foreign currency) transfer (used to return in lump sum

form the revenues from the foreign asset taxation) which we will define

in detail later on.

       The first order and envelope conditions for the domestic agents

now imply:



(28.a)                —       [1   + (1       -
                                                  q1)   x1 ] q1
                                                           19




                $                                      2
(28.b)                     —    [1    + (1 -       q       )   x2      ]       q
                                                                                   2

             (1 + r)



while the foreign individual optimization would imply:



                                               1               1           1
(29.a)          $      —       [1   + (1 - q       )       x       ]   q



(29.b)          $      —[1          + (1 - q2) x2 ]



        As is known from the literature on capital taxation in an open

economy (see for example Hansson and Stuart (1986)), in the presence of

taxes the strict interest parity condition cannot hold simultaneously

for both countries. In other terms, (28.b) and (29.b) cannot be

satisfied both with equality. Here, as usual in the literature, we

assume that the home country holds both assets, so that (28.b) is the

relevant expression determining the foreign price of bonds. 6 The

foreign country, on the other hand, will hold only foreign assets, since

the return on the home country bond is lower than the return on a

foreign bond for a foreign resident.

        Next, we have to specify what happens in the home country to the

tax revenue from foreign asset transactions. In order to concentrate on

the price effects of capital controls, we prevent changes in the money

supply from occurring as a result of the tax. We assume, therefore, that




6 The alternative assumption that the country without controls is holding both
asaets would make the model trivial: domestic agents would not hold foreign
assets and therefore the capital controls would have no effects on the exchange
rate.
                                                      20




the government reintroduces in the system the money collected with the

tax. There sre two obvious alternative ways to achieve this result.

According to the first, the government uses the foreign currency to

purchase foreign goods and transfer them to the domestic agents.

Alternatively, the government could use the proceeds to purchase

foreign assets (foreign reserves) and transfer the proceeds hack to the

agents in the form of a transfer v. Both alternatives also have the

advantage of eliminating possible wealth effects aasociated with the

tax. It turns out that the effect on the exchange rate is the same

under both arrangeaents.

     Consider the first case, in which the money collected is spent in

the foreign goods market. Equilibrium in the securities market implies:



(30.a)
            1
           z1 +
                            1
                                — z1
                                       1
                                             — —l
                                               z      —q1 x1

                    2
          __________            +
                                       2             —2
                                                     a     —       2 x2
(30.b)                              a2                         q
           (1 ÷ r)



Using these conditions together with conditions (28.a)-(28.b), we can

derive the solutions for                    and —2




                1
                                (1 +       x1)   -
                                                     [(1 + x1)2     -       4    fi   x1} 1/2
(31.a)                  —
                                                           2




            —2
                                (1 +       x2)   -
                                                     [(1 + x2)2         -
                                                                                4fi x2/(l+r)]2
(31.b)      a           —
                                                           2
                                                         21




We can observe that                is a negative function of r, the degree of

capital controls, i.e. an increase in the tax on foreign asset purchases

will reduce the total share of foreign money used for foreign asset

purchases. '

       The domestic and foreign price levels are now given by:



                                                1
                  I
                            1       1
                            m1+m2-z1-z2
                                                     1
                                                                  1-z—l
(32.a)          p —                         I                 —
                                                                       1
                                        y                          y




    As is known from the literature on two-country infinite horizon models,
divergences in the rate of time preference in the two countries from the net
real interest rate would lead to unappealing long run properties. Since interest
parity conditions imply that the return on the domestic aaaet should be equal to
the net return on foreign aaaeta (the foreign real rate minus the rate of

capital                 r —
               taxation •   i.e.
                               -            r*      r),
                                     equality of the two countries rates of time
preference would imply that either the domestic rate of return and/or the
foreign one will diverge from their respective rate of time preference (i.e.
                                            *
either  r —           r*
              -r • & or r # 6). Since our interest here is to concentrate on
the exchange rate effects of capital controls, we want to abstract from current
account movements driven by divergences between rates of time preference and
                                                                                                            *
real   interest rates. We therefore assume that the foreign discount factor (fi
           *
l/(l÷& )) is equal to $/(l+r). In other terms, we hypothize that the difference
between the foreign and the domestic rate of time preference is equal to the
tax rate on foreign asset transactions (5* -                               5   —   r).   It then follows that:
6 —   —r       (r*r) r*
               <    — 6*. The above assumption guarantees the equality between
each country's rate of time preference and the net rate of return on financial
assets while preventing the divergence between the two countries rates of time
preference from creating incentives to borrow or lend. Our approach is quite
similar to the one followed by Svensson (1988, 1989) who, in a different
two-country model, assumes that the rate of time preference differs across
countries in order to prevent country differences in the degree of risk aversion
from affecting the current account. One could, of course, take a different
approach and move to a finite horizon model or to an overlapping generations
model: these models, however, would introduce dynamic effects such as borrowing
and lending from which we want to abstract. Finally, whenever we perfom
comparative statics exercises in which the rate of capital taxation is changed,
                                                                   *
                                                                           with
                                                                                                       *
we adjust the value of the discount factor fi so that the equality of fi
fi/(l+r) is maintained and potential current account effects are neutralized.
                                                             22




                        2    2               2           2                       2                 —2
               2       m1 + m2          -
                                                 - z2             +(r/(l+r))z1
                                                                                         1 -       z
(32.b)        '    —                                                                 —
                                                     2                                         2
                                                 y                                        y

          1
where               is the amount collected by the government and used on the
          + . z1
foreign good market.

        It then follows that the exchange rate is given by:




(33)          e—
                       (1 -

                       (1 - z
                              ) 2
                                            y2
                                             1
                                                             U2
                                    )       y                U1



Since the equilibrium 2 is negatively related to an increase in r, it

follows that a higher level of capital controls (a higher r) will

correspond to a higher level (i.e an appreciation) of the exchange rate.

        The result that capital controls tend to appreciate the exchange

rate is intuitive, and similar to results previously obtained by

Greenwood and Kimbrough (1987) and Stockman and Hernandez (1988).

However, it is important to notice that the reason for such an

appreciation is quite different in our model and, we believe, more

plausible. In the other models, foreign exchange controls act as a

tariff on goods purchases (rather than a tax on asset purchases as a

capital control should be); therefore, they alter the relative price of

the goods and the equilibrium real allocation. Then, the effect on the

exchange rate is through a change in terms of trade and a change in the

marginal rate of substitution U2/U1. In our model, instead, there is no

change in the relative price of the two goods or in their allocation

across countries: capital controls are neutral from that point of view.

Here, the introduction of capital controls reduces the demand for the
                                                                     23




foreign security and the amount of foreign money held for transactions

in the asset market. Consequently, there is an increase in the money

holdings for transactions in the foreign goods market and this tends to

increase the nominal price of foreign goods and thus appreciate the home

country's exchange rate.

       It is easy to show that the above results are unchanged under the

alternative hypothesis that the revenues from the tax are used in the

foreign security market. In this case the equilibrium in the foreign

asset market would be modified to:



                         2
              _________                +        2           _________          2 —              2      2         2 x2
(34)
                                               z2
                                                        +
                                                                              z1                    + z2 —   q
                  (1 +       r)                               (1 +      r)

Using (34) together with (28.b), we obtain:




              2
                                      (1 +     x2)      -
                                                            [(1   + x2)2           -
                                                                                       4fi x2/(l+r)]1"2
(35)      z        —
                                                                    2


The foreign price level is now given by:



                                  2        2            2     2
                             m1+m2-z1-z2                                               l-z 2
(36)     p         —                                                      —
                                                    2                                       2
                                               y                                        y


From (31.b) and (35) it is also clear that 2 — z2 and thus the exchange

rate is the same as in (33).

       The main result of this section is that capital controls have a

positive effect on the exchange rate. This result suggests that a
                                   24




liberalization of capital restrictions is likely to lead to a

depreciation of the currency that is being liberalized. It also suggests

that capital controls in a number of ENS countries might have been

effective in limiting exchange rate depreciations resulting from

divergent economic policies among the member countries.



4. Liberalization of Capital Movements and Debt Management.

     Recently, we have observed considerable interest among academics

and policy makers concerning the issue of the relation between debt

maturity structure, sustainability of public debt and interest rates

(see Ciavazzi and Pagano (1989) and Alesina, Prati and Tabellini

(1989)). This interest has been stimulated by the observation that in a

number of EMS countries, increasing budget deficits have led to a

sizable increase in the debt to GDP ratio . However, not enough

attention has been devoted to the implications for the exchange rate of

the structure of public debt. In this section we would like to discuss

some of these implications.

     As will be seen below, we find in our framework a non-neutrality of

the maturity structure that is reminiscent of the mechanism working in

Ciavazzi and Pagano (1989). However, here the mechanism is not driven by

the probability of default (as in Ciavazzi and Pagano) but rather by the

relative "liquidity" of goods and asset markets.

     In this and the later sections it is convenient to abstract from

the growth in money supply: the model, in fact, does not have any

particularly new implication regarding the effects of inflation.



    As of 1989, the public debt is over 100% of CDP in three ENS countries:
Italy, Belgium and Ireland.
                                                            25




Therefore, as in Lucas (1988), we assume that the government imposes a

lump-sum tax (of size ir1 M )                  at      the beginning of each period (prior to

any trading) which is exactly sufficient to remove the increase in

money generated by the previous period open market operation. Then, the

tax is such that money growth is zero or:



          M1
           t+l                                 i                  i
(37)              —     1   + (1       -
                                           q       )   xi     -       —1




Substituting (37) in (7), we obtain that the price of the one period

bond now reduces to q1 — fi            and,            therefore, z1 —     fi xi.   In other words,

the real interest rate is equal to the rate of time preference (r —                                 5).
In this type of model, this equality is independent of the maturity
                                                                                               i      n
structure of the debt so that, an n period bond will be priced q —

In   an economy where only n-period bonds exist, the amount of money held

for transactions on the asset market will therefore be z —                                   x1 .   In
the general case in which n different asset of maturity from 1 to n

periods are contemporaneously issued the value of z1 would be:




(38)       z —                     j
                      i—i


       The important point of this exercise is to note that changes in the

maturity structure of the debt alter zi and, therefore, have effects on

the level of the exchange rate. First, for equal face value of the




   We refer the reader to Lucas (1988) for the formal, more general derivation
of these type of results in a closed economy setting.
                                                   26




issue, i.e. Xm —            x   where in <    n,   z will be larger if the open market

operation is conducted in the shorter maturity bond (m). Therefore, the

steady state exchange rate will be more appreciated in this scenario.

       In the case above, however, the total revenues from the bond issue

are different. In fact, the shorter maturity bond, having a higher

price, will deliver higher proceeds. Consider then the situation in

which the government has a constant amount of debt outstanding and has

to decide the steady state maturity of this debt. For simplicity,

consider the two cases in which the government has all its debt in one

period bonds (D1) and the case in which the debt is in n-period bonds

evenly spread so that each period Dn/fl come to maturity. Then, in this
          i             .                                       .            .   1
case, x1 — D1 while X                  Din. Consequently, in the first case z — fi D1

while in the second Z — fin Din. Since the present discounted value of

the two forms of debt financing must be equal, it must be that:



                  n-l       .    D
(39)                    fr              —
                                              D1
                  j=O



Since z —         fin Din in the case of n-period bonds financing, using (39)
we get:



                        n       (1-fl)
                                                    <               —
(40)          Z   —
                                     n        D1        fi D1           z1
                                (1 -   fi )

This   result implies that, the longer is the maturity structure of the

debt, the smaller will be the equilibrium share (z) of money holdings

used for asset transactions. The result also suggests that in the case

of longer maturity bonds the exchange rate will be more depreciated:
                                   27




since a longer maturity of the debt leads to a lower share of cash

balances used for asset purchases (z), the equilibrium in the exchange

rate market implies a more devalued currency.

     This effect of the maturity structure on the exchange rate suggests

two policy observations. First, it might explain why in countries with a

short maturity structure of the debt (such as Italy), the exchange rate

tends to be relatively strong in spite of the large money creation. If

asset purchases are subject to a liquidity constraint, short term bond

financing implies a larger share of money balances used for asset

transactions and therefore a more appreciated exchange rate. Second, the

result implies that a policy move towards a longer maturity structure of

the debt will lead to a reduction of the share of money used for asset

transactions that will tend to depreciate the exchange rate. It then

follows that, if the objective of the policy makers to stabilize the

exchange rate, a move toward a longer maturity of the debt should be

accompanied by a reduction in the money supply so that the excess

liquidity created by the fall in z is absorbed and the exchange rate

does not depreciate.

     Finally, it is interesting to compare the implications of the

maturity structure for the exchange rate in our model and the the one of

Giavazzi and Pagano (1989). In Giavazzi and Pagano (1989), a longer

maturity of the debt reduces the probability of a devaluation and

therefore may prevent the occurrence of a devaluation crisis. Our model,

however, suggest that, jf liquidity constraints in the asset markets are

important, the monetary authorities should also consider the effects of

a longer maturity on the exchange rate through the reduction in the

share of money used for security purchases.
                                       28




5. Uncertainty   and exchange   rate volatility.

     In this section we extend the previous framework to allow for

uncertainty. The objective is to analyze how the results of Lucas (1988)

on the "excess" volatility of the interest rate in the presence of

liquidity effects extend to the exchange rate in an open economy

setting.

     As in Lucas, we assume that the only source of uncertainty in the

model is the size of x1 and x2 which are distributed with a joint

density function f(x1, x2). We also assume that x1 and x2 are i.i.d.

random variables. In the uncertainty case it is important to specify the

exact timing of the various transactions, and of the opening and closing

of the various markets. We assume that at the beginning of the period,

each household divides their initial money balances between cash

holdings for purchases of goods (nt, n?) and assets (z z). Next, two

different members of the household access the two different markets. The

agent which transects in the good market does not have any further

opportunity to make transactions in the foreign exchange market 10, and

thus faces the constraints:




(41.a)        p1 }     —n              i — 1, 2




(41.b)        p2 c —    n              i — 1, 2




The agent that transacts in the exchange market, instead, has access to



     One can think of this assumption as implying that the transactions costs to
return on the exchange rate market are too high.
                                                        29




the foreign exchange market. Therefore she faces a budget constraint of

the form:




(42)        + e
                  4 — (14 - n)                + e
                                                    (4       - 4) — q1 b + e q2 4              i— 1,2




As before, transactions in the markets occur with the seller currency so

that it is still true that bond prices are determined by



(43.a)      z1 —q 11
                   x

(43.b)      z2 —q 22
                   x

One can observe that while                     and x2 are stochastic, the equilibrium

values of         and z2 are constant since the the xis are assumed to be

i.i.d. variables. The equilibrium conditions (43.a)-(43.b) then imply

that q1 and q2 will be stochastic as well.

Formally, the representative domestic household solves:



                                                                     1          2

                                                                                    +
(44)        V(i4 ,    ez4)—              1212
                                        max

                                        n1,n1 ,b1 ,b1
                                                              U(—f-,
                                                                 p
                                                                     —4)
                                                                      p



                                +
                                                    "x2 V(x4, e 4) f(dx1,               dx2)
                                              "x1


s.t.
              1
            (m1 -
                      1
                           + e (m1 -
                                    2          2
                                                    =    q
                                                             11
                                                              b1   + e q
                                                                           22
                     n1)             n1)



       Again, we assume here the existence of an interior equilibrium.
                                                                  30




where         and               are defined by:



                                          11   1
                            —
                                         py  +b1
                                                              x.
(45.a)                                               .
                                         [1 +   (l-q     )




(45.b)
                    2                            b
                                                     2            2
                                         [1 +   (l-q     )    x


The   first   order conditions (where A is the multiplier associated with

the budget constraint) are:



                                n1

(46a)         ____________                 —
                                                If                 A(x1 x2 )   f(dx1     2
                                                                                       dx )
                            p                   x x           2




                                    2
                                n
                        (-f)
                     p
              ____________                                                  x2) f(dx1, dx2)
(46b)                           2
                                           —
                                                    .1
                                                                  e A(x1,
                            p                   x x2



                                         Vj (1i4.
                                                         e'       m)
(47.a)         A        —
                                    fi
                                         [1 + (1
                                                     1
                                                    q )           x1 ] q


                                          V (mt, e' m) e'
 (47.b)       eA —                                 2   2    2
                                          [1 + (l-q ) x ] q


and the envelope conditions are:
                                                      31




(48.a)                   —
                                           1
                                       p



                         —
(48.b)      (
                                        2
                                       pe

Recalling that prices and 4 are not stochastic (since the resolution of

uncertainty occurs after the decision on 4 and
                                                                                 4), from           the first

order conditions, integrating conditions (47.a)-(47.b) and using the

envelope conditions, we get:




(47.a)'    1 —
                             JJ                [1 ÷ (l-q )
                                                           1           x1   J   q
                                                                                    1
                                                                                         f(dx1, dx2)




(47.b)'    1 —      fi
                             J2 J2             (1 ÷ (l-q )
                                                           12
                                                                       x
                                                                        2
                                                                            ]   q
                                                                                 2       f(dx1, dx2)




Finally, using the equilibrium conditions (43.a) and (43.b), we obtain:



                                                               1
                                                           X
            1                I'   I'
                                                                                          1     2
(48.a)'    z —      fi                                         1                 f(dx ,       dx    )

                             'x Jx2            [1 +   (1-q         )   x1


                                                           x:
                —
(48.b)'             pJ J                               (1-q            x2
                                                                                        f(dx1, dx2)
                      I 2 [1 +                                     )




Moreover, if we simplify the environment by assuming the existence of a

lump-sum tax ,r(x) that keeps the money holdings constant, the

expressions (48.a) and (48.b) reduce to:
                                                  32




          z1 —                                x1 f(1 2)
(49.a)
                            fi 'xl Jx2

(49.b)          —           '                 x2 f(d2' 2)
                                     2
We can further simplify this solution by assuming that 2' and x2 are

independent (   f(d2',           dx2) —
                                             f1(d2')   f2(dx2) ) so that:



           z1 —                      2'
(5O,a)
                            $ "xl            f1(d2')


(50.b)          —           fi       x2
                                             f2(dx)



One can observe that the equilibrium 2' and z2 are constant over time,

independent of the shocks, Similarly,                      and n2 are constant so that the

price levels in the two countries are constant as well. What about the

equilibrium level of the exchange rate ? Notice that, since the asset

markets and the good market are separate, under conditions of

uncertainty the exchange rate cannot equilibrate both markets

simultaneously. Here the exchange rate equilibrates the asset market, a

consequence of our previous assumption that the asset market and the

exchange rate market are simultaneously open.

In particular, from (47.a)-(47.b) we obtain:



                        1                1
                    p           U2   q
(51)     e —
                        2                2
                    p           U1   q
                                                           33




or, using the equilibrium price levels:



                                                                    1
                    1 -z1                     y
                                                  2
                                                      U2        q
(52)     e —
                    I -z2                     y
                                                  1
                                                      U1        q
                                                                    2




Notice that the equilibrium exchange rste level is composed of two

parts. First, a "fundamental" component:




            1 -z 1            y
                                  2
                                              U2
(52.a)
            I -z 2            y
                                  1
                                              U1



which ia the exchange rate that would prevail in the absence of

liquidity effects, i.e. the exchange rate reflecting the law of one

price. Second, a part that would be traditionally defined ma

"non-fundamental" but that is still an equilibrium component in the

framework of this model:




                     1
                1         1               2
            q         z               x
(52.b)     -——
            q         x               z



which is due to the random bond shocks in the asset market.

       It can also be observed that, while arbitrage in the goods market

does not hold instantaneously, it still holds in an "expected" aenae.'2


12 If this were not the case there would be systematic profit opportunities
deriving from arbitrage in the goods market. Then, the assumption that the agen
in the goods market does not access the exchange rate market because it is too
                                           34




In fact, (52) implies that the expected exchange rate is given by the

"fundamental" exchange rate. 13

       The equilibrium exchange rate (52), therefore, can be written in

logs as:




(53)     ln e — s   — k + ln(x2 )   - ln(x1


where k is a constant including the non-stochastic components of the

exchange rate. It then follows that the variance of s is given by:




(54)       Var(s) =   Var[ln(x1)J   +   Var[ln(x2)]


We therefore find for the exchange rate the same excess volatility

result as found by Lucas for the interest rate. In particular, since

output, real allocation, money holdings and prices are constant, the

model would imply that the fundamental value of the exchange rate should

be constant as well. Then, the variance of the exchange rate based on

fundamentals should be equal to zero. Here, instead, stochastic open

market operations lead to interest rate shocks, liquidity effects and

exchange rate volatility in spite of the fact that the fundamental value

of the exchange rate should be constant. In other terms, the excess

volatility of interest rates found by Lucas for a closed economy spills

over in an open economy on the exchange rate.14



costly to do so would be untenable.
13     For simplicity, we disregard Jensen's inequality.
'4We have so far considered the extreme case where a lump sum tax
maintains constant money holdings so that the variance of the price
level is zero; as seen above, in spite of this zero variance of prices,
                                                       35




       We have considered above the case in which x1 and are x2 are

independent. In the general case in which the two random variables are

correlated we would get:



(55) Var(s) —         Var[ln(x1)]         +   Var[ln(x2)]   -   2 Cov(ln(x1), ln(x2))




It is then easy to see that, even in the presence of unexpected

liquidity shocks, the variance of the exchange rate can be reduced to

the variance of its fundamental value (i.e. zero) if the monetary

policies of the two countries are coordinated so that x1 and x2 are

perfectly correlated.

       Finally, one can observe that we obtain a continuous variation of

the real exchange rate (re) measured as:



(56)     ln(re)— s +         ln(p2)       -
                                              ln(p1)


with all the movements being driven by movements in the nominal exchange

rate e. In particular we obtain that:




(59)     Var(ln(re)) —           Var(s)




the variance of the exchange rate is positive and equal to the sum of
the variance of the logarithms of the xis. In general, without the tax,
the variance of the inflation differential is given by:
                 1'         2'
             p          p                         1        2
    Var(—1.—-—--—) =                          Var(x) +Var(x)
             p          p
which is still much smaller than the variance of the exchange rate
(remember that x1 is constrained to be less than one in equilibrium).
                                    36




It can be observed that this result is consistent with the empirical

evidence about the high correlation between nominal and real exchange

rates (e.g. Mussa (1987)). One can also notice that this result is

obtained in a model in which prices are not sticky but are free to

adjust to changes in money supply growth.

     These results depend on the assumption that goods markets and asset

markets (inclusive of the foreign exchange market), while simultaneously

open, are spatially separated. An alternative modeling strategy is

followed by Stockman and Svensson (1987) who assume a sequential order

in the opening and closing of the markets. In particular, goods market

open first and only after they close do the asset markets open. More

importantly, foreign exchange markets are open both during the goods and

assets transactions. In this way, in every period we observe two

different exchange rates, each equilibrating the goods and the asset

market, respectively. Our analysis could be easily reformulated

assuming a similar type of sequential opening of markets. In that case

we would also obtain two exchange rates in each period. The first,

equilibrating the good market, would be equal to the "fundamental

component" (52.a), and the other, equilibrating the asset market, would

equal to the one derived in (52).



6. Conclusions

     The main results of the paper are the following. In models where

there exists some degree of separation between the goods market and the

financial market, the exchange rate is affected by the relative

 liquidity of the two markets. In particular, the equilibrium level of
                                   37




the exchange rate depends on the share of money used for asset

transactions: the greater this share the more appreciated the exchange

rate. Also, the share of money used for bond transactions is positively

related to the rate of bond creation in the the economy. Second,

capital controls in the form of taxes on foreign asset acquisitions tend

to appreciate the exchange rate in the domestic economy because they

reduce the share of foreign money used for asset transactions.

Conversely, a liberalization of capital controls tends to depreciate the

exchange rate. Third, the maturity structure of public debt affects the

equilibrium exchange rate. In particular, a move towards a longer

maturity structure will tend to depreciate the exchange rate by reducing

the share of domestic money used for asset transactions. It then

follows that countries which are simultaneously liberalizing capital

movements and trying to lengthen the maturity structure of their debt

may face a tendency towards a depreciation of their exchange rate.

Fourth, under uncertainty, liquidity effects lead to volatility of

nominal and real exchange rates even when the fundamental value of the

exchange rate is constant. In particular, the liquidity effects on

interest rates of stochastic shocks to bond creation spill over to the

foreign exchange market and lead to excess exchange rate volatility.

Then, only a very tight coordination of the monetary policies of two

countries can assure the stability of the exchange rate in the presence

of these stochastic liquidity effects.
                                   38




                                 Reference



Alesina, A., A. Prati and C. Tabellini (1989) "Debt Panics and Debt
    Management in Italy", mimeo, June 1989.

Giavazzi, F. and A. Giovannini (1986) "The EMS and the Dollar",
    Economic Policy, No.2, 1986.

Giavazzi, F. and A. Giovannini (1989) Limiting Exchange Rate
    Flexibility: The European Monetary System, M.I.T. Press, Cambridge.

Giavazzi, F. and M. Pagano (1985) "Capital Controls and the European
    Monetary System" in Capital Controls and Foreign Exchange
    Legislation, Occasional Paper, Euromobiliare, Milano.

Giavazzi, F. and M. Pagano (1989) "Confidence Crises and Public Debt
    Management", NBER Working Paper No. 2926, April.

Hansson, I. and C. Stuart (1986) "The Fisher Hypothesis and
    International Capital Markets", Journal of Political Economy,
    Vol.94, No.6, 1330-1337.

Helpman, E. (1981) 'An Exploration in the Theory of Exchange-Rate
    Regimes", Journal of Political Economy, Vol.89, no.51, 865-890.

Helpman, E. and A. Razin (1985) "Floating Exchange Rates with Liquidity
    Constraints in Financial Markets", Journal of International
    Economics, Vol.19, 99-117.

Greenwood, J. and K. P. Kimbrough (1987) "An Investigation in the
    Theory of Foreign Exchange Controls", Canadian Journal of
    Economics, Vol.XX, No.2, 271-288.

Lucas, R.E. Jr. (1988) "Liquidity and Interest Rates", mimeo, The
    University of Chicago, September 1988.

Lucas, R.E. Jr. and N. Stokey (1987) "Money and Interest in a
    Cash-in-Advance Economy", Econometrica, 55, 491-514.

Mussa, M., (1987), "Nominal Exchange Rate Regimes and the Behavior of
    Real Exchange Rates: Evidence and Implications" in Karl Brunner and
    Allan Meltzer (eds) Real Business Cycles. Real Exchange Rates and
    Actual Policies. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
    Policy, North Holland.

Stockman, A.C. and A. Hernandez (1988) "Exchange Controls, Capital
    Controls, and International Financial Markets", American Economic
    Review, Vol.78, No.3, 362-374.
                                  39




Stockman, A.C. and L.E.O. Svensson (1987) Capital Flows, Investment,
    and Exchange Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics Vol.19, 171-201.

Svensson, L.E.0, (1988) "Trade in Risky Assets", American Economic
    Review, Vol.78, No.3, 375-394.

Svensson, L.E.0. (1989) "Trade in Nominal Assets: Monetary Policy, and
    Price Level and Exchange Rate Risk", Journal of International
    Economics, Vol.26, No.1-2, 1-28.
