NBER WORXING PAPER SERIES

CONSUMPTION GROWTH PARALLELS INCOME GROWTH:
SOME NEW EVIDENCE

Chris

Carroll

Lawrence H. Summers

Working Paper No. 3090

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1989

The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from the National Science
Foundation. We would also like to thank David Cutler, James Poterba, Greg
Mankiw, Olivier Blanchard, Daniel Feenberg, and the members of the M.I.T.
Public Finance Lunch, Money Lunch, and Money Workshop for constructive
comments. Thanks especially to Knut Morck and Alessandro Missale for generous
help in obtaining data, and to Steve Zeldes for help on the uncertainty theory.
Remaining errors are of course our own. This paper is part of NBER's research
programs in Economic Fluctuations and Financial Markets and Monetary Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3090
September 1989

CONSUMPTION GROWTH PARALLELS INCOME GROWTH:
SOME NEW EVIDENCE

ABSTRACT

This paper argues that the versions of both permanent income and
life—cycle theories which have recently become fashionable are
inconsistent with the grossest features of cross—country and cross-

section data on consumption and income. There is clear evidence tha:
consumption and income gr:wth are much more
predicted by these theories.

closely

linked than wOu be

it appears that consumption smoothing

takes place over periods cf several years not several decades.

These results confirm Milton Friedman's (1957) initial view that:
"The permanent income corrpcnent is not to be regarded as expected
lifetime earnings... It is to be interpreted as the mean income at any

age regarded as permanent by the consumer unit in question, which in
turn depends on its horizon and foresightedness."

They call into

question the usefulness of standard representative Consumer apprcaches

to the analysis of saving behavior. And they call for increased
emphasis on liquidity constraints and short run precautionary saving as
determinants of consumption behavior.

Chris Carroll

MIT
Department of Economics
Cambridge, MA 02139

Lawrence H. Summers
NBER
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 229
Cambridge, MA 02138

Introduction
The idea that consumers allocate their consumption over time so as to
maximize a stable individualistic utility function provides the basis for
almost all modern work on the determinants of consumption and saving

decisions. The celebrated life cycle and permanent income hypotheses
represent not so much alternative theories of consumption as alternative

empirical strategies for fleshing out the same basic idea. While tests of
particular implementations of these theories sometimes lead to statistical
rejections, life cycle/permanent income theories succeed in unifying a wide

range of diverse phenomena. It is probably fair to accept Franco
Modigliani's (1980) characterization that "the Life Cycle Hypothesis has
proved a very fruitful hypothesis, capable of integrating a large variety
of facts concerning individual and aggregate saving behaviour."
This paper argues, however, that both permanent income and to an only
slightly lesser extent life cycle theories as they have come to be
implemented in recent years are inconsistent with the grossest features of
cross—country and cross section data on consumption and income and income

growth. There is clear evidence that consumption and income growth are
much more closely linked than these theories predict. it appears that
consumption smoothing takes place over periods of several years not several
decades.

These results confirm Milton Friedman's (1957) initial view that:
"The permanent income component is not to be regarded as expected

lifetime earnings... it is to be interpreted as the mean income at any
age regarded as permanent by the consumer unit in question, which in
turn depends on its horizon and foresightedness."

They call into

—2—

question the usefulness of standard representative consumer

approaches

to the analysis of saving behavior. And they call for increased
emphasis on liquidity constraints and short run Precautionary saving as
determinants of consumption behavior.

This paper is divided into five sections. Section I presents the
rational expectations version of the Permanent Income Hypothesis which has
been increasingly popular in empirical macroeconomics recently, and draws

out the low frequency implications of this hypothesis. The

principal

implications on which we concentrate are, first, that (absent capital

market imperfections) the anticipated rate of growth of income should be
unrelated to the rate of growth of consumption, and second, that the rate
of interest should be a powerful determinant of the

rate of growth of

consumption. We present evidence which challenges both of these
propositions. We demonstrate that over periods of several years there is
nearly perfect equality between rates of income growth and consumption

growth. These facts hold both across countries and, within countries,
across different eras when productivity increased at different

rates. The

prediction of the permanent income hypothesis that consumption growth and
anticipated income growth are unrelated is clearly refuted.

We next argue

that these facts cannot be explained by imperfections in the international
capital market, since there is no evidence that Countries

with more rapid

consumption growth have higher rates of return on bonds or other assets.
Section ii asks whether recognizing that consumers have finite
lifetimes helps in understanding these stylized facts. This is plausible

a priori. Because the gap in lifetime income between old and new
generations ones is greater in rapidly than in slowly growing countries the

—3—

life cycle hypothesis would predict

that consumption growth should equal
income growth looking across countries
with permanently different

productivity growth rates. We find, however, that
not consistent with the data. Contrary to
individual consumers in rapidly

the life cycle story is

the predictions of the theory,

growing countries like Japan have had more

rapid consumption growth rates than consumers in the United States where

income growth is slower. Indeed, where

life cycle theory predicts that

longitudinal age-consumption profiles should be similar in countries with
different growth rates, the fact is much more nearly that point-in—time
cross sectional age consumption profiles

are similar across countries.

The close international linkages between
income growth could arise either because

countries both to defer consumption and

consumption growth and

some common factor causes some
to grow rapidly or because

individual consumers display more sensitivity to current income than theory

suggests they should. In Section iii we seek

to distinguish these

alternative views by looking at the relationship between income growth and
consumption growth for consumers in different

occupations and educational

categories. Using data from several American Consumer Expenditure
Surveys, we discover that there is considerable
profile of income across categories,

and that the lifetime profiles of

consumption track the profiles of income
Section iv uses information on

variation in the lifetime

very closely.

saving rates to confirm the inference

drawn in the previous sections

that consumers are not responsive to changes
in their long run future income.
First, we show that there is no tendency

for countries that experience

reductions in their expected growth rate to

experience short run increases in

saving as theory would predict. Second,

—4--

we test the pure life cycle theory's prediction that when a country
experiences a sharp productivity slowdown as the United States has in
recent years, there should be a tendency for the relative saving rate of

the young to increase greatly. This prediction is not borne out. Third,
we document that contrary to the theory's prediction there is no tendency
for young people in occupations where income rises rapidly to have lower
saving rates than those in occupations where income rises slowly.
Section V discusses the implications of these results for consumption

theory. We suggest that both our data and the available time series
evidence is consistent with Milton Friedman's view that people save ro
smooth consumption over several years in the face of uncertain income but
because of liquidity constraints, caution or shortsightedness do not seek

to smooth consumption over longer horizons. We follow the recent work of
Deaton (1989) in arguing for a "buffer stock" view of saving as appropriate

for most consumers. This view is supported by tabulations from a
longitudinal data set on tax returns suggesting that about 40% of the
population never earned more than $100 in dividend and interest income over
a six year period, 30% of the population earned more than $100 in every

year, and 30% earned more than $100 in some but not all years. The buffer
stock view of saving is attractive in another respect. If the size of the
stock is proportional to income, then one would expect to observe the close
relation that is actually observed between saving rates and income growth.
We also present evidence, however, that suggests that even if the
consumer may

typical

be accurately described by the buffer stock model, the typical

saver may not be. This discrepancy is possible if the distribution of
saving is more unequal than the distribution of consumption, so that the
great majority of dollars saved are not saved by the typical consumer but

—5—

rather by a small number of very wealthy consumers who have

very high

saving rates. We argue that the apparent importance of the distinction
between the typical consumer and the typical saver

is

large enough to

justify more attention and perhaps to justify different models for the two
groups.

Section VI concludes the paper. We begin by discussing the
destructive implications of the results for representative Consumer
approaches to the study of asset pricing, economic growth and economic

fluctuations. We then suggest some constructive implications of the
results for understanding international differences in saving rates,
takeoffs of economic growth and the effects of tax policies. Finally, we
suggest some directions for future research.

I.

International Evidence on Consumption and Growth
The representative agent infinite horizon consumer model is the

simplest and probably most commonly used model in studies of intertemporal

issues. The Ramsey model (as we will refer to it throughout) provides the
basis for the large body of work on consumption that has emanated from the
seminal analysis of Hall (1978)

.

The increasing popularity of this

framework for analyzing intertemporal income and consumption behavior is
suggested by the large literature surveyed in Campbell and Mankiw (1989)
The focus of the research described there has been on the relationship
between short—run fluctuations in consumption and income and on the nature
of substitution between present and future income.

Here we focus instead

on longer term predictions of the theory.

In the commonly used constant relative risk aversion formulation,

—6—

solution of the model gives rise to the first order condition for a
consumer operating under certainty:

a(r—8)

where

is the elasticity of substitution of consumption, &

consumer's subjective discount rate and r is the interest rate.

(1)

is

the

Under

uncertainty, it will continue to be the case that the interest rate is a

sufficient statistic for predicting consumption growth. In a world with a
well functioning capital market that equates returns on the safe asset in
different countries, the simple model of (1) predicts that consumption
growth rates averaged over long time periods should be equalized around the
world if tastes for present as opposed to future consumption do not vary

across countries.1 It certainly would not imply that consumption growth
rates should bear any particular relation to income growth rates. We shall
now argue that this prediction is obviously and dramatically falsified by
the recent experience of industrialized economies.

We have gathered data on income and consumption for fifteen OECD

countries for the period 1960_l985.2 Our sample includes all the major
Western European economies, Japan, the United States, and Canada as well as
all of the smaller economies for which relatively complete data was

available for the entire period. We study the effects of low frequency
1 We comment below

on the possibility that differences in tastes can explain our

observations.

2 Because of data limitations we do not carefully distinguish durable and nondurable consumption as theory would suggest. Given that durables are a relatively
stable share of consumption in the United States at least, we doubt that this has much
impact on our results.

—7—
variations by looking at differences both across Countries and across

different time periods in individual countries. For these comparisons, the
issues of measurement and time aggregation that have been discussed in the
literature on the time series properties of consumption are not very

important. In order to highlight the strength of the patterns in the data
we present them graphically.

Figures la-id document a stylized fact that any theory of consumption

should account for: At low frequencies there is near perfect equality

between consumption growth rates and income growth rates. When
consumption growth rates are plotted against income growth rates the

result

is almost precisely a 450 line. While Figures la, ib, and ic document this
fact looking across the entire 1960-1985 period and two different subperiods, Figure id compares the change in income growth with the change in

consumption growth between the 1960-73 and 1980—85 periods. We choose
these periods so as to avoid the difficulty of assessing when during the
1970s expectations became entrenched that the productivity slowdown would

last. Again the result is close to a 45 degree line.
While we have used GDP growth in these comparisons rather than the
disposable income measures that would be more appropriate on some views,
this and other measurement issues cannot be important.

it is easy to see

that the consumption growth—income growth regularity has to hold up using

almost any measure. Suppose that over a 25 year period a countrys saving
rate changed by 15 percentage points. This would only alter its
consumption growth rate by .6 percentage points, a rather small difference
compared to the spread of growth experiences illustrated in Figures là and
lb.

In fact, the striking thing about saving rates, whether measured on a

private or a national basis, is their stability through time. Comparing

—8—

the saving rates of the Countries in Our sample before and after 1973, no

country experienced a change of more than 5% in either its private or its

national saving rate.3 This compares with a range of saving rates across
countries of over ten percent.

Returning now to the Ramsey model, Figures la-id appear anomalous in
light of the model's implication that the expected rate of growth of
consumption should be the same across countries, and should be unrelated to

the rate of growth of income, We therefore consider in turn whether income
surprises, imperfect capital markets, or international differences in
tastes can explain the consumption/income parallel within roughly a Ramsey
framework.

Income Growth Surprises

One possible objection to direct tests of the independence
proposition arises from the possibility that differences in income growth

over time were largely unexpected. If the consumer receives information
about present or future income she will adjust her level of consumption
discontinuously to be consistent with her new intertemporal budget

constraint. From this new level the proposition will again apply, but if
we calculate consumption growth between the period before the information
arrived and the period after it arrived we will not observe a growth rate

of (r—8). Moving from the abstract to the concrete, this point would be
important if, for instance, Japan's continued growth over the postwar
period constituted a succession of pleasant surprises which

successively

caused Japanese consumers to adjust consumption upward in accordance
We use both private and national, saving measures in order to avoid

in the Ricardjan equivalence debate.

taking a stand

with

—9-.

their new, surprisingly higher, lifetime income.
A first bit of evidence on the plausibility of this scenario is given

by Figure 2, which plots DRIs projected income growth for our sample of
fifteen countries from 1988 to 2000 against their actual growth rates over

the period 1976-1988. The figure illustrates that there are major
differences in expected rates of growth of income across countries.
Furthermore, expected future income growth is clearly correlated with past

income growth. This suggests that the simplest version of a "surprise"
theory, in which any deviation from the average growth rate is
unanticipated, is very hard to sustain.

Table 1 presents some more formal tests of the idea that the close
international correlation between income growth and consumption growth

reflects the effects of income surprises. We estimate an international
cross section relating consumption growth to measures of expected income

growth formed on the basis of past income growth. Each equation includes
year dummies so the identifying variation comes from variations across

countries in consumption growth and lagged income growth. The results
using measures of income growth over long past periods suggest a nearly
one-to-one relationship between expected income growth and consumption
growth.4'5

The results using only a single lag of income growth are less strong.
Note that this test differs from the popular Hall—style tests by focusing on low—
frequency measures of income growth rates like the geometric average over the previous

five years rather than very high frequency variables iike previous quarters income
growth.

If we believe there is long—term dependence in growth rates then this is an

appropriate variable to use as a proxy for expected current and future growth.
We recogn1e that the previous discussion does .iot fully address the impliCations

of uncertainty, because the model which produces (IJ is a perfect certainty model. e
address the implications of a model which incorporates important uncertainty below.

— 10

—

However, this is accounted for by the fact that lagged income growth over a
long period is a better predictor of contemporaneous income growth than is

lagged income growth over a short time period. When past income growth is
used as an instrument for expected income growth all specifications suggest
a very strong relationship between consumption growth and income growth.
Imperfect Capital Markets and Different Interest Races

Consider a set of independent closed economies with different rates

of exogenous productivity growth. Then theory predicts that each would
converge to a steady state with consumption growth equal to income growth.
The first order condition (1) would be satisfied in each country because of
differences across countries in the steady state real rate of interest.

More rapidly growing countries would have higher real interest rates. It
is possible therefore that the close correlation between consumption growth
and income growth is a consequence of imperfections in the international

capital market. In this case, one would expect to observe a close
relationship between consumption growth rates and rates of return.

Figures 3a—d illustrate, however, that there is essentially no
evidence looking across countries that differences in consumption growth
rates across countries are explained by differences in real interest rates

or other proxies for ex ante returns. This point may be seen most easily
by comparing the United States and Japan. It is almost inconceivable that
a plausible measure could be found on which ex-ante returns were higher in

Japan than in the United States in recent years. This evidence is
reinforced by Figure 3e which asks whether changes in consumption growth
rates in different countries between the pre-1973 period and the post-1980

period are predicted by changes in real interest rates. Perhaps
surprisingly the countries with the greatest declines in consumption growth

— 11

rates

—

had the smallest declines in real interest rates.
The point that differences in average returns across countries cannot

account for differences in consumption growth can be made another way. The
range of consumption growth rates in our sample of countries is 3.4

percent. Most estimates of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution
put it at below .25. Even taking the high rate of .25, and assuming that
differences in consumption growth rates were perfectly explained by
differences in rates of return, the range of rates of return would have to

be 13.6 percent. Persistent differences in safe rates of return of this
magnitude over a 25 year period are implausible on even strong views about
world capital immobility.

In an influential paper Mehra and Prescott (1985) have raised
questions about the ability of the representative consumer model to account

for the risk premium between debt and equity. This problem is deepened by
the apparent absence of correlation between safe interest rates and

consumption growth rates across countries. It appears that any successful
attempt to rationalize differences in consumption growth rates across
countries with fairly similar interest rates would involve postulating a
high interternporal elasticity of substitution. This deepens the difficulty
of accounting for the equity risk premium.
Variation in Tastes

One potential channel for reconciling the Ramsey formulation with

these facts is to assert that discount rates 3 differ across countries. If
the production technology is of the "Ak" variety discussed by Barro (1989)
differences in 3 would also be associated with differences in steady state

growth rates. The same would be true in endogenous growth models relying

— 12 —

on increasing returns of the type developed by Paul Romer (1986) and
others. Even if there were diminishing returns, one would expect that low
5 countries would grow more rapidly while in transition to their steady
states (assuming countries started with equal, below steady state capital
intensity)

We are skeptical that differences in growth across countries arid

across time primarily reflect taste differences. It seems very implausible
to suppose that the primary reasons for the worldwide slowdowns in economic
growth rates between the 1960—73 and 1980-87 periods was a taste shock

reflecting increased impatience. Yet, since the growth rate of consumption
in (1) depends only on tastes and the interest rate, a simultaneous
worldwide increase in impatience would be necessary to account for the
simultaneous slowing of consumption and income growth.
Even returning to the cross—country consumption growth-income growth

relation, the "tastes" theory has a problem. If differences in tastes were
a dominant explanation for differences in growth rates there should be a
strong tendency for low S (fast growing) countries to lend to high S (slow

growing) countries. As Table 1 makes clear, this tendency is not apparent
in the data. No matter how the data are disaggregated by time there is
apparently little or no correlation between trade balances and growth
rates.

Note finally that unless an extremely high value of a is selected,
enormous differences across countries in subjective rates of discount are
needed to account for the wide range of observed consumption growth rates.
Conclusion
We conclude that there do not appear to be plausible ways of squaring

— 13 —

the independence proposition with our facts. While some
story involving
both variations in r and in

could be used to account for differences in

consumption growth across countries, the problem of explaining why they are
so nearly equal to differences in income growth would remain.

II. The Life Cycle and the COn3umption/Ineome Parallel
As a matter of logic, the life cycle hypothesis is

consistent with

both the stylized fact that consumption and income growth rates are equated
across a sample of countries and the fact that saving and growth rates are

positively correlated. To see this think of a very simple life cycle model
where individuals seek level consumption over their lifetimes.
individuals would have level consumption over their lifetimes

Even though
regardless of

their income growth rates, it will nonetheless be true that in steady state
total consumption will grow at the same rate as total income.

This is

because the gap in lifetime income between old and young generations is
greater in rapidly than in slowly growing countries.

Consider the modern life cycle hypothesiss explanation of the
equality between consumption and income growth rates across countries with

different growth rates. The essence of the theory (assuming common tastes
worldwide and the irrelevance of rate of return differences) is that the
rate of growth of consumption for all individuals is the same in all

countries. (Implicitly we are assuming rational expectations rather than
the myopic expectations assumed by Modiglianj in some early statements of

the life—cycle hypothesis.) Countries differ in their consumption growth
rates only because of the differential effect of the continuous replacement
of old, lifetime poor individuals by young, lifetime rich ones.
This argument has two essentially equivalent testable implications.

— 14 —

First,

tracking the Consumption of a given cohort, say those who were 25 in

1950, one should find no difference across countries in the rate of growth

of consumption. Second, at a point in time the age—consumption cross—
section profile should be less positively sloped in a rapidly growing

country than in a slowly growing country. This is because in more rapidly
growing countries the old are much lifetime-poorer than the young so
consumption of the old will be much lower relative to consumption of the

young. This point is illustrated graphically in Figure 4a. This figure
supposes that each individual desires a rate of growth of consumption over
his lifetime of 2% annually, and demonstrates what the age/consumption
cross—section profile should look like in steady state across countries
with different growth rates, normalizing the consumption of all individuals
by the consumption of individuals at age twenty.

Compound interest produces dramatic results here. The ratio of the
consumption of the 65 year olds to the consumption of 25 year olds should
be more than twice as great in countries growing at a four percent rate as

in countries growing at a two percent rate. Given the large differences in
growth rates illustrated in Section I, if the life cycle hypothesis is even
approximately accurate some tendency for consumption of the elderly to be
relatively low in rapidly growing countries ought to show up in the
international comparisons.

In order to test this proposition, we have obtained cross-sectional
point—in—time consumer expenditure profiles by age for Canada, Denmark,

Japan, Norway, the United Kingdom, and the United States.6 Sources and
methods are described in the data appendix. Our estimates of the age6

See the data appendix for details on data sources and methods.

— 15

—

consumption profiles are provided in Figure 4b. We have carried the
profiles only up to age 65 because of concern that measures of the
consumption of the aged are distorted in some countries by the tendency of
the poorer elderly to move in with their children.
The results are at odds with life cycle hypothesis, since the

profiles look quite similar across countries. The similarity of these
profiles means that there is no evidence that old people in the slowgrowing countries have relatively higher consumption than those in the

fast—growing countries. To take a specific example, the profile is more
positively sloped in Japan than in the United States, exactly the opposite
of what the theory would predict given Japan's much more rapid growth rate.
Norway, which has also grown relatively rapidly, also has relatively higher

consumption among the aged than the United States. Deaton (1989) using a
sample of LDC's age—consumption profiles reaches conclusions similar to
those reached here.

This comparison is very crude. But it is instructive to observe how
large the differences in age-consumption profiles predicted by the theory

would be. Over the 25 year period 1960-1985 per capita GNP in Japan grew
at 5.2 percent as compared with 2.1 percent in the United States.

Suppose

that we take the Japanese steady state growth rate to be 4.0 percent and
the US steady state growth rate to be 2.5 percent. Then the lifetime
income of 30 year olds in Japan should be 3.94 times the lifetime income of
65 year olds, compare. with a ratio of 2.37 in the United States.

This is

a difference equal to more than 150% of the income of the average 65 year
old.

It is large enough that one would expect it to show up even in Our

crude measures of age consumption profiles.7
Given the large differences in

lifetime

incooe between cohorts it is also

— 16 —

What about the experience of individual cohorts? The longitudinal
evidence that we would like to have to answer this question is not

available. However, evidence discussed by Kotlikoff and Summers (1981) for
the United States and by Ando and Kennickell (1987) for Japan suggests that
the shape of age—expenditure profiles is quite stable through time.
Figures 5a and 5b for these two countries confirm that between the dates

for which we have specific data the profiles have been fairly stable. If
we make the stability assumption for all the countries in our sample it is
possible to trace the consumption of individual cohorts by using data on

aggregate consumption and the age structure of the population. If
indicates the relative consumption of people in age group

Pi. indicates

the number of people in this age group ir year t, and Yt is total real

personal consumption in year t, then we calculate a scaling factor s from
the equation:

(2)

5t cipit
Using the scaling factor

we calculate real consumption of people

of age group i in year t, cr1t, from cr cst. The results are shown in
Figure 6. Not surprisingly given our results so far, this technique
indicates that individuals in fast-growing countries like Japan have
enjoyed much more rapid growth in consumption than individuals in slower-

growing countries like the United States. How much more rapid? Given that
the cross-section profiles are very similar across the whole range of
countries in Figure 4b, it follows that none of the difference in
surprising under the life cycle theory that the consumption of 30 year olds is not
much greater than the consumption of 65 year olds in both countries.

— 17 —

aggregate consumption growth rates across countries can be explained by
life-cycle replacement effects.
Conclusions

While there are obviously many measurement problems here, the data
suggest that demographic replacement of the low-consuming aged by the
high-consuming young cannot account for the correlation between income

growth and consumption growth across countries. If this were the
explanation for the correlation there would be large differences across
countries in the ratio of the consumption of the old to the consumption of

the young. These are not observed.
These results call into question the life—cycle hypothesis's

interpretation of the positive correlation between saving and growth. The
life—cycle explanation as described, for example, by Modigliani (1967)

relies on differences in the ratio of lifetime income among the old and the
young to account for the positive relation between saving and income

growth. It is not consistent with the observation that individuals in
rapidly growing countries enjoy more rapid consumption growth over their
lifetimes than individuals in slowly growing countries.

III. Tests Using Individual Data
Section I demonstrated that consumption growth has been very closely
related to income growth across both countries and time and argued that

this was not consistent with the standard Ramsey model. Section II argued
that the consumption/income parallel could not be explained by life-cycle

considerations. This leaves two classes of explanations for the apparent
international association of consumption growth and income growth. A first

— 18 —

possibility

is that because consumers are myopic or liquidity constrained

or operate on the basis of rules of thumb, consumption and income are

strongly associated. A second possibility is that some common cause of
both rapid income growth and rapid consumption growth operates across
countries.

In an effort to distinguish these possibilities, this section uses
information on income growth and consumption growth for individuals in
different occupations and with different educational backgrounds.
Liquidity constraints, myopia, or the like would be expected to create an
association between age-consumption and age-income profiles across

different occupations. On the other hand theories of growth that might
apply at the international level would not imply that individual age-income
and age-consumption profiles should move together.

Anecdotal evidence about sports stars and medical students suggests
that consumption is closely tied to current income, but for a more formal
test we turned to the Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Expenditure

Surveys of 1960-61 and 1972—73. These studies, originally done for the
purpose of calculating consumer price indices, contain detailed expenditure
and income accounts for a large representative sample of households (13,000
in 1960, 20,000 in 1972), and so are an ideal source for comparing income

and consumption of households at different ages. For our income measure we
took the total after-tax income of the household, We experimented with
several definitions of consumption and expenditures, ranging from total
expenditures of the household (including payments for social security and

prearranged pension plans) to just consumption of nondurable goods. The
consumption measure below does not include payments for social security,

— 19 —

private

pensions, or home mortgages, but does include gifts and

contributions to private charities and to other households, as well as
insurance premia.

Figures 7a,b and 8a,b present mean income and consumption profiles
for the nine occupational groups and the five educational levels that could

usefully be distinguished with the CES.8 The data's suggestion that
saving for almost all groups increased between the first and second survey
is almost certainly a consequence of changes in measurement procedure.
What is more interesting is the figures' apparent refutation of the simple
life cycle/permanent income view that the shape of the path of income

should not have an effect on the shape of the consumption path. In life
cycle terms, these graphs indicate that people in occupational or
educational groups with income peaks late in life do not borrow
significantly against those future earnings in order to finance higher

consumption when they are young. Conversely, people with income peaks
relatively early in life do not appear to save much in anticipation of

lower future income. These observations appear inconsistent with life
cycle theory.

It is possible to imagine some combinations of circumstances which
can explain some of the apparent correlation above while remaining roughly

within a life cycle framework. For instance, suppose that each cohort in a
category consumes its permanent income and that the differences in income
8

The unused occupational groups were retired people. nonresponses. and

unused

others. The

educational group was "none, nonresponse, or other". The figures grouped by

occupation are in

order

of increasing variance, so more credibility shoulO be ascrbeo

to inferences drawn from figures near the top of the page than those near the bottom.
The difference in variance across educational groups was substantially less (the
groups are closer in size) so the figures grouped by education are ordered by
increasing educational level.

— 20

—

across categories and age groups are the result of idiosyncratic shocks to
cohorts. Then we would observe the pattern that the income and consumption
of households of any given age within a category would be closely related,

as we see in the figures. This explanation works, however, essentially by
denying any element of predictability in income profiles. But at least
across educational categories there is a very strong resemblance of the
age/income profiles in the 1972—3 CES to those in the 1960-1 CES -

surely

a

strong refutation of the "no predictability' hypothesis. And informally,
we surely believe that people with college and postgraduate educations can
expect higher wage growth over their lifetimes than those with only grade
school educations, so that there is surely some degree of predictability.
Although the degree of similarity of 1960 and 1973 income profiles is
smaller across occupations than across educational categories, it is still
the case that several occupations, particularly professionals, managers,
operatives, and unskilled workers, have quite similar, and thus presumably
predictable, profiles in the different years.

The calculations here do not take account of changes in family

composition. By calculating consumption on an equivalence scale basis it
is possible to create consumption profiles that do not follow estimated

income profiles. But it is not clear what this proves, since total
consumption spending does follow income. More relevant is the observation
that there do not appear to be large differences in average family sizes at

different ages among different educational and occupational groups. While
the issue deserves further research, our tentative conclusion is that
parallel movements in income and consumption cannot be explained by family
size considerations.

— 21 —

Another explanation of the consumption/income parallel was provided
by Ghez (1969)

Using the 1960 CES, Ghez prepared a figure for all

consumers similar to our Figures 7 and 8 for subcategories of consumers and
sought to explain the observed close correlation between income and
consumption using a "family production function" model of the type
advocated by Becker (1965) .

Suppose, for example, that utility is a

function both of consumption c and hours of leisure h. Suppose further
that, because of the accumulation of experience or other human capital.

hourly wages grow over the life cycle. Then individuals will have an
incentive to work the longest hours when they are most productive, late in

life. But this extra work takes away leisure time, giving the consumer an
incentive to consume more time—substituting goods. The consumer will
therefore be observed consuming more during those periods of life when he

works most and earns the most income. To be more specific, this model
would suggest that busy executives late in life would be more likely to
have a maid to do housekeeping chores and more likely to send out their
laundry than young people with (presumably) more time on their hands.

The Ghez model seems unlikely to be a satisfactory explanation for
the close consumption/income parallel observed in Figures 7 and 8 for

several reasons. First, it is not even obvious that consumption and hours
are substitutes rather than complements. With more leisure time one can
engage in expensive activities, such as foreign travel, that may

not

be

possible at all at in busier periods of life. Ghez himself makes the point
that if time is very valuable one may eat more fast food (presumably
inexpensive) and fewer elaborate meals out (presumably expensive)

Further, even if we accept that consumption and hours are substitutes, the
Ghez model only makes predictions about the sign of the relationship

— 22 —

between income and consumption, not about its size. There is no reason in
his model to expect that the relationship between income and consumption

will be one-for-one as we observe. Finally, the Ghez explanation relies
heavily on the assumption that hours and income move exactly in parallel.
Figure 9, which is reproduced from a book by Becker and Ghez (1975), plots
hours worked and hourly earnings at each age across the life cycle for two

educational groups using 1960 census data. It is apparent that there is
very little variability in hours worked over the lifetime in either group.
Furthermore, hours seem to decline after roughly age 35, while income and

consumption both peak in the CES data roughly at age 50. Finally, there is
no clear difference across the two educational groups in the age profile of
hours worked in spite of a noticeable difference in the profile of wages.
we conclude that consumption/hours substitution is not a viable explanation
for the consumption/income parallel.
Conclusion

This

evidence on individuals suggests to us that explaining why

consumers should allow their consumption to be heavily influenced by
current income is a more plausible route to explaining the international
correlations with which we began the paper than is seeking an endogenous
growth theory that could explain both high consumption and high income

growth. It is also noteworthy that the behavior of these profiles suggests
that the excess association of income and consumption is stronger at the
low frequencies considered here than it is in the higher frequency contexts
that have been more extensively studied.

— 23 —

IV.

Saving and Expected Income Growth
The analysis so far has suggested that both internationally and

across countries consumption and income growth are much more closely

associated than standard theories would predict. A different way of
stating the same point is to observe that saving decisions appear to be
less responsive to expected long term growth rates of income than simple

theories would predict. In this section we examine the response of saving
to differences in expected income growth using several different types of
data.

The worldwide productivity slowdown after 1973 provides one natural
test of the proposition that a decline in growth should lead to reduced

human wealth and increased saving. As Figure 10 demonstrates, the life
cycle hypothesis predicts that a two percentage point decline in expected
income growth should have dramatic effects on saving, particularly for

young consumers. Young consumers targeting even a three percent annual
consumption growth rate are predicted to raise their saving ratio out of

income by 20 percent. For the population as a whole the saving rate should
increase by about 10 percent since the human wealth effect is less
important for older consumers.

As Figures lla-d demonstrate, these predictions are not borne out.
Saving rates around the world did not rise following the productivity

slowdown. If anything they have fallen. Moreover, there is no tendency
for the countries which have suffered the greatest declines in growth to
have had greater than normal increases in saving.
This failure of the theory might be due to other shocks which have

changed saving behavior. A further test using information derived from the

— 24

productivity

—

slowdown focuses on its effects on consumers in different age

groups. A decline in growth reduces expected future income by much more
for young consumers than for older ones, and not at all for those who have

retired. Whatever happened to overall saving, one would expect to observe
a tendency for the relative saving rate of the young to rise following the

productivity slowdown if consumers were farsighted. This tendency should
have been reinforced by declining fertility. It is borne out only to a
very slight extent in Figure 12.

(Again, because of changes in measurement

procedures, nothing can be inferred from the position of these profiles,

only their shape.) This finding is perhaps not so surprising given that
the shape of the age-saving rate profiles in Figure 12 are not really
consistent with the predictions of the life—cycle theory in the first
place.

Information on the shape of occupational income profiles can also be

used to test the life-cycle theory. It predicts a tendency for those in
occupations where income can be expected to rise rapidly to save less than

those in occupations where income can be expected to rise slowly. The
profiles from Figures 7 and 8 can be used to calculate a ratio of future
income to current income for young people in different occupational groups
and the results can then be compared with observed saving rates.
Figures 13a and 13b plot, for each occupation in 1960, the ratio
(future income/current income) against the saving rate of young people in
that occupation, where "future income" is defined as the sum of income for

people age 30—65 and "current income" is the sum of income for people age
25—29, and "young" refers to people in the age group 25-29. The slope of
these lines should be strongly negative because high-future-income

— 25 —

occupations should be low-saving occupations. Instead, the slope seems to
be positive. This evidence is also consistent with the view that
consumption is excessively sensitive to current income, though this cannot
explain the positive association in the data.
Overall information on saving supports the conclusion reached in
earlier sections that consumption is much more closely tied to current
income than strong forms of the life-cycle or permanent income hypotheses

would predict. While reassuring, this evidence is of course not
independent of the earlier evidence on the behavior of measured
consumption.

V.

Liquidity Constraints, Myopia, and Uncertainty
One obvious interpretation of the close link between consumption

growth and income growth is that consumers are liquidity constrained or

myopic. This would "explain" why consumption and income growth are so
closely associated. The principal difficulty with this line of thought is
that in order to account for the observed equality of consumption and
income growth rates one would have to assume that essentially all consumers
were liquidity constrained or myopic.
To see this consider the formulation of Hall (1978) in which the

population is divided into two classes. A fraction a of the population
consumes all its income and no more each year because of liquidity

constraints and/or myopia. The remaining fraction (1—a) behave according
to the first order condition in (1) .

Assuming that the optimizing non-

liquidity—constrained latter group enjoys consumption growth at the same
rate in every country at the rate (c*/c*), the growth rate of consumption
will be given by:

— 26

c/c

—

(3)

a(y/y) + (1—U) (c*/c*)

In order to account for the unit slope observed in Figure

necessary to postulate that U=l

so that

1 it is

the entire population is liquidity

constrained. This assumption robs the permanent income theory of any

content. In addition, it leaves unanswered the unquestion of where savings
come from. Of course it is also contradicted by all of the evidence
supporting the permanent income hypothesis. The challenge is finding a
theory that can account for the apparent absence of pervasive liquidity
constraints or myopia in high frequency tests but can still account for our
low frequency facts.

However, the possibility that most consumers act as if they were
liquidity constrained or expected to be in the future should not be ruled

out. Studies such as Campbell and Mankiw (1989) which seek to estimate the
fraction of rule—of-thumb or liquidity constrained consumers by applying
time—series techniques are likely to understate it for three reasons.
First,

the specification

adopted assumes a restrictive form of liquidity

constrained behavior. It would be more difficult to demonstrate
conclusively the existence of an economically significant set of permanent
income consumers if the myopes were assumed to follow a rule in which

consumption responded to income and its lags. Second, the assumption that
liquidity constrained consumers spend a fixed fraction of their income on
non—durable consumption rules out the possibility that these consumers cut

durable spending disproportionately when income declines. If this is in
fact the case, standard methods will understate the liquidity constrained

— 27 —

fraction

of the population. Third, most recent research effort has focused

on the post—war period where income is close to a random walk. DeLong and
Sunmer5 (1986) present evidence that in the pre—War period when income
fluctuations were more transitory the fraction of liquidity constrained
consumers was greater.

In spite of the considerable evidence that liquidity constraints are

important,the assertion that people spend their incomes is not a rich
enough theory of saving. We are attracted by Angus Deaton's (1989) view of
savings as a "buffer stock" for contingencies. As he argues, situations
where consumers are liquidity constrained and where they are unwilling to
borrow because of the possibility that this would force their subsequent
consumption to decline sharply in the event of bad news are likely to be

operationally very similar. The buffer stock view has the appeal of
predicting (or at least labelling) the consumption smoothing which goes on
at high frequency but not implying that consumption smoothing should go on

over long horizons. It also has the potential to explain the observed
correlation between saving and growth. If consumers desire (as financial
planners recommend) a buffer stock equal to a certain number of months'

income, saving will be greater for consumers with rapidly growing incomes

than for those with slowly growing incomes. Essentially, the accelerator
mechanism will create a positive growth—saving relationship.
Table 3 presents some empirical evidence drawn from panel data on tax

returns for the period 1979-1984 which supports the buffer stock idea. For
persons under and over 65, it presents estimates of the fraction of people,
fraction of labor income, fraction of total income, and fraction of
interest and dividend income going to persons with less than $100 in

— 28

interest

—

and dividend income in various numbers of years. The results

suggest that liquidity constraints are potentially very important.

More

than half of total income went to persons who usually (three years or more
out of six) had less than $100 of interest and dividend income.
Furthermore, the fraction of total interest and dividend income received by
those who do not always have such income is quite small.

This suggests

that even in years when such people have over $100 of interest and dividend

income they do not have very large amounts of such income. Interestingly,
whatever weights are used it appears that about a third of households have
minimal interest and dividend income in some but riot all years. This is

what one expects on the buffer stock view. It suggests that "snapshot"
evidence estimating the fraction of the population without assets is likely
to underestimate the potential significance of borrowing constraints.
The view that borrowing constraints are important for a large
fraction of consumers is also supported by the observation that a large
majority of American households report that they have substantial amounts

of consumer debt. The interest rate on this debt is typically considerably
greater than the rate on safe assets like treasury bills. Simultaneously
borrowing at high rates and holding safe assets is difficult to square with

the Ramsey model view of consumption decisions. As Julio Rotemberg and
others have argued, it is rational for a consumer who believes he may be

liquidity constrained in the future. Such a consumer would also tend to
allow his consumption to closely follow his income.

It is also important to recall that typical consumers and typical

savers may behave very differently. This point is illustrated by Table 4.
The conceptual unit in this table is the typical dollar of income rather

than the typical taxpayer. If the distribution of property income is very

— 29

—

income to
unequal we should expect the median or mean dollar of property

accrue to a person with a very large amount of such income. This is

exactly what the table shows. Although the median dollar amount of
interest and dividend income was $185, the median dollar of such income

went to someone with property income of $16,100. Furthermore, although the
mean amount of interest and dividend income was $2755, the mean dollar went
to a taxpayer earning $46,533 of property income.

(See appendix for

details)

The numbers become even more striking when we use assumed rates of
return to convert statements about capital income into statements about
liquid assets (see appendix for details) .

When we do this we discover that

the median dollar of (estimated) assets is held by a person holding
$212,415, and that the mean dollar is held by a person with nearly a

million dollars of liquid assets. The general picture of extreme
inequality in the distribution of wealth painted by these numbers is borne
out by an analysis of some evidence from the Federal Reserve's Survey of
Consumer Finances in a recent paper by Avery and Kennickell (1988) .

The

SCF allows a direct calculation of net saving via a comparison of families'

net worth in 1983 and 1986. In Table 12 the authors estimate the fraction
of aggregate positive saving between 1983 and 1986 that was done by the

members of each 1983 wealth decile. They estimate that nearly 70 percent
of all the positive saving between 1983 and 1986 was done by families in

the top 1983 wealth decile. Using crude smoothing techniques (see
appendix), we calculated that the median dollar of saving was done by a
family roughly at the 94th percentile in the wealth distribution.

Smoothing again, we estimated that a person at the 94th percentile in the

— 30

—

1983 wealth distribution had $661,000 (1988 $) of net wealth. This
compares with an estimated median 1983 net wealth of $46,800 (1988 5) .

Again it would appear that wealth and saving are extremely unequally
distributed.

Taken together, this evidence along with Tables 3 and 4 suggest that

there are two kinds of consumers. The great majority of consumers are
liquidity constrained and have only small amounts of liquid assets, which

they keep as a buffer against uncertainty. A small minority of consumers,
however, have very substantial assets and are not liquidity constrained.
These wealthy consumers are the source of most of the net dollars saved in
the economy.
Conclusion

The broad picture painted above suggests that focusing separately on
two different models, one for the liquidity constrained majority of
consumers who save little outside of housing equity and one for the small
but wealthy minority who seem to do most of the saving, will yield more
empirical success than continuing to work with a single model postulating

identical unconstrained consumers. These are not new ideas: in arguing for
a typically short horizon, Milton Friedman (1957) observed "..The
appropriate definition of the permanent component [of income] is a period

of three years or slightly longer. This is the same as the conclusion
reached earlier from [different] data on urban families. It is also
consistent with the time series data. It is encouraging to find such a
close agreement in the precise definition of permanent components suggested

by three independent bodies of data." And the idea that accumulation is
Note that these wealth estimates include housing equity, which accounts for the
discrepancy between the estimated median wealth here and in Table 4.

— 31

chiefly
VI

—

an activity of the already wealthy goes back at least to Pareto.

Conc1usiOfl
Recent studies of consumption behavior have tested increasingly

subtle implications of the life cycle/permanent income hypothesis using
increasingly sophisticated time series techniques with increasingly

ambiguous results. Many existing estimates suggest that at least a large
fraction and possibly all of consumption is done by optimizing non-myopic

non-liquidity constrained consumers maximizing individualistic utility
functions with long or infinite horizons. We believe this conclusion is

not correct. It seems to us that the wide variety of evidence presented
here is much more robust to the possibility of measurement or specification
error than the numerous complex econometric tests that have been performed.
We regard our evidence as decisively refuting the low frequency predictions
of standard intertemporal theories.

As we emphasized in the introduction, the evidence here is generally
consistent with the life-cycle and permanent income hypotheses as they were

originally advanced. Indeed, Milton Friedman explicitly rejected the idea
that consumers had horizons as long as a lifetime in discussing the

permanent income hypothesis. And Modigliani relied on myopic expectations
in some early development of his theory. What is decisively rejected here
is the modern representative consumer versions of these theories, not the
core idea that people seek to smooth consumption.

While the evidence here does not undercut the usefulness of the lifecycle and permanent income theories in explaining some broad features of
consumption behavior, it does cast serious doubt on modern uses of these

— 32

theories

—

which take the idea of a representative forward looking consumer

very seriously. The absence

of any relation between rates of return on a

variety of assets and consumption growth rates across countries makes us
skeptical of the use of consumption information in explaining risk premia

on different capital assets. The absence of any clear tendency for
consumption to respond to expectations of future

income growth leads us to

doubt that models which assume consumers optimize over long or infinite
horizons will give very good predictions about

the effects of various tax

changes. And we suspect that those concerned with modelling the
determinants of income growth should build in a different consumption
function than the one suggested by the Ramsey model.
that a major claim of real business cycle theorists
the basis of non-cyclical phenomena.

Finally, we note
is that their models on

It does not appear that the

representative consumer approach used in most real business cycle models is
consistent with low frequency evidence.

We argued in Section V that Deaton's notion of the saving of the
typical consumer as a buffer stock to smooth consuuptiofl over short

horizons and to prepare for temporary sharp declines in

income was

consistent with both the evidence usually cited in favor of life-cycle
permanent income theories and our low frequency evidence. We argued
further, however, that although the buffer stock model may describe the
typical consumer well, it may not accurately describe the

typical saver

because saving and wealth are extremely unequally distributed.

Further

research is needed to determine how the behavior of the typical consumer
differs from the behavior of the typical saver.

Even though it may not apply to all consumers, we are attracted to

— 33 —

the buffer stock model for several reasons.

It provides a natural

explanation for the correlation between saving and income growth both

across countries and across occupational groups. If consumers desire to
hold a cash reserve equal to a certain number of months of income, they
will have higher saving rates the more rapid is their income growth.
This notion raises a number of interesting possibilities for the

growth process. If, as recent studies have argued, steady growth rates are
increasing functions of saving rates, and if as we have just suggested
saving rates are positive functions of growth rates, there is a clear

possibility of multiple equilibria. This idea might be relevant to the
experience of nations like Taiwan and Korea where actual and expected
growth rates have increased sharply and at the same time that saving rates
have soared.

The buffer stock model, if correct, also has implications for certain

tax policy issues. In the United States there has been considerable
controversy about the efficacy of IRAs and other savings vehicles. Critics
allege that individuals transfer money from one account to another to

realize tax benefits without doing any incremental saving. To the extent
that, because of its illiquidity, IRA saving is not a substitute for buffer
stock saving, it may be incremental even for households which have liquid
assets.

Our future research in this area will proceed in two directions.
First we need to refine our knowledge about the behavioral differences

between the typical consumer and the typical saver. Second, we will try to
develop models that can explain the differences between typical consumers
and typical savers, and models that are consistent both with the high
frequency evidence that some consumption smoothing exists and the low

— 34 —

frequency evidence that consumption growth tracks income growth.

Although

a single unified model may be desirable as an eventual goal, it may turn
out to be more fruitful in the meantime to pursue separate models to
explain the consumption/income parallel and the consumption/saving

divergence. We hope that this multifaceted approach will eventually
succeed both in explaining international differences

in saving rates and in

making predictions about the response of saving to policy changes.

— 35 —

Appendix: Data Sources and Methods

This

appendix describes the sources and methods used to prepare the

We proceed roughly in the order in

data charts and tables of the paper.
which the data appear.
OECD Data on Income, Consumption,

and Interest Rates

OECD data come from the DPi 3OECDNIA,

Data for most countries for most
Product is given by the series

series begin in 1960. GrosS Domestic

VAGDPA, personal consumption is given by

AGPCR. We derived the ci deflator

AGPC, real personal consumption by
and hence inflation rates by

@IMF and €OECDMEI databases.

dividing AGPC/AGPCR (for some reason the

direct data on deflatorS is less

complete than this indirect source)

Population figures come from the @IMF database, series 199z.

balance data were taken from the

Trade

tIMF database series 177ac&d or the

nearest existing equivalent. The

fifteen countries which appear in most

West
of the figures are: the u.s., the U.K., Austria, Belgium, France,

Germany, Italy, Norway,

switzerland, Canada, Japan, Finland, Greece,

Australia, and Sweden.

For short run interest rates we

generally used the rate of return on

three month T-BillS, except in Italy
month T-bjllS (with a few missing

where the only series was for six

observations which we filled from

other interest rate series), and France

and Germany where we used call

before the
money rates because there was no three month T-bill data
David
early eighties. The other rate of return data are courtesy
Cutler, who calculated them from the Morgan Stanley Capital
International Perspective.

— 36 —

International

Cross-Section Data on Income and Consumption

Gathering the data for Figure 4b sent us far and wide. For Japan we
used the profiles given in Ando and Kennickell, p. 194, specifically the

data on mean CONSM in the working families. For Canada we used data
taken from the Statistics Canada publication Family Expenditure in
Canada, kindly provided to us by Harry Champion of Statistics Canada
prior to publication. For 'Iorway we used unpublished data from

government consumer surveys, graciously provided by Knut Morck. For
Denmark we used data from the Statistisk Arbog 1988 (Statistical

Yearbook), p. 171. Data for Great Britain were taken from Browning,
Deaton, and Irish (1985), p. 5O3.

To generate Figure 6 we used the above—described cross-section ageconsumption data from all our countries, cohort population data from the
U.N. publication Global Estimates and Projections of Population by Sex
and Age,and real personal consumption data from the DRI OECD databases

mentioned above, We imputed family consumption by age of head of
household by assuming that that the relative magnitudes of consumption
of typical families at different ages did not change over time (see
equation 2 and the description of the calculations in the text)
U.S. Cross—Section Data on Income and Consumption

All the micro data for the U.S. presented in figures 5a, 7, 8, and 12
were calculated from the Consumer Expenditure Survey tapes of the BLS

for the 1960—61, the 1972—73, and the 1985 and 1986 surveys. These
surveys attempt to construct a complete balance sheet for the households
surveyed over a one year period, including information on changes in
assets and liabilities which should balance the difference between

— 37 —

definitions of variables have
income and consumption. Fortunately the
not changed much between the surveys so we are able to calculate income
and consumption measures that should correspond over time. The 1960
survey, however, differed from

the later surveys in at least two

respects. First, each household was interviewed only once, at the end
of the survey year, and asked to

recall income and expenditures for the

preceding year. In the later surveys each household was interviewed
quarterly for five quarters in a row and asked about consumption over

the preceding three months. Second, in the 1960 survey the interviewers
made a greater effort tO ensure that the family balance sheets actuaiiy
balanced, $0 that if income exceeded consumption by $1000 the
interviewer tried to make sure that net assets rose by $1000. There was

less emphasis on such balance in the later surveys.
The figures result from straightforward

calculations from the 1960-1,

1972-3, and 1985 Consumer Expenditure Survey tapes.
income measure was disposable income

In all years our

after tax, calculated in the

earlier surveys by subtracting all taxes

from the total income variable;

disposable income exists directly in the 19805 tapes so was not

calculated. As our measure of consumption we took the variable called
"current consumption expenditures" in the
added insurance premia and cash
same

variable

1960 and 1972 surveys and

ontrjbutiOflS/gift5. To construct the

from the 19805 surveys we took the "total expenditures"

variable and subtracted contributions to pensions

retirement funds, and

social security. The 1972-3 survey presented a particular problem
because income numbers below $2000 or above $35000 were not reported.
By comparing means of our tape sample with means in the BLSs printed

— 38 —

summaries of the 1972—3 CES, however, we were able to calculate the
average income of the bottomcoded individuals as $973.18 and the average

income of the topcoded consumers as $54,942. The disposable income
figures were $897.14 and $44,057 respectively. For consumers whose
income was top or bottom-coded we assumed that their income was equal to

the average income of their group. A final adjustment to the 1972 and
1985 samples was necessary because a small fraction of the people did
not provide complete information about income; these were excluded from
the sample altogether.

The basic patterns presented here were robust to the few reasonable
variations in calculation technique we could think of, which consisted
of excluding people from

the

sample for various plausible reasons and of

considering different definitions of consumption and income (e.g.
nondurables consumption, pre-tax income, wage income, etc) .

Detailed

charts for 1985 analogous to those from 1960—1 and 1972—3 were not

presented for two reasons. First, the 1985 data seemed to have much
higher variability. This is partly due to a smaller sample size (about
half as large) and partly (we think) due to a new processing methodology

devised by the BLS. Second, the occupational group classifications in
the 1980s—series CES's are much less detailed, and occupations within

each group seem less similar, than is the case with the 1960—61 and
1972—73 surveys.

Liquidity

Constraints Tax Panel Data

The liquidity constraints tax panel is a random sample (based on
primary taxpayer's Social Security number) of tax returns. It includes
single and joint returns, but women drop from the sample when they marry

and return when they divorce or widow. The sample was maintained for

— 39

—

1979 to 1984. Of the total set of tax returns in the data set, there

were

5997 taxpayers with positive adjusted

gross income in all six

years. This is the sample we used in preparing Tables 3 and 4. The
calculations for the tables were performed by Daniel Feenberg of the
N.B.E.R.

The procedure

for estimating liquid assets from capital income was

simple. To estimate the market value of the stock portfolio we took
dividend income and divided by the dividend/price ratio on the stock

market as a whole for the appropriate year. To estimate the dollar
value of interest-bearing assets we divided by the average interest rate

on interest—bearing assets and cash. The latter was estimated by taking
total personal interest earnings from the NIPA and dividing by the sum
of cash and interest—bearing assets taken from the Federal Reserve

Board's Balance Sheets for the U.S. Economy. The latter figure yields
interest rates in the 8-10% range, probably much higher than the actual
interest rate on the typical dollar of interest—bearing assets and cash.
Overestimating the interest rate should cause us to underestimate
associated wealth, however, so whatever error exists here biases our
results against finding the extreme inequality in wealth that we do in

fact find. A more better interest rate measur should only intensify our
findings about inequality.

The rates used in these calculations are given below. The
dividend/price ratios were taken from the Dow Jones-Irwin Business and
Investment Almanac,

1986.

— 40

Dividend
Year

Price
Ratio

1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984

5.47
5.26
5.20
5.81
4.40
4.64

—

Average
Interest
Rate

7.8

84
9.4
9.3
8.8

8.9

A brief word about the interpretation of the numbers in Table 3 is in

order. Consider, for example, the part of the table concerning AGI for
everyone excluding the elderly. We claim that the median AGI weighted
by AGI is $38,537. What this means is that if we were to sort all
taxpayers by AGI and then to find the taxpayer such that the sum of the

AGIs of the taxpayers with less AGI than his equals the sum of the
AGI's of the taxpayers with more AGI than his, that taxpayer has an AGI

of $38,537. This is what we mean when we say that the median dollar of
AGI goes to a taxpayer with AGI $38,537. The meaning of the mean dollar
of AGI weighted by is less intuitive, but can be understood by analogy

with calculation of mean tax rates. Suppose we knew income and total
taxes paid by a set of individuals, and we wanted to calculate the

average tax rate on all the dollars of income in the group. Simply
taking the average of the tax rates across individuals would be
inappropriate because the tax rate on individuals with high incomes
clearly has more influence on the tax rate on the average dollar of

income than the rate on low-income individuals. The appropriate
procedure is to take a weighted mean of all the tax rates, where the

weights are given by the incomes of the individuals. By analogy, the

— 41 —

appropriate

procedure to find the typical"

dollar

of income in the mean

sense is to take a weighted mean of income where the weights are also
given by income.

Wealth Calculations from Avery and Kennickell

Avery and Kennickell present tables drawn from the 1983 and 1986
Federal Reserve Survey of Consumer Finances, which is virtually the only
reinterview wealth survey containing a large number of high income

families. This survey allows a direct calculation of net saving via a

comparison of each familys net worth in 1983 and 1986. In Table 12 the
authors estimate the fraction of aggregate positive saving between 1983 and
1986 that was done by the members of each 1983 wealth decile. We used this
table to generate a crude approximation to the distribution function for
saving by wealth decile.

The technique was as follows. The graph of saving by wealth decile
appeared to be close to exponential, so we assumed that the function
log(saving) =

f(1983 wealth decile) was exactly linear. Using two points,

the saving of the first decile and the saving of the

last decile, we

calculated the slope and the intercept for the line passing through those

two points. This technique should substantially underestimate the
inequality of the wealth distribution because research (as well as the
simple graph of log saving against wealth decile) suggests

that wealth is

even more unequally distributed in the upper income brackets than the log

assumption suggests. Since the results indicate a high degree of
inequality in spite of this bias we are confident that our figures do not
overstate the degree of inequality.

Given a continuous function for the distribution of saving as a
function of wealth it is a simple matter of numerical integration

to find

— 42 —

the point at which saving below that point equals saving above the point.
This is the point that defines the amount of saving done by what we call iLi

the text the "median" saver. The procedure described above was repeated
using Avery and Kennickell's Table 10 to produce a distribution of wealth
by wealth decile and the resulting function was used to calculate the
estimated wealth of someone at the 94th percentile in the wealth
distribution, the point that the previous function identified as being
associated with the median saver.

References
Ando, A. and Modigliani, F., "The Life Cycle Hypthesis of Saving:
Aggregate Implications and Tests", American Economic Review, Vol.

53, May 1963, pp. 55—84, and Vol. 54, Part I, March 1964, pp. 111—
113.

Ando, A. and Kennickell, Arthur B.

"How Much (or Little) Life Cycle Is

There in Micro Data? The Cases of the United States and Japan," jr,
Macroeconomics and Finance: Essays in Honor of Franco Modigliani.
MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 1986.

Avery, Robert B. and Arthur B. Kennickell, "Savings and Wealth: Evidence

from the 1986 Survey of Consumer Finances," paper presented at the
50th Anniversary Conference on Research in Income and Wealth of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Forthcoming in a conference
volume from the N.B.E.R.

Barro, Robert. "A Cross-Country Study of Growth, Saving, and
Government," in this conference.
Becker, Gary, "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," Economic Journal,
vol. 73, no. 5, pp. 493—517, September 1965.

Browning, Martin, Angus Deaton, and Margaret Irish. "A profitable
Approach to Labor Supply and Commodity Demands Over the Life Cycle."
Econometrica, Vol. 53, No. 3, May 1985.
Campbell, John Y. & Mankiw, N. G. (1989) "Consumption, Income, and
Interest Rates: Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence" N.B.E.R.
Working Paper No. 2924, March 1989.

Deaton, Angus (1989) . "Saving in Developing Countries: Theory and
Review." Paper prepared for the First Annual World Bank Conference
on Economic Growth.

DeLong, J. Bradford and Lawrence H. Summers (1986), "Is Increased Price
Flexibility Stabilizing?" in American Economic Review Vol. 76, No.

5. December 1986, pp. 1031—1044.

Friedman, Milton. A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton
University Press, 1957. Princeton, N.J.
Ghez, Gilbert (1975), "Education, the Price of Time, and Life—Cycle
Consumption," in F. Thomas Juster, Education. Income, and Human

Behavior.

Published by the Maple Press for the Carnegie Foundation

for the Advancement of Teaching and the National Bureau of Economic

Research. pp. 295-312.
__________ and Gary S. Becker. The Allocation of Time and Goods Over
the Life Cycle. University of Chicago and National Bureau of
Economic Research. 1975.
Hall, Robert E.

"Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle—Permanent

Income Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence" Journal of Political
Economy, December 1978.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Lawrence H. Summers, "The Role of
Intergenerational Transfers in Aggregate Capital Accumulation" in
Journal of Political Economy, 1981, vol. 89 no. 4.
Levine,

Sumner N. The Dow Jones—Irwin

Business and Investment Almanac,

1i.
Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward Prescott (1985) .

"The Equity Premium: A

Puzzle." Journal of Monetary Economics 15, 1 (January 1985), pp.
145—161.

Modigliani, Franco. "The

Life

Cycle Hypothesis of Saving and

Intercountry Differences in the Saving Ratio" in Essays in Honor of
Sir Roy Harrod, 1967.

_______ "The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving Twenty Years Later,"
in The

Collected

Papers of Franco Modigliani. Volume 2. The Life

Cycle Hypothesis of Saving, ed. Andrew Abel. MIT Press, Cambridge
MA, 1980.

"Life Cycle, Individual Thrift, and the Wealth of

Nations," American Economic Review, Vol 76, NO. 3 (June 1986), p.
297.

Morgan Stanley, Capital International Perspective, various issues.
Romer, Paul. "Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth," Journal of
Political Economy, 94, October 1986, 1002—1037.
Statistics Canada, Family Expenditure in Canada. Statistics Canada
catalog 62—555, 1989.

United Nations, Department of International Economic and Social

Affairs. Global Estimates and Projections of Population by Sex and

Age. The 1984 Assessment. New York: 1987.

/

</ref_section>

Table 1
Regressions of Consumption Growth on Income Growth

Coefficient
on Income

Income
Growth

Growth

fStd Err

Measure

Coefficient on
Lagged Income

Growth

{Std Err)

{.0374}

0.601

0.253
(0.048)

Past 3 years

0.725
(0.22)

(0.388)

Past 5 years

0.964
(0.194)

0.97
(0.237)

Current

Income (OLS)

Past 10 years

1.000

(0.524)

1.101

1.14
(0.595)

These equations were run over using the 15 countries described in the text.
Data for 1960—1985 were used, and dussnies for each year (not reported)
were included in all regressions.

Equation 1 runs current consumption growth on current income growth
Equation 2 forms an expectation of current income growth using
the average income growth over the past three years
Equations 3 and 4 form expectations using previous five year
and previous ten year growth rates
Column 1 gives the coefficient when the RHS variable is
as just described
Column 2 gives the coefficient using a one year lag
of the variable just described

Table 2: The Relationship Between Trade Balances and Growth Rates
Cross-Country
Correlation
between
Trade Balance
and Growth

Sample Data

1961—1985 Averages of Growth and Balance

0.051

1961—1973 Averages of Growth and Balance
1974—1985 Averages of Growth and Balance

0.213
0.045

1961-1965
1966—1970
1971—1975
1976—1980
1981—1985

0.113
0.265

Averages
Averages
Averages
Averages
Averages

of
of
of
of
of

Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth

and
and
and
and
and

Balance
Balance
Balance
Balance
Balance

—0.116
—0.327
0.222

Source: DRI @IMF database for trade balance
DRI @OECDNIA database for real GDF Growth

Table 3: The tncidence of Liquidity Constraints

Total Population
Number of
Years with
< $100 in
Interest and
Dividend Income

Fraction of the
Population
falling in
this cateqory

Fraction of
total labor
income that

Fraction of
total incom,
that goes to

Fraction of
total capital
incom, that
goes to people
people who fall goes to people
in this category in this category in this category

0

27.6

37.3

41.4

90.4

1

6.5

8.0

7.7

4.5

2

5.5

6.0

5.7

2.0

3

5.9

7.0

6.5

1.6

4

6.9

7.0

6.6

0.9

5

8.8

8.3

7.6

0.5

6

38.7

26.7

24.5

0.2

?opuiation
Number of
Years with
< $100 in
Interest and
Dividend Income

Fraction of the
Population
falling in
this category

Fraction of
total labor
income that

Fraction of
total income
that goes to

Fraction of
total capital
income that
goes to people
people who fall goes to people
in this category in this category in this category

0

35.2

39.7

47.4

92.8

1

6.2

7.8

7.1

2.8

2

5.2

6.0

5.3

1.7

3

5.3

6.3

5.8

1.0

4

6.1

6.7

5.9

0.7

5

7.8

7.9

6.7

0.4

6

34.2

25.6

21.8

0.3

Source: Calculations by Daniel Feenberg of the National Bureau of Economic Research
See Appendix for more detailed discussion of calculations

Table 4: Sources of Dividend and Interest Income

Population Excluding Elderly

Whole Populatioi

Interest and Dividend Income

Interest and Dividend Income

Weighted by
AGI

Taxpayers

mt & Div Income
Estimated Assets

9344
2755
46533
43840

544

185
16100

AGI
Taxpayers

Mean

Median.

62910
30069

38537
45728

AGI
Taxpayers

mt & Div Income
Estimated Assets

mt & Div Income
Estimated Assets

Median.

AGI
Taxpayers

63279
30481
150050
148073

38773
25468
56695
53676

mt & Div Income

Mean

Median

45327
27616
45110
44750

35248
23439
25960
26920

137393
28282
1032177
995144

6735
2183
224299
212415

Wage Income
Mean

Median

42940
25212
28198
27701

32923
20995
6051
6361

Weighted by
AGI

Taxpayers

mt & Div Income
Estimated Assets

Estimated Assets

Estimated Assets

AGI
Taxpayers

Weighted by

Estimated Assets

99797

Wage Income
Weighted by

I1ean

Adjusted Gross Income

mt & Div Income
Estimated Assets

113
12657
11457

mt & Div Income
Estimated Assets

Adjusted Gross Income

Weighted by

364

7878
1600
62515
58401

AGI
Taxpayers

162342
48914
778317
753831

9966
3588
287375

AGI
Taxpayers
Int & Div Income
Assets

Source: Calculations by Daniel Feenberg of the N.B.E.R.
See Appendix for more detailed description
All figures in 1988 dollars

vs.

Figure lb
GNP Growth Rates vs.
Consumption Growth Rate.,
Per Capita, 1960—1973

Figure is
GNP Growth Rates
Consumption Growth Rates,
Per Capita, 1960—1985

S.0%
7

".'i'z1'.

7.0%

C a.oi

0
07

5.0%

C 4.0%
0

n
$

G •°

G

r

0
w

t :::
h

II1*III7I

r
0
w
t
h

w

0.0%

4.0% 5.0% 6.0%
GNP Growth

'..O% 2.0% 3.0%

7EtTr i..--!

:::

0.2%

7.0% 4.0%

0.0%

1.C% 2.0% 3.0% 4.0%

5.0%

6.3% 7.2% 4.0%

GNP Growth

Figure Id
Change in Per Capita GNP Growth Rates
vs. Change in Consumption Growth
Comparing Period 60—73 to 81—85

Figure it
GNP Growth Rates vs.
Consumption Growth Rates,
Per Capita, 1980—1985

7.0%

C

C
0

0
07

3

G 4 .0%
r

0 3...
V

t

Fn

as 5.0% -:-

5....

2....

Is

—
—

—

.—

i 0
n w
t
h

—

-.—
• —

0.0% 1.0% 2.0% 3.0% 4.0% 5.0% 6.0% 7.0% 4.0%
GNP Growth

::::

- - --2

..
——

G • .V•
r

'V

0.0%

1
1

i..

— —
,

.?j.. .ii.- ....

:I:,..4' r

0.0% 1.0% 2.0% 3.0% 4.0% 5.0% 4.0% 1.0% 4.0%
Fall in GNP Growth

Figure 2
Per CapitC Irtcone Growth
projected 1988—2000 vs.
Actual 1976—1988
5.00%
4.50%

4.00%

r 9 3.50%
8 3.00%

j8

e— 2.50%

c 2 2.0O%ö_
to
e

0

1.50%

d 0 1.00%
o . 50%

0.00%
0.00%

I

I

I

1.00%

2.00%

3.00%

Actual Growth 1976-1988

Figire 3b
Consumption Growth
vs. Stock Market
Earnings Price Ratio

Figure 3a
Consumption Growth Rates
Per Capita vs. Short Run
Real Interest Rate,, 1960—85

4.0%

S. 0%

G

Rr
ao
tw
et

C
0

to 4.0%
S
U

m 3.00

hp
0

to

t
2.0%

t 0

—+—-—,—,—

-• .
+.—

Rrn
aos
t wu
•tm

.

—

—

C

Go

——

._..

hp
o

t

fol
to

n

n
• 0%

0.0%
—2.0%

—In

0.0%

1.0%

Short

2.0%

3.0%

0.0%

4.0%

2.0%

Figure 3c
Growth Rates vs.
Average 2Ividend Yield. 1960—85

—

Go
Rrn

4.0%

a Os

—...—.-—----—_

.

tot

—— —

12.0%

C

Go
P r to 4.0%

aos

t wu
e t m 3.0%

3. 0%

.

3.0%

to

hp

t

.

0
f o i 2.0%

to

to

n

1.0%

0.0% —
2.0%

00.0%

0.0%

t wu

etc
hp
o t

0.0%

Figure 3d
Consurption Per Capita
Growth Rates vs.
Average Peal Returns, 1962—85

Ccnsurnpt ion Per CapIta

0.0%

4.0%

Market
Farroings Price Patio

irterest Rates

C

4.0%

Stock

Ruro Peal

— — —j.—

3.0%

4.0%

3.0%

4.0%

Average Dividend Yield
oro

Stocks

—

7.0%

1.0%

I .0%

0.0%

—4.00 —2.0%

0.0%

2.0%

4.0%

4.0%

Average Real Return
on Stocks

4.0%

10.0%

Figure 3.
Change in Per Capita Consumption Crowt
vi. Change in Real Interest Rates
Comparing Period 60—73 to 80-85

C
0
F n
a S
1
1

5%

4%

r

io

3%

t

2%

nw
h

1%

0%

1%

2%

Fall

3%

4%

5%

6%

in SR Real Interest
Rates

7%

5%

Figure 4a

Predicted C By Age In Steady State in the LC Model
Across Countries With Different Rates of Growth of Income
Growth

Rate
200

of

Income

180

160

0. 5%

140

1.0%

120
2.0%

100

''

•'•— 3.0%

80
60

4.0%

5.0%

40
20
0
20

25

30

35
Age

40

45

50

55

60

of Household Head

Figure 4b

for

Age/Consumption Cross—Section Data
the JS, Canada, Japan, Britain, Denmark, and Norway

200
180
160
140

0 Japan

120

U Canada

100

D Britain

80

Denmark

60

A Norway

40

20
0

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

Figure 5a
Age Consumption Profiles for the U.S.
1960, 1973, and 1985

1.80
1.60
1.40

0.40

0.20
0.00
25—29

I

I

I

35—39

30—34

Age

50—54
40—44
45—49
of Head of Household

— 1960

— 1973

55—59

60—64

1985

Figure 5b
Age Consumption Profiles for Japan
in 1974 and 1979

1.80

..—...
........,.

...w.

0.80
0.60
0.40
0.20

0.00

I

I

I

I

21—25 26—30 31—35 36—40 41—45 46—50 51—55 56—60 61—65 66—70 71—75

Age

of

Head of Household

* 1979 Survey

1974 Survey

Figure 6
Consumption at Each Age for a Family Whose
Head was Age 55 in 1985

1800
1600

c

— Japan

1400

0
n 1200

Canada

S

u

Norway

1000

m

Britain

P 800

— us

t
600

0

Denmark
400

200
0

20 2224 2628 3032 34363840 42 44 46 4850 5254
Age of Head of Household

Source: See text and Data
Appendix

Rgur. 7a:
1960 CES ncomICanstaTIptbn Prohies by Education
10

SO. 004d $oho0

F101.h.d 0300 School

1050 804oot

3.00

2.

2.00

75

0.

1.75

1.

3.90

25

1.30

031
20—20

20—34 35—30 40—44 45—44 50—34 55—51 00-41

20—20 30—34 35—10 40—44 40-41 50-54 55-51 40—4

So. ColL.q.

I'1

25-14 30-24 35-30 42-44 45—44 50-34 35—50 00—

tinhiflod Colh.0.

2.00

0.79
1.50
0.25

0.00

0.33
25—24 30—34 35—30 40—44 45—11 50—94 55—54 40—44

S.. the Data A.ndix for d.taaa on Usi conatiulon o( Figures 7 and 8.
The darloer

ns dlspoaab4s income and the gift ne consumption.

20—20 30—34 35—34 40-44 49—44 50-54 S5—S 00—44

Figur. 7b:
1960 CES Inccm.Con.umpden Proliles by Occ*4atIon

Prot...LonaI

Op.rativ..

Craftoaln

7.73

1.31

1.00

1.50

7.21

1.00

•

0.71

0 75
25—25 30—34 31—30 40—14 45—40 30—54 IS—SI 44—44

i

a

21—20 34—14 31—30 40—44 41—40 50—54 11—10 00—44

25—20 30—34 31—21 40—44 45—40 50—14 11—10 (4—4

C1.ric.1

Manaq.r

Uo.k111.d

1.35

1.50

0.75
25—21 30—34 35—30 40—44 45—40 50—34 51—11 40—44

I

I

I

25—21 30—54 33—30 40—44 45—40 50—54 55—10 40—44

25—20 30—34 51—50 40—44 41—40 10—54 51—10 40—4

S.rvtc.

S.1t —0.ploy.d

1.32

1.71

1.35

1.50

1.50

1.50

1.35

1.25

1.25

1.00

3.75
21—30 30—34 31—30 40—44 43-40 50—94 so-si 40—44

:: _____________________
35—20 30—34 55-30 40-44 41-40 50-14 11—50 40-44

25—20 30—34 35—30 40—44 45-lI 10—14 55—50

-'

FIQu. $.:
1q72 CES rmWCo4.umpIiOfl Pro1is by Edubs
10 S04 140o.L

1

t0I.02.d 410 Ld.04J.

•0q8 4h..L

1.

1.

1.

1.
0. iS
20—20 30—34 30—34 40—41 45—10 50—51 33—04 40—44

23—20 30—21 23-54 40—44 IS-lI SO—SI 55-00 40-44

24—24 30—34 30—14 10-44 43-44 50-31 54-04 40-44

! C1q4

F12•34d COI.q.

2S—2$ 10—34 35—34 10—44 10—40 00—SI 35—SI 00—41

20—35 30—34 30-35 10—44 41—44 00—04 Si—SI 40—4,1

1.
1.2

Figurs 8b:

1972 CES k WConarç ion Prcss by Occn
Cp.r.ttv.s

Craft Ian

Prot.i.lonal

I.

.1.

0.50

1.21

1_is

0.0*

21—20 30—34 fl—SO 40—44 45—40 50—04 SI—lI (4—44

21—30 30—34 35—31 40—44 45—40 SO—SI IS—Il 40-41

UnIlitUod

1.rlcal

21-20 30—24 31—3 40—44 I S—Il SO-Il 55—10 (0-

I. Ti

5,

IO

21-20 34—34 33—30 40—44 45—43 53—54 53—31 10—44

25—20 30—34 33—30 40—44 45—40 50—14 15—50 (0—44

S.rvtc.

Sal..

21-20 20-34 33-21 40—44 45—40 50—34

55—10 (0-'

3.1 f—OInplOyOd

I 35

1_SO

i SO

1.20

1.00

0_fl
05—2* 10—34 35—10 40—44 45—40 50—54 51—51 (0-44

20-20 30—34 35—31 40—44 43—41 50—14 55—50 (0-44

21—11 30—34

35—30 40-44 40-40 10—Il SI-SI (0—I

6

IS

I
20
25

I

•5
S.
S.

I

30

SOURCE:

XX

I

35

I

40

I

50
55

60

I

65

Becker and Chez (1975), pp. 86—87.

45
Age

XXX

70

XXX

...••......••S••••..••S•.....S.. 5.
Hourly earningS

Averogehoursperyear

XX

xXK5x55*x55*15xXx X

P

P — peak in hours or earnings.

X

X
X

XXX

XX

Figure 9a

8r

14

16

-

20 -

22

,.
75

2

3

x

X

I
30

35

I

40

- Desk In hours or earnings.
Figure 9b

P

25

Xx

45
Ag.

I

50

55

60

I

I

S

P
S

5

I

3

2

75

-

••

••4

X5

Dollars

70

X%

X
X

65

Hourly earnings

XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
XXXX

p
x*Averogehoursper year

S
S
S

20

X

X
X

S.
•S

X

—

15

6

8

10

12

14

20

22—

Hundred hours

(five-year moving average)
Dollars

(five-year moving average)

Hundred hOurs
24

HOURLY EARNINGS AND AVERAGE HOURS PEN YEAR. TOTAl. UNITED STATES.
ALL EMPLOYED WHITE MEN. HIGH SCHOOL LEVEL

HOURLY EARNINGS AND AVERAGE HouRs PER YEAR. TOTAL UNITED STATES.
Au. EMPLOYED WHITE MEN, GRADE ScHool. LEVEL

Figure 10
Change in Saving as a Fraction of Income
If the Expected Growth Rate of Income
Changes From 3% to 1% Per Capita Per Year,
Calculated for Lifetime Consumption Growth Rates
Ranging from -1% to 3%

C
h

70%

aa

60%

ns
g

•a
jF

0
f

50%

I 40%

rn
a c 30%

Sco
a m 20%

vie
£0

fl
g

10%
0%

1 3 5 7 9 1113151719212325272931333537394143454749515355
Years into Life Cycle

— ——1%

—

0%

— — 1%

— — 2%

—

3%

Figure lib
National Saving Rate. B.fc. 1973
vs. National Saving Rates After :73

Figure lie
Privat. Saving Rate. Before 1973
vs. Private Saving Rate. After 1973

AA

AA

vf
gt

vf
gt

S

Sr

C

Sr

a

a

vi
i9
n7

vi
j9
n7
g3

g3

25.0%

25.0%

20.0%

15.0%

10.0%

5.0%

0.0%

Average Saving
Before 1973

Average Saving
Before 1973

Figure lid
Fall In National Saving Rate,
vs. Fall In Growth Rates
(Average 1980—85 minus Average 1960-7:

Figure ilc
Fall In Private Saving Rates
vs. Fall In Growth Rates
(Average 1980—85 minus Average 1960—73)

5.0

—
— — — .— — — —

4....

..

S

a

Fv
ci
ln
lq

IR

2.....

1..,.
.0%

— .0

ma

—2._ -

t

—.0%•

e

— '

.

S
a

Fv
ai
in
lg

—

IR
na
t

—4_n%. —

——

,

e

1.0%

2.0% 3.0% 4.0%

7.0%

——

6.0%

---—-

10%

•—-••—--

2....

Fall in Avg Annual Growth
in Per Capita GOP

7.0%

:————

—p-.——,—

—*—

'_
......_.

0.0%

1.0%

2.0%

—

i
—

.—...—.

i 'ii: :ii

1:: :

—

___•__

0._

5.0% 6.0%

——-—

:::
1....

—5.... -——.—.— .—.
0.0%

——'

.0%

3.0%

4.0% 5.0%

.

6.C%

Fall in Avg Annual Growth
in Per Capita GOP

7.0%

Figure 12
Saving Rates By Age in
1960, 1972, and 1985

1972—73

20%

1985—96
15%

10%

5%

0%

25—29

30—34

35—39

40—44

Age

45—49

50—54

of Household Head

55—59

60—64

65—70

Figure 13*
Young Fanu.lies' Saving as a Fraction of Income
Versus Future Income Stream. in Their Occupation
1960 CSS
S
a
V

15%

•t4anaqers

13%

n A
9%

a

f2 5%

F5 3
a3 1%
m
1

•

0

—3

1

•UnSkilled

i
e
S

•craftsmen

9
8.5
Incomes of Families

7.5

8

9.5

10

10.5

Age 30-65
Divided By Current Income of Families
Age 25-30

Figure 13b
Young Families' Saving as a Fraction of Income
Versus Future Income Streams in Their Occupation
1972—73 CES

S
*

20%

•Manager

i

•Professional

Craftsmen
A 15%

g9
0

10%

F

5

t!ves•Chj'
•Unskilled

• Sales

a3
m
0%

I

I

•Service

1
i

8

8.5

10.5
10
9.5
Incomes of Families Age 30-65
Divided By Current Income of Families
Age 25-30
9

11

11.5

