                           NBER WORXING PAPER SERIES




            DECENTRALIZED INVESTMENT BANKING: THE CASE OF DISCOUNT
                 DIVIDEND -REINVESTMENT AND STOCK- PURCHASE PLANS




                                Myron S. Scholes
                                 Mark A. Wolfson




                             Working Paper No. 3093




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 1989




We have benefitted from discussions with Jeremy Bulow, Paul Healy, Michael
Jensen, Robert Kaplan1 Robert Mnookin, Krishna Palepu, Andre Perold, Richard
Ruback, and an anonymous referee. This paper is part of NEER's research
program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #3093
                                                     September 1989


               DECENTRALIZED INVESTMENT BANKING: THE CASE OF DISCOUNT
                    DIVIDEND-REINVESTMENT AND STOCK-PURCHASE PLANS


                                               ABSTRACT
      Discount dividend-reinvestment and stock-purchase plans allow shareholders to capture part

of the underwriting fees incurred in new stock offerings and save sponsoring finns some of theusual

underwriting   costs. We tested the degree to which individual investors can profitably serve this

investment banking (unction by implementing simple investment/trading strategies designed to

capture the discounts and distribute the shares in the market. The large profits earned by our
strategies raise serious questions about why it takes firms so long to raise the target level of capital

and why many eligible shareholders do not participate in these discount plans.




     Myron S. Scholes                               Mark A. Wolfson
     Stanford Business       School                 Stanford Business School
     Hoover Institution                             Hoover Institution
     Stanford University                            Stanford University
     Stanford, CA 94305                             Stanford, CA 94305
                                                   —1—

1. Introduction

       The. idea that in an efficient market investors cannot profit from publicly available

information is taught in nearly all introductory finance courses. Despite supporting evidence,

however, several papers present empirical anomalies. For example, French (1980) and Gibbons and

Hess (1981) demonstrate that returns are significantly lower on Mondays than on other days. By

implication, investors who plan to alter their stock positions should sell on Friday and buy at the

close of Mondays trading. ICeim (1983) finds that investments in small stocks yield abnormally

positive returns during the first week in January. By implication, investors could profit if they buy

shares of small stocks just before the first of the year.



       These and other documented anomalies weaken the case for the efficient market. (See also

the "Symposium on Some Anomalous Empirical Evidence Regarding Market Efficiency," 1978.) On

the other hand, none of these papers test whether investors can actually profit from these
anomalies. We add to the list of anomalies but with a twist. We document not only an apparent

profit opportunity but also the results from investing our own money.



       Our investment strategy was simple. We discovered that many companies offered

stockholders the right to buy additional shares at a discount, typically of 5.263% (or 5/95) from

extant market prices. To qualify to buy this discount stock, one had only to hold at least one share of

company stock in certificate form and sign up to participate in the discount stock-purchase program.

The next step was to mail in a check for stock periodically. The company then issued, free of

commissions, discount shares that could be sold in the market within a few weeks. With an

investment of $200,000 we realized a profIt of $421,000 (consisting of $163,800 of net discount income

(the sum of all gross discounts less transaction costs), $182,600 of return on investment due to a general

increase in stock prices, and $74400 of abnormal return on investment beyond the net discount income).
                                                  —2—

This profit is net of brokerage fees, hedging losses, and other transactions costs. Ninety percent of

our activity occurred over less than two years.



      For example, a J. P. Morgan shareholder could buy up to $5,000 of J. P. Morgan stock each month

at a 5263% discount. If the shareholder could immediately sell this stock at no cost, a sure profit of

$263.16 would result on each transaction. We would have preferred J. P. Morgans sending us a check

for $263.16 each month to our having to mail in the check, buy shares, and then sell them at a later

date. In fact, if we could have avoided the transaction costs incurred in undertaking these tasks, we

would have been satisfied to receive somewhat less. If investment is undertaken once a month at a

discount of 5.263%, the compound annual return exceeds 85% of the monthly investment amount.



      Although it is a useful teaching device, the efficient markets hypothesis may leave students

with the false impression that innovations go unrewarded. In fact, successful innovation holds the

possibility of producing both generous financial reward for the individual and significant

improvement in social welfare. In contemplating the transaction costs and the possible impact of the

discount stock-purchase programs on stock prices, we considered it quite possible that the profit

opportunities were more apparent than real. Although our back-of-the-envelope calculations

indicated that participation in the programs would be profitable, we thought transaction costs,

other unanticipated costs, and participation by other traders might well make abnormal returns

impossible. By running our experinwnt with actual trades, we were able to provide direct evidence of

our ability to innovate arid earn abnormal returns in the market.



      That we did profit handsomely suggests that the market Is not as efficient as the textbook

model suggests. Moreover, many of the programs existed for several years before we began our

experiment, and program sponsors routinely informed shareholders of record of the opportunities to

invest at a discount. Eventually, many companies eliminated the discounts on their programs as we

were joined by other arbitrageurs who helped the firm raise substantial capital. We view our
                                                —3—

profits as compensation for the provision of investment banking services to corporations offering

discount stock-purchase programs, which delegate the underwriting process to shareholders. In
retrospect. we were paid too muck We and others might have provided the same services for a much

tower discount. We do not know whether sponsoring corporations could have achieved the same

results at tower cost using an underwriter or whether we earned abnonnal profits because other

investors did not join us soon enough. Had mole investors participated, corporate sponsors probably

would have reduced their discounts sooner, reducing our profit and, as a mutt, reducing the costs to

other shareholders of raising capital.



      Over time, many corporations realized they could raise substantial amounts with this

decentralized investment banking concept. BankAmerica, for example, reduced its discount four

times in less than two years and allowed shareholders to invest much more than $5,000 per month.

As a result, it raised over $350 million over this period at discounts well below 4%.



      The use of discount stock purchase plans, and the closely related practice of allowing

shareholders to buy stock at a discount only with reinvested dividends, raises several questions. We

inquire whether these programs are equitable to nonparticipating shareholders and whether they

represent an efficient institutional device for raising capital. We only begin to shed light on the

answers to these questions. In conducting our experiment, we discovered a number of interesting

features of these arrangements.



      In section 2, we describe some features of these discount plans, and in section 3, we lay out

details of the Investment strategies we used to determine the costs of securing the discounts. In

section 4, we compare discount stock-purchase plans with conventional underwritings as means of

raising capital. Concluding remarks appear in section 5.
                                                   —4—

I Characteristics of Discount Programs
      Dividend-reinvestment and stock-purchase plans have been popular, especially among public

utilities, for two decades. We identified 82 companies offering such plans at some point between
1984 and 1988. Cash discount plans are concentrated in banking and financial services, although
public utilities, real estate firms, and a few manufacturers are also represented.



Industry Concentration
      Table I reveals that 74 of the 82 plans we identified were concentrated in three industries:
banking (45), real estate, including real estate investment trusts (15), and public utilities (14). Of our

$3.6 million in investments, $2.6 million was invested in banks, and the rest was split relatively

equally among real estate firms, public utilities, and other firms. Banks' prominence in these
programs may reflect experimentation with an alternative institutional arrangement for raising
capital in the face of regulatory pressure. We explore other motivations in section 4.



Investment Ceilings and Discounts

       All firms discount programs limit the allowable investment. The limits prevent certain
shareholders, such as institutional and corporate investors, from fully exploiting economies of scale

in purchasing shares and reselling them in the secondary market. Moreover, nearly all plans require

that participants possess stock certificates issued in their own name rather than in the name of their

broker as agent. This requirement prevents brokerage houses from offering a service that automates

participation in the discount program on a large scale for their clients.



       Table 2 reports the frequency distribution of maximum investment amounts, discount amounts,

and the period over which investment ceilings apply (quarterly, monthly, or annually) for the 66

plans for which we have data.1 In 57 of the 66 plans, the discount is 5%. Thirteen plans impose

     All of these programs offered shareholders an opportunity to reinvest dividends in shares of the company
at a discount. The purchase limits tabulated in table Z however, apply only to optional cash investments. An
unlimited amount of dividends can be reinvested at a discount in these programs. This is true for all 82 of the
discount cash purchase plans we surveyed and for hundreds of other programs that do not offer discounts on
                                                     —5—

 monthly investment ceilings. 49 impose quarterly limits, and four plans impose annual limits.

 Twenty plans permit investments of $5,000 per quarter per account at a 5% discount. The next most

common arrangements are $3,000 per quarter @ 5% (seven plans), $2,000 per quarter @5% (six plans),

and $5,000 per month @5% (six plans).



         With the exception of BankAmerica (whose plan is discussed separately), the maximum

purchase permitted per account is $120,000 per year. The smallest purchase ceding is $4,000 per

year. Table 3 reports the distribution of annual purchase limits for the 57 firms offering 5%
discounts. Twenty-two (inns fall in the $20,000-$25,000 range, 14 in the $10,000-$20,000range, and 8

in the $50,000-$100,000 range.




         Several plans changed their investment ceiling or discount or both over time. For these finns,

we show in the tables the terms in the earliest discount program prospectus we obtained. For

example, Chesebrough Ponds began with a monthly investment ceiling of $5,000 that it later

dropped to $1,000. CSX changed its limit from $5,000 per quarter to $1,500 per month. First Union's

maximum investment ranged from $500 to $10,000 per quarter. Bank of New England, Bankers Trust,

Icoger Companies, and Koger Properties all initially offered 5% discounts, which they later reduced
to 3%.




optional purchases of additional shares with cash. In 1975, AT&T became the first to offer this kind of program.
ISee Light (1977) for an analysis of the AT&T decision to initiate a discount dividend reinvestment plani The
plans in this latter category typically allow shareholders to purchase additional shares at 100% of fair Sarket
value but free of commissions. We did not buy shares to reinvest dividends at a discount to determine whether
this offered a profit-making opportunity, but It may be worth noting that a stock paying dividends at the annual
rate of 5% and offering the option to reinvest such dividends in additional common shares at a discount 0(5%
offers a bonuc return of only one-quarter of 1 percent of the Investment position carried per yr.
     A number of dividend-reinvestment plans allow holders of securities other than common stock to purchase
common shares at a discount. Preferred shareholders are often allowed this option. Certain debtholders are
also eligible to participate in some plans. Note that a 5% discount applied to the reinvestment of interest on
12% debentures translates into a "bonus" yield of 60 basis points. It might be Interesting to study whether the
yields on such securities are lower than on those of comparable risk but where the interest is 09t eligible for
reinvestment in discounted shares,
                                                     —6—

      BankAmerica represents the extreme case of term changes. It began with a maximum monthly

investment of $10A0 and a 5% discount. The discount has since been reduced in four steps to 2%, and

the maximum monthly investment has been increased substantially.



Calculating the Actual Discount Received
      The price paid for shares purchased at a discount is based on an average of market prices
observed over anywhere from I to 20 trading days. (See table 4.) The most common averaging periods

are one day and five days.


      In private conversations, corporate treasurers and investor relations administrators for some

plan sponsors said they based the sales price on an average of prices over a number of days to
minimize the effect of short sales on share price. Many investors in discount programs apparently

lock in sure returns by selling shares short on the investment date. First Chicago, for example,
altered its pricing formula, for precisely this reason, from one based on the price solely on the
investment date to one based on a five-day avenge of high and low prices.2



      Besides varying in length of the averaging period, plans vary along three other dimensions
that are relevant to calculating discounts. First, there is the question of which prices are used: last

traded, daily high and low, or closing bid and ask. More than 40% of the firms use last traded price.

A similar number use an avenge of daily highs and lows. One in six (inns use the average of closing

bid and ask prices.



      Second, the avenging period varies. In 60% of the plans It ends on the day of investment and

in the rest on the day before. Third, the date by which investment funds must reach the plan
administrator varies. Many firms permit funds to be tendered well beyond the point At which the

averaging period for determining price begins.

2   It is possible, however, to sell short on each of the 5 days preceeding the purchase date.
                                                        —7—

  3. HIStOrICal Development of the Investment Program

          Whether a 5% discount is a generous inducement
                                                                  to shareholders to play the underwriting role
  depends on the costs of participating in the plan. These include the costs of
                                                                                       becoming informed about
  the plan's details, the cost of bearing or avoiding undesired market risks, the cost of monitoring the

  investment, the transaction costs incurred in the secondary market, and the cost of complying with

  margin requirements and tax laws. Because we faced so many uncertainties in
                                                                                               implementing our
  investment strategies, we felt that simulating or otherwise estimating our costs using exogenously

 determined parameters would be too unreliable. As a consequence, we document here some of these
 costs from actual experience.



         In August 1984, we obtained a prospectus for J. P. Morgan's discount program offering the

 opportunity to invest up to $5,000 per month per account at a discount of 5% (actually 5/95 or 5.263%)
 from market prices. This appeared to be so generous that we wondered why money didn't simply

 pour in, reaching the capital target almost immediately.



        We decided to find out first hand what some of the costs to reap the "underwriting" discounts
 must be.3 Since we knew there were other discount programs as well, we decided to participate
 modestly in a number of them to document their difkrences.



        Our initial sources of data for discount programs were Standard and Poor's Cumulative

Dividends, which included a table entitled "NYSE and ASE Companies Offering Dividend
Reinvestment Plans" (pp. 162-3 in the 1984 volume), and a Money Magazine article entitled "No


     This is a corollary of the Fama proposition. This
                                                       proposition results from the apocryphal tale of the time
Eugene Paina, Professor of Finance at the University of Chicago and one of the fathers of "efficient market
theory," was out strolling with a colleague. On being told that he had just walked past a twenty-dollar bill that
was lying on the sidewalk, Fama immediately replied, "Nonsense! If there
it would already have been picked up."                                      were a twenty-dollar bill lying there,
                                               —8—

Brokerage Fees, and Discounts Too" (Jordan E. Goodman, October 1983, pp. 171-2). We telephoned or

wrote to the administrators of some of the plans named for general information and prospectuses.



      In September 1984, we purchased a single share in each of ten companies through a Merrill

Lynch Sharebuilder account (maximum commission rate of 10% of the purchase price). The

investment totaled less than $400, and our commission was $33.06. Single shares in an additional

fifteen companies were purchased in early October at a cost of roughly $300. Since virtually all

programs require that participants be shareholders oI record, we instructed Merrill Lynch to transfer

shares out in one of our names.



      It took three to six weeks for our stock certificates and the sign-up forms for the discount
programs to arrive. Eventually, we learned that investment could begin as soon as the plan
administrators recognized us as shareholders of record in their computers. This cut the delay from

the purchase of initial quali'ing shares to investment in discount shares to about two weeks.



      On November 1, we made our first discount investments: $3,000 in HospitaL Corporation of

America (we could have invested $12,500) and $4,000 in Bankers Trust (the ceiling was $5,000).

Later that month, we made our first investment in seven other companies and our second investment

in HCA and Bankers Trust. Our total investment in November was $47,500.



      Unless the investor requests a certificate for shares purchased, the sponsors retain the shares
"for safekeeping and convenience." Some program administrators will sell shares on request and

mail a check (or the proceeds, less a commission. We occasionally used this service, but we found

that we could secure better commissions through our own broker, and we believed our broker could

secure better execution of trades as well, particularly with limit orders. In any event, we typically

requested that a certificate for "all whole shares purchased with the enclosed investment" be
mailed out.
                                                        —9—



            In early December, we received our first certificates for shares purchased through the discount

  programs. In the meantime, we had negotiated very favorable Commission rates with a San
  Francisco broker. We promptly sold our shares as certificates were received, and deposited the net

  proceeds in our bank account. The cycle had been completed, and the hidden costswe expected to

  encounter never emerged. We were now ready to proceed to the next stage of the investment strategy.



            During December, we invested an additional $55,000 in various programs: In addition, we

  purchased multiple shares in the programs that appeared to operate smoothly. Finally, we began to

 search for additional discount programs. We consulted the April 1984 Directory of Comnanies

 Offering Dividend Reinvestment Plans, which listed names and addresses of companies that
 administer their own plans and plans for others.4



           In January 1985, we began making investments in discount programs in batches. With two

 adults and two children in each household, our batch size was
                                                                           typically eight: eight checks and
 eight investment stubs indicating our intent to invest and our desire to have certificates for shares

 mailed out. The checks were mailed in eight company-supplied
                                                                           postage-paid first-class envelopes
or sent by overnight mail in a single envelope at our expense.



           We used overnight mail to ensure that the plan administrator received the funds on the

requisite date,5 as well as to take advantage of the averaging rules many plans use to determine the

purchase price for new shares.


        By using an optical scanner and a son/merge function of a word processing package, we were able to send
out within hours several hundred letters requesting prospectuses. This procedure turned up a number of
discount programs not identified in other data sources. Some time later, we came across an annual publication
put out by Evergreen Enterprises listing companies with dividend reinvestment programs. It specifically notes
those with cash discount programs. Although we learned of some new programs from this source, we found it
contained somewhat dated information.
    The date on which funds had to be received by program administrators often preceded the date on which
funds were invested by several days. We are cluite sure that in several cases, funds received after the required
date were nevertheless accepted for investment. In one instance, however, funds were returned for being too
late.
                                                      — 10 —




           We were surprised that many programs do not require investment funds to be tendered before

    the averaging period starts. As a result, we were granted a valuable option. If share prices declined

    during the averaging period, part or all of the discount could disappear, and we could choose not to

    invest that period.6 This option is particularly valuable in plans that impose investmentceilings

    over periods that cover more than one investment date. For example, it is common to allow

    investment once a month with a maximum per account for any calendar quarter. lii these programs we

    avoided investment in the first month of each calendar quarter unless the price on the day before the

    required payment date had increased during the averaging period by a program-specific threshold

    percentage. This strategy enabled us to increase our average discount above the 5.263% we would

    have expected if we had ignored price behavior during the averaging period in making our
 investments. In one case, we were able to achieve a discount of 10% through strategic timing of

 investment. In several other cases, we earned 8%7



          Batch processing was just one of several refinements we made in our investment strategy in

January 1985. The others included (1) the purchase of insurance against price declines on our net

investment position; (2) the purchase of more than eight initial (qualifying) shares in companies

offeflng new programs which enabled us to experiment with setting up more than eight investment

accounts although we had only eight social security numbers in our two immediate families; and (3)

the securing of lines of credit at local banks.




         From time to time, we used three strategies to protect ourselves against stock-price declines.

First we purchased in-the-money put options on the stocks in which we tooklong positions (e.&, J. P.

6 To illustrate, suppose the purchase price for shares is 95% of the average dosing price over the five days
ending just prior to the investment date. If these prices axe $2L00, $24.50, $25.00, $23.75, and $23.00, the
                                                                                                             avenge
is $24.25, and the purchase price becomes 95% of this avenge, or $230375. The dlscountaC purchase price of
the shares actually exceeds the last traded price of $23.00, and the effective discount becomes a negative 0.16%.
7
    Although we calculated optimal investment strategies for these averagirg programs, we didnt always
implement them. The careful monitoring of daily price movements is tune-consuming.
                                                    — 11 —


Morgan, First Chicago. Hospital Corporation of America). These specific hedges were effective but

expensive. The bid-ask spreads on finn-specific options are relatively high, as are the commissions.

One could easily spend 1% of the exposure in purchasing insurance in this fashion. Moreover, it is

time-consuming to implement these hedges.



       Our second hedge was to sell short. This method, too, is effective but expensive, but here the

expense is of a different sort. We did not receive the proceeds from our short sales, and we were

required to pledge cash or securities as collateral. Although we put up $200,000 of personal capital,

it wasn't long before we faced a capital constraint even after margining our accounts. A number of

program sponsors have told us that short selling is common, particularly among investors who control

a large number of investment accounts. Apparently, such investors do not face the same capital

constraints we did.



       Our initial motivation in using specific hedges, despite their cost, was to determine whether

sizable riskless profits could be secured. Once we established that riskiess profits of roughly 4% of

investment could be secured on a typical 5% discount program, we decided not to use these hedges

further, because the effective insurance premium (including transaction costs) exceeded the benefit

of price protection.



       Specific hedges had another drawback Shares held for more than six months were eligible

for long-term capital gain treatment at federal tax rates capped at 20% in 1984-1986 venus 50%

otherwise.8 But a specific hedge prevents the holding period from running. Several of our firms

turned out to be merger targets giving rise to large capital gains. Where specific hedges were not

employed, we chose to hold for six months securities that had appreciated significantly in the three


8
    Actually, the gain could be taxed at 0% if the shares were used to make qualified charitable contributions,
an opportunity we chose to exploit for some of our appreciated shares. Some of these shares were used to
endow charitable trusts (e.g.. the Mark and Sheila Wolfson Philanthropic Fund). This enabled a tax deduction
to be taken in 1986, at a federal tax rate of 50%, for charitable gifts to worthwhile causes to be made In yrs
after 1986, when tax rates were scheduled to be well below 50%.
                                                     — 12 —

 to five weeks between our investment and our receipt of a certificate for shares purchased. As a

 result, long-term capital gains comprise 65% of our total capital gains.9


        Our third hedge was a macro hedge, in which we simply purchased actively traded put

 options on a market index. This enabled us to sleep reasonably comfortably at night even when, at its

 peak, our total investment in stocks exceeded $500,000. Still, industry-specific and finn-specific risk

 were not well hedged throughout most of the period, and we did suffer one disaster, a $16A) loss on

 a $34,000 investment in Banks of Mid-America in 1986. In all, the three hedging strategies gave rise

 to gross losses of $27,000 from short sales and put options.



 Restrictions on Investment Accounts

        We realized early that economies of scale were significant in our operations. The most
 important costs were fixed: the time we spent learning of programs' existence, about when and where
 to invest and about when to sell securities. Because our investments across accounts were "carbon

 copies,: there were great economies in record-keeping as well.



        There were also large economies of scale in brokerage commissions. Our brokeragreed to sell

the shares in our eight accounts in a single trade through a single brokerage account, cutting eight

separate checks for the proceeds.10 The brokerage fee was the same whether shares were sold for
two or eight separate shareholders. This enabled us to trade at commissionsavenging less than one-

quarter of 1 percent of the market value of the shares sold, with many trades at less than one-eighth
of 1 percent.11



    The discount from market price at which shares are sold to          ipants is taxed as dividend income, not
capital gains. In fact, this dividend income is even eligible for the dividends-received deduction (which has
ranged from 70% to 85% over the 1984-1988 period) for corporate investors. This makes most of the discount
income tax exempt at the corporate level.
10 To minimize confusion among the taxing authorities, we constructed a spreadsheet tracing each sale to the
specific shareholders. This became our so-called 1099-B reconciliation schedule, a copy of which was filed with
each of our tax returns.
   This Is the round-trip commission cost, since shares acquired directly though the discount program are
commission-free.
                                               — 13   —




      Given these scale economies, we tested whether we could set up more accounts in some

programs than the eight we already had. We found plans varied tremendously in their willingness

to tolerateproliferation of accounts. A couple of plans openly encouraged multiple accounts, with

administrators telling us by phone that some investors had many more accounts in their plan than we

did. For example, several large banks have had more than one investor with between 50 and 100

related accounts. These investors routinely invested the maximum allowed per account and quickly

turned over the shares to arbitrage the discount income. Other plans were less sanguine about this

practice. Consider the following:


                'Optional cash payments received in excess of $12,500 per calendar
                quarter purported to be invested in multiple accounts for the benefit of the
                same Participant will be returned, without interest, if the company
                reasonably determines that the same Participant is. through the opening
                of multiple accounts, investing an aggregate of more than $12,500 in any
                calendar quarter."
                                (Hospital Corporation of America, Supplement to
                                Prospectus dated 8/26/82. Supplement dated 1/17/84. p.1)

Similar sentiments are reflected in the prospectuses of California Real Estate Investment Trust

(9/3/85. p. 16), New Jersey National Bank (7/16/84, pp. 5-6), and Storage Equities (8/30/85, p. 10).



      Most plans did not include language such as that reported above, however, and the use of

multiple accounts was publicly acknowledged by some administrators. For example, according to the

administrator of treasury services at TECO Energy, a number of investors established multiple

accounts to circumvent the limits on cash payments. (Source: Wall Street loumal. 4/26/86, p. 33) The

director of shareholder relations for Indian Head Banks, in a letter to shareholders announcing the

termination of cash discounts, stated that arbitrage and multiple accounts were the primary reasons

for cancelling the program.
                                                    — 14 —

         To establish whether multiple accounts could be used, we created revocable trusts.12 We

 invested a total of $96,000 of trust hinds through the discount programs of seven companies.



         We sought legal counsel on the use of these thists to augment our participation in some discount

 programs, and were assured of their legality. None of the companies in which trust investments were

 made restricted multiple accounts in their prospectuses. Moreover, none of these companies ever

 questioned our eligibility even though we mailed checks and investment stubs in the same Federal

 Express envelope used for the other eight accounts. Once we established that additional accounts

 were possible, we stopped using them.



 Securing Lines of Credit

         Once we began investing in batches, we soon faced a capital constraint. In response, we

arranged for lines of credit totaling $300,000: a $200,000 line at prime plus 15% and a $100,000 line

at prime plus 2.0%. Our borrowing never exceeded 50% of our total investment because of margin

rules.



         The credit lines were terminated at the end of 1986. During the two years in which they were

active, we accumulated $14,000 in interest expense. At an average interest rate of 12%, this

translates to an avenge loan balance of about $58,000. The actual amount fluctuated considerably.

Indeed, at some points we held substantial cash positions, generating $7,000 of interest income over

these two years. Since idle cash yielded interest at roughly 2% below prime, we were careful to pay

down our loans before accumulating cash. At an average interest rate of 8%, our avenge cash balance

was on the order of $44,000, or $14,000 less than the average size of our loan)3


12 A revocable trust Is a trust controlled by the grantor or another designated trustee. Assets can be added to
or removed from the trust at any time. We were able to obtain additional tax identification numbers by using
these trusts, and this was a requirement to set up additional accounts in some programs. For each trust, we
designated a 5% income beneficiary and named the trust after that person. We retained the residual interest
in the trust income and assets.
13 The 514,000 excess of average loan position over average cash balance is equal to the $14,000 of gross
interest expense on our loans only by coincidence.
                                                     — 15   —




 Changes In the Level of Investment Activity Over Time

          Table 5 reports that we invested through the discount programs of 30companies over the 1984-

 1988 period. For all but two finns, we invested positive amounts in three or fewer of the fiveyears.

 primarily because discounts were eliminated.14 We invested in only one calendaryear in eleven

 firms, two calendar years in eleven firms, three calendar years in six firms, four calendaryears in one

 firm, and all five calendar years in one finn. We invested in 14 firms in 1984, 22 firms in 1985, 17

 finns in 1986, three firms in 1987, and four finns in 1988. Although we invested over $2 million in

 1985, we invested just under $1 million in 1986 and $100,000 in 197.



        Our total initial investment over the five-year period for any given firmranged from a low of

 $3,000 to a high of $400,000. For any given year. initial investment in individual firms ranged from

a low of $1,000 to a high of $370,000. The $370,000 was invested in J. P. Morgan in 1985. Morgan's
discount was terminated in October 1985. The $370,000 investment was the result ofinvesting $5,000

per month in eight accounts for eight months plus $5,000 in ten accounts for one month. A total of
$315,000 was invested in Bank of New England, also in 1985. Like J. P. Morgan the bank terminated
its discount late in 1985. The news of such terminations brought us about as much cheer as the receipt

of an IRS audit notice. In table 6 we list the stocks in which we acquired initial shares but madeno

further investments. In most cases, these companies tenninated their discounts before we could buy
shares.



        While we knew of a number of other programs, all were less attractive to us than those we
initially patronized.1S Some programs in which we did not participate imposed investment ceilings



14   The two-year investment hiatus in South Jersey Industries in 1986 and 1987 resulted from the termination
of discounts at the end of 1985, followed by their renewal in 1988.
15We are aware of ten programs that were still active at year-end 1988 and a few programs that were initiated in
1989.
                                                   — 16 —

that we believed were too small to justify the cost of time and ecplidt transaction costs. In others,

the discount was less than 5%.



       In principle, a 3% discount program was quite profitable, but not generous enough to

compensate for our time given the modest scale at which we invested. Our out-of-pocket expenses

consisted primarily of brokerage fees and execution costs. Execution costs arise because we expect to

buy shares at prices that represent an average of the bid and ask prices, while we are likely to sen

shares in the market at prices closer to prevailing bid prices.



       Recent evidence shows that the bid-ask spread, in relation to market prices, decreases with

greater trading volume and with higher market value of outstanding equity; for large, actively

traded firms, the spread is less than 1% Isee Sirri (1989) and Barclay and Smith (1988)1. Evidence

also suggests that nearly 40% of all trades on the New York and American Stock Exchanges may occur

within the bid-ask spread. Although we were not able to document it, we believe that many of our

trades (both market orders and limit orders) were executed within the bid-ask spread. Moreover, we

are confident that the weighted avenge bid-ask spread for our firms was under 1%. As a result,

03% would seem to be a conservative upper bound estimate of our execution costs. On the other hand,

by checking trading volumes and the size of bid-ask spreads, we estimated that the execution costs to

trade shares in gjg programs were more than 2%, and we avoided investing in these plait.



       Another reason for not investing in certain programs was that they required considerable

monitoring to determine whether a reasonable discount was available. CAL RET, for example.

offers shares at a 5% discount, but its formula for calculating the market price requires numerous

tedious calculations. The prospectus even warns that the discount could be negative36

"The Market Price is the highest of the following sales of prices: (a) the average of the High aitd Low Sale
Pnces of the Common Shares, as quoted under the American Stock Exchange Composite Transactions, on the
date the distribution is declared; 1W the average of the Daily Closing Prices of the Common Shares, as so
quoted, for a period of ten (10) trading days prior to the distribution payment date (the Investment Date); and
(c) the average of the High and Low Sale Prices of the Common Shams, as so quoted, on the Investment Date.
If no Common Shares are traded on the relevant distribution declaration date or Investment Date for purposes
                                                    — 17 —




       Two other factors contributed to our sabbatical from investing in 1987. First, a regulatory

change applying to brokers precluded our trades from being merged into a single transaction after
December 31, 1986. This increased our proportional brokerage fee dramatically. For the trades
undertaken in 1988, our brokerage fee still avenged well under one-half of one percent, but if we had

undertaken the same trades in 1985 and 1986 under the post-December 31,1986 rules, our commissions

would have been three to four times as large as the 0.22% rate we incurred in those years (for an
additional cost of $15,000-$20,000).



       The final factor relates to family tax planning. Before the effective date of the Tax Reform

Act of 1986, the dividends and capital gains earned in our children's names were taxable at bargain

rates. As of January 1, 1987, this was no longer true for two children.17




Stock Price Performance for Firms In which We Investrd

       One concern we had was that part of our discount would be lost to poor stock performance. We

cannot address this question definitively, but our anecdotal evidence suggests that, if anything, we

outperfonned comparable firms not offering discount programs.



       Table 7 shows that we generated $190,000 of gross discount income. $25,000 of dividend income

and $215,000 of capital gains. From this $430,000 of gross income we subtract net interest expense of

$7,000 and $2,000 of other expenses, leaving $421,000 in net profits.



       How does our nondiscount income compare with what we would have earned if we had
invested alternatively? Ninety percent of our investment was concentrated around 1985-1986

of calculating the Market Price, the daily High and Low Sale Prices shall be determined on the basis of the most
recent prior date on which Common Shares were traded."
(CAL         Prospectus. 9/3/85, p.7)
Page 15 of the CAL REIT prospectus warns in italics that the discount could theoretically turn out to be a
negative one.
17Children under fourteen now pay tax essentially at their parents marginal tax rates.
                                                 — 18   —




 (including year-end 1984 and the beginning of 1987). and over 70% of our funds were committed to
 bank stocks. During this period, an investment in the Standard & Poors 500 index would have
 returned 56%, including dividends. The Salomon Brothers index of 35 bank stocks returned 59%. We

 were actually somewhat more heavily invested during 1985 and the first half of 1986 than during

 the second half of 1986. The S&P 500 stocks returned 59% in the six quarters ending in mid-1986, and

 the Salomon Brothers bank stocks returned 76%. S&P 500 stocks then fell by 2% in the second half of

 1986 and the bank stock index fell by 9%. We were virtually out of the market in 1987 and began

investing again early in 1988. This proved quite lucky: bank stocks lost 17% in 1987 and gained 23%
in 1988.



       To estimate whether our investment in discount programs underperformed a naive investment

strategy, we assumed that our investment alternative would have simply been to invest in the
Satomon Brothers Bank Stock Index. These calculations are shown in panel B of table 8.



       We invested $200,000 at the start of 1985. 11 we had left this entire amount invested in the
index throughout 1985 and 1986 we would have realized a return of 59%, or $118,000 in excessof our

initial investment. At the end of June 1986, however, we withdrew $150,000. This would have saved

us $13,500,   because the index declined by 9% over the second half of 1986. We also invested our gross

discount income of approximately $171,500 during 1985 and 1986. On
                                                                   average, approximately half,
or $86,000, was invested throughout the entire period. An investment in the SalomonBrothers index
would have returned $50,700 on this average investment over the period. Finally, our net borrowing
over the period averaged $14,000, and we would have earned $8,300 on this investment.



      We   withdrew our entire investment at the beginning of 1987. An average investment of
$90,000 in 1988 would have returned $20,700 if invested In the bank stock index.
                                                 — 19 —

       After subtracting our hedging losses and transaction costs, we estimate that we could have

 earned $182,600 by investing in the bank stock index rather than in the stocks we actually held. We

 call this the net benchmark return. This is a conservative benchmark in that 25% of our actual
 investment was in industry sectors that underperformed bank stocks.



       Turning to panel A of table S we see that the actual return was $257,200 more than the
$163,800 of net discount income we earned. Net discount income is estimated to be 5.26% of the
$3,609,000 invested less the costs to sell shares (including both brokerage fees of 0.22% and execution
costs of 0.50%).



       The $257200 of nondiscount income is $74,600 above the benchmark return. With anaverage

investment of approximately $250,{E0 per year for two years and $90,000 for a thirdyear, the excess
return (above the benchmark) is 12% per year. So the concern that discount income would, in part,

disappear because of poor stock performance for the sponsoring firms was not borne out by our
experience. The favorable stock perfonnance for firms offering discount stock purchase plans is
somewhat surprising and is worthy of further investigation. Are there common characteristicsacross
these firms, not recognized by the market e jg   that caused them to perfonn so well?



4. Decentralized Investment Banking

      Firms can raise equity capital in myriad ways, including conventional underwritings of
common or preferred shares, equity rights offerings, warrant offerings, convertible bond and preferred

stock offerings, share issuances to purchase assets or shares in mergers and acquisitions, and awards

of shares (or contingent claims to shares) to employees through retirement plans and incentive

compensation arrangements. In principle, issuing shares directly to shareholders at a discount can
make shareholders better off than they would be under conventional underwritings. if the discount
offered to shareholders is similar to the fee an underwriter would charge, and if the post-issuance
                                                — 20 —

value of the firm is identical with the alternative methods of raising capital, the discount plan can

be viewed as offering shareholders a dividend bonus. But this analogy can be taken only so far,

because most shareholders do not participate in discount programs, the right to purchase shares at a

discount is typically not related to the level of share ownership (unlike rights offerings) and the

plans do not prevent new shareholders from purchasing small ownership interests in the secondary

market and then supplying a disproportionate amount of the new capital at bargain prices.



How Much Money is Raised through Discount Frograms?

       Table 9 reports capital amounts raised through dividend reinvestment plans in 1985 for two

categories of firms. In the first category are eight finns offering 5% discounts on optional cash

purchases of shares throughout the entire calendar year (1985) and that reported the amounts raised

as a separate line item in their annual reports.18 The seven firms in the second group make similar

financial statement disclosures but offer no discounts on cash purchases.



       The eight firms offering 5% discounts raised through their programs an average of 98%

(median; the mean is 93%) of the common and preferred dividends they paid in 1985. By contrast,

the seven firms offering no discounts raised an average of 12% (median; the mean is 14%) of their

common and preferred dividends.



       United Water Resources and Hexcel offer less generous investment opportunities than the

other six finns offering 5% discounts. Although the table does not show it, these firms' common

stocks are also less actively traded than the stocks of the other firms, making execution costs higher.

Accordingly, the capital raised for these finns, as a fraction of common and preferred dividends, is

just above 50%, or less than half as much raised by the other firms offering 5% discounts.




t8Many finns lump the amount raised through these programs with amounts raised in altenative ways. These
firms are excluded from the table.
                                               — 21 —

         The other finn that   stands out is Hanford National. Although this is a large firm that
offered generous investment limits and whose shares traded actively, the program raised only 51%
of common and preferred dividends in 1985. The only clue we have to explain this discrepancy is

that Hartford National was notably slower in 1985 than were other firms in sending us certificates

for shares we bought through the discount program. If our experience is typical, this slowness
discouraged shareholder investment.



         Over the nine months of 1985 in which J. P. Morgan offered a discount program, it raised $92

million through its dividend reinvestment plan (or 44% of common and preferred dividends paid for

the entire year). In 1986, in the absence of a discount cash purchase option. $55 million was raised

through the reinvestment plan (only 23% of common and preferred dividends).



         The decline in capital raised through the Bank of New England's dividend reinvestment plan

was even more dramatic. In 1986, in the absence of a discount, only $8.3 million was raised (down

from $41.7 million in 1985). This is only 15% of common and preferred dividends (down from 96% in

1985).



         Investors clearly respond to the opportunity to buy new shares for cash at a discount, but a

substantial majority of shareholders do not exercise their option to purchase shares at a discount. It
is puzzling that finns are willing to incur such high costs to pay dividends and then issue an

offsetting amount of new equity. Not only is there the familiar tax cost of paying dividends, but here

we also have the administrative cost of running the discount program, the transaction costs
associated with resales of shares in the secondary market, and perhaps most important, the cost to

existing shareholders of offering 5% discounts to new shareholders. Although the answer may
relate to concern over adverse stock market responses to cuffing dividends or floating an equity issue

through an underwriter, these phenomena are not well understood and deserve closer attention.
                                                 — 22   —




Are Short-Term Traders Really Welcome?

       Apparently, firms have objectives other than raising capital in sponsoring discount stock-
purchase programs. Some are interested in promoting long-term investment by shareholders. Others

appear interested in encouraging wider ownership of shares, perhaps to make a change in corporate

control more difficult to effect. And with the possible exception of BankAmerica and a couple of

other large banks, all finns seem to be concerned about the effect on share prices of arbitrage by plan

participants.


       Although a few program sponsors seem content to have shareholders purchase shares at a

discount and then sell them quickly, others clearly oppose such activity. Excepts from prospectuses

for firms in the latter category appear below:


        If it appears to Chesebrough that a participant has used, is using or may be
        using the optional cash payment feature to generate short-term profits or (act)
        otherwise with an effect that, in the sole judgment and discretion of
        Chesebrough, is not in the best interests of Chesebrough or Chesebrough's other
        shareholders, then Chesebrough may decline to issue all or any portion of the
        shares of Chesebrough Common Stock for which any optional cash payment by
        or on behalf of such participant is tendered.
                (Chesebrough Ponds, Prospectus. 5/22/85, p. 8)


      The antiarbitrage language in these prospectuses is apparently not entirely without content.

Our efforts to help Chesebrough Ponds raise capital were, after a number of months of faithful
investment, rewarded with a six-month suspension of four of our eight accounts. We received no

suspensions from any other company, and our investments were never refused. We never received a

single letter of warning from program sponsors.



      At the other extreme from Chesebrough Ponds is BankAmerica. It entered the discount
program business relatively recently, Introducing its Shareholder Investment Plan In June, 1987. The

plan permitted shareholders of record to invest up to $10,000 per month in common shares at a 5%

discount from market prices. The plan was so popular that BankAmerica decided to reduce the
discount to 4% a mere four months later.
                                               — 23 —




      In June 1988, the discount was reduced further (03% and the bank announced that participants

could request permission to invest more than $10,000 per month.19 We inquired by phone whether an

investment of $100,000 in the forthcoming month would be allowed. The answer was yes, but the

plan administrators would not reveal what the investment ceiling might be.



      The June 1988 amendment contained another change making it clear that the bank was

primarily interested in using the discount program to raise equity capital at low cost: it allowed

participants to enter standing orders to have the bank sell their shares immediately after

investment. The plan administrator would then simply send a check for the proceeds less a

brokerage commission.



      BankAmerica raised over $150 million from its discount program in the lint year. In

September 1988, iust fifteen months after the program was introduced, the discount rate was cut for

the third time, to 2.5%. And in February 1989, when more than $350 million had been raised in just

over a year and a half at an average discount rate of well below 4%, the discount was reduced once

again, this time to 2%.



      The BankAmerica program raises an interesting tradeoff between equity and efficiency

considerations. While a relatively few well-endowed shareholders are likely to dominate the

plan, they are also likely to be the most efficient 'underwriterc of the firm's securities, and at a 2%

discount, the total underwriting fee paid is 60% less than that incurred in the 5% discount program.




19 It also announced that optional cash payments could be made electronically using the banks Home
BankingTM or Business connectionlM systems.
                                                — 24 —


Corporate Finance Implications of Dividend-Reinvestmentand Discount Stock-Purchase Plans

       The evidence in section 3 suggests that raising equity capital through a discount stock-
purchase plan does not lower a finns stock price. A negative valuation effect could be capitalized

into the price of the stock, however, when the plan is announced. We did, not investigate this

possibility, but some related evidence in Dubofsky and Bierman (1988) is worth citing. They find, for

a sample of 46 firms announcing the initiation of discount dividend reinvestment plans (DRP)

between 1975 and 1983, and for which no other Wall Street Journal news items were reported in the

three days surrounding the DRP announcements, that common stock returns, in excess of the market,

were statistically significantly positive on the announcement by an amount avenging one-third to

one-half percent.



       These results contrast with the documented announcement effects of underwritten stock and

stock rights issues. Asquith and Mullins (1983) report a -3.14% abnormal two-day return for

industrial stocks and a -0.75% abnonnal two-day return (or utilities on the announcement of new

equity issues. Eckbo and Masulis (1989), updating the results in Smith (19Th on underwritten stock

and stock rights issues through 1981. find a significant -3.3% abnormal return on the announcement of

an underwritten industrial offering, approximately twice the abnormal return on a rights offering.

These negative returns are for the entire outstanding equity of the firm and may represent a

large fraction (in some cases more than 100%) of the new equity being issued.



       We learns from our conversations with the sponsors of discount stock-purchase plans that the

negative response to an announced equity offering is an important consideration in decisions to raise

equity through a stock-purchase plan. It has been noted that the stock-price decline may be

attributable to investor concern that equity is being issued because management has private

Information suggesting that the stock is overpriced (see, for example, Myers and MajIuf (1984)). But

if management wants to raise equity capital and does not have negative inside information,

committing the firm to raise money to finance a future project over a period of months or years, rather
                                               — 25   —




than all at once, may mitigate the adverse selection problem. Raising capital over time allows some

of the information management has when the plan to raise equity is announced to be reflected in

publicly disclosed accounting measures of performance and other outlets, thereby reducing

information asymmetries.



      This may help to explain why firms limit the amount of stock investors may purchase at a

discount. This practice slows down the rate at which funds are raised, which may enable the firm to
issue equity without incurring the loss in the market value that typically accompanies conventional

underwritten equity issues. So discount stock-purchase plans can be viewed as a form of sunshine

trading,! wherein firms announce to the market that they wish to raise a given amount of capital but

give shareholders some control over the rate at which it is raised. Although this remains

conjectural, it would be interesting to determine whether this is an important motivation for stock

purchase plans.



      Smith (1986) has argued that the more severe the information asymmetry between managers

and outside securityholders the greater the demand for the monitoring and certification services of

an investment banker. The discount of 5.26% offered to shareholders in discount stock-purchase plans

is similar to the direct costs incurred in using the services of an underwriter. But the discount stock

purchase plan allows some of the discounts to be earned by current shareholders, and these plans

appear to avoid a negative impact on stock prices. Eckbo and Masulis (1989) estimate the total

expenses of firm commitment offerings (where the investment banker bears the risk of stock-price

uncertainty while stock is being distributed in the marketplace) to be 4.9% over the period 1963-
1981. These costs appear to average between 3% and 4% in the Eckbo and Masulis sample for the

dollar range of offerings encompassed by our stock purchase programs. These expenses include direct

issue costs other than investment banking fees that average under 1%.
                                                    —26—

       While Bhagat, Man and Thompson (1985) estimate that the introduction of Rule 415 (shelf

registration)2° in March 1982 reduced fees significantly (15-50%. depending upon how one interprets

their data), this estimate results from comparing underwriting costs of firms that used shelf

registration from those that did not, and these finns seem likely to differ along dimensions not

captured in the study.



       Table 10 shows the underwriting costs by size of offer and year of offering for the post-shelf

registration years 1983, 1985, 1987, and 1989 (through mid-June of 1989). for all common stock issues

and bank common stock issues, other than initial public offerings. The data come from Securities

Data Corporations New Issues Service. In the $20-$50 million range for share issues, the fees

(excluding direct issue costs) are 4.5% to 5.0% of issue size, somewhat higher than those reported by

Eckbo and Masulis for the pre-shelf registration period. Fees for shares issued by banks are

somewhat smaller, typically 3.5% to 4%. So while discount stock-purchase programs are not

directly comparable to underwritten offerings as a mechanism for raising new capital, the direct cost

of the two mechanisms appear to be similar, and discount programs both appear to avoid market

impact costs and allow some of the underwriting fees to be earned by existing shareholders.




5. Concluding Remarks

       Developing the raw data on which this case study is based was fun (at least for a while).21

The experiment allowed us not only to test whether we could earn abnormal profits based on publicly

available information, it also led us to consider why firms would use discount stock-purchase

programs with restrictions on investor participation. At a discount rate of 5%, the programs in

which we participated offered substantial profit opportunity, especially to investors choosing to

     In a shelf registration, firms can register securities in advance of an issue and update the registration
documents only if information has changed since the last registration. This allows a finn to market a new issue
more quickly than if it had to secure new Securities and Exchange Commission approval.
21 But the next time we consider undertaking "case research" we hope it will be a little less labor intensive.
Putting together a 20 page single-spaced typed schedule of capital gains and losses for our 1985 tax returns was
not enjoyable.
                                               — 27 —

exploit the natural economies of both scale (for a given plan) and scope (across plans) available.

Since most shareholders do not participate in these plans (and therefore do not share in the
discounts) the question arises whether a 5% discount is too generous to maximize the welfare of

current shareholders. The elimination of discounts on optional cash purchases in so many plans

(particularly in 1986) is consistent with this speculation.



      Another explanation for termination of cash discounts is simply that firms raised the target

level of capital. Given the profits we (and presumably others) made, firms might have been able to

raise the same amount of capital at less direct cost to shareholders by reducing the size of the

discount and increasing investment limits, as BankAmerica and a few others have done. On the

other hand, if there is value in slowing down the rate at which capital is raised, allowing large

investors to acquire shares too quickly could exact an adverse selection-related cost by depressing

share prices. But if capital is required for immediate investment, raising capital slowly may not be

viable.



      Some of the finns we spoke with found discount purchase programs a highly cost-effective

means of raising capital. Others had less favorable experiences. They were unhappy that they

could not control the behavior of arbitrageurs who established many accounts and invested more

capital than the sponsoring firms would have preferred. A number of sponsors observed that their

investment bankers discouraged them from using these programs, although they were aware of the

potential conflicts of interest that could motivate such warnings. After all, the investment banks

lose underwriting fees if these programs displace conventional underwritings. As banks and other

capital-hungry companies gear up for the next round of capital raising, it will be interesting to see

whether the discount stock purchase plans play an important role, and if so, how much, how often,

and at what discount shareholders an permitted to invest
                                                    — 28 —


                                                    Table   I
                    Di*ibu don by lndustiy of Cash lnvnthtent In Common Stocks
                  Purchased at a Discount Throug)t Stock Purchase Plans (1984-1988)

                                             Numbed Flmts                       Range
                                Real                                              of
                                Estate                                        Investment
                                                                                   per         Total
Category         Bank           RUT Utility              Other       Total         Firm      Investment
                                                                                  ($000)       ($000)

                    21            4             9               4     38      $      0        $         0

11                   8            5             1               0      14            0                 0
                     2            1             2               0       5           >0-6               24
                     1            3             0               1       5           >6-50           182
                     2            0             1               2       5          >50-100          371
                     4            2      -      0               1       7         >100-150          899
                     3            0             0               0       3         >150-200          573
                     1            0             1               0       2         >200-300          530
                                                                                                  jQ
                    24          11
                                              _Q
                                               5
                                                              _Q
                                                                4
                                                                      _1
                                                                      44
                                                                                  >300-400
                                                                                                  =
                                                                                              $3609

1+11                45        = 15             14               8
                                                                     —
                                                                     82

III               = 14
                                =a5            2
                                                              ——4     25                      $   =3585


Total investment by industry:
                Bank                                                $ 2592
                Non bank:
                    Real estate                     $   360
                    Utility                             335
                    Other                                            __iQIz

                Total                                               $ 3609

        Category 1: firms in which we did not become shareholders of record and thus were
ineligible to participate in discount programs.

        Category 11: finns in which we did become shareholders of record, although, as the table
reveals, we chose to invest through the discount programs of only 30 of these 44 firms.

        Category 111: all but the first two rows of Category II finns.
                                               — 29 —


                                               Table 2

                   Frequency Distribution of 82 Common Stock Purchase Plans.
          by Maximum Cash Purchase Allowed per Account and Discount from Market Price
                                   for the Period 1954_1988a

             (Table Values Correspond to Number of Firms that Fall into Each Category)

                                                   Discount from Market Price
Purchase         Purchase                                                            total No.
Frequency         Limit                                                     b of Firms
Monthly          $    1,000                    4                                           4
                      2,000                    1               I                           2
                      5,000                    6                                           6
                                             .:i
                     10,000
            TotalNumberofFinns               a12
                                                             —
                                                             a 1
                                                                                        —
                                                                                        13

Quarterly        $ 1,000                       3                                           3
                      2,000                    6                                           6
                      2,500                    I         1                                 2
                      3,000                    7                                           7
                      3,500                                    1
                      4,000                    2                                           2
                      5,000                   20                       1        1         22
                      6,000                                    1                           1
                     10,000                    1               1                           2
                     12,500                    1                                           1
                     20,000                    1                                           1


                                                     ——a—a
                     30.000
            TotatNumberofFinns              —
                                            43         1       3       1        1         49

Yearly           $ 3,000                       1                                           1
                     20,000                    1                                           1

                     30,000                                                     1          1

                                                                           _i
                     40,000
            Total Number of Firms
                                             —
                                             —2                            a—   2
                                                                                         ._j.
                                                                                           4


            TotalNumberofFirms               57        1       4      1         3        66

Data not available

                                                                                         62

a Several plans changed the maximum investment amount and/or discount over time. These (inns
are reflected in the table at the terms contained in the earliest discount program prospectus we have.
b Although these three plans offer no discount from the calculated price of shares, the price is
based on an average of prices over a number of days (ranging from 5 to 20), and payment may be made
just prior to the end of the averaging period. As a result, the effective discount can be generous.
                                          — 30    —




                                          Table 3

       Frequency Distribution of Maximum Annual Cash Investment Amount Permitted
                        per Account for the 575%-Discount Programs
                                For Which Data Are Available
                                         (1984-1988)


                                       Monthly         Quarterly    Annual
Range of Annual Investment. I          Programs        Programs    Programs
       tc$1O,000                                            9          1           10

 $10,000,<1< $20,000                        4              10                      14

 $20,000,<J< $25,000                        1              20          1           22

 $25,000, <ic $50,000                                      1

 $50,000,clc$100,000                        6              2                        8

      I$100,000                           __i             __i                      —a

                                           12             43           2
                                                                                   =
                                                                                   57
                                               — 31 —



                                               Table 4

                         Formulae to Determine Purchase Price of Shares and
                                 Thning of Payment Req uiremenb


                       Number of Firms Usinç                                        Advance
                                                              Averaging Period      Payment
Numberof         Last         Average         Average           Eadsonflay          Require-
Days Prices     Traded        High and     Closing Bid &    Of       Preceding        ment
Factored In      Price        Low Price     Ask Prices   Investment Investment     (In Days)
                   1                                             x                   2
                   I                                            x                    3
                   I                                             x                   5
                   2                                             x
                   1                                                          x      -
                                  7                             x                    -
                                  I                             x                    I
                                  I                             x                   2
                                  I                             x                   S
                                  I                                           x      -
                                                  I             x                    -
                                                                                    4b
      2            1                                                          x     5
      3            1                                                          x     3
                   I                                                          x     5
                                                  I                           x     -
                                                  I                           x     2
                   3                                            x                   -
                   2                                            x                   2
                   2
                                  1                             x                   I
                                  I                             x                   2
                                  1                             x                   5
                                  I                                           x     2
                                  I                                           x     5
                                                  2                           x     -
                                                                              x     5
     10            1
                                  I                             x                   -
                                  I                             x                  10


     15            1                                                          x     41
     20            1                                                          x     I
                   2                                                                4
a   One of these firms expressed willingness, by phone, to relax the ten-day advance payment
requirement.
                                          ..Continued....
                                             — 32 —


                                      Continuation of Table 4

                        Formulae to Determine Purchase Price of Shares and
                                'flming of Payment Requirements



b me advance payment requirement varies month to month, averaging four days.

C   One of these finns initially set the price equal to the average dosing bid price on the five days
preceding the investment date. This was later changed to the average of the bid and the ask price,
effectively reducing the discount by one-half of the bid-ask spread.

d This firm required advance payment at least ten business days preceding the investment date.
However, funds were refundable up to 48 hours prior to the investment, so the effective advance
payment requirement is two days. This is important in detennining the effective discount,since the
investment can be avoided if prices decline during the first eight days of the averaging period.

e   Advance payment requirement varies with the dividend record and dividend payment dates.

   The advance payment requirement varies month to month, averaging four days. Despite the 15-
day averaging, the advance payment requirement was waived by phone one month when the price
had risen substantially, making the discount approximately 10%.

g The advance payment requirement varies, month to month, averaging four days. The averaging
period for these two companies also varies. More precisely, it is the average closing price for the
entire month preceding the investment.
                                           — 33    —




                                           Table 5

             Cash Investment Amounts In Common Stocks Purchased At a Discount
                       Through Stock Purchase Plans by Him and Year
                                     (in thousands of $)
                                               1984       1985    1986   1987   1988   Total
 1. BankArnerica                                                                200     2(X)
 2. Bank of New England                                    315                          315
 3. Banks olMid-Ainerica                                           34            IC)     44

 4. Bankers Trust                                 13       185                          198
 5. Chesebrough Ponds                                       54     32
 6. Columbia Gas                                             5                            5

 7. Chemical Bank                                 5
 8.   CSX                                         5        120     12                   137
 9. FirstofAmericaBank                            5        125    160                   290

10.   First American of Tennessee                           36     48                    84
11.   First Chicago                                        145                          145
12.   First Union                                 10       105     60                   175

13.   Hospital Corporation of America             253       123                          38
14.  Hartford Nationai/Shawmut Nat'l              5         50    160     40     60     315
15. Hubbard Real Estate                           3                                       3

16.   Hexcel                                      I                32                    61
17. Indian Head Banks                            2          36     48     32            118
18.   J. P. Morgan                              30         371)                         4(K)

19. KogerCo.                                                       40                    40
20. Koger Properties                                               40                    40
21.   Muitibank Financial                         5                                       5

22. Meridian Bancorp                                        16     96                   112
23. New Jersey National                                     90     40                   130
24. PropertyTrustCo.ofArnerica                              20                           20

25. Santa Anita Realty                            4         64     64                   132
26.   Signet Bank/Bank of Virginia                                 32     24             56
27.   Storage Equities                            S         &)     40                   125

28. South Jersey Industries                                160                   80     240
29. TECO Energy                                              6                            6
30. United Water Resources                     —            W            —      — 84
             Total                             1183
                                               —C         20823   ———=
                                                                  962     96    350    3609

                                        ...Continued...
                                 — 34 —



                          Confinuation of TableS



        Number of Firms In WhICh InvesUnents Were Made.


In only one calendar year                                 11


In two different years                                    11


In three different years                                   6

In four different years

In five different years


        Number of Firms in Which Investments Were Made


During 1984                                               14


During 1985                                               22

Duringl9S6                                                17

During 1987                                                3

During 1988                                                4
                                                 — 35 —



                                                 Table 6


                   Firms with Discount Programs in Which No Investments Were Made


            Firms In which initial shares were nurchased but no further Investments were made:a

              1.      American Security                     8.    North Fork Bancorp
              2.      Arizona Bancwest                      9.    Niagara Mohawk
              3.      California REIT                      10.    Ohio Edison
              4.      Connecticut Water Service            11. ONEOK
              5.      First Wyoming Bancorp                12.    Sovran National
              6.      Horizon Bancorp                      13.    Southeast Banking
              7.      Lincoln Telecommunications           14.    Texas Commerce Bancshares



                                  Firms In which no shares were purchased:t

              1.      Bancorp Hawaii                       20.    Koger Partnership Limited
              2.      Bank of New York                     21.    Manhattan National
              3.      Carolina Power and Light             22.    MFG Oil
              4.      Celina Financial                     23.    Middle South Utilities
              5.      Chase Manhattan                      24.    Nabisco Brands
              6.      Citizens Bancorp                     25.    Nevada National Bancorp
              7.      Energynorth                          26.    Northeastern Bancorp
              8.      Equimark                             27.    Northwest Energy
              9.      Etown Water                          28.    Piedmont Natural Gas
             10.      First and Merchants                  29.    PNB Mortgage and Realty Trust
             11.      Florida Coast Banks                  30.    ProMed Capital
             12.      florida Nat'l Banks of Florida       31.    Public Service New Mexico
             13.      Gould Investors Trust                32.    Rainier Sancorp
             14.      Green Mountain Power                 33.    Southern Bancorp
             15.      Health Care REIT                     34.    Suffolk Bancorp
             16.      Hibernia                             35.    Sunwest Financial Service
             17.      Indianapolis Water                   36.    Tracor
             18.      InterNee                             37.    USF&G
             19.      Kemper                               38.    Virginia National Bankshares



a In most cases, the reason for not investing is that cash discounts were terminated before we
received our shares.

b The reasons for not investing Include: (1) discount program terminated by the time we found out
about it; (2) Investment limits too small to compensate us for the value of our time; (3) estimated
bid-ask spreads too large (rendering execution costs too high) to justify investment; and (4) discounts
of less than 5%.
                                                — 36   —




                                                Table 7

             Profitability and Aggregate Cash Invested in Common Shares at a Discount
                                Through Stock Purchase Plans by 'Year
                                         (In thousands of $)


                 Investment         Taxable            Short-Term             thng-Tenn    Total
Year              Amount          Dividends&               Capital             Capital    Capital
                                     Discount              Gainst'                cain?   cain?
                                     Incomea



1984              $1185              $5                     $0                $      0    $0
1985                20815             125                     34                    0        34
1986                 962               64                     25                    97      122

1987                  96                4                      2                    4         6
1988                                  _jz
Total            $3609                                                        $140        $215


                        Dividends plus capital gains                 $ 430
                        Interest income                                  7
                        lnterestexpense                                (14)
                        Other Investment expenses                       (2)
                        Net profit

a Discount income is taxed as dividend income. The total gross discount income is approximately
$190,000, and total dividend income is approximately $25,000.

b Capital gains are net of brokerage commissions of $10,000, execution costs of perhaps twice this
amount, and losses in 1985 of $27,000 from short sales and the purchase of put options.
                                                 — 37   —




                                                 Table 8

                        Actual Return versus Benchmark Return on lnvesbnent

Panel A

Actual return:                                                                        $ 421,000
Subtract expected net discount income
        Gross discount per dollar invested                               5.26%
        Less brokerage fee (one way)                                     0.22%
        Less execution cost (one way)                                    0.50%
        Net discount per dollar invested                                 4.54%
        Net discount on $3,609,000 invested                                              163J00

Actual return in excess of net discount income                                           257,200

Expected return in excess of net discount income due
to the increase in bank stock prices
(This is the "net benchmark return" from Panel B.)                                       382,oa)

Excess of actual over benchmark return beyond the
net discount income                                                                  $    74,6CC


NOTE: On an average investment of approximately $250,OG1 per year for two years and $90,L)O0 for a
third year, this excess return is 12% per year.


                                                     ....Continued....
                                                 — 38 —



                                         Continuation of Table 8


                           Actual Return versus Benchmark Return on Investment



Panel B
                                                            Period      Benchmark        Benchmark
Investment                             Investment                        Rate of              Total
Source                     Date         Amount            Investment      Return              Return

Initial                                                     1/1/85-
   investment              1/1/85      $ 200,000           12/31/86           59%         +$118,000

Withdrawal                 7/11%           150,000          7/1/84
                                                           12/31/86           -9%         + 13,500
Reinvestment of
gmesdiscount                (a)            86,000           1/1/85-
income                                                     12/31/86           59%         + 50,700
Investment
financed by                 (b)            14,000           1/1/85-
line of credit                                             12/31/86           59%        + 8,300
New investment             1/1/88          90,000           1/1/88-
                                                           12/31/88           23%        + 20,700
          Gross benchmark return                                                          $211,200
          Hedging losses                                                                 -  27,000
          Brokerage fees and
          execution costs @ .25% and .50%, respectively                                   -     1.600
          Net benchmark return                                                           $    I82,600


(a) $3,259,00 invested at a discount of approximately 5/95 yields $171,500 of gross discount income.
On average, approximately half or $86,000 is invested throughout the entire period.

(b) $14,000 is the avenge excess of borowings over cash held over thepesiod 1/1/85-12/31/86.
                                                   — 39   —




                                                   Table 9


                     Amounts Raised through Dividend Reinvestment Plans in 1985


          I.      Firms offerIng 5% cash purchase discounts throughout 1985, disclosing amounts raised
as a   separate line item in their annual report
                                                              Amount Raised            As a Fraction of
                                        Investment             (In Millions          Common and Fret erred
Company                                   Ceiling                 of dollars)         Dividend Payments

Bank of New England                    $ 5,lXXWmo.               $ 41.7                         96%
First of America                          5,000/qtr.                14.9                       100%
First Union                               3,000-
                                         l0,000/qtr.                44.8                       109%
Hartford National                         5,000/qtr.                16.4                        51%
Hexcel                                    1.000/qtr.                 1.4                        51%
New Jersey National                       5JY30/qtr.                 6.7                       103%
Storage Equities                          5,000/qlr.                18.9                       178%
United Water Resources                    3.000/qtr.                 5.2                        54%

          Median (mean) capital raised as a fraction of dividends: 98% (93%).




        U.     Firms that appear on the Bank Compustat tape (150 banks) offering dividend
reinvestment programs without a discount cash purchase feature, disclosing amounts raised as a
separate line item In their annual report
                                              AmountRaised                      As a Fraction of Common and
Company                                   (In Millions of Dollars)              Preferred Dividend Payments

Bank of Boston                                     $ 12.7                                   22%
Citizen & Southern                                     4.9                                  12%
First Jersey National                                  1.1                                   8%
First Security                                         05                                    4%
Irving Bank                                            4.7                                  11%
NCNB                                                   8.2                                  18%
United Virginia BankShares                             4.6                                  21%

          Median (mean) capital raised as a fraction of dividends: 12% (14%).
                                                — 40      —




                                                Table 10

                        Gross Underwriting Spreads for Common Stock Issua
                                 (Excluding Initial Public Offerings)
  by Year and Size of Issue for selected years over the Period 1983-1989 (through mid-June of 1989)



                           1983                    1985                    1987                 1989
                       Avg.       #oI      Avg.           #of       Avg.          #f    Avg.           #f
All Issue?             Gross      Issues   Gross       Issues       Gross      Issues   Gross      Issues


      10              7.61%        212     8.17%              116   7.80%          87   9.66%           14
  $1 0-20             5.77%        186     5.86%               94   5.98%          53   6.25%           23
  $20-SO              4.53%        200     4.76%               91   5.01%          81   5.10%           17
  0-100               3.70%         91     3.74%              37    4.01%          46   4.36%           Ii
  $100 -              3.30%         40     2.67%              42    2.93%          31   2.00%            2




                       Avg.        # of    Avg.         # of        Avg.          #01   Avg.           I of
Bank?                  Gross      Issues   Gross       Issues       Gioss      Issues   Gross      Issues

  $0-la MM            6.94%          5     6.77%              13    6.98%          11   7.47%            1
  $10-20 MM           5.32%          3     5.19%              11    5.99%           2   5.50%            1
  $20-SO MM           3.59%          3     4.58%              11     -              -   6.00%            1
  $50-tOO MM          3.35%          2     3.14%               3    3.61%           5    -                -
  $100- MM            3.01%          1      -                  -    2.96%           4    -               -




• Excludes issues that do not have gross spread information available.

Data Source: Securities Data Corporations New Issues Service.
                                               — 41 —



Refernices


Asquith, Paul and David Mullins, Jr., 1986, Equity issues and stock price dilution, Journal of Financial
 Economics 15,61-89.
Barclay, Michael J. and aifford W. Smith, Jr., 1988, Corporate NyOut policy: Cash dividends
 versus opat market purchases, Journal of Financial Economics, 61-82.
Bhagat, Sanjai, M. Wayne Mart, and C. Rodney Thompson, 1985, The Rule 415 experiment: Equity
 markets, The Journal of Finance 45, 1385-1401.
Dubofsky. David A. and Leonard Bierman, 198$, The Effects of dividend reinvestment plan
 announcements on equity value, Ahon Business and Economic Review, 58-68.
Eckbo, B. Espen and Ronald W. Masulis, 1989, Rights vs. finn emmibnent offerings of common stock:
 An empirical analysis, unpublished paper, (The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, B.C.,
  Canada).
French, Kenneth, 1980, Stock returns and the weekend effect Journal of Financial Economics 8,55-69.
Gibbons, Michael and Pat Hess, 1981, Day of the week effects and asset returns, Journal of Business
  54, 579-596.
Keim, Donald B., 1983. Size related anomalies and stock market seasonality: Further empirical
  evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 12, 13-32.
Light, jay. 1977, American Telephone and Telegraph Company - 1975, (Harvard Business School
  Case 9-277-016, February, 1977).
Myers, Stewart and Nicholas Majluf, 1984, Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms
  have information that investors do not have, Journal of Financial Economics 13, 187-221.
Sirri, Erik R., 1989, Bid/ask spread, price, and volume of specialist market, unpublished manuscript.
  (University of California, Los Angeles, CA).
Smith, aifford, 1977, Alternative methods for raising capital: Rights versus underwritten
  offerings, journal of Financial Economics 5, 173-307.
Smith, Clifford, 1986, Investment banking and the capital acquisition process, journal of Financial
  Economics 15, 3-29.
Symposium on some anomalous empirical evidence regarding market efficiency, 1978, Journal of
  Financial Economics 6, 95-330.
