                                        NBER Yorking Paper #3097
                                        September 1989


   THE COMPARATIVE PERFORMANCE OF FIXED AND FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATE REGIMES:
                               INTERWAR EVIDENCE


                                   ABSTRACT

This paper reports evidence on the characteristics of fixed and flexible
exchange rate regimes. It contrasts experience under three interwar exchange
rate regimes: the free float of the early 1920s, the fixed rates of 1927-31,
and the managed float of the early 1930s. A number of important differences
across nominal exchange rate regimes emerge. Major findings include: (1) The
variability of nominal exchange rates was positively associated with the
freedom of the float. Nominal rates were considerably more variable under free
than managed floating.   (2) The reduction in nominal exchange rate variability
achieved with the move from free to managed floating was not accompanied by a
commensurate fall in exchange rate uncertainty. Yhile government policy
succeeded in damping spot rate fluctuations, it seems to have been subject to
periodic shifts that heightened risk. (3) There was a strong association
between nominal exchange rate predictability and real exchange rate
predictability in both the free float of 1922-26 and the managed float of
1932-36. Together with (2), this implies that intervention of stabilize
nominal rates did not guarantee a commensurate reduction in real exchange rate
uncertainty. (4) There was no direct correspondence between the degree of
exchange rate stability and the volume of international capital flows. Real
interest differentials were larger under the managed float of the 1930s than
under the free float of the 1920s. (5) Capital controls provide a major part
of the explanation for differences across regimes in the magnitude of real
interest differentials. Controls were considerably more prevalent under
managed floating than under either free floating or fixed rates. Thus,
interwar experience provides a counterexample to the popular notion that
capital controls tend to be associated with fixed rate regimes.




                                       Barry Eichengreen
                                       Department of Economics
                                       University of California
                                       Berkeley, CA 94720
