NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

QUALITY lADDERS IN THE THEORY OF GROWTH

Gene M. Grossman
Elhanan Helpman

Working Paper No. 3099

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1989

Part of the work for this paper was completed while both authors were visiting
the Institute for Advanced Studies at Hebrew University, and while Grossman was
at the World Bank and Helpman at the International Monetary Fund. We thank
these organizations plus the National Science Foundation and the Bank of Sweden
Tercentennary Foundation for financial support. We are also grateful to Lars
Svensson for his conunents. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in
Growth and Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3099
September 1989

QUALITY LADDERS IN THE THEORY OF GROWTH
ABSTRACT

We develop a model of repeated product improvements in a continuum of

sectors.

Each product follows a stochastic progression up a quality ladder.
Progress is not uniform across sectors, so an equilibrium distribution of
qualities evolves over time. But the rate of aggregate growth is constant.
The growth rate responds to profit incentives in the R&D sector. We explore
the welfare properties of our model. Then we relate our approach to an
alternative one that views product innovation as a process of generating an
ever expanding range of horizontally differentiated products. Finally, we
apply the model to issues of resource accumulation and international trade.

Gene M. Grossman
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
(609)452-4823

Elhanan Helpnian

Department of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
(03)545-9209

I.

Introduction

Casual observation suggests the central role that quality upgrading plays

in raising our standard of living. For example, the ease and comfort of
transportation have increased enormously since the horse-and-buggy gave way to

a succession of automobiles of ever higher quality. New generations of
televisions provide finer detail and sharper colors. And the enjoyment of
music in the home has been enhanced by the replacement of the gramophone by
the phonograph, and the phonograph by the compact disk player.

Intermediate goods too have been subject to product improvement. Witness
the recent revolution in desk-top computing. Or consider the advances that
have taken place in integrated circuitry. These innovations have raised total
factor productivity in the manufacturing of consumer goods and capital
equipment, and made possible the production of entirely new final products.
The economics of quality improvement have been studied by industrial

organization economists in their work on patent races. Beginning with Loury
(1979), Dasgupta and Stiglitz (1980), and Lee and Wilde (1980). much effort
has been devoted to understanding the incentive that firms have to bring out

new and improved products. This literature typically views the R&D
competition as a once-and-for-all race for technological supremacy. While
contributing many useful insights, the one-shot framework fails to capture an

essential aspect of quality competition. This is the continual and cyclical
nature of the process whereby each new product enjoys a limited run at the
technological frontier, only to fade when still better products come along.

Almost every product exists on a quality ladder, with variants below that may
already have become obsolete and others above that have yet to be discovered.

Recent work by Segerstrom et.al.(1987) and Aghion and Howitt (1989)

provides the beginnings of a theory of repeated quality innovations. These

2

authors cast the patent-race paradigm in a dynamic, general-equilibrium

setting. The result in each case is a model of long-run growth based on
endogenous technical change.'

Their models enable us to study the structural

and institutional determinants of ongoing technological progress.
Each of these interesting efforts contains at least one unappealing

element, however. In the work by Segerstrom et.al.(1987), patent races take
place in a multitude of industries in sequence. That is, all research effort
in the economy first is devoted to improving a single product, then another,

and so on, until all products have been improved exactly once. Then the cycle
repeats. In Aghion and Howitt (1989), by contrast, the patent race takes
place at an economy-wide level. A successful research project improves all
products simultaneously. The sole innovator thereby gains monopoly power
across all industries. Evidently unhappy with this implication, Aghion and
Howict make reference to antitrust laws to justify their imposition of a
requirement that the monopolist must license the portfolio of patents to a
continuum of arms-length competitors.
In what follows, we propose an approach that resolves these difficulties.

This approach draws on the building blocks provided by Segerstrom et.al.(l987)

and Aghion and Howitt (1989). We envision a continuum of products, each with
its own quality ladder. Entrepreneurs target individual products and race to

bring out the next generation. These races take place simultaneously. In any
given time interval some of the efforts succeed while others fail. Successful
ventures call forth efforts aimed at still further improvement, with each

Related work by Schleifer (1986) and Krugman (1988) deals with a
continual process of cost innovation. Reductions in cost and improvements in
quality are two different ways for firms to supply more services at a given
price.

3

innovation building upon the last. This specification accords well with the
description of the research process in, for example, Freeman (1982) and Dosi
(1988).

Our model generates an equilibrium distribution of product qualities that

evolves over time. Each individual product follows a stochastic progression
up the quality ladder. But, in the aggregate, the innovation process we
describe is a smooth one. An index of consumption grows at a constant and
determinate rate in the steady state. This rate is readily calculable.
We believe that our approach will prove useful in many applications. In
this paper, for example, we explore the relationship between the accumulation
of resources and the long-run rate of growth, and describe the long-run
pattern of specialization in a two-country world economy with innovation and
trade. In Grossman and Ftelpman (1989e), we use a similar framework to study
the product life cycle with concurrent innovation by high-wage producers and
imitation by low-wage producers.

Our approach is related to an alternative one that views product
innovation as a process of generating an ever expanding range of horizontally

differentiated products.2 This latter framework has been applied to positive
and normative topics in economic growth in recent work by Judd (1985), Roruer

(1988) and ourselves (Grossman and Helpman, l989a,b,c,d). At first glance.
the economics of the development of horizontally differentiated products seems

quite distinct from that of product improvement. Yet, as we shall demonstrate
below, the two approaches yield quite similar answers to many questions.

2 Scherer (1980, p.409) cites survey evidence that firms devote 59% of
their research outlays to product improvement, 28% to developing new products
and 13% to developing new processes. These data may understate the importance
of vertical relative to horizontal differentiation in the innovation process,
since many "new products" replace old products that perform similar functions.

4
Indeed, it is possible to construct comparable variants from each class of

model that share identical reduced forms (at least in simple cases). The
alternative analyses do diverge, however, when it comes to normative issues.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We develop our
simplest one-factor model of quality-based grovth in the next section and
explore its positive and normative properties in Section III. In Section IV
we pursue the analogy between quality-based growth and variety-based growth.
Then, in Section V, we extend the model to include an outside good and a
second primary input, and investigate the implications of factor accumulation

for growth. In Section VI we introduce a second country and international
trade, and describe the long-run pattern of trade. Section VII concludes.

II. The Basic Model
We consider an economy with a continuum of goods indexed by w. The set
of goods consists of the interval (0,1] whose measure is one. We refer to the
measure of a subset of goods as the "number" of goods in the subset. Hence,
the total number of goods, which we take to be fixed, is equal to one.
Each product

can be supplied in a countable number of qualities. We

choose units so that the lowest quality equals one; i.e., q0(w)—l. Quality j

of product w is given by q(w)—A, where )>l is the same for every w. In
order to attain quality j, a product must be improved j times. Each step up
the quality ladder requires R&D. We describe this activity below.
Consumers allocate spending according to a common intertemporal utility

function

(1)

U —

f et

log u(t)dt

5

where p is a subjective discount rate, t indexes time, and log u(t) represents
the flow of utility at time t.

log u(t) —

(2)

Instantaneous utility is given by

f

where d(w) denotes consumption of quality j of product w at time t. Every
consumer maximizes utility subject to an intertemporal budget constraint

f et)E(t)dt

(3)

A(O)

where E(t) represents the flow of spending at time t, R(t) is the cumulative
interest factor up to time t, and A(O) denotes the present value of the stream

of factor incomes plus the value of initial asset holdings at t—O. Naturally,

E(t) —

(4)

f

where p(w) is the price of quality j

of

product w at time t.

The consumer maximizes utility in two stages. First, he allocates E(t)

to

maximize u(t) given prices at time t. Then he chooses the time pattern of

spending to maximize U. To solve the static problem, the consumer selects for

each product the single quality j—J()

adjusted

that carries the lowest quality-

price pj()/qj(c).3 Then he allots identical expenditure shares to

all products. This gives static demand functions

In

what follows,

is unique.

6

f

d(c)

(5)

—

E(t)/p(w)

for j—(")

fI. 0

otherwise.

Substituting these demand functions into (2), and the result into (1), we
can reformulate the intertemporal maximization problem as one of choosing the
time pattern of spending to maximize

U —

(6)

J

et(log E(t) +

f

[log q() • log p(w)]dw)dt

subject to (3), where q(w) and pt(w) represent the quality level and price,

respectively, of J(w). The solution to this problem is characterized by

E/E—R-p

(7)

and either (3) or the transversality condition. Since preferences are
homothetic, aggregate demands are those of the representative consumer. In
what follows, we use E to denote aggregate spending and (5) to represent
economy-wide demand functions.

Turning to the production side, we endow the economy with a single
primary factor called "laborTM (but see Sections 5 and 6). One unit of labor

is needed to manufacture one unit of any product, regardless of quality. Of
course, better quality products cannot be produced until they have been

invented. Patent restrictions may apply as well, as we shall discuss further
below.

At any point in time producers in any "industry" w compete as price-

setting oligopolists with common costs equal to the wage rate w(t). Then, if

7

several firms in an industry are able to produce goods of the same quality,

each sets a price equal to unit cost and each earns zero profit. Alter-

natively, one producer may enjoy a quality lead over her industry rivals. If
she charges a quality-adjusted price below that of other producers of the same

good, she faces unitary-elastic demand. Demand falls to zero for qualityadjusted prices above the minimum among those charged by competitors. As a

consequence, the leader maximizes profits by "limit-pricing; i.e., by setting
a price that, adjusted for quality, falls epsilon below the production cost of

the nearest competitor. We shall show below that the nearest competitor is
always one step behind. Then all products with a unique quality leader sell
for

(8)

p—Aw.

This price yields demand per product of E/Aw. The leader earns a flow of
profits w—(l-6)E, where £'l/X.

A blueprint is needed to produce any commodity. These blueprints are
costly to develop. Research efforts might, in principle, be devoted either
towards imitating existing products or towards developing the next generation.

However, we can rule out the first activity, since a successful imitator will
earn zero profit in the resulting Bertrand competition and so be unable to

recoup any R&D costs. Even if imitation were costless, it might be precluded
by patent protection afforded to the leader. For these reasons, we
concentrate here on product improvements.4

In Grossman and Helpman (1989e), we develop a two-country model in
which factor prices differ across countries. Then imitation may be profitable
in the low wage country, because success in creating a clone yields strictly

8

An entrepreneur may attempt to improve any product. If she undertakes
R&D at intensity & and targets her research efforts at product

for a time

interval of length dt, then she will succeed in taking the next step up the

quality ladder for that product with probability dt. This formulation mimics
the one-shot, partial equilibrium patent-race models of Lee and Wilde (1980)

and others. It implies that R&D success bears a Poisson probability
distribution with an arrival rate that depends upon the level of R&D activity.

A unit of R&D activity requires a1 units of labor per unit of time. An
entrepreneur who is not currently an industry leader may target any product in

her R&D efforts. If she succeeds, she will take over industry leadership and
begin to earn a flow of profits .

the

Since these profits are independent of ,

individual entrepreneur is indifferent as to which product she targets.

We shall focus on the symmetric equilibrium in which all products are targeted

to the same extent. Several entrepreneurs may be involved in the race to
improve the same product. However, we need not distinguish among
let &

represent

them, and so

aggregate R&D intensity per product.

Without any cost advantage, an industry leader will not engage in R&D.5
To see this, note that a research success would leave the leader with a two-

step lead over her nearest competitor, and thus allow her to increase her

price to Aw. This would yield incremental profits of (l-l/A2)E -

(l-l/))E/A,

(l-l/A)E

—

which is strictly less than the incremental profits (1-l/A)E that

accrue to a non-leader who achieves a research success.

positive profits to the imitator in the resulting duopoly equilibrium.

In Grossman and Helpman (l989e) we allow for the possibility that
leaders, by dint of their past R&D successes, might be able to improve upon
their products at lower (expected) cost than outsiders. This modification of
the model enriches the set of possible outcomes at some cost in terms of
simplicity.

9

We derive now an equation for the equilibrium level of R&D activity per

product. Let v represent the stock-market value of an industry leader. An
entrepreneur who devotes resources a1& to R&D for interval dt at cost va1dt

attains an expected reward of vdt. Since the risks involved in any
particular research effort are idiosyncratic, free entry ensures that costs

are equal to expected reward when &>O. Thus v—wa1.
The ownership shares in industry leaders pay dividends irdt over a time

interval of length dt, and appreciate by vdt if no entrepreneur succeeds in

supplanting the firm's leadership position. However, with probability dt the
leader's product is improved upon during the interval dt, in which case the

shareholders suffer a capital loss of amount v. All told, the shares bear an
expected rate of return of (lr+v)/v -

t. This

return is risky. But once again

the risk is idiosyncratic, so arbitrage in the capital markets ensures
equality between the expectd rate of return and the safe interest rate R.
Using v—wa1, we may write the no-arbitrage condition as6

+ — it

+

We choose labor as numeraire; i.e., w(t)—l for all t. Recall that
r—(l-6)E. This, together with (7) and the no-arbitrage condition, implies

(9)

This

B —

(l-6)E

-

provides a differential equation for spending. The rate of growth in

6 We derive a similar condition in Grossman and Helpman (l989b) by
equating R&D costs to expected present discounted profits, and then
differentiating with respect to time. The same method could be used here.

10

spending increases with the level of spending and decreases with aggregate R&D

intensity.
We close the model with a market-clearing condition. Let L be the total

supply of labor. Total manufacturing employment equals7

f [E(t)/p(t)]dw — SE(t)

while the R&D sector employs a1 workers. Therefore, equilibrium in the labor
market implies

(10)

a1 +

SE

— L

The differential equation (9) together with the side condition (10)
describe the evolution of our economy for every initial value of spending E.
We depict the dynamics in Figure 1, where LL represents the resource
constraint (10), and lilt describes combinations of E and

(11)

(l5)E —

such that E—0; i.e.,

+

The economy must always lie along LL, with spending rising above 1111 and

falling below this line. For any initial value of E below that labelled E,
spending eventually falls to zero, a violation of the transversaiity

We assume here that even at time 0 each industry has a unique leader
plus a competitor one rung down the quality ladder. This implies that
p—i/S for all products. We will show that, with this assumption, the economy
jumps immediately to the steady state. Alternatively, we might start the
economy with a universally known backstop technology for quality q0 of each
good. Then the steady state that we describe is approached in the limit,
after all goods have been improved for the first time.

11

condition. For initial values of E above E,

approaches zero at a point

where the level of spending implies expected profits in excess of R&D costs.

This event would contradict profit maximization by entrepreneurs. We conclude
that the economy must jump immediately to the steady state at point A. The
equilibrium values of E and &

solve

(10) and (11).

In the dynamic equilibrium, each product is improved with probability dt
in a time interval of length dt. By the law of large numbers, a fraction i.

of

the products are continually being improved. These will not be the same
products in every "period", nor will technological progress be uniform across

sectors. In fact, our model predicts an evolving distribution of product
qualities, with individual products constantly swapping relative positions
within that distribution.
Before we proceed to investigate the market determinants of R&D and the
welfare properties of the equilibrium, it is worthwhile to point out an

alternative interpretation of our model. This interpretation treats each good
as an intermediate input into the production of a single final consumer

good. Then (2) gives the constant-returns-to-scale (Cobb-Douglas) production
function for the final good, and u represents the flow of final output. The
consumers' utility function remains as in (1), but now u there stands for the

consumption of the single final good. This good is priced at marginal cost in
a competitive equilibrium; i.e.,

log r —

f

log[p(w)/q(c.))dw

This provides a natural interpretation of (6) as the discounted value of the

logarithm of real spending E/p.

12

From this point on the analysis proceeds as before to arrive at the
differential equation (9) and the resource constraint (10).

With this new

interpretation, technological progress entails improvement in intermediate
inputs, which serves to raise total factor productivity in the manufacture of
consumer goods. It would be a simple matter to augment the model by including
direct use of primary factors in the production of final goods, in which case

we would have a specification similar in many respects to Romer (1988). We
shall pursue this analogy further in Section IV below.

III. Eui1ibrium and Optimal Growth
We define the growth rate g to be the rate of increase of u. With the
interpretation of the w's as intermediate goods, g represents the rate of
growth of final output. With our original interpretation of the ce's as
consumer goods, g corresponds to the rate of increase in a quality-adjusted
consumption index.

To calculate g, we substitute (5) and (8) into (2) to derive

log u(t) —

log

E -

log A + f log q()dw

The last term depends upon & and t. For any given w, the probability of
exactly m improvements in a time interval of length r is (see Feller, 1968,
p.159)

f(m,r) —

(&r)e'

Since in equilibrium the same intensity of R&D applies to all products, f(m,r)

13

represents the measure of products that are improved exactly m times over an

interval of length r. Therefore,

f log q(w)dw —

f(m,t)logX

The right-hand side equals log A times the expected number of improvements in

or

an interval of length t,

(12)

log u(t) —

log

E -

t1ogA. Hence,

log

A + &tlogA,

and the growth rate g—dogA.
We are now prepared to study the determinants of the growth rate. We
solve (10) and (11) to derive the following reduced-form expression for :

—

(13)

This

(l-6)L/a1

-

equation or Figure 1 can be used to examine the comparative statics. In

terms of the figure, an increase in L shifts the LL curve out and so increases
equilibrium ..

Thus, as in Romer (1988), Aghion and Howitt (1989) and

elsewhere, a larger resource base implies faster growth (but see Section V

below). Similarly, a decline in a1 shifts LL out and also shifts im down.
R&D

effort

expands due both to a resources effect and an incentive effect.

The same is true about an increase in A (decrease in 6), which not only raises
but also spurs growth directly, because the technology jumps become larger.
In sum, R&D

responds

to profitability incentives and the economy exhibits

dynamic increasing returns to scale.

14

We turn now to issues of welfare. Using (1), (12), and the knowledge
are constant in equilibrium, we can calculate the following exact

that E and

expression for U:

piJ —

(14)

log

E -

log

A +

(&/p)log

A

This representation of lifetime utility induces a preference ordering on E and
&

that

can be depicted by well behaved indifference curves such as UU in

Figure 1. Greater spending means higher utility early on, which may
compensate for fewer quality improvements and hence lower utility later.

We find the optimal growth rate by maximizing (14) subject to (lO).8
This gives the optimal intensity of innovation

*

\'15'/

—L

-

P

which we find in Figure 1. at the tangency of an indifference curve and the
resource constraint U..

We discuss the possible discrepancies between the optimal and equilibrium

activities,

such as that of Section V
8 In a model with more than two
below, we would need to distinguish between the second-best growth rate which
takes the oligopoly pricing of innovative products as given and the first-best
rate that sets all prices equal to marginal cost (see Grossman and Helpman,
1989c). To achieve the first best we would generally require two policy
instruments, one to correct for externalities generated in R&D and the other
to ensure optimal output of the innovative products. However, with all
manufactured goods priced similarly and with labor supplied inelastically, the
problem of optimal resource allocation becomes simply one of determining
whether the resources devoted to R&D in the market equilibrium are too many or
too few.

15

growth rates with the aid of Figure 2. In the figure, we have plotted the
curve for A/(A-l). This must not exceed L/pa14-l if we are to have positive
growth in equilibrium (compare the vertical intercepts of LL and flu

1).

( 16

in

Figure

Hence, —O for XA0 and )O for A>A0. Next, we compute from (13) and (15)

*

)

-&—

P(L
t..-

+ 1

-

A

Figure 2 also shows the curve for A/logA. As is clear from the figure, &>&

for

AE(A0,A1) and A>A2, whereas &<s for AE(A1,A2). In other words, the

market incentives for R&D are excessive in our economy when the steps of the
quality ladder are quite small or quite large, but are insufficient for steps
of

intermediate size.
This finding can be understood with reference to

identified
a

by Aghion and

the market distortions

Howitt (1989). First, successful innovators generate

positive externality for

consumers. Consumers pay the same price as before

the innovation but receive a product of higher quality. This externality
certainly lasts as long as the innovator maintains her monopoly position.
Actually, it lasts indefinitely into the future, since all later innovations
improve upon a product that is one step higher up the quality ladder than

otherwise. This externality, which combines what we shall call a
sur1us effect (during the life of the new product) and what Aghion and Howitt
term an intertemDoral soil].over effect (extending over the lives of later

products), is proportional to logA/p.

Second, a successful innovator generates a negative externality for the

extant industry leader. The entrepreneur is motivated by the profits she can
earn, whereas total industry profits are bound to be unaffected by her success

16

or failure. In effect, the innovator "destroys" the producer surplus of the
firm it displaces (hence the title of the paper by Aghion and Howitt). Aghion

and

Howitt term this the business-stealing effect. Here it is proportional to

(A1)/(&*+p),

since the flow of profits is proportional to (A-i), and &"+p is

the effective rate of discount of profits, taking into account the optimal
expected rate of arrival of the next innovation.9 For low or high values of )
this effect dominates (because A/logA is then large), while the combined
consumer-surplus and intertemporal-spillover effects dominate when A takes on
an intermediate value.

The optimal growth rate is more likely to exceed the equilibrium

rate

when L/a1 is large; i.e., in large economies as measured in units of (R&D)
efficiency

labor. Then the optimal rate of innovation is great. Larger

values of s." reduce the size of the business-stealing effect per unit output

changing the size of the consumer-surplus effect per unit output.

without

The optimum can
outlays.

with

Let T be

be decentralized here by means of a tax or subsidy on R&D

the multiple (or fraction) of R&D

costs

borne by the firm,

T>1 for a tax and T<l for a subsidy. With such a policy in effect the

no-arbitrage condition (11) is replaced by one with the left-hand side divided
by T. An increase in T shifts the 1111 curve upward in Figure 1 and so generates
an
the

equilibrium with greater spending and less innovation. A decrease in T has

opposite effects on resource allocation. By varying T, the government can

achieve

any point along LL, including of course the optimum.

For

both external effects, the factor of proportionality is the optimal

level of sales per product. Using the expression for & in (15), it is easy
to show that the difference between the cominbed consumer-surplus plus
intertemporal spillover effect and the business-stealing effect has the same
sign

as the right-hand side of (16).

17

IV. Oualitv versus Variety
We have followed Segerstrom et.al. (1988) and Aghion and Howitt (1989) in

treating endogenous product improvements as the engine of growth. As we noted
in the introduction, this approach to technological progress differs from the
one pursued in recent papers by Rower (1988) and ourselves (1989a,b,c).1-°

This work treats technology-based growth as a process of generating an ever-

expanding variety of horizontally differentiated products. In this section,
we shall develop a simple variant of a variety-based growth model to

demonstrate a remarkable similarity between the alternative approaches. In
particular, we show below that the variety-based growth model and the qualitybased growth models have identical reduced forms and we discuss the analogous
roles that different parameters play in each formulation.

We continue to represent consumer preferences by (1). Now, however, the
consumption index u(t) exhibits love of variety over an infinite set of

horizontally-differentiated products, as in Dixit and Stiglitz (1977). We
replace (2) by

[f(t)a] ,
1I

(17)

u(t) —

0< a < 1

where n(t) denotes the measure (number) of differentiated products available
at time t

too

and

d(w) represents consumption of brand c at time t.

In this case

the differentiated products can be interpreted either as final consumer

goods or as intermediate inputs. Under the latter interpretation, (17)
represents a production function and u is output of a homogeneous consumer

10 See also Judd (1985), who studies the introduction of new products via
R&D, but in a dynamic framework in which growth ceases in the long run.

18

good (see Ethier, 1982). We shall not dwell on the intermediate goods
interpretation in order to save space.

This preference structure implies an intertemporal allocation of spending
given by (7) and well known static demand functions that exhibit a constant
price elasticity of demand of 1/(l-a)>l and a unitary expenditure elasticity
of demand for each variety (see, for example, Grossman and Helpman, 1989d).
We assume that a unit of any brand can be produced with one unit of labor,

with labor again being the sole primary input. In this case, marginal
production costs equal the wage rate w and oligopolistic price competition
among suppliers of available varieties implies mark-up pricing,

(18)

p —

or

(1/a)w

for every product at each point in time. This equation is analogous to (8).
It implies that profits per brand are i—(l-a)E/n, where E is total spending.

Entrepreneurs must devote resources to R&D

in

order to bring out new

products)1 Product development requires aD/K units of labor per increment to
the set of varieties, where K is the stock of knowledge capital at a point in

time. Knowledge capital is a public good; it is freely available to all
potential innovators. Moreover, knowledge capital is generated as a by-

product of product development.12 For simplicity, let K—n. Then product
development costs are cfl—waD/n. We assume that the developer of a new variety
maintains indefinite monopoly power in the sub-market for her specific brand.

11 Or, more precisely, resources are spent to expand the measure of the
set of available products by dn.
12 For discussion of this assumption, see Roiner (1988).

19

Free entry by entrepreneurs ensures that, whenever innovation takes
place, the present value of the infinite stream of future profits exactly

matches the cost of product development. The time derivative of this zeroprof it condition gives the following no-arbitrage condition:

(1-a)E÷
ñ_R
wa
This condition equates the interest rate to the instantaneous profit rate

r/c- ci-a)E/wa0 plus the capital gain c/c — w/w
We

-

again choose labor as numeraire; i.e., w(t)—l for all t. Let 7—n/n be

the growth rate of the number of varieties. Then, using (7), we can reexpress the no-arbitrage condition as

(19)

—

(l-a)E

-

-

which is analogous to (9) above. Here a0 plays the role of a and y plays

the

role of &; the latter analogy will become clearer from what follows.
Total demand for labor is the sum of employment in R&D, (a0/n)n, and that

in manufacturing, E/p—E. Thus, labor-market clearing implies

(20)

a0-y+aE—L

which is analogous to (10). The differential equation (19) together with the
side condition (20) determine the evolution of the economy over time, given an

initial value of spending. Clearly, the system can be described by means of a
figure that is analogous to Figure 1, with y replacing

on the horizontal

20

axis. Hence, the economy jumps to a steady state that satisfies (20)

and a

steady-state no-arbitrage condition,

(21)

that

(l-a)E/aD — p +

is analogous to (11).

Comparing (l0)-(ll) with (20)-(21) establishes the equivalence of the two

reduced-form systems. In the latter, y

replaces

&,

aD

replaces a1, and a

replaces 6. Clearly, all comparative static calculations that apply to one
system must apply to both.

The following observations may clarify the similarities between the two

approaches and the economic structures that they generate. In both models,
agents invest resources to acquire the exclusive ability to manufacture a new

product. Moreover, the R&D activity generates unappropriable spillovers

in

both cases. In the variety-based growth model, the R&D externality is quite
explicit. Each completed product development project lowers the cost

of later

R&D efforts. In the quality-based model, the externality is implicit. When
one improvement project succeeds, other researchers can quit their efforts to

achieve that same innovation and begin to work on the jj improvement.

In

both instances we assume that by observing the results from one innovative
success, researchers can learn scientific and engineering facts that are

useful in their own research endeavors. This seems a natural and important
characteristic of research and reflects the public good nature of technology
as information.

The two approaches do diverge, however, in their welfare implications.
Proceeding with the analysis of the variety-based growth model, we note that

21

(17) implies13

(22)

log u(t) —

log

E +

log

a +

7t(l/a-1)

which is analogous to (12). Equation (22) gives the growth rate in the
variety-based model as g—-y(l/a-1). Substituting (22) into (1), we obtain the
welfare function

(23)

pU —

log

E +

log

a +

(-y/p)(1/a-l)

which is comparable to (14). Now we can maximize (23) subject to (20), and
compare the resulting optimal f

to

the market equilibrium y. We find in

contrast to our earlier result that whenever the optimal rate of innovation is
positive this rate exceeds the market determined rate (see Romer, 1988 and

Grossman and Helpman, 1989c for similar results). The reason is as follows.

Each new product initially contributes (l-a)En'12 to consumer surplus. The
marginal entrant inflicts an aggregate loss of profits of (l—a)E/an on the n

existing firms. The marginal utility of income is an11'. Thus, the static
consumer-surplus effect and the static business-stealing effect just offset

one another. Moreover, both of these effects compound similarly over time.
What remains then is the intertemporal spillover effect whereby current

technological advance reduces the cost of later R&D. Therefore, the marginal
innovation conveys a net positive externality in the variety-based growth
model and equilibrium growth is always too slow.

13 In writing (22) we assume without loss of generality that the initial
number of differentiated products n(0)—l.

22
V.

Resources and Growth
We endeavor now to extend our model of quality-based innovation in order

to bring out certain features of the growth process that are not evident from

a one-factor, one-manufacturing-sector formulation. Specifically, we study

in

this section the relationship between the growth rate and the accumulation of

particular factors of production. In the next section we examine the long-run
pattern of trade in a two-country world economy. It should be apparent as we
proceed, in view of our findings in the previous section, that similar results
apply to an appropriately extended variant of the variety-based growth model.

We add to the model of Section II a sector that produces a homogeneous

product of fixed quality. This might be a service sector, for example. We
replace (1) with the augmented preferences,

(24)

U — 5 et[slog u(t) + (l-s)log y(t)]dt

where y(t) represents consumption of the homogenous product and u(t) is as

before (see (2)). Then consumers allocate at every point in time a share s of
their spending to the vertically differentiated products and a share (l-s) to

the outside good y. The time pattern of spending follows (7).

We add as well a second primary factor of production. We shall refer to
the two factors as unskilled labor (L) and skilled labor (H). Let unit
manufacturing costs of the vertically differentiated products be cX(wL,wa) and
those of the outside good be cy(wt,ws), where w denotes the reward to input
1, i—L,H. The cost of a unit of innovative activity is given by cI(wL,wH).

We assume perfect competition in the market for the outside good and
Bertrand competition as before in the markets for the vertically differ-

23

entiated products. Let the former good serve now as numeraire. Then we have
in place of (8) the following pricing equations:

(25)

Px — AcX(wL,wH);

(26)

1 — cY(wL,wB)

Factor market clearing requires

(27)

aI(wL,wfl)& ÷ a,(wL,wH)X + aY(wL,wB)Y

—

[]

where a() represents the cost minimizing input vector per unit of output for
i—I,X,Y, and X and Y denote output quantities. The input vectors are given by
the gradients of the respective unit-cost functions. Static equilibrium in
the commodity market entails

(28)

s/(l-s) — pxX/p1Y

Finally, the steady-state no-arbitrage condition reads (in place of (11)):

(29)

(l_6)pX/c1(wt,w11) — p +

&

As before, convergence to the steady state is immediate.
We wish to explore the relationship between the growth rate and the size

of the resource base. A common feature of recent models of endogenOUs
technological progress has been that larger economies grow faster (see

Aghion

24

and Howitt, 1989, Roiner, 1988, and Grossman and Helpman, 1989a). We shall
show that this result depends critically on the general equilibrium structure

of these models. In general, only accumulation of factors that are used
intensively in the growth-generating activities guarantees faster growth.

To make this point, we pursue the special case in which R&D and
manufacturing of X use only skilled labor while production of the outside good

uses both primary factors. With this restriction, we can combine (25)-(28) to

obtain

a& ÷ I—

(30)

Y(w5,L) +
H1(w5,L) — H

Aw

where Y() represents the profit-maximizing supply of the outside good and

H() represents that sector's demand for skilled labor when it employs the
entire unskilled labor force. Similarly, we combine (25)-(26) and (28)-(29)
to obtain

(31)

We

Y(w L)

(1-6)— wa1

—

p +

plot these two equations as HR and Jill, respectively, in Figure 3.

Now consider an increase in H. This shifts the HH curve up and to the
left, while leaving JUl unaffected. The new equilibrium involves more

innovation and faster growth.14 Here we see that accumulation of the factor
used intensively in R&D indeed is conducive to growth.

When L increases, both curves shift to the right. The rate of innovation
grows if and only if the rightward shift of JUT from A exceeds the rightward
14 The growth rate of a consumption index now is sLlogX.

25

shift of HH. This occurs when the elasticity of substitution between skilled
and unskilled labor in the production of the outside good is larger than one,

but not when it is smaller than one)-5 Intuitively, the outside good draws
skilled labor away from R&D and X due to an output effect, but releases
skilled labor as w11 rises due to a substitution effect. When the elasticity
of substitution is large, the latter effect dominates and so more skilled
labor finds itself employed in R&D in the new general equilibrium.

A more striking result emerges from a different special case. Suppose
R&D uses only skilled labor, the outside good uses only unskilled labor, and
the vertically differentiated products require both factors in fixed

proportions. It is straightforward to show that, in these circumstances, an
increase in the supply of unskilled labor

slow growth. The general point

is that a positive monotonic relationship between resource supplies and
employment of those resources in the growth-generating activities exists only
for certain general equilibrium structures.

VI. International Trade
In this section we show how quality ladders can be embedded in a model of

international trade. We use the two-factor, two-sector structure of Section V
to explore the nature of a trading equilibrium and to examine the long-run

15 The rightward shift in hUt is given by the change in w5 that leaves
Y(w,L)/w5 constant as L increases. The rightward shift in 1*1 is larger or
smaller than this as H1 increases or decreases with L when Y(w5,L)/w5 is kept
constant. Using the condition for optimal H1 (marginal product equals wage),
we find that H1 increases with L when Y(w5,L)/w5 is constant if and only if
is the
9H+EH>l, where O is the share of H in the cost of producing Y and
absolute value of the elasticity of the marginal product of skilled labor in
the Y sector. Since Bfl-+-Eli=l+EL(l-a), where EL is defined analogously to c
and a is the elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled labor in
the production of the outside good, our claim is established.

26

pattern of trade when resources in each country are devoted to improving the
quality of some products.

To begin with, suppose that each vertically differentiated product must
be manufactured in the country in which the most recent product improvement

has taken place. That is, we rule out international licensing and multinational corporations for the moment. In Figure 4 we draw a rectangle whose
dimensions represent the aggregate world endowments of H and L. If there were
no country borders, then the equilibrium would be that described in Section V

above. We ask now whether an equilibrium with free trade can reproduce the
essential features of that integrated equilibrium, despite the fact that
factors now are restricted to stay within their countries of origin.

The vector OQ* in the figure represents the total employment of H and L
in the activities of product improvement and manufacturing of X in the

equilibrium of Section V (henceforth, the "integrated equilibrium"). This

vector is given by a1.+axX. The vector Q0 similarly represents employment
in the production of the outside good in the integrated equilibrium. We
depict the endowments of the two countries by a point in the rectangle, with
the vector of factors measured from the origin at 0 representing the endowment

of the home country and that measured from 0 representing the endowment of

the foreign country. We claim that if the endowment point, marked E, falls
within the parallelogram OQO*Q*, then there exists a trading equilibrium with
all aggregate variables identical to those of the integrated equilibrium.
At E, the home country is relatively well endowed with skilled labor.
Suppose that factor prices and interest rates in the two countries were
equalized nonetheless and that their levels were the same as in the integrated

27

equi1thrium)6 Then techniques of production would be the same. The home
country achieves full employment if it employs OP in the combined activity of

product improvement and manufacturing of X and OP in the production of

outside goods. Full employment obtains abroad when that country employs OP
in the combined activity and O*P in manufacturing of Y. These employment
vectors give the same aggregate levels of activity as in the integrated

equilibrium. The ratio of the line segments OP/OQ gives the number n of
vertically differentiated products that is produced at home. The home country
also performs a fraction n of world R&D activity, and thereby maintains

leadership in n products in all periods.17 The foreign country produces the

remaining n—l-n vertically differentiated products and undertakes the
fraction n of R&D effort.
It remains to be shown only that, with these proposed allocations, the

product markets clear and all profitability conditions are satisfied. Since
we have provisionally assumed that factor prices are the same in each country
as they were in the integrated equilibrium, all activities break even in each

country, as they all did in the integrated equilibrium. Also, with interest
rates as before, the no-arbitrage condition continues to be satisfied in each

country. With the same costs of production, commodity prices are the same as

in the integrated equilibrium. Aggregate income is the same as well. Since

16 International trade in financial assets would of course guarantee
equalization of interest rates. However, as we shall see, a steady-state
equilibrium exists with identical interest rates in the two countries even
when financial assets are not traded.
17 Entrepreneurs in the home country might, for example, be the only ones
Or
who attempt to improve a fraction n of the products, each at intensity &.
home entrepreneurs may attempt to improve the entire spectrum of vertically
differentiated products at intensity nt. Other allocations are possible as
well, so long as the aggregate innovation effort devoted to each product ' is
the same and equal to t. from the integrated equilibrium.

28

preferences are homothetic, the distribution of income does not matter for

aggregate demand, and so product markets clear. This completes our demonstration that commodity trade (with or without trade in financial assets)
suffices to reproduce the essential features of the integrated steady-state
equilibrium.

What then is the pattern of world trade? Suppose, to begin with, that
financial assets are not traded; i.e., each country must finance all R&D that

takes place within its borders from domestic savings. Then the trade account
must balance. The homotheticity of preferences implies an identical
composition of aggregate demand in the two countries. But from Figure 4 we
see that the unskilled labor abundant (foreign) country specializes relatively

in the production of the unskilled labor-intensive (outside) good. Hence the
home country imports the outside good. With trade balanced, this country must
be a net exporter of vertically differentiated products. This pattern of
intersectoral trade corresponds of course to the predictions of the Heckscher-

Ohlin model. Here it applies to the steady state of a dynamic world economy
with continual quality upgrading.

The two-country world economy does not converge immediately to a steady
state, unless the initial ownership shares in blueprints for frontier products

happen to coincide with the n and n of the steady-state equilibrium. In
general, these shares are attained during a phase of dynamic adjustment. If
international trade in financial assets takes place along the adjustment path,
then typically the steady state will not be characterized by balanced trade.

Although the production patterns of the steady state remain as described
above, it may happen that one country will import both the outside good and
(on net) vertically differentiated products. It can do so if its steady-state

29

surplus on service account is large enough. Trade imbalance can never reverse
the pattern of trade from that predicted by the }Ieckscher-Ohlin theorem,
however.

Finally, we relax the assumption that product improvement and manu-

facturing of the improved product must take place in the same country. In the
region of factor price equalization (OQO*Q*) there is of course no incentive
to separate these activities, because the same costs prevail everywhere.
Suppose, however, that the endowment point lies in triangle ODQ of Figure 4.

Then factor price equalization does not obtain when products are improved and

produced in the same country. If these two activities differ in their factor
proportions, then each country enjoys a comparative cost advantage in one of

them. Assume for concreteness that at common factor prices R&D employs more
skilled labor relative to unskilled labor than does manufacturing of the

vertically differentiated products. Let OD and DQ be the employment vectors
in these two activities, respectively, in the integrated equilibrium. Then,
following Grossman and Helpman (1989d), it is easy to show that a suitable

number of multinational corporations will form. These firms undertake their
R&D at home, but perform their subsequent manufacturing activities in the

foreign country. For endowments in ODQ, the formation of multinationals
restores factor price equalization and enables the world.economy to once again

reproduce the integrated equilibrium. For still larger differences in factor
composition across countries, multinational corporations still emerge but the
trade equilibrium differs from that of the integrated economy.

30

VII. Concluding Remarks

We have developed a model of ongoing product improvements. This model
draws several building blocks from earlier work by Segerstrom et.al (1987) and

Aghion and Howitt (1989). Entrepreneurs race to bring out the next generation
of a continuum of goods. In each industry success occurs with a probability
per unit time that is proportional to the total R&D resources targeted to

improving that product. Each product follows a stochastic progression up the
quality ladder. But the equilibrium is characterized by an aggregate rate of
innovation that is determinate, and constant in the steady state.
The model captures many realistic aspects of the innovation process.

Individual products become obsolete after a time. Progress is not uniform

across sectors. Research responds to profit incentives. And innovators are
able to benefit from observing and analyzing the research successes of their

rivals. These features fit the detailed historical descriptions of industrial
R&D provided by Freeman (1982) and others.
We related our approach to an alternative one that treats industrial R&D
as a process of creating an ever expanding range of horizontally differ-

entiated products. The latter framework has been applied to issues of longrun technological progress and growth by Rower (1988) and ourselves

(1989a,b,c). We showed that the two approaches though seemingly quite
distinct actually share identical reduced forms for their simplest variants.
Thus, both approaches yield the same answers to many positive questions about

the determinants of the long-run growth rate. However, as Aghion and Howitt
(1989) pointed out, the normative analyses of the variety-based and quality-

based growth models differ. In the former, the equilibrium rate of innovation
always is too slow. But when growth derives from product improvements, it may

31

be slower or faster than is optimal. We have been able to derive and contrast
these results using very comparable versions of the alternative models.
In one section of this paper, we cast the innovation process in a two-

country setting. We described a long-run equilibrium with product improveruents taking place in each country, with intra-industry trade in vertically

differentiated products, and with inter-industry trade of technologically

progressive goods for homogeneous, unchanging goods. The Heckscher-Ohlin
theorem predicts the long-run pattern of intersectoral trade despite the

diversion of resources to R&D and the continual technological advance that
takes place.

Building on the framework developed here, we provide a richer story of
international trade in a companion paper (Grossman and Helpman, l989e).

There, all product improvements take place in a high-wage region with

comparative advantage in R&D. But entrepreneurs in the low-wage region are
able to produce clones of state-of-the-art products if they succeed in reverse

engineering. Imitation, like innovation, requires resources and entails
uncertain prospects. Unlike earlier models of the product life cycle based on
horizontally differentiated products (e.g., Krugman, 1979, or Grossman and
Helpman, 1989b), this one predicts that the locus of output of a particular
type of good will move back and forth between the North and the South as the

former region captures market share when quality improvements take place and
the latter then begins the process of imitating the new, improved product.
This description of the product cycle would seem apt for many industries;
e.g., personal computers and many consumer electronics.

We believe that our model is rich in its predictions, yet technically

quite manageable. It might gainfully be extended to include endogenous

32

accumulation of primary factors. We hope that it will prove useful in
application to additional issues concerning innovation and long-run growth.

33

References

Aghion, Philippe and Howitt, Peter (1989), "A Model of Growth Through Creative
Destruction," mimeo.
Dasgupta, Partha and Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1980), "Uncertainty, Industrial
Structure, and the Speed of R&D." Bell Journal of Economics 11, pp.1-28.
Dixit, Avinash and Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1977), "Monopolistic Competition and
Optimum Product Diversity," American Economic Review 67, pp.297-308.
Dosi, Giovanni (1988), "Sources, Procedures, and Microeconomic Effects of
Innovation," Journal of Economic Literature 26, pp.1120-1171.
Ethier, Wilfred J. (1982), "National and International Returns to Scale in the
Modern Theory of International Trade," American Economic Review 72,
pp.389-405.
Feller, William (1968), An Introduction to Probability Theory and its
Application, 3rd Edition (New York: John Wiley).
Freeman, Christopher (1982), The Economics of Industrial Innovation, 2nd
Edition (Cambridge MA: MIT Press).
Grossman, Gene M. and Helpman, Elhanan (1989a), "Comparative Advantage and
Long-Run Growth," Working Paper No. 2809, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

_____ (1989b), "Endogenous Product Cycles," Working Paper No. 2913, National
Bureau of Economic Research.

_____ (1989c), "Growth and Welfare in a Small Open Economy," Working Paper
No. 2970, National Bureau of Economic Research.

_____ (1989d), "Product Development and International Trade," Journal of
Political Economy 97, forthcoming.

_____ (1989e), "Quality Ladders and Product Cycles," in preparation.
Judd, Kenneth (1985), "On the Performance of Patents," Econometrica 53,
pp.567-585.

Krugman, Paul R. (1988), "Endogenous Innovation, International Trade and
Growth," paper presented at the SUNY-Buffalo Conference on *The Problem
of Development'.

_____ (1979), "A Model of Innovation, Technology Transfer, and the World
Distribution of Income." Journal of Political Economy 87, pp.253-266.

Lee, Tom and Wilde, Louis L. (1980), "Market Structure and Innovation: A
Reformulation," Quarterly Journal of Economics 94, pp.429-436.

34

Loury, Glenn (1979), "Market Structure and Innovation," Quarterly Journal of
Ecpnotnica 93, pp.395-410.
Romer, Paul M. (1988), "Endogenous Technological Change," paper presented at
the SUNY-Buffalo Conference on 'The Problem of Development'.
Scherer, Frederick M. (1980), Industrial Market Structure and Economic
Performance, 2nd edition (Boston MA: Houghton-Mifflin).
Segerstrom, Paul S., Anant, T.C.A., and Dinopoulos, Elias. "A Schumpeterian
Model of the Product Life Cycle." Econometrics and Economic Theory Paper
No. 8606. East Lansing, MI: Michigan State University, 1987.

</ref_section>

ure

t

E

U

iT

L/I
E

U

L
L.

L

I>,

4

'4:'>,

N)

1

C

ID

-n

3ure 3

H

IT

iT
H

fl9ure

4

L
HI'

1*
0

L

