                                                           NBER Working Paper #3103
                                                           September 1989


          WORLD INTEGRATION, COMPETITIVE AND BARGAINING REGIMES SWITCH: AN EXPLORATION


                                                     ABSTRACT

The purpose of this paper is to study the role of an endogenous switch from a competitive to a bargaining

international equilibrium. We consider two trading blocks, which can engage in a free-market determined trade, or

a bargaining dictated trade. Bargaining can be called for by either pany, and it may involve a fixed real cost. We

propose a framework in order to deal with these issues. We apply such a framework to a symmetric global

environment, where the bargaining equilibrium is shown to offer an international diversification of the country-

specific shocks, whereas the competitive equilibrium retains the country specific nature of the shocks. The degree

of trade dependency is shown to determine the risk diversification achieved via the bargaining process, the

frequency of bargaining, and the volume of trade. An increase in the relative importance of the trade dependent

activities is associated with greater international diversification of country-specific shocks, and with a greater

frequency of bargaining. We derive the optimal investment -- less costly bargaining will move us towards a comer

solution, where trade dependency and local shock diversification are maximized. With positive bargaining costs,

we will observe an internal solution with smaller diversification of local shocks. In such an environment the

choice of optimal trade dependency balances at the margin the expected diversification against the costs of

bargaining.




                                                           Joshua Aizenman
                                                           1101 E. 58th St, G.S.B.
                                                           University of Chicago
                                                           Chicago, IL 60637
                                                           (312)702-7270
