                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     AN EQUILIBRIUM THEORY OF EXCESS VOI..ATILITY AND MEAN REVERSION IN STOCK
                                  MARKET PRICES




                                  Alan   .1. Marcus




                             Working Paper No. 3106




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge MA 02138
                                 September 1989




This paper is psrc of N8ER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the suthcr not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
I

                                            NBER Working Paper #3106
                                            September 1989


                  AN EQUILIBRIUM THEORY OF EXCESS VOLATILITY AND MEAN
                           REVERSION IN STOCK MARKET PRICES


                                       ABSTRACT


    Apparent mean reversion and excess volatility in stock market prices can be
    reconciled with the Efficient Market Hypothesis by
                                                        specifying investor
    preferences that give rise to the demand for portfolio insurance.
                                                                        Therefore,
    several supposed macro anomalies can be shown to be consistent with a rational
    market in a simple and parsimonious model of the economy. Unlike other models
    that have derived equilibriwn mean reversion in prices, the model in this paper
    does not require that the production side of the economy exhibit mean
    reversion. It also predicts that mean reversion and excess volatility will
    differ substantially across subperiods.




                                           Alan J. Marcus
                                           Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation
                                           1759 Business Center Drive
                                           P.O. Box 4115
                                           Reston, VA 22090
                                           (703)759-8001
1.   Introduction

     The two biggest challenges to the Efficient Market Hypothesis in

recent years have been findings that stock market prices are excessively

volatile compared to dividends [Shiller (1981)], and that aggregate stock

price indices exhibit mean reversion [Fama and French (1988), Poterba and

Sunirners (1988)]. Most researchers of these phenomena are careful to note

that their findings are not necessarily inconsistent with efficient

markets, and in particular, that they can be reconciled with the E?ffi via

time-varying interest rates or risk prernia. Nevertheless, it appears

difficult at first glance to imagine credible models of the economy that

would generate equilibrium behavior consistent with these phenomena, and

the literature by and large leaves the impression that the most

economical explanation of these "macro anomalies" lies in systematic

overreaction of security prices to exogenous shocks. Indeed, the now

common terminology "fads model" and "excess" volatility reveals the

tentative inference drawn from these studies.

     More recently, equilibrium models consistent with apparent mean

reversion in stock market prices have been advanced by Cecchetti, Lam,

and Mark (1988) and Brock and LeBaron (1989), Both of these papers use

variants of Lucas' (1978) model, and both exploit consumption smoothing

motives to generate stationarity in stock price distributions. In

Cecchetti et al., the real sector is modeled by positing two states (boom

and bust) for the macro economy with Markov transition probabilities. In

low dividend periods, individuals desire to sell assets to maintain
  consumption levels. In aggregate, however, net demand cannot be

 negative. Instead, asset prices fall and expected returns rise. Thus,

 the driving force behind mean reversion in prices is the desire for

 consumption smoothing in the presence of stochastic, but (because of the
                                                                             4
 two-state   assumption) essentially mean-reverting, shocks to dividend

 growth. In Brock and LeBaron, a similar effect is achieved by

 considering i.i.d. shocks to an otherwise fixed production function.

 While they focus on liquidity constraints at the level of the firm, they

 also show that the tendency for high
                                        consumption to revert back to
 typical consumption will cause mean reversion in prices at an aggregate

 level. In both papers, there is a well-defined notion of "good times"

 and "bad times," and the economy tends
                                          on average toward normal times.
      This paper also is an attempt to reconcile mean reversion and excess

 volatility with market rationality. Unlike the previous literature,

 however, the model focuses on risk aversion per Se, and is unconcerned

with consumption smoothing. Indeed, even if the real economy as measured

by dividends or earnings follows a pure random walk, so that agents do

not foresee changes in output, stock prices in this model still will seem

to exhibit both mean reversion and excess
                                            volatility. This result
therefore extends and complements the results in the Lucas-based models,

and shows that even a very simple one-period model can generate

meaningful mean reversion and excess volatility.

     In contrast to the Lucas-based models, the model in this paper

relies on the particular specification of
                                            Utility functions to generate
interesting results. However, not much Structure is necessary to obtain

these results. In particular, I show that a sufficient condition for




                               —2—
both mean reversion and excess volatility is that the representative

agent in the economy would be a demander of portfolio insurance if the

risk-free rate and market price of risk were constant. This condition is

straightforward and is consistent with the demand for portfolio insurance

evident in the marketplace. The model used here is related to Blacks

(1989) model in that both rely on an inverse relationship between the

market price of risk and asset prices to generate mean reversion. Black,

however, posits this relationship a priori, and explores its

consequences. Here, the derivation of the relationship is the central

focus of the paper.

     Section 2 of this paper lays out a formal model of the economy and

shows how mean reversion and apparent excess volatility can arise in a

rational market. Section 3 explores the potential magnitude of these

effects. Section 4 concludes.



2. Equilibrium Macro Anomalies

     Because the demand for portfolio insurance will play a central role

in the analysis to follow, I will specify a utility function intimately

related to such a demand. Consider, therefore, the family of utility

functions of end-of—period wealth of the form


     U(w) =              (w—w
                            mm
                               .)                                         (1)
                   l-y

where W .
       mm
              is   a floor on wealth that might correspond to a subsistence

value and is the natural level at which wealth would be insured. The

function in equation (1) is a member of the HARA family of utility

functions. Perold (1986) shows that such a derived utility function is




                                    —3—
consistent with a more rigorously defined intertemporal utility of

consumption function, U(C), where

     U(C) =

and C .    is   subsistence consumption. Similarly, Constantinides (3.988>

derives a similar, though more complex, version of (1) where

"subsistence" consumption is determined by habit     formation.   [See his


equation (11).]

        It is easy to show that the relative risk aversion, A, of an

inveStor with utility function (1) is

                                                                        (2)
                   mis


        As W becomes infinite, preferences asymptote to the familiar

constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) formulation. As W approaches

H        however, agents become absolutely risk-averse.
 mis,
        Merton (1971) demonstrates that in an economy with one riskless

asset paying rf and one risky asset (the market) with expected return

rM and variance o, the optimal allocation, x, to the risky

asset will be

            rM —   r
             Aa
Therefore, the dollar demand by the representative agent for holdings of

the risky asset is

        XW=rMf (H—H.)
                   nun
                                                                             (4)




Demand is formally identical to the CRRA case except that wealth is




                                   —4—
                                                                                         F



 replaced by the ____________
                  surolus of wealth over W,.

         Call the value of the risky asset P. and the net supply of the

 risk-free asset F, so that W = P + F.         The model allows F =     0.   Then the

market clearing condition for the risky asset is obtained by equating

asset demand from (4) to the value of the risky asset.

         r —r
         M (P+F—w.
            2    mm               )   =p                                           (5)




     Now consider an exogenous stock to aggregate profitability which

lowers the value of P.
                                                      rM and , the fall
                                For fixed values of

in the left-hand side of (5) will exceed that of the right-hand side if

and only if W          ,   F, which certainly would be the case if risk-free
                mm n

borrowing    were an inside asset.1 When W .          , F,   the exogenous
                                          mmn
reduction in the value of holdings of the risky asset leads to an even

larger reduction in demand for the risky asset. After the shock, there

will be a desire to sell off shares to restore portfolio balance. But

this response constitutes a generalized version of portfolio insurance,

whereby investors follow a rule that shifts the portfolio from risky to

riskless assets as the risky asset falls in value (Perold and Sharpe,

1988).

     Of course, there cannot be a net demand for portfolio insurance in

the face of fixed market parameters, since not
                                                        everyone in equilibriwn

can simultaneously desire to buy or sell shares. Leland (1980) takes the

investment opportunity set as given and examines the conditions

determining which heterogeneous investors will be suppliers or demanders

of portfolio insurance. Here, we impose more homogeneity on preferences




                                      —5—
 consistent with a more rigorously defined intertemporal utility of

 consumption function, U(C), where

              U(C) = (C-C .
                         mm       )l_Y
 and C .
              mm
                   is   subsistence consumption. Similarly, Constantinides (1988)

 derives a similar, though more complex, version of (1) where

 "subsistence" consumption is determined by habit formation. [See his

equation (11).]

              It is easy to show that the relative risk aversion, A, of an

investor with utility function (1) is

                        w
                                                                             (2)
                            mm


              As W becomes infinite, preferences asymptote to the familiar

constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) formulation. As W approaches
Wmi   a
          ,    however, agents become absolutely risk-averse.

              Merton (1971) demonstrates that in an economy with one riskless

asset paying rf and one risky asset (the market) with expected return

rM and variance e, the optimal allocation, x, to the risky
asset will be

                   rMrf
                   A6

Therefore, the dollar demand by the representative agent for holdings of

the risky asset is

          xW = rM
                        —
                            rf   (W —
                                         mm )
                                          .
                                                                                (4)



Demand is formally identical to the CRRA case except that wealth is
 and allow   the market parameter rM to adjust to maintain equilibrium.

 As agents sell of f shares in response to the exogenous shock, prices fall

 further and rM increases. The market clearing Condition, equation (5),

 is restored when
                    rM increases by enough to equate quantity demanded to
 the market value of the risky asset. 2

      Therefore, the same condition that gives rise to a demand for

 portfolio insurance, W .
                        mm
                             , F, also will result in both excess

 volatility and mean reversion in the price of the risky asset.     Consider

 first excess volatility. The shock to corporate profitability, or for

 concreteness dividends, lowers prices directly through the present value

 relationship. Then there is a secondary, or "multiplier effect" as

decreased demand for shares lowers prices even further.    As a result, P
will be more volatile than dividends, kow consider mean reversion. The

equilibrium expected market return will increase after the market price

falls, thereby leading to the appearance of mean reversion iii prices. We

turn to the potential magnitude of these effects in the next section.

     As a digression, however, note that it is easy to Stretch the model

a bit to rationalize the 1.0 and Macinley (1987) result that at short

horizons, the market exhibits Positive serial correlation. If portfolio

adjustments occur with a lag after the market is shocked, then the price

effect of the change in equilibrium rM which reinforces the exogenous

Shock to prices, will be spread out over a brief period, leading to

positive short-term Serial correlation in aggregate market returns. Over

longer horizons, however, after the market equilibrates to the new

expected return, serial correlation in returns will appear negative.




                               —6..
3. Nerica. Solutions
    To quantify the potential for mean reversion and excess volatility,

we need to specify the stock valuation process. One of the simplest

specifications is that dividends, D, follow a lognormal random walk with

trend. Suppose, therefore, that

     Dt =   Dtl    exp(u + g -   2,2)
where u is normally distributed as N(O, 2) and g is the trend growth

rate of dividends. Given this specification, the value of the risky

asset is simply

             D                                                            (6)
            rM - g


     Recall that as D is shocked, rM will change as well, leading to a

secondary impact on P. The elasticity of P with respect to D is, from

equation (6)

     dP/P
             = -PM                                                        (7)
     dD/D             dD


Equation (7) is the excess volatility relationship. Because

drM/dD C 0,       the proportional change in the market price when D is

shocked will exceed the proportional change in dividends, and indeed, in

a single factor model with shocks only to D, the relative volatilities

will be

        2     2        dr 2                                                 (8)
             aD(lPii)
                   dO


where       is the variance of the market price, P.

     Equations (5), (6), and (8) allow for numerical solution of the

market equilibrium. For chosen values of Wmin D, y,




                                    —7—
                                                                                               t


      and   F, it   is possible to solve
                                                these equations for a, P. and
                                                                            rM.
            The Solution algorit
                                           proceeds as follows. At a given value of D
     and    an   initial guess for
                                            calculate from (5) and (6) the
     equi1ibri rate
                                 rM and corresponding value of P.     Calculate rM for
     a slightly higher value of D and evaluate
                                                           drM/dD. Use (8) to update
     the guess for Q.             Using this new guess,
                                                          repeat the process.
     Iterate until the the guess for
                                                  and the resultant values of P
     and drM/dD are consistent
                                        with equation (8).

            Figure 1 graphs the equiljbri
                                                    expected market return as a function
  of the current dividend
                                      levelfor parameters as follows: W
                                                                         mn=100;   F=90;
  rf...025; g=.02;                     At a dividend level
                                                             of 12, for example,
  the market rate is about
                                       .095. so that the market
                                                                  price is 12/(.095_.02)
 =    160, meaning that floor wealth,
                                                100, is about 40% of total wealth
 (90+160). As D becomes large, the equilibri
                                                              market return asymptotes to
                    2
                        +
                            rf                                                           (9)
 which is .08 using the
                                    chosen parameters.

        Equation (9) is the standard
                                                solution for market
                                                                      equi1ibrj in a
  CRRA economy with no inside asset, and no floor on
                                                      subsistence wealth.
 As D and,
            correspondingly P become large, both
                                                   floor wealth and the
 value of the riskiess
                        asset become relatively
                                                 trivial in comparison to W,
 while risk aversion
                      asymptotes to y• Therefore,
                                                    (9) becomes the
 Solutiø5 to (3) with A = 'y, x = 1, and

other extreme, as D falls,
                                            =          the. At
                             the egui1ibri value of rM becomes
unbounded at a positive value
                                of D, slightly below 6.8 in Figure 1.
Values of D less than the
                           asymptote value do not allow for market
equiljbrj. At these points
                                          the economy is so poor and correspondingly

                                                                                               t



                                          —8—
  risk averse that no promised return can induce enough demand to absorb

 the supply of risky shares. Figures 2 and 3 illustrate the problem. In

 Figure 2, as rM increases, stock demand initially increases (a
                                                                               5



 substitution   effect), but ultimately must fall because increases in

 reduce P, and thereby overall wealth, which eventually dominates the

 substitution effect. Indeed, by the time rM is high enough to drive P
 down to W .    — F, demand will fall to zero. Note that while there
          mm                                                         are
 two intersections of the demand and supply curves, only the equilibrium

 on the left is stable. If D is too low given the values of y and

     as in Figure 3, there will be no intersection between the

 demand for and the value of the risky asset.

      Returning to Figure 1, it is apparent that equilibrium mean

 reversion" can vary considerably across subperiods. When wealth is high

 relative to W., the equilibrium expected return is nearly constant,

and the aggregate market should obey a random walk if the driving

variable D is a random walk. In periods
                                             that include severe recessions
or depressions, however, wealth_induced
                                          changes in risk aversion will be
correspondingly severe and can lead to equilibrium returns that vary

substantially and inversely with the level of stock prices. This

implication is consistent with the finding of
                                                 Kim, Nelson, and Startz
(1988) that mean reversion in the postwar period is not significantly

different from zero, but is significant in
                                              periods that include the Great
Depression.

     Figure 4 presents the ratio of     to      as a function

of D. The relationship is similar to that observed for equilibrium

rM. At low wealth levels, small changes in wealth result in
                                                                relatively




                               —9—
large changes in rM and, consequently, to a larger multiplier effect on

stock prices. Hence, the "excess volatility" ratio is greater in this

region. At higher wealth levels, the volatility ratio asymptotes to

1.0. Again, the excess volatility ratio can be arbitrarily high, and

should be expected to vary across subperiods.



4. Conclusion

     Apparent mean reversion and excess volatility in stock market prices

are consistent with a rational market equilibrium in an economy that

would be characterized by a net demand for portfolio insurance if the

market price of risk were fixed. The model developed here therefore

shows that the Efficient Market Hypothesis is broadly consistent with a

range of recent "macro anomalies." Moreover, the model sheds some light

on the different degrees of mean reversion measured in different

subperiods, as well as on the shorter—term positive serial correlation in

stock market prices.

     One obvious question is whether an equilibrium model like the one in

this paper can be empirically tested against a fads model. An empirical

implication of this model is that periods of high mean reversion and

highe excess volatility ought to coincide and ought to occur following

severe market declines. A model of market irrationality that holds that

fads are essentially overreactions to exogenous shocks which the market

eventually corrects also would predict a coincidence of mean reversion

and excess volatility, but not necessarily following bear markets. If,

however, market mispricing is independent of fundamentals, perhaps

deriving from noise traders for example, then it is possible that




                              — 10 —
                                                                   I




episodes of excess   volatility   and mean reversion would occur

independently leading to another difference in the empirical

implications of the two models.




                                    -   11 -
                                Footnotes




1.   If Win exceeds F then the market equilibrium (equation (5)]

     requires that (rMrf)/Y    exceeds 1, implying in turn

     that the LHS has a greater sensitivity to P than the RHS.



     It is possible that an equilibriuni might not exist.    As rM rises,
2.

     demand as a fraction of wealth increases, but wealth falls because

     the price of the risky asset will fall as its discount rate

     increases. It is possible that there is no market clearing value of

                issue is explored more fully in the next section.
     rM. This




                                  12
                                                                                             -c




                                 References
                                                                                             -4
 Black, Fischer, "Mean Reversion and Consumption Smoothing," NBER Working
      Paper No. 2946 (April 1989).

 Brock. W.A. and LeBaron, B.D. "Liquidity Constraints in Production Based
      Asset Pricing Models." University of Wisconsin, Madison, Working
      Paper (March 1989).

 Cecchetti, Stephen G., P0k-sang Lan, and Nelson C Mark. "Mean Reversion in
      Equilibrium Asset Prices." NBER Working Paper No. 2762, (November
      1988).

 Constantinides, George M. "Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity
      Premium Puzzle," University of Chicago, Graduate School of Business,
      Working Paper No. 225 (February 1988).

 Fazna, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French. "Permanent and
                                                        Temporary
      Components of Stock Prices," Journal of Political Economy 96 (April
      1988), 246—273.

Kim, Myung Jig, Charles P. Nelson and Richard Startz. "Mean Reversion in
     Stock Prices? A Reappraisal of the Empirical Evidence," NBER Working
     Paper No. 2795 (December 1988).

Leland, Hayne E. "Who Should Buy Portfolio Insurance?" Journal of Finance
     35 (1980), 581—594.

1,0, Andrew W. and A. Craig MacKinlay. "Stock Market Prices Do Not Follow
     Random Walks: Evidence From a Simple Specification Test." NBER
     Working Paper No. 2168 (February 1987).

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. "Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy," Econometrica
     46 (November 1978), 1429—1445.

Merton, Robert C. "Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a
     Continuous—Time Model," Journal of Economic Theory 3 (December
     1971), 373—413.

Perold, Andre F, and William F, Sharpe. "Dynamic Strategies for Asset
     Allocation." Financial Analysts Journal (January-February 1988),

Perold, Andre F. "Constant Proportion Portfolio Insurance," Harvard
                                                                                 U. •'
     Business School, Working Paper (August 1986, Revision August 1987).
                                                                                         I
Poterba, James. M. and Lawrence H. Summers, "Mean Reversion in Stock
     Prices: Evidence and Implications," Journal of Financial Economics
     22 (October 1988).

Shiller, Robert J, "Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to Be Justified by
     Subsequent Changes in Dividends?" American Economic Review 71 (June
                                                                              I; I;
     1981) 421—436.



                             — 13   —
                                       Figure   1




                      Ec1LIibHum MartKet Hcturr
      0.15



      0.14



C
      0.13
=
3
Q)
fti

0     0.1?
Qi

 0
a:
D     0.11
4)
 0
 a)
 a
 x
Ld
       0.1



      0.09



       0.08
                                       14                 18   22   24
              b   8    10   12

                                 Current [)ivdend Level
                                                                         I
                                                        Figure 2

                                               Market EquWbaurri
     1   60

     150
              —
     140

     1:30     -
                                    Value of   risky asset
     120-
U)
     110—
C,

     100-


         80-
         70
                       /
                        /'
              —.   /             Demand           .
         SQ
                                 Risky Asset
2        o
o                                                             '-




                   -             - --_                             _                ___
                             5            10                 14         18          26   30
                                                 MorIt       Expected Return   ()
                                                                           Figure 3

                                                              M a r kE      11                   LI   fll
                                                                                 Eq LI iii H r
                          1   60
                         1    50
                         140
                         lv                      Value    of risky asset

 U                       120
 0
4)
i-n
                        11     0
 L
 0
4—                      100
U
C
U
E
lj)                           80
U                             70
C
0
4-                            60
0
a)                            50
3
U                         40
>
                          .30                    Demand    for
                                                 Risky asset
                          20
                              10

                              0
                                            13           10                14           18              22   26   30
                                                                 Market Expec ted Return     ()
      ,•--,   I, .   .*...,        ,.,.-t                                                                              .——.—-—,   ,—
                          VoIcitWy F.itio
             -                       Viir(r)/Vcjr([)
       1.7



       1.6



       1.5

 (I)
 a)
 U
 C
 0     1.4

 >
9-
0
0      1.3
0
Cr:



       12


       1.1




                          I      I     I                     I    I   I


             6   8   10   12          14                18   20       22   24
                               Current Dividend Level
