NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE STOLPER - SAMUELSON THEOREM RECONS IDERIa
AN EXAMPLE OF RICARDIAN DYNAMIC TRADE EFFECTS

Robert

Baldwin

Working Paper No. 3110

NATIONAL BUREAU OP ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1989

This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3110
September 1989
THE STOLPER-SANUELSON THEOREM RECONSIDERED:
AN EXAMPLE OF RICARDIAN DYNAMIC TRADE EFFECTS

AZSTRACT

Standard trade theory views the capital stock as an endowment. However, trade
policy can affect a country's steady—state capital stock. By ignoring the endogeneity

of capital, standard analysis is incomplete and can be misleading. For instance,
when capital in endogenous, the Stolper—Samuelson theorem incorrectly predicts the

long—run impact of a tariff n factor rewards in a 2—by—2 trade modeL Moreover,

the output effects of a trade policy can be greatly amplified by its indirect effect on

the steady—state capital stock. Since this indirect effect may take a very long time
to be fully realized, trade policy can have a long—lasting effect on growth. Ricardo

first studied

this link between trade and steady—state factor supplies.

Richard
NBER

E. Baldwin

Columbia University
611 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
(212)854-3491

This paper shows that trade policy can affect a nation's steady—state capital stock, so
standard trade theory, which takes the capital stock as an endowment, is Incomplete and
can be misleading. For instance, in a 2—by-—2 trade model the Stolper—Samuelson theorem
incorrectly predicts the long—run impact of a tariff on factor rewards. Moreover, the output
effects of a trade policy can be greatly amplified by its indirect effect on the steady—state
capital stock. Since this indirect effect may take a very long time to be fully realized, trade
policy can have a long—asting effect on growth. Ricardo first studied this link between
trade and steady—state factor supplies.

This paper points out that standard trade theory, which views countries' capital stocks as
endowments, is incomplete and can be misleading. A textbook version of the Stàlper—Sasnuelson

theorem states that if a country's imports are relatively capital—intensive, imposing a tariff
unambiguously raises the return on capital and lowers the return on labor.1'2 Yet the capital

stock is not like land or natural resources; it is endogenously determined by savings and
investment behavior which are in turn almost surely governed by intertemporal optimization.
Allowing the capital stock to be endogenous in the simplest two goods, two fictors trade model

yields substantially different results. This paper shows that the tariff mentioned above has
affect on factor prices. Instead, it leads to an endogenous change in the capital—labor ratio and
thus is entirely translated (via the Rybcsynski effect) into an output effect. A trivial implication
of this point is that the standard 2—by—2—by—2 trade model should not take capital as a factor.

Capital, however, is an important factor of production in advanced industrialized countries.

If a nation's capital stock is determined endogenously, trade policy will affect its steady—state
level in almost any inoacl where trade policy affects factor rewards. Thus standard trade analysis,
which focuses on static allocation and strategic effects, is incomplete. In other words, by ignoring

the endogeneity of capital, standard trade policy analysis .n.... what could be a quantitatively
Important effect. Baldwin (1989b) quantifies this effect in a simple one —, two factor model
1

and shows that this indirect, dynamic effect can be quite large. Moreover, since the adjustment of

the capital stock may take a very long time, trade policy can have a very long—lasting effect on
the growth rate of output.
Ricardo 's Dynamic Model
Ricardo (1815) emphasised this dynamic effect in a simple model where growth occurs due to

the accumulation of productive factors (farm land and wage labor). In a closed economy, growth

and the rate of profit eventually fall to sero due to airnhiisbing return. in agriculture. Trade

permits continued growth as "England's agriculture is stationary but Manchester and
Birmingham make her the workshop of the world which pays in food and primary products for the
expanding output of the workshop.

Trade does not affect the long—run growth rate (which is

sero), it affects the amount of productive factors in use and thereby the level of output at the
long—run steady state. According to Findlay (1984), it was this link between the accumulation of

productive factors and trade, not so much the static gains from trade, that made free trade
attractive to Ricardo. Ricardo's model has little direct applicability to the modern industrialised
world. Yet the basic point is important. Even if trade policy does not affect the long—run growth

rate, it can affect the steady—state level of productive factors. Consequentially, it can affect the
medium—term growth rate as the economy moves toward the new steady state.

Theoretically this Ricardian dynamic effect is completely distinct from the very important

dynamic effect. stressed in the Grossman—Relpman trade and growth literature.4 In these
models, trade policy can permanently affect the long—nan rate of return on accumulating factors

(be it knowledge, human capital or varietie, of intermediate inputs). Trade policy can therefore

permanently alter the long—run growth rate. The Ricardian dynamic effect does not alter the
growth rate on the steady—state growth path. It alters the level of this path. Putting this point

differently, the Grossman—Eelpman dynamic effect depends on the link between trade and the

rate of return on accumulating factors. The Ricardian dynamic effect depends on the link
between trade and the steady—state factor supplies. Empirically, however, it would be rathqr
difficult to distinguish between the two effects.
2

Section 1 lays out the basic model which is beat thought of as a shotgun wedding of the
Heckscher—Ohlln trade model and the Solow growth model. Section 2 derives the steady-itate

growth path. Section 3 investigates the link between protection and factor rewards in a small
open economy. Section 4 presents a su.nmny and some concluding remarks.

1. The Basic Model

We work with a model which: (i) is identical to the standard 2—by—2--by—2 model in any

period (i.e., with a fixed capital stock), and (ii) is .1mph to solve for the evolution of the capital

stock. Consider an integrated world equilibrium with two goods (1 and 2) produced with two
factor (capital K and labor L) under constant returns to scale by price—taking firma. The fixed
coefficients technology (identical in all countries) relates output of the two goods, x1 and '2 to
inputs at all points in time (for convenience the model employ, continuous time; the time index is
suppressed where clarity permits):

(1)

.1

x=znsnI
1

L1

j (sit/A)

K1
,

1

I.

alK j

.r L2

x=msnl
2

1(2

(a,/A) 52K

Labor augmenting technology exogenously advances according to: A(t) = A(O)e', where fl is the
exogenous rate of technological progress. Good 2 is assumed to be relatively capital intensive, so

a2KaiL> a2LaiK. Neither good ii storable. In keeping with the trsditional trade model, there
are no adjustment costs to changing the amount of K or L employed in either sector.

The standard Solow growth model views investment as forgone consumption. The literal
translation of this economic insight into mathematics (in the context of this model) is:

(2)

= ()1/2 (12)1/2

where I and 12 are the amounts of goods 1 and 2 devoted to making new capital instead of

3

consumption. Depreciation is ignored, so lii the change in the capital stock.
The infinitely—lived representative consumer's preferences are given by:

U=

(3)

(l__(/e))JCct [C1(t)1/2C2(t)1/2]1")dt,

where p reflects pure time preference, U ii the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (assumed to

be positive) and c.(t) lithe consumption of good i at time t.

2. The Steady-State Balance Growth Path of the Integrated WorM Equilibvtm
Both the Heckscher—Ohlin and neoclassical growth models are long run models. For instance

traditional growth theory makes no attempt to account for the business cycle, and the standard
trade model makes no attempt to describe the adjustment to the static equilibrium. In keeping

with this spirit, we focus on the steady—state growth path (which ii a dynamic model's equivalent

of the long run). The appendix sketches stability and convergenceresults. To solve for the
steady—state path we presume that it exists and write down the set of simultaneous conditions
that this implies. Finding a set of paths and time—invariant variables that meets these conditions
is equivalent to finding a steady—state balance growth path (and proves existence).
Static Equilibriism

The representative consumer chooses expenditure paths for goods I and 2 to maximi.ses
utility subject to a lifetime budget constraint. Given (3), if the representative consumer's optimal
total expenditure at t is E(t), the optimaj static allocation is to divide this evenly between goods 1

and 2. Defining his income in period t as Y(t), we have that expenditure on new capital goods
(which is assumed to be the only way to carry over income between periods) is Y(t) — E(t). The
consumption demand functions are therefore:

(4)

c1(t)(p1(t))'(E(t)/2) and c2(t)=(p2(t))'(B(t)/2)
4

where p1(t) and p2(t) are the prices of good 1 and 2 at time t. Additionally, the representative
consumer's demand for new capital goods leads to derived demands for good 1 and 2

(5)

11(t) = (P1t)'(Tt)—81t))/2

and

12(t) = (p2(t))_t(Y(t)_.B(t))/2

Equations (4) and (5) imply that equilibrium production satisfiesp1x1 =

p2x2 at every instant.

Price, factor rewards (w for wages, nor the rental rate) and outputs at all times satisfy:

1

(6)

p1 = (alL/A)w + alKr

=

(7)

(L/A)'

+ a2Kr

(8)

A(t)L = alL11 + a2Lx2

(9)

K = alKxl +a2Kx2

The matrix of a.'s is assumed to be non—singular. Good 1 is taken as the numeraire.
It is usefiul to define indices for aggregate real consumption, C, aggregate output, X, and the

price level, P. C(t) ii defined as (c1(t))I'2(c2(t))l'2, X(t) as (x1(t))1'2(x2(t))''2, and P(t) as
Additionally, we define world income as: Y(t) 9 w(t)A(t)L + r(t)K(t). Plainly

income equals output in equilibrium so Y also equals x1(t)+p2(t)x2(t). Note that
expenditure is exactly equal to C(t)P(t) and world income ii exactly equal to P(t)X(t).

Bainced Growth Path
The easiest way to find the steady—state balanced growth path is to guess what it will look

like and then verify that the guess is correct In this simple model the obvious guess is that the
relative price of goods and the rental rate are time—invariant, and everything else grows at i7. To

start out, suppose K grows at i so that K/A(t)L is time invariant. Inspection of (8) and (9)
reveal, that if this ratio is time—invariant, output of the two goods will grow together at the rate

i7 Given (4) and (5), balanced output growth implies that the world relative price of goods, p2,
and the price index P would also be time—invariant (call these

5

and P5). Obviously then Y also

would grow at i9. With income and foregone consumption growing at 1, the index of consumption
would alsogrow at 17.

Next we turn to the steady—state rental rate. The maximization of (3) subject to a life—time

budget constraint is a clonic optimal control problem. A usefiul way to write the lifetime budget

constraint it

(10)

where

= (1/P(t))(w(t)A(t)L + r(t)Z(t)) — C(t), subject to urn Z(t) -. ic

t-'w

0

Z ii the consumer's stock of assets (capital), and Ic is an arbitrary constant. The

Hainiltonian for utility niarimisation subject to (10) is

H[C,A1 = (1_11)eCHtI'O + A{(wL + rZ)/P — C}

where A is the co—state variable. The necessary conditions are that A = —a

and B =0 (using

the standard notation that a dot indicates a time derivative). in this case these imply

a
A

= —A(r/P)

(it)
A

=

We are interested in Ô, so we take the time derivative of the latter and eliminate A with the

former. This yields the differential equation:

t(t)/C(t) = u [rtvt —

(12)

Clearly

if O/C equals T

(as

argued above) then r(t) must be constant in steady state. In
6

particular, the steady—state rental rate, r, equals P'Ol/c+ p). lir is constant and yet Y and K

aregrowingat17itmustbethatwagesarealsopowingatq(renflLiifi<j) Usingr'in(6)
enables us to pin don w(t) on the steady—state path. Substituting r5 and the steady—state wage
rate into (7) yields the time—invariant p in terms of r' and unit input coefficients (recall that w

and A are both growing at 17). Note that if income and consumption grow at the same rate,
investment is a time—invariant fraction of income. Lastly1 since p is uniquely determined,

(4)

and (5) would uniquely determine the steady-state ratio x2/x1. This together with (8) and (9)

would give us the unique steady—state ratio K(t)/A(t)L (call this value k') We shall find it
convenient to refer to the K(t)/A(t)L ratio as k(t).
To summarize, we have found the time—invariant relative price and rental rate in terms of
preference and technology parameters. Also we have characterized the steady—state paths of

'2' Y, C, w5 and K. This set of variables and paths characterise the steady—state balanced
growth path for the integrated world economy. Having found it we know that a steady—state
path ests. Furthermore, there ii only one steady-state path on which both goods are produced.

To see this, we work backward. If */E don not equal tfv then the capital stock heads toward
either infinity or zero. Thus on any steady-state path, expenditure and income must grow at a
common rate. Consequently, on any steady—state path K must also grow at this common rate. If

this growth rate does not exactly match the growth rate of effective labor, the output of either
— I. or good 2 will eventually be driven to zero (Rybczynski effect).

3. Protection and Factor Rewards When Capital is Endogenous
We now turn to the effects of a tariff on factor prices and output. The steady—state balance
growth path described above was for the integrated world equilibrium. Any division of the factors

among countries would reproduce the integrated world equilibrium, as long as the relative
"endowments' are similar enough so that no country specializes. Clearly, any such division would

be time—invariant since each country would have proportional balanced growth paths (in other

words the steady—state growth path is independent of L). To be concrete suppose the home
7

country is "endowed" with aK(t)/A(t)L ratio equal to k°, when k° isles than k5. Obviously the
home country imports the capital—intensive good 2. Finally to keep the dynamics simple, we rely
on the convenient fiction that the home country is small in that sense that its output does not
affect world prices.

Consider the effects of the borne country unexpectedly imposing a permanent tariff on
imports.5 Ignore for a moment the endogeneity of capital. The tariff raises the local price of good
2. By assumption the determinant of the a.. matrix is positive, so by (6) and (7) this price change

lowers wand raises r in the home country. Having assumed fixed input coefficients, there would

be no output response. Had we allowed for factor substitutability, the price rise would shift
resources to the protected sector. This is the Stolper—Samuelion effect. It has three aspects: r
rises and w fails (factor price effect), these changes are greater than the changes in goods prices

(magnification effect), output of the protected sector rises and output of the export sector falls
(quantity effect).

Consider the effects of this short—run change in factor prices on the endogenous
capital—labor ratio. The jump in r raises the return to foregone consumption in the home

country. This leads consumers to find it optimal to accumulate capital faster than on the
steady—state path. Thus the home k rises. This rise in k leads to an increase in good 2 production

and a fall in good 1 production (Rybcsynski effect) — reducing both imports and exports. It

does not, however, affect relative prices due to the small, open economy assumption.
Consequently, the initial rise in k has no effect on the return to foregone consumption (since the

amatrix is non—singular). k will therefore continue to increase. Indeed, as long as the tariff is
effective, r will be above r5 so k will continue to rise. The rising k drives the home country toward

self—sufficiency in x2. When k rises enough, imports of good 2 cease and the tariff becomes

irrelevant. At this point relative goods prices equals the world price, p, so the home return to
capital is r5. Dynamic equilibrium is restored. The Stolper—Samuelson effect does not hold in the

long run.
Phase Diagram Analysis

8

As it turns out, it is straightforward to describe the adjustment process more precisely. The
dynamics of this system are simple and can be solved using Dornbusch (1976) techniques. There

are two state variables, K and C. C can jump, K cannot. It is convenient to transform the model
in order to work with the capital and consumption per unit of effective labor, A(t)L. We refer to

these as k and c respectively. That is c(t) equals C(t)/A(t)L; also define x(t) as X(t)/A(t)L.
Capital accumulates according to:

=x(t)—c(t).

(13)

In the pre—tariff equilibrium consumption evolves according to

;/c = u [r'/?

(14)

—

Here x depends on k according to:

x(t) = if k(t) J,

(15)

Signing Pf.J requires additional assumptions. A rise ink expands x and contracts x1. The
effect on the index 1ht22hit2 is in general ambiguous. Figure 1 depicts the problem. With fixed
coefficients, the production frontier (at any point in time) is square. An increase in k would shift

the corner from B to B'. Depending on the relative factor intensities, B' maybe above or below

the hyperbolt Q = x1hi'2x2h/'2 (Q is an arbitrary constant). Essentially for B' to be above the
hyperbola, the factor intensities of 1 and 2 must be sufficiently different.6 (If the factor intensities

are quite close, x must fall a lot to release the right amount of its capital and labor to allow
sector 2 to employ the new capital.) We assume that fbr all relevant k the au's are such that our
index of output is increasing in

We analyse the dynamics with a phase diagram. Figure 2 plots the & =0 schedule in c—k
9

space. =Ois upward sloped since higherkields to bigherxwhichmustbe offset byahigherc
if

is to remain unchanged.7 The arrows indicate the laws of motion off the £ = 0

schedule. Forallpairzofkandctotherightofk=0,zisgreaterthancsokwillberising;for
combinations to the left, k will be failing. Since k is assumed to be such that the home country is
unspecialized, factor price equalization holds. Consequently r equals r5 for any combination of k

and c inside the dashed lines (k and show the limits of the diversification cone).

is therefore

zero anywhere within this region. The position of the economy, {c? k°}, will be determined by
the initial "endowment", k°.

Now consider how the tariff changes this picture. The rise in home p2 raises r above r5. By
(14) this implies that

is positive at the initial point, (c? k°}. The tariff will affect p2 for all k

lea than k5 (since the home country will be an importer of good 2 for such k). However, for
greater or equal to k5, the tariff will be irrelevant, so

is still zero for all combination, of c and k

where k is between Ic' and E In Figure 3 we have added arrows to represent this change in the

laws of motion. Note that this system displays saddle path stability. The saddle path is drawn as

55. The new steady—state is labeled B in Figure 3. Finally, we are ready for the more precise
analysis of the adjustment. Imposition of the tariff leads to a jump in r. This changes the laws of

motion as discussed. Consumption jumps down to the saddle path and both c and Ic increase
during the adjustment process.8
Summarizing the above discussion we have:

Proposition I: (Stolper—Samuelson effect with endcgenous capital)

A tariff on capital—intensive imports has no long—run effect on factor prices. Instead, it
leads to an endogenous change in the capital—labor ratio and thus is entirely translated (via the
E.ybczynski effect) into an output effect.

Abandoning the Smell, Open Economy Asrimption

It may appear that the small, open economy assumption is crucial to the results. This is
incorrect. Consider the same setup with only two countries, each of which is large. Again divi4e

up the steady—state Ic such that the home country imports good 2. Impose the same tariff. AU
10

proceeds as before except the dynamics are more complicated. The rise in home k is accompanied

by a fall in foreign k (since p2 in the foreign country fails). Eowever, there Is still a unique
steady—state path where both goods are produced. Assuming that the world does reach it,
producers in both countries must face 4, so that r in both countries will be?. With the home
country tariff firmly in place, the only way this can occur is if the home country ii self—sufficient

in good 2, so that the tariff is irrelevant. This implies that the tariff either shifts both countries to

self—sufficiency (a kind of factor endowment equalization), or turns the home country into an
exporter of good 2. Such a system involves five differential equations ( and

for each country

and j,). Consequentially the adjustment path is potentially quite complicated.

4. Summary and Concluding Remat*s
This paper uses a simple model to illustrate a simple point. The fact that the capital stock Is

endogenously determined has important implications for trade theory and policy analysis. This
point has two implications, one trivial, one profound. The standard 2—by—2-—by—2 trade model

(which is generally considered a long—run model) should not take capital as one of its two factor..

In the simple example considered here, the Stolper—Sainuelson theorem incorrectly predicts the
long—run effects of commodity price changes on factor rewards. Protection of the capital—intense

sector leads to no change in factor rewards. Instead it has an amplified effect on production. This

point is really quite general. Almost any growth moTdel ties don the return on foregone
consumption (consider the Fisher diagram). If capital is foregone consumption (ignoring price
effects) then the rental rate in the model is tied don. This removes a degree of freedom from the
2—by—2 model. This degree of freedom is replaced by allowing the capital stock to vary. Thus
instead of obtainbig a unique set of prices, factor rewards and outputs for the integrated world

equilibrium given factor endowments and trade policy, we obtain the equilibrium factor
endowments given trade policy. Had we called the two factors labor and land (as Stolper and
Samuelson 1941 did), the analysis is moot. Thus, this is the trivial implication.

In the modern world, capital is an important factor of production. Moreover a country's
11

capital stock ii determined by investment and savings behavior, which ii almost surely
determined by intertemporal optimization. This papa shol!. that trade policy can alter the
intertemporal optimization problem and thereby alter the steady—state capital stock (more
precisely, the capital—labor, ratio). Consequently, a complete analysis of the effects of trade policy

should not ignore the Ricardian dynamic effect. Baldwin (198Db) shows that this Ricardian

dynamic effect of trade policy on output. may be many times larger than the standard static

effects of resource allocation and market segmentation. Other factors, such as labor skill,
technology and infrastructure also accumulate. Since trade policy cetti-la pariMis affects factor
rewards, it will in general affect the steady—state supplie. of such factor..

More tentatively, one might speculate that the Ricardian dynamic effect is in part
responsible for the growth performance of Japan and Korea. Both countries appear to have highly

distorted trade policies which favor capital and skilled—labor intensive industries. Presumably

this boosts the return on accumulating physical and human capital. Even more tentatively, we
note that worldwide growth was higher than normal during the decades of the multilateral tariff
reduction on manufactured goods. Suppose manufactured goods are capital—intensive (physical

and/or human). If the multilateral liberalization raised the return on these factors, the Ricardian
dynamic trade effect may have contributed to the faster growth during those decades.

This simple model is certainly not appropriate for the detailed study of the Ricardian
dynamic trade effect. Baldwin (1989a) investigates the R.icardian effect in a model where trade
policy has less extreme effects on factor endowments and the trade pattern.

12

mm
dtcwsopg&, 1E&aJ a 'kd/a/ztfrae4yafr44
1.

See Either (1984), and Dixit and Norman (1980) for thorough treatments of the

Stolper—Samuelson theorem in a static setting.

2. Stolper and Saznuelson (1941) were careful to refer to their factor.., labor and land.
3. Findlay (1984) page 190.
4. For example see Grossman and Helpman (1988, 1989a,b).

5. The solution would be significantly more complicated if consumers were allowed to anticipate
the tariff, or if the tariff were thought to be temporary.

6. More formally note that the dx(t)/dk equals (1/2A)((a2K_a2Lk)(alLk__alk))_11'2 times
where A is the determinant of the a.. matrix. Define a range of k

equal to (alK/ajL)+v v 0. The range of k for which this derivative is positive, for any given

set of a..'., is defined by those v which satisir (l/2)(!!—a) > v. Note that this set is not
J

a2L

1L

alK The
empty since if the integrated world equilibrium ii to be non-specialized,a21
—> k >—.
2L

1L

range of k's for which the derivative is positive (and k is in the diversification cone) is given by

,a2K alK\ Cv andy c I
those vs for which (1/2)t—————.j

a2K

a2L ti1

alK

a21 ai1

7. If f'(•JcO, 6o would be negatively sloped, yet the saddle path would still be upward sloping.

8. If consumption starts out at any other point, the country will become specialized in the
production of one good. This is where our simplifying assumptions begin to get in the way.
Having assumed fixed coefficients, the system (in particular w and r) is not determined under
specialisation. We cannot therefore describe the dynamics outside the diversification cone.

13

REFER2NCFS
Baldwin, ft. (198k) "Measurable Dynamic Gain. From Trade," Working paper.
Baldwin, ft. (1989b) "On the Growth Effects of 1992," forthcoming Economic Policy, Fall 1989.

Dornbu.ch, R.(1976) "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Joumal of
Political Economics, 84, p1161—1176.

Dizit, A. and Norman, V. (1980) Theory of International Trade, Cambridge University Press.

Either, W. (1984) "Higher Dimensional Issues In International Trade," in Handbook
of International Economics, volume 1, B.. Jones and P. Kenen (edt), Elsevier.

Findlay, ft. (1984) "Growth and Development in Trade Models," in Handbook of
International Economics, volume I, IL Jones and P. Kenen (ed.) Elsevier.

Grossman, G. and Helpman, E. (1988) "Product Development and International Trade,"
Princeton University Working Paper

Grossman, 0. and Belpman, B. (198k) "Comparative Advantage and Long Run Growth,"
NBER working paper.

Groeman, G. and Helpman, E. (1989b) "Endogenous Product Cycles" Princeton University
Discussion Papers in Economics, 144.

Ricardo, D. (1815) "Essay on the Influence of a Low price of Corn Upon the Profits
of Stocks," in The Works and Correnmndence of David Ricardo, 1951, P. Straffa
(ed), Cambridge University Press.
Stolper, W. and Samuelson, P. (1941) "Protection and Real Wages," Review of Economic Studies,
9, 58—73.

14

Appendt Stabi&p and Convergence
Tbe dynamic. of the integrated world equilibrium are simple. It I. convenient to work with
the transformed model as in Section 3. Capital accumulate. as:

k = x(t)—c(t).

(at)

Consumption evolves according to

(.2)

cic= c [r(t)IP(t) — — q.

Here; P and r depend on k and c according to:

(.3)

(a4)

r(t)/P(t) = hj k(t) I,

x(t) =

It ii a simple but unner.m.y exercise (using (6H9) and (4) and (5)) to derive the exact
function, h. The derivative, which ii all we need for stability analysis1 can be signed using the
fundamental theorems of the standard trade theory. An increase in k leads to an expansion of
good 2 production and a contraction of good 1 production (R.ybcsynski effect). By the (4) and
(5), this lowers the relative price of good 2. By the Stolper—Samuelson effect, this induces a rise

in the return to effective labor and a fall in the return to capital. Moreover, the fall in r is a

magniflcationofthefallinp2. Pcanbeviewedasanaverageofp1andp2.

Weknowthatthe

proportionalcbangeinrislenthaneither,sothatitialsolessthananaverageofthetwo.

15

Thus

as long a k is such that specialisation don not occur, hj. is negative. f'(.J is signed by the
assumptions detailed in Section 3 and footnote 6.

The=Oandk=QschedulesareplottedinPigure4. &=Oisupwardslopedsincef'(.Jis

positive. = 0 is vertical since there isa unique k for which r equals r. The arrows indicate the

awsofmoticuofftheOandOscheduln. PorallpainofcandktotherightdO,k
is"too°high,sor/Pistoolow,socwillbefalling. RnllpainofcandktotbeleftofQ,c
willbe rising. Similarlyforanycombinationofkandctotberightof&0,xisgreaterthancso
k will be rising; for combinations to the left, k will be falling.

This system has a unique saddle path (drawn as SS). Units the economy starts out
somewhere on the saddle path, it will never converge to the steady—state balanced growth path.

This however is not a problem since the representative consumer can choose c freely (i.e.1 c is a
jump variable). Moreover, he would choose to be on the saddle path since any other path would

eventually lead to nero consumption. If he starts below the saddle path capital accunniaS.
forever as consumption falls toward zero. Starting out shove the path leads him to consume too
much as k and therefore x tend toward nero. This rather obvious point can be formalised by the
use of & tran.vcrnality condition. Alternatively, we could have worked with an intertemporally

separable utility function for which the sub—utility function goes to negative infinity (at a
sufficiently fast rate) as C goes to zero. For such a function it would never beoptimal to allow
consumption to go to zero. (3) then could be taken a a local approximation of such a function.

16

Figure 1

xl

I

.4

3,

g=

__X2

17

Figure 2

4& :0

k
k

C

Ii'

18

Figure 3

C

a

C

0

I ss

k

C

19

Figure 4

C

1
S

4—f

r

S

L
k

Ii'

20

