                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE EFFECTS OF IMMIGRATION ON THE LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES OF NATIVES




                                Joseph Altonji

                                  David Card




                            Working Paper No. 3123




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 September 1989




We are grateful to Brian McCall and Sarah Turner for assistance with this
research. This paper was prepared as a contribution to the Trade and
Immigration Project of the National Bureau of Economic Research. We are
grateful to John Abowd, Richard Freeman, Peter Kuhn, and participants in
seminars at Princeton University and the National Bureau of Economic Research
for comments on earlier drafts. This paper is part of NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #3123
                                       September 1989


      THE EFFECTS OF IMMIGRATION ON THE LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES OF NATIVES


                                   ABSTRACT

     This paper examines the effects of immigration on the labor market
outcomes of less-skilled natives. Working from a simple model of a local labor
market, we show that the effects of immigration can be estimated from the
correlations between the fraction of immigrants in a city and the employment
and wage outcomes of natives. The size of the effects depend on the fraction
and skill composition of the immigrants. We go on to compute these
correlations using city-specific outcomes for individuals in 120 major SMSA's
in the 1970 and 1980 Censuses. We also use the relative industry distributions
of immigrants and natives to provide a direct assessment of the degree of labor
market competition between them.
     Our empirical findings indicate a modest degree of competition between
immigrants and less-skilled natives. A comparison of industry distributions
shows that an increase in the fraction of immigrants in the labor force
translates to an approximately equivalent percentage increase in the supply of
labor to industries in which less-skilled natives are employed. Based on this
calculation, immigrant influws between 1970 and 1980 generated 1-2 percent
increases in labor supply to these industries in most cities. A comparison of
industry distributions of less-skilled natives in high- and low-immigrant share
cities between 1970 and 1980 shows some displacement out of low-wage immigrant-
intensive industries.
     We find little effect of immigration on the employment outcomes of the
four race/sex groups that we consider. Our estimates of the effect of
immigration on the wages of less-skilled natives are sensitive to the
specification and estimation procedure. However, our preferred estimates,
which are based on first differences between 1980 and 1970 and the use of
instrumental variables to control for the endogeneity of immigrant inflows,
imply that an increase in immigrants equal to 1 percent of an SMSA's population
reduces native wages by roughly 1.2 percent.




     Joseph C. Altonji                 David Card
     Department of Economics           Department of Economics
     Northwestern University           Princeton University
     2003 Sheridan Road                Princeton, NJ 08544
     Evanston, IL 60208                (609)452-4045
     (312)491-8218
     One of the most controversial aspects of immigration policy is the

extent to which the arrival of immigrants helps or harms less-skilled

natives. Although economists have developed a variety of theoretical

models to analyze this question,1 relatively little empirical evidence is

available.2 In this paper we use variation in the fraction of immigrants

across different cities to measure the effects of immigration on the labor

market outcomes of less-skilled natives. We assemble information from the

1970 and 1980 Censuses on labor market outcomes of natives in 120 major

cities. Information from consecutive Censuses allows us to correlate

changes in immigrant fractions with changes in native outcomes within

cities - -   thereby   abstracting from differences across cities that might

bias a simpler cross-sectic-'al analysis. We also provide a variety of

information on the industry distributions of natives and immigrants, and

analyze the changes in these distributions that have occurred in cities

with higher and lower immigrant shares.

    In the first section of the paper we present a simple theoretical model

that describes the effects of immigration on the domestic labor market. We

assume that the labor market within each city consists of skilled and

unskilled workers, and that immigration adds workers to both sectors, with

relative additions depending on the nature of immigrant inflows to the city

in question. Our theoretical framework departs from earlier models in two

ways. On one hand, we disaggregate labor along skill lines, rather than


     LSee, for example, Johnson (1980a, l980b), Chiswick (1982) or Borjas (1987b).

           of the available evidence is summarized by Greenwood and
McDowell (1986), General Accounting Office (1988) and Papademetriou et. a]-.
(1989). Two studies of particular relevance to ours are Grossman (1982)
and Borjaa (1987b). Lalonde and Topel (1988) provide a parallel study to
ours, focussing on the effects of recent immigrants on the labor market
outcomes of earlier immigrants. Muller and Espenshade (1985) analyze the
effect of immigrants on various California cities.
                                          2

along th. lines of national origin. On the other hand, we allow for

demand-sid effects associated with increases in the local population, and

for supply-side effects associated with the possible crowding-out of native

workers in response to lower wage rates. The model leads to a simple

empirical specification in which wage and employment outcomes of less-

skilled natives (either in cross-section or within cities over time) vary

with the share and skill composition of immigrants in the local labor

market.

   In the second section of the paper we address the question of whether

immigrants and natives within the same city compete in the same labor

market. Given the size of immigrant flows during the last two     decades,   our

theoretical analysis implies that large adverse affects on less-skilled

natives are unlikely unless increases in immigration lead to

proportionately larger increases in the supply of labor to less-skilled

jobs. We focus on industry-specific labor markets within cities. We

develop a simple index which measures the impact of a given inflow of

immigrants on the labor market of natives. We find that a onepercentage

point increase in the share of immigrants in a city generates approximately

a one-percent increase in the supply of labor to industries in which less-

skilled natives are employed. The degree of competition between immigrants

and lesa-skjlled natives varies somewhat by race and sex group, being

highest   for   black females, and lowest for black males. Overall, however,

the results suggest that immigrants are not sufficiently concentrated in

the industries that employ less-skilled natives to have large impacts on

the less-skilled native groups.
                                        3

   We go on to investigate whether immigrant inflows have displaced less-

skilled natives from certain industries. Here, we compare the industry

distributions of less-skilled natives in cities with relatively high and

relatively low immigrant densities. We find some evidence that lass-

skilled natives in high-immigrant cities have moved out of immigrant-

intensive industries. We also find that the nation-wide trend of falling

employment in these industries has been slower in high-immigrant cities,

suggesting that the availability of immigrant labor has enabled certain

low-wage industries to survive in high-immigrant cities.3

    In the third section of the paper we turn to a regression analysis of

the relation between immigrant shares (or the change in immigrant shares)

and employment outcomes of natives (or the change in these outcomes) across

major cities. The results vary somewhat between the cross-sectional and

first-difference analyses. We argue, however, that the first-difference

analysis is less likely to be contaminated by city-specific factors that

affect immigrant densities and native outcomes. The analysis of changes

shows no effect of increased immigration on participation or employment

rates of less-skilled natives. It does reveal a systematically negative

effect on native wages, although the specific estimates depend upon the

group and upon whether or not we use   an   instrumental variables procedure to

account for the fact that immigration inflows may depend on local labor

market conditions. For the four race/sex groups that we consider, the

instrumental variables estimates (which we prefer) imply that an inflow of




        similar conclusion is reached by Kuhn and Wooten (1987) and
Papademetriou    J1 (1989), Chapter 4.
                                        4
immigrants equal to 1 percent of an SMSA's population4, reduces average

weekly earnings of less-skilled natives by about 1.2 percent. The least

squares estimates, by comparison, imply a more modest .3 percent reduction'.



I.     Analytical Framework

       Our framework for analyzing the effect of immigration on the labor

market outcomes of less-skilled natives is to view the inflow of immigrants

to each city (or, more precisely, Standard Metropolitan Area) as an outward

shift in the supply of labor. Since we are specifically interested in the

effects of immigration on less-skilled natives, we consider a two-sector

labor market consisting of skilled and unskilled labor. Within skill

categories we make no distinction between native and immigrant labor, nor

between earlier and later cohorts of immigrants. We assume that the

demands for skilled and unskilled labor in each city are decreasing

functions of their respective wage rates, and that prices of capital and

other inputs are exogenous to the local labor market.

     This framework contrasts with the one adopted by Borjas (l987b), for

example, who treats immigrants and natives as separate factors of

production and assumes that locally-produced output is sold at an exogenous

price. In this case the conventional elasticities of labor demand are

undefined, sinc, an increase in the wage rate of one type of labor with

other factor prices held constant leads to an increase in marginal cost




       The average change in the percentage of immigrants between 1970 and
1980 in the 120 cities in our sample is 1.4 percent, and ranges between 0
and 11.4 percent.
                                         5

that drives local firms out of business.5    Given that many of the goods

produced within a city are non-traded services, however, and that many

others enjoy some degree of imperfect substitutability due to

transportation costs, we believe it is more reasonable to posit the

existence of downward-sloping labor demand functions at the local level.

   The observation that the demand for labor within a local economy arises

in part from the demand for location-specific goods and services implies

that a partial equilibrium model of the labor market is potentially

misleading. In the extreme case, if LU. output is locally consumed, and if

new immigrants arrive in the same skill proportions as the existing labor

force, then an influx of immigrants leads to a new equilibrium at the

original wage rates, with proportionately higher levels of employment,

output, and consumption." More generally, the arrival of new immigrants

shifts the demand for city output and hence the demand functions for

skilled and unskilled labor. The size of this effect depends on the share

of output consumed locally and on the relative skill composition of the

existing and immigrating labor forces.

    To illustrate these propositions and establish a framework for our

empirical analysis, consider an urban economy with two goods: a locally-

produced good (or service), Y, that is consumed locaF.y and exported to




     51f the price of output is exogenous it is more convenient to work
with the elasticities of factor prices with respect to factor quantities,
holding constant marginal cost. These are usually known as elasticities of
complementarity: see Hamermesh (1986), for example.

     6This depends of course on constant returns to scale and on perfectly
elastic supplies of capital and other inputs.
                                             6

other cities; and an imported national good.7 Assume that Y is produced by

a competitive industry with a constant-returns-to-scale technology using

skilled labor, unskilled labor, and other inputs (capital and/or raw

materials) whose prices are exogenous and fixed.8 Under these conditions,

total industry cost (in units of the imported good) is described by a

function of the form

      C(w,w,Y) — Y c(w,w),
where w and w3 represent the real wages of unskilled and skilled labor (in

units of the imported good), and c(.) is a unit cost function.9 Let q

represent the unit price of local output (denoted in units of the imported

good). The assumptions of constant returns and perfect competition imply

q_c(w3w).
    Demand for Y arises from three sources: local demand from skilled

workers, Y; local demand from unskilled workers, Y; and export demand

from the rest of the economy, Y,. Let D5(q,w) and D(q,w) represent the

per capita demand functions of skilled and unskilled workers, respectively,

and let D(q) represent the demand function for locally produced output

from the rest of the economy. Let P5 and P represent the populations of

skilled and unskilled workers in the city,        and   denote the total population

by P — P   +   P.       Product market equilibrium requires

   (1) Y —
               P3
                    •
                        D5(q,w5)
                                   +   ' D(q,w)     +
                                                          D(q).
     71n order to avoid the theoretical prediction of factor price
equalization across cities, it is necessary to assume that the number of
goods produced within a city is less than the number of locally-supplied
factors, See Kuhn and Wooten (1987) for a further discussion of this point.

           ignore land or any other locally supplied factors.

     9For notational simplicity we suppress the dependence of c(.) on the
prices of non-labor inputs.
                                                7


   Let L(w,q) and L(v.q) represent the per capita labor supply

functions of skilled and unskilled workers, respectively. Equilibrium in

the local labor market requires

  (2a) P •        L(w,q)   — Y   •
                                     c1(w,w),
and

              •            — Y
  (2b)            L(w1q)         •



where c1(.) and c2(.) denote the partial derivatives of the unit            cost
function with respect to unskilled and skilled wage rates, respectively.

   Suppose that in an Initial equilibrium the fraction of unskilled workers

in the local population is a —                  We   wish to analyze the effect of an

inflow of immigrants of size I. Let a represent the share of unskilled

workers in the new group. The effects of an Immigrant inflow can be

obtained by differentiating equations (1), (2a), and (2b), and making use

of the fact that the proportional change in the price of output, q/q,

equals the share-weighted sum of the proportional changes in all factor

prices.

   For simplicity, assume that the cross-elasticities of the output demand

and labor supply are zero)° Then the proportional changes in skilled and

unskilled wage rates satisfy the following pair of equations:

   (3a)           (a/a) LI/P —           - c)   log w +           log w,
   (3b)     A (l-a)/(l-a) LI/P —                log w + (         - c)   Mog w,
where       is the elasticity of labor demand for skill group i with respect

to the wage of group j, c is the elasticity of labor supply of group i,

and A and A are a pair of numbers between 0 and 1:
     s      u


        101n the notation of equations (1) and (2), 8D (q,w)/ôw — 0 and
8L(w,q)/8q —      0 for j—(u,s).
                                                   8

              — (Y   -       -     • Y)   / Y,         k1 —

        A     — (Y       k2 • Yu   -
                                     Y)   / Y,         k2 —   a(l-a)/(a(l-a)).
       The labor demand elasticities in equations (3a) and (3b) are determined

by the conventional Marshall-Hicks formulas:


        ljj
              —
                  S(j        -


where          is the share of the value of output paid as wages to skill group

I,          is the partial elasticity of substitution of skill group i with

respect to group j, and                is the elasticity of demand for Y with respect to

its relative price q (a weighted average of the elasticities of demand

exhibited by consumers in the local market and those elsewhere in the

economy).

       The expressions A (a/a) M/P and A5 (l-a)/(l.a) SI/P in equations (3a)

and (3b) give the effective percentage increases in unskilled and skilled

labor resulting from an inflow of immigrants I. The increases in skilled

and unskilled populations are aAI and (l-a)I, respectively. The

proportional increases in the populations of unskilled and skilled workers

are therefore (a/a) SI/P and (l-a)/(l-a) LI/P, respectively. The factors

A and A adjust the gross increases in labor supply for the net increases

in demand generated by the new immigrants. If local output is consumed

entirely within the city and immigration is balanced in the sense that a —

a, then A —          A   —   0. Otherwise, the effective increases in labor supply
depend on the fraction of local output sold outside the city, and on the

imbalance of skill ratios between the existing and newly-arriving

population. In the simple case where newly-arriving immigrants have the

same   skills     as the existing population, Au —             A   —
                                                                       x'"'   the fraction of

output exported. If newly-arriving immigrants are less-skilled, however,
                                                          9

   >        >   A, accentuating the effective increase in unskilled labor

supply.

      Using equations (3a) and (3b), changes in wages rates can be related to

changes in the fraction of immigrants in the local population (f) by noting

that of —    (I/P)     —   (1-f)   LI/P. In the special case that the demand for

unskilled labor is independent of the wage rate of skilled labor (i.e.

'1us —   0) equation (3a) can be simplified to
                                     -AU
         (4) log w —                                  (a/a)    LI/P,

                                         -Au
                                                                (a/a) f,
                                                  -
                                   (1-f) (c

which specializes to the formula derived by Johnson (1980a) when A —           1 and

a —   a.    Our model extends Johnson's earlier analysis in two directions:

by allowing for skilled and unskilled workers in the existing and

immigrating populations; and by accounting in a very simple manner for the

effect of added population on the demand for local output.

      If the demand for unskilled workers depends on the wage rate of skilled

labor (i.e.        0   0),   then the expression for the change in unskilled wage

rates takes the more general form

      (5)   olog w —         u
where

                             - A(a/a)         -   A
                                                                  ,/cc5-
                       —
                                   (cu   -
                                             ,uu)     -         , /(c
                                                              ussu    $
                                                                       -
                                                                        pSS)

     11Johnson (1980a) makes the further assumption that the elasticity of
labor supply among existing immigrants is 0, so that the effective supply
elasticity in the market for unskilled labor is (1-f ) c, where f is the
fraction of immigrants in the existing pool of unskihed workers, and c is
the labor supply elasticity of natives.
                                           10

Using the labor supply function, the change in the per capita labor supply

of unskilled natives can then be written as

     (6) log L —      £   •   B    SI/P.

     To get some idea of the magnitude of the coefficient B relating wage

changes to immigrant inflows, suppose that         — a, so that A      A. In this
case, equation (5) can be rewritten as

            1og w —       A   b AI/P,

where the coefficient b (b < 0) is a function only of the supply and

demand elasticities for skilled and unskilled labor, and A equals the

fraction of local production exported to other cities. Values of the

coefficient b corresponding to alternative values of the supply and demand

parameters of the model are displayed in Table 1. The rows of the table

present alternative choices for the ratio between the partial elasticity of

unskilled labor with respect to non-labor inputs            and the partial

elasticity of skilled labor with respect to non-labor inputs '°sk             The

share-weighted average of these two elasticities is constrained to equal

.6.12 The columns of the table present alternative choices for the partial

elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled labor su For

each choice of the technological parameters, two values of b are reported,

corresponding to alternative choices for the elasticities of labor supply:

0.1 and 1.0. Other parameters in the model are set as follows: the share

of skilled labor (9) —    .4;     the share of unskilled labor (9) —   .3;   and the

elasticity of demand for city output (7) —      -2.5.




              U°UIC + Ssosk —      6' + 6), where 9 represents the value
share of labor in the ,Jth skill group.
                                      11

    The first row of the table presents calculated values of b under the
                                                              u
assumption that capital is a substitute for unskilled labor and a

complement for skilled labor.13 As Hamermesh (1986, pp. 460-462) has noted

in his review of the literature on labor demand, many empirical studies

based on the distinction between blue collar and white collar workers in

manufacturing have confirmed this hypothesis. In contrast, the last row of

the table presents values of bu under the assumption that skilled and

unskilled labor are equally substitutable with capital.14 Despite the wide

variation in demand and supply parameters represented in the table, the

range of the coefficient b is relatively modest: from - .49 to -   .27.15
Under the assumption that immigrants add nothing to the demand for locally-

produced output (i.e., \ — 1) these coefficients imply that a 1 percent

increase in the population of a city due to an influx of immigrants with

the same skill composition as the existing labor force reduces unskilled

wages by .3 to .5 percent. The implied reduction in the per-capita labor

supply of natives (and existing immigrants) is proportional to this

reduction in wages, multiplied by the elasticity of labor supply. If the


          entries are included in the first row under the column for
a —   .25.  In this row of the table, a
                                        k is strongly negative (-.525).
Tlus skilled and unskilled labor must b relatively strong substitutes
(i.e. a > .8) to satisfy the restrictions on the matrix of partial
elasticjes.
     14
        If a — a k' equation (5) implies that the value of the
coefficient    is independent of the substitutability between skilled and
unskilled labor.

     5The elasticities of demand for unskilled labor with respect to its
own wage rate (,) implied by the parameter choices in Table 1 range from
-1.0 (in the lower left-hand entries of the table) to -2.6 (in the upper
right-hand entries of the table).
                                         12

elasticity of labor supply elasticity is in the range of 0 to 1, the

implied reduction in per capita labor supply of natives is 0- .5 percent.

    The magnitude of these predicted effects is d.ampened by any

expansionary effect that immigrants have on the demand for locally produced

goods. For example, if one-third of output is consumed locally, then the

implied wage effects of a given immigrant inflow are reduced by
                           16
approximately one-third.        Any imbalance in the skill distribution of

arriving immigrants, on the other hand, accentuates their impact on the

local labor market. In the most extreme case, if newly arriving immigrants

are all unskilled, and the proportion of skilled workers in the existing

labor force is .5, then the predicted value of b ranges from -2.0 to -1.0,

implying roughly 2-3 times larger effects on unskilled wage rates.

     Our empirical strategy in Section III, below, is to correlate

variation in the share of immigrants in the local labor market with

variation in the employment and wage outcomes of less-skilled natives. We

interpret the coefficient relating wages to immigrant shares as an estimate

of the expression B in equation (5), and the coefficient relating

employment rates (or participation rates) to immigrant shares as an

estimate of the product of       and the supply elasticity of unskilled native

workers. As the previous discussion makes clear, the value of        depends

on the nature of immigrant flows to each city, and on the characteristics

of th. demand for output produced in each city. Even ignoring these issues

(as we do), it is important to keep in mind the potential endogeneity of


     16Estimates of the fraction of output produced in a city that is
consumed locally are not easily obtained. Roughly 35 percent of consumer
expenditures are allocated to personal, health, business, and education
services, public utilities, transportation services and other goods with a
high local content.
                                      13

immigrant inflows to different cities. If the supply of immigrants is

wage-elastic, then the covariation across cities between the labor market

outcomes of natives and the share of immigrants in the labor market will be

a positively-biased estimate of the expression B. In our analysis we

address this issue with an instrumental variables scheme that isolates the

component of immigrant inflows associated with the pre-determined

characteristics of each city.

     Before turning to the empirical work, two limitations of the model

deserve discussion. First, the model assumes that the existing native

population is immobile. However, one might loosely interpret the supply

elasticity of natives to reflect both labor supply changes of the current

population of the city and out-migration (or in-migration) of natives to

(or from) other cities.1 If one interprets the inter-city mobility of

natives as raising the long run elasticity of labor supply, then one would

conclude that migration by natives in response to immigrant inflows would

lower the effect of immigration on wages. It would also lower the effect

on labor supply per capita of natives, as measured by a variable such as

the employment/population ratio.'8 However, inter-city migration would

imply spillover effects on wages and employment/population ratios in other

cities, which we ignore in our empirical work.




     17
        If the immigrants are primarily unskilled, then one might expect
out-migration of unskilled natives and in-migration of skilled natives.

     18Filer (1988) shows that the net migration rate of natives to an SMSA
between 1975 and 1980 is negatively related to the migration rate of
immigrants into the SMSA between 1970 and 1974 and to the migration rate of
immigrants into the SMSA between 1975 and 1980.   The negative relationship
appears to be strongest for low-skilled and less educated natives.
                                      14

      Second, the model assumes that the local labor market clears. Within

 the model unemployment can be viewed as depending upon the wage rate

 relative to the benefits of being unemployed. This view is most sensible

 in the long run. Barriers to wage adjustment (such as binding minimum wage

 levels or fixed welfare benefits) might be expected to strengthen the

effect of an increase in immigrants on the employment and unemployment

outcomes of natives, while weakening the effects on wage levels relative to

those implied by equations (6) and (7). The employment effects for natives

could be especially large if employers of immigrants are less likely to

comply with minimum wage laws or to be unionized.19



II. Industry Distributions of Natives and Immigrants

     Our empirical analysis is based on the labor market outcomes of less-

skilled natives in 120 major SMSA's in the 1970 and 1980 Censuses. We

consider four groups of "less-skilled" natives: white males with less than

12 years of completed education; white females with less than 13 years of

completed education; black males with less than 13 years of completed

education; and black females with less than 13 years of completed

education. Our data base consists of samples of each race-sex group drawn

from the one-in-a-hundred public-use sample of the 1970 Census and the

five-in-a-hundred "A" sample of the 1980 Census. A description of our

sampling procedures, as well as information on our procedures for matching




     19
         Papademtriou      (1989, Ch. 4) suarize evidence from a few
industry studies suggesting that in some cases immigrant labor has been
used to undercut union firma paying higher wages and employing native
workers.
                                        15

SMSA definitions between the 1970 and 1980 Censuses, are provided in

Appendices A and B.

     Table 2 provides an overview of our samples of less-skilled natives.

The samples are restricted to individuals between the ages of 19 and 64 who

report themselves as not in school during the Census week.2° Because of

the age and education requirements, the average age of our less-skilled

native groups is close to 40. The average years of complete schooling is

less than 8 for white male high school dropouts, and between 10 and 11 for

the other groups.

     The labor market outcomes that we consider are the labor force

participation rate during the Census week; the employment rate during the

Census week (measured for those in the labor force in the Census week);

the employment-population ratio in the Census week; the fraction of people

who reported working at any time in the previous year (for simplicity, we

refer to this as the employment-population ratio last year); and the

logarithms of weeks worked and average weekly earnings during the previous

year (measured for those individuals who report positive weeks of work and

positive earnings in the previous year). Precise definitions of these

outcomes are presented in Appendix A.

     The model of the previous section treats the market for less-skilled

workers within each city as homogeneous. Even within a particular city,

however, the market for less-skilled workers may be segmented along

industry lines. If immigrants and natives tend to work in different

industries, then the first-round effects of new immigration will be mainly


     20By the "Census week", we mean the week immediately preceding the
administration of the Census, for which individuals report their major
activity. The Census is administered on April 1.
                                      16

concentrated among existing immigrants. If immigrants tend to work in the

same industries as a particular sub-group of natives, however, then the

effects of immigration on this subgroup of less-skilled natives will be

magnified.

     Some simple evidence on the correspondence between industry-

distributions of native and immigrants is presented in Table 3. This table

shows, for the 10 two-digit industries with the highest immigrant

employment shares and the 10 industries with the lowest immigrant shares,

the fraction of each of the four less-skilled native groups in the industry

in 1980.21 High immigrant-share industries include several low-wage

manufacturing industries (apparel, leather, furniture, miscellaneous

manufacturing, and textiles) as well as low-wage service industries

(private household services, hotels and motels, restaurants and bars, and

transportation services), and agriculture. Low immigrant-share industries

include the government sector, as well as railroads, communications, and

several regionally-based industries (tobacco, pipelines, coal-mining, and

oil and gas extraction). A comparison of the second and third columns of

the table shows that industries with high or low immigrant shares in 1980

exhibited the same characteristic in 1970, although the immigrant fractions

in many industries increased sharply between 1970 and 1980.22 The




     210ur two-digit industry classification is explained in Appendix C.

     220f the 10 highest immigrant share industries in 1980, 7 were in the
top 10 industries by immigrant share in 1970. The rank-order correlation
across industries in 1970 and 1980 immigrant shares is .86.
                                        17

immigrant share of total employment in all industries in our sample of 120

cities increased from 6.0 percent in 1970 to 9.6 percent in 1980.23

     The data in Table 3 suggest that immigrants are most directly

competitive with native women - -   particularly   black women. In fact, the

proportion of black females in the ten highest immigrant-share industries

in 1980 was almost as high as the fraction of immigrants in those

industries. By comparison, black males are the least concentrated in high

immigrant-share industries, and the most heavily concentrated in low

immigrant- share industries.

     One way to evaluate the impact of immigration on a particular native

group is to calculate the overlap in the industry distribution of the group

with the industry distribution of immigrants. Assuming that inter-industry

mobility costs are large, the effects of immigration on native wages will

be directly proportional to the average increase in labor supply to

industries in which natives are employed. To formalize this measure, let

SNi represent the share of the native group in the ith industry, let
                                                                         E
represent the initial level of total employment in industry i, and let

represent the increase in labor supply to the ith industry associated with

the arrival of a fixed number of new immigrants E. The average

proportional increase in labor supply experienced by the native group is



                  SNi
                         E


     23The average fraction of immigrants in the total population in our
sample of cities in 1970 was .044, and ranged from .003 to .242. The
average fraction of immigrants in the total population in 1980 was .058,
and ranged from .008 to .357.
                                           18

Suppose that new immigrants sort themselves into industries in the same

                                                           AE, where S1 is the
proportions as existing immigrants. Then AEi —        S1
share of existing immigrants employed in industry i. Finally, E —            S   E,

where S is the share of all workers in industry i and E is level of total

employment in the labor market. Thus, the average proportional increase in

labor supply experienced by the native group is        E/E, where

                    —         sNj:Ij
                        ::
This expression reduces to 1 in the case of a homogeneous labor market, in

          —        —
which
              S1       S.    In a heterogeneous labor market, however, the

average proportional increase in labor supply experienced by a particular

native group may be more or less than E/E, depending on the degree of

similarity between the industry distributions of immigrants and the native

group.

     Estimates of this index of labor market competition are presented in

Table 4 for the four groups of less-skilled native. We have calculated the

index separately using the 1970 and 1980 industry distributions of natives

and immigrants. We have also calculated the index separately over two

subsets of cities: the 20 cities with the highest fraction of less-skilled

immigrants in 1980; and the 40 cities with the lowest fraction of less-

skilled immigrants in 1980. These cities are identified in Appendix D.

    Estimates of the index of labor market competition are very similar

using the 1970 and 1980 industry distribution. The values of the index

range from a low of .85 in 1980 for white males in low immigrant cities to

1.28 in 1970 for black females, and are consistently below 1 for black

males. The results confirm the impression that black females are in most
                                        19

direct competition with immigrants, whereas black males are most isolated

from immigrant competition. Nevertheless, the values of the index are not

far from 1 for any of the groups, suggesting that increases in in the share

of immigrants in the labor market have roughly proportional effects on the

labor markets of unskilled natives.24        The differences in the index

between high- and low-immigrant cities are positive for males and negative

for female., suggesting that immigrants and native males are in more direct

contact in high-immigrant cities, while immigrants and native females are

in less direct contact. One interpretation of this finding is that in

high-immigrant cities, less-skilled native females have been displaced from

immigrant-intensive industries. We explore this hypothesis next.

      Evidence on the extent of industry displacement is presented in Tables

S and 6, which give the cross-sectional and time-series patterns of

differences in the industry distributions of less-skilled natives in high-

immigrant and low-immigrant cities. Table 5 displays, for 10 high

immigrant-share industries and 10 major immigrant-employing industries, the

relative share of unskilled natives in high- versus low-immigrant cities.

Specifically, let      and     represent the employment of native group

N in industry i in high-immigrant and low-immigrant cities, respectively.

Let
      E and    represent total employment in industry i in these cities,

and let E and E represent total employment of the native group in

total employment of the native group in these cities. Table 5 displays for

each industry and native group the ratio



          should be pointed out that the index is computed from the
industry distribution of existing immigrants, and cannot be used to assess
the effects of a inflow of immigrants that are much different from the
existing stock.
                                      20

                           E /EH
                       +
              /   Et       E   / EL

which represents the relative employment share of natives in the ith

industry in high- versus low-immigrant cities, divided by the relative

shares of natives in total employment in those cities. A value of unity

indicates that natives have equal shares of employment in the industry in

the two groups of cities, controlling for their relative shares in total

employment. A value of less than unity, on the other hand, indicates

relative displacement in the high immigrant-fraction cities.

     For most of the high-immigrant share industries there is evidence of

displacement of natives in the high-immigrant share cities. The

displacement effects are less apparent for white males, with ratios in

excess of unity for four industries.25 For the other three groups,

however, relative employment shares in the set of high-immigrant cities are

generally less than unity. 3y comparison, the evidence of displacement of

less-skilled natives from the major immigrant-employing industries in the

lower panel of Table S is mixed. On balance, these data suggest that the

industry displacement of natives is restricted to low-wage service and

manufacturing industries and agriculture. As the ratios in the right-hand

column of Table 5 suggest, these industries are generally more important in

high-immigrant than low-immigrant cities, although in cross-section it is

difficult to distinguish alternative explanations for this effect.26


     25The number of white males in private household services is so low
that the index cannot be calculated.

     26For example, many high-immigrant share cities are also major
transportation centers (New York, Loc Angeles, Miami). This fact may
partially explain the relatively high share of the transportation services
                                     21

     Table 6 repeats the analysis in Table 5, taking the ratio of the

relative employment share of natives in 1980 to the relative employment

share in 1970. A value of unity for this ratio suggests that natives have

maintained their relative share of industry employment, controlling for the

relative growth of total employment of natives in the two sets of cities.

A value of less than unity, on the other hand, suggests that natives have

lost relative share in the industry in high-immigrant versus low-immigrant
          27
cities.

     The results in Table 6 are generally consistent with those in Table 5,

and suggest some movement of less-skilled natives out of high-immigrant

share industries in the high-immigrant cities between 1970 and 1980. The

fifth column of the table indicates the relative growth of total employment

by industry in high- versus low-immigrant share industries, while the sixth

column gives the ratio of total employment in the industry in 1980 in all

cities to total employment in all cities in 1980. Although several high-

immigrant industries were declining relatively quickly between 1970 and

1980, in most cases the relative decline was slower in high-immigrant

cities. This suggests that the availability of immigrant labor may allow

certain industries to survive in high-immigrant cities even at the same

time as natives continue to exit from these industries.


industry in the high-immigrant share cities.

          is interesting to note that total employment growth rates between
1970 and 1980 for the 20 high-immigrant share cities and the 40 low-
immigrant share cities were virtually identical: the ratio of 1980 to 1970
employment was .92 for the high-immigrant share cities and .91 for the low-
immigrant share cities. The relative growth rates of less-skilled native
employment, however, were somewhat different in the two sets of cities.
The relative ratios of 1980 to 1970 employment totals in high- versus low-
immigrant cities were .96 for white males; .90 for white females, 1.02 for
black males; and .87 for black females.
                                         22

     Our   analysis   of the industry distributions of immigrants and less-

skilled natives suggests three conclusions. First, a one percentage point

increase in the share of immigrants generates approximately a one percent

increase in the supply of labor to industries in which less-skilled natives

are employed. There is no indication that immigrants and less-skilled

natives are concentrated in particular industries in a manner which would

greatly accentuate the labor market competition between them, or on the

other hand substantially reduce the degree of labor market competition

between them. Second, among the four native groups that we consider,

immigrants are most directly competitive with black females, and least

competitive with black men. Third, differences in industry distributions

between high- and low-immigrant cities suggest that natives have been

displaced from some low-wage service and manufacturing industries, and that

these industries have declined less quickly in cities with more immigrants.



III. An Analysis of the Effects of Immigration on Less-Skilled Natives

     In this section we examine the correlation across cities between the

labor market outcomes of less-skilled natives and the fraction of

immigrants in the city. We present cross-sectional analyses for 1970 and

1980 as well as a first-differenced analysis of changes between 1970 and

1980. Our basic approach is very simple. We regress SMSA averages of the

labor market outcome variables for our four race/sex groups against

measures of the immigrant fraction in the SMSA and a variety of controls

for the characteristics of each city. Before turning to the results of the

analysis, however, we first discuss the construction of SMSA means for the

outcome variables. We then briefly discuss potential econometric problems
                                     23

with the cross-sectional and first-differenced analyses, and offer some

comments on the interpretation of our estimates.

III.a Construction of SMSA-Level Outcome Measures and Control Variables

     The first step in our analysis is to construct SMSA-specific means of

the outcome variables that are purged of differences in the observable

characteristics of the native population across different cities. Given

the limited information collected in the Census, this step amounts to

regression-adjusting the outcome variables for differences in age and

education. Such an adjustment has two potential advantages. First it

should reduce the sampling variation associated with the means of the

outcome variables across different cities. Second, it should eliminate any

bias arising from correlations between the fraction of immigrants in a city

and the age and educational attainment of natives.

     For each race/sex group in each of the two censuses we regress each of

the outcome variables against a full set of SMSA dummies and a flexible

function of age and education. Specifically, we include a cubic polynomial

in age, a detailed set of dummy variables for different education levels,

and a full set of interactions of age and education up to the second order.

We then use the estimated SMSA dummies as our regression-adjusted outcome
            28
measures.

     The explanatory variables in our analysis include the fraction of

immigrants in each SMSA and three additional control variables: the

logarithm of SMSA population; and SMSA-specific means of age and education

for the particular race/sex group under consideration. Although the

outcome variables are adjusted for age and education, we found in


     28A similar approach is used by Borjas (l987b).
                                     24

preliminary work that the mean of adjusted weekly earnings is correlated

across cities with the mean of education, particularly for blacks. We have

no explanation for this phenomenon, although it may indicate a correlation

across cities between the quality and quantity of education among blacks,

or possibly a market externality associated with higher levels of education

among the less-skilled black population. In any case, we include SMSA-

specific means of age and education for the particular race/sex group in

all of our SMSA-level regressions. These means are calculated directly

from our native extracts.

    Our measure of the fraction of immigrants in each SMSA is the fraction

of foreign-born residents, taken from published tabulations of the 1970 and

1980 Censuses. From the standpoint of the theoretical model it would be

preferable to use the fraction of immigrants in the local labor force.

Since our sample sizes for 1970 are too small to provide reliable estimates

of the fraction of immigrants in many of the smaller cities, we have relied

instead on the published population data. Provided that changes in the

immigrant labor force are proportional to changes in the population of

immigrants, the use of fraction of immigrants in the population will not

affect our results.



III.b Econometric Issues

     We next turn to a brief discussion of our estimating equations. We

focus on three issues: possible sources of bias in the estimating

equations; the interpretation of differences between cross-sectional and

first-differenced estimates of the effects of immigration; and the use of

weighted least squares in the estimation.
                                            25

        Our cross-sectional estimating equations have the form


        (7) NJ -       b + f C +

where Nj is the adjusted labor market outcome for native group N in

city J,        is a vector of control variables for the race/sex group and

city (the mean of age and education for the group, and the logarithm of

SMSA population), f1 is the fraction of immigrants in the city, and eNi

a residual term. Similarly, our first-differenced estimating equations

have the form


        (8) Nj — XNj     b +        C +

where        refers to the change in the variable Z in city j between 1970 and

1980.

    Depending on the choice of outcome measure Y, these equations have the

form of equations (5) or (6) derived from our theoretical model. The

interpretation of estimates of the coefficient c obtained from equation (7)

or (8), however, depends on the nature of the residual terms in these

equations. These residuals can be decomposed into two conceptually

distinct components: (1) a market-level SMSA effect due to factors other

than immigration (for example, unmeasured characteristics of natives or

demand shocks affecting the local economy); and (2) sampling variation

arising from the fact that we observe only a sample of natives in each

SMSA. Let Nj represent the true population value of the outcome variable

for natives in city j. Then we may decompose eNJ as


             eNj   aNi + ''Nj -   'Nj
where a represents the SMSA effect due to factors other than

immigration and Nj -              is the component of eNl attributable to
                          Nj
                                        26

 sampling variability. Only if a is orthogonal to the fraction of

 immigrants in the city will estimates of the coefficient c from the cross-

 sectional regression (7) yield unbiased estimates of B or c•B, as

described by equation (5) or (6). In the first-differenced specification

the corresponding requirement is that changes in the unmeasured SMSA

effects be uncorrelated with changes in the fraction of immigrants in the

city between 1970 and 1980.

     Clearly, the main advantage of the first-differenced analysis is that

it eliminates any bias introduced by city-specific fixed effects that are

correlated with the fraction of immigrants in a city and the labor market

outcomes of natives. Transitory effects (associated with transitory

fluctuations in the demand for the output of specific cities, for example)

will still lead to biases in the differenced analysis if they influence the

inflow rate of immigrants. The recent analysis of Bartel (1988) suggests

that economic conditions have a relatively small effect on the destination

city chosen by immigrants. Instead, Bartel's findings suggest that

immigrants are mainly attracted to cities with large concentrations of

previous immigrants from the same   country.29 Nevertheless,   her research

leaves open the possibility that the timing and size of immigrant inflows

are affected by economic conditions in particular cities.

    We attempt to control for any potential correlation between immigrant

inflows and local economic conditions in our first-differenced analysis by

an instrumental variables procedure. As suggested by Bartel's (1988) work,

we use the fraction of immigrants in a city in 1970 to predict the change



    29
         See also Greenwood and McDowell's survey.
                                          27

   in the fraction of immigrants over the following decade.3° Immigrant

   inflows are strongly correlated with the initial fraction of immigrants in

   a city, and these variables are reasonably strong predictors of the change

   in immigrant fraction.

          In comparing the cross-section and first-difference results one should

   also keep in mind that the first-difference analysis is more likely to

  capture the short-run effects of immigration, in which the capital stock

   and the industry/skill composition of labor demand have not had time to

   fully adjust. The effects of immigration on per capita employment rates

   and wages may weaken over time as natives move to other cities or to labor

  market sectors that are less affected by immigrant competition. Dynamic

   issues are not addressed in our formal model, but we suspect that the short

   run effects of immigration on employment of less-skilled natives will be

   larger than the long run effects. The relative magnitude of the short run

   and long run effects on wages depend on whether there are barriers to wage

   adjustments in the short run. In fact, we find that the cross sectional

   estimates of the effect of immigration on employment outcomes of natives

   are larger than the differenced estimates, whereas the opposite is true of

   the estimated effects on wages. This leads us to suspect that the

   differences between the cross-sectional and differenced results are

   primarily due to correlations between city-specific effects and immigrant




     30
        An alternative strategy is study the impact of immigrant flows to
particular SMSA's that one can identify as exogenous. For example, Card
(1989) examines the impact of the Mariel boat lift on the Miami labor
market and finds little effect on the wages and unemployment rates of less
skilled blacks and other non-Cuban groups. His results for wages are
somewhat at variance with the instrumental variables estimates we report below.
                                          28

shares that are eliminated in first-differences rather than to a

distinction between long run and short run effects.

     A final econometric issue arises from the relatively small samples of

black natives in many    cities,   particularly in our 1970 sample. We restrict

our cross-sectional and differenced analysis of each race/sex group to the

set of cities for which we have at least 30 group members in both 1970 and

1980. Consequently, we work with a set of 91 cities for black males, a set

of 94 cities for black females, and a full set of 120 cities for white men

and women. We also use weighted least squares methods to estimate our

equations, using the square root of the number of observations for the

race/sex group in the city as a weight. In our first-differenced

spe ifications we use as a weight (N701 +
                                               N80)4'2,    where N70 and N80

are the number   of   observations for the native subgroup in the SMSA in 1970

and 1980, respectively.31 This weighting scheme assumes that the residual

eNi arises mainly from sampling variability associated with the estimated

outcome measure.       Even controlling for the covariates in our models,

however, the labor market outcomes of different race/sex groups are

correlated across cities, suggesting the presence of omitted city-specific

effects. We have not adjusted our standard errors or estimation procedures

to take account of such error components.



III.c EmDirical Results




     31
           • v estimation of the first difference equation also uses these
weights.
                                     29

      To provide an introduction and overview of our results, Table 7

presents weighted least-squares estimates of the effects of immigration on

the labor market outcomes of the pooled set of four race/sex groups. The

estimated equations include unrestricted intercepts for the four groups, as

well as group-specific coefficients on the means of age and education. The

coefficients on the immigrant share variable and the population variable,

however, are restricted to be the same across the four native subgroups.

    The cross-sectional results for 1970 show significantly negative

effects of an increase in immigrant shares on the labor force participation

rates and employment rates of less-skilled natives. The results imply that

a 10 percentage point increase in the fraction of immigrants in an SMSA

would lead to a reduction in the employment/population ratio of less-

skilled natives of roughly 2 percent. The employment rate would also fall

by 1. percent, implying an increase in unemployment rates of about 1

percent. Among those who work, average weeks per year would fall by about

2 percent.

     These negative employment effects contrast sharply with the finding

that immigration has a positive effect on weekly wages. The estimated

coefficient in row 6 implies that a .1 increase in the immigrant share

would lead to a 4.7 percent increase in weekly earnings. Within the

context of our model, these results can only be reconciled if the labor

supply elasticity of less-skilled natives is negative.32


           implied per capita labor supply elasticity is roughly -1. Art
alternative explanation, which might be consistent with an extended version
of the model allowing for heterogeneity within the population of less-
skilled natives, is that a downward shift in the wage distribution induced
by immigration results in the exit from the labor force of natives with the
lowest skilled levels. However, given that the decline in the employment
population ratio is small, a compositional shift cannot explain the results
                                      30

      The 1980 cross-sectional results for the various employment outcomes

also indicate a negative effect of immigration, although the estimated

coefficients are smaller in magnitude than those for 1970. In the 1980

data, however, the estimated effect of immigrant densities on the average

weekly earnings of natives is essentially zero. This gives some reason for

caution in the interpretation of the 1970 results.

      Weighted least-squares estimates of the first-differenced

specification are presented in the third column of Table 7. In contrast to

the cross-sectional results, these estimates suggest a modest oositive

effect of the fraction of immigrants on the employment outcomes of natives.

The estimated effect on earnings per week is negative (- .267) but not

st   tistically   different from 0.

     Instrumental-variables estimates of the first-differenced specification

are presented in column 4. These estimates give an ambiguous picture of

the effect of immigration on the employment outcomes of natives. A

marginally significant positive effect on the employment rate in the Census

weak is counterbalanced by a marginally significant negative effect on the

employment-population ratio last year. Nevertheless, the instrumented

first-differenced results indicate a significantly negative effect of

immigration on wages. The coefficient is -1.2 with a standard error of

.242. The more negative effect associated with the IV estimation scheme is

consistent with the hypothesis that the least-squares estimate is

positively biased by endogenous immigration inflows.




even if the wages of those who leave employment were essentially 0 prior to
their departure.
                                         31

     The pooled data suggest that the effect of immigrant densities on the

employment   and   participation rates of natives is small and potentially

zero. If the instrumented first-differenced specification is taken at face

value, however, the effect on wages is apparently negative. For the most

part, these conclusions carry over to the detailed results for the four

subgroups, to which we now turn.



Results for Individual Race/Sex GrouDs

     Estimates of the relation between immigrant fractions and the labor

market outcomes of black males are presented in Table 8, which has the same

format as Table 7. As in the pooled analysis, the cross-sectional results

for black men suggest a negative correlation between the fraction of

immigrants and employment outcomes. In the differenced analysis, however,

the relation is much less consistent. Likewise, although the 1970 cross-

sectional analysis suggests a positive effect of immigration on black male

wages, the 1980 cross-sectional results and the differenced results

indicate a negative effect.

     The results for white male dropouts are presented in Table 9. These

results are very similar to those for black males, although the point

estimates of the effects of immigration on wages are somewhat smaller in

magnitude. Again, the differenced specifications in particular suggest a

negative effect of immigrant densities on native wage rates, while the

effects on employment and participation rates are smaller and vary with the

precise measure of employment.

    The regression results for black females in Table 10 are of particular

interest, given the evidence in Section II that black women are in closer
                                       32

competition with immigrants than the other three groups. Nevertheless, the

estimated coefficients for this group are not much different than those for

the other groups. The cross-sectional results suggest a small negative

effect of immigrant shares on employment outcomes, and a modest positive

effect on weekly wages. These conclusions are reversed, however, in the

first-differenced analysis, which suggest a generally positive effect on

employment rates, and a negative effect on wage rates. The differenced

results for black females are not particularly sensitive to choice of

least-squares or instrumental variables estimation, a1thoug as in previous

tables the strongest negative wage effect is obtained by the instrumental

variables procedure.

    Table 11 presents our results for white females. Again the cross-

sectional results for 1970 indicate a negative relation between immigrant

shares and employment outcomes, while the differenced analysis indicates

much weaker effects. The cross-sectional and first-differenced

specifications fit by least-squares suggest a positive effect of immigrant

shares on wage rates. When the change in immigrant share is instrumented,

however, the estimated wage coefficient is negative and consistent with the

results for the other native groups.

    A check on the wage effects reported for the different native groups

in Tables 7-11 is contained in Table 12. Here, we estimate the same

specifications using the wage outcomes of immigrant workers as the

dependent variable. We use two measures of immigrant wages: the mean of

actual log weekly earnings for male immigrants; and an adjusted mean that

controls for the average levels of age and education of immigrants in each

city. The results reveal three findings. First, unadjusted mean earnings
                                      33

of immigrants are more strongly correlated in cross-section with the

fraction of immigrants than mean earnings that have been adjusted for

measured skill attributes. This suggests a negative correlation between

the skill level of immigrants and their fraction in the population.

Second, as we found for the native groups, the instrumental variables

estimate of the first-differenced specification leads to the largest

negative estimate of the effect of immigrant densities on wages. Finally,

the instrumental variables estimates of the effect of immigrant shares on

immigrant wages is very similar to the corresponding estimate for native

wages.   There is no evidence that immigrants have a stronger negative

effect on their own wages than on those of less-skilled natives.



Other Results

     We estimated many of our least-squares models for the 1970, 1980, and

1980-1970 samples with a control for the fraction of blacks in the SMSA

population. This addition made little difference to the results.

     We also re-estimated many of our specifications using the fraction of

Nless..skilledu immigrants in the SMSA population in place of the overall

fraction of immigrants in the SMSA population. We defined the fraction of

1lessskilledR immigrants as the product of the faction of immigrants in

the SMSA population and the fraction of male immigrants in the SMSA whose

predicted earnings are less than the national median for male immigrants.

(See Appendix D).    The (unweighted) correlation across 120 cities between

the lessskilledR immigrant fraction and the total immigrant fraction is

.94 in 1970 and .95 in 1980.    The correlation of changes in the two

immigrant   measures is .82. Perhaps as a result, least squares results
                                     34

using the fraction of less-skilled iigrants are similar to those reported

in tables 7-11. The regression coefficients typically increase in absolute

value, reflecting the fact that the scale of the less-skilled immigrant

variable is compressed relative to the other variable. It is worth noting

that instrumental variables estimates (using the fraction of immigrants in

the SMSA in 1970 and its square as instruments) point to a somewhat larger

negative effect of the fraction of less-skilled immigrants on the weekly

earnings of natives. The coefficients for black males, white males, black

females, and white females are -7.0, -4.8, -12.9 and -12.3 respectively.

These estimates are very imprecise, however, perhaps because the

correlation between fraction of immigrants in £970 and the change in

f 'ction of less-skilled immigrants in the SMSA is only

     Finally, we re-estimated the 1980 cross-sectional specifications and

the first-differenced specifications for each of our labor market outcome

variables using the SMSA-specific mean of the corresponding labor market

outcome for white males age 31-64 with 13 or more years of schooling as a

control variable. We view this approach, which uses the labor market

outcomes of highly-skilled workers to control for general labor market

conditions within each city, as an alternative to our instrumental

variables procedure. It is strictly correct only if, in contrast to the

implications of our model, immigration has no effect on more highly

educated white males. The results from this alternative procedure are

generally similar to our ordinary least-squares estimates, and suggest




          In contrast, the correlation between the fraction of immigrants
in 1970 and change in fraction of all iigrants in the SMSA is .597.
These correlations refer to the unweighted sample of 120 SMSA's.
                                        35

smaller negative impacts of immigration on less-skilled native wages than

the instrumental variables procedure.



IV.    Conclusions
      This paper presents a variety of evidence on the effects of immigration

on the labor market outcomes of less-skilled natives. Working from a

simple theoretical model of a local labor market, we show that the effects

of immigration can be estimated from the correlations between the fraction

of immigrants in a city and the employment and wage outcomes of natives.

We go on the compute these correlations using city-specific outcomes for

individuals in 120 major SMSA's in the 1970 and 1980 Censuses. We also use

the relative industry distributions of immigrants and natives to provide a

direct assessment of the degree of labor market competition between them.

      Our empirical findings indicate a modest degree of competition between

immigrants and less-skilled natives. A comparison of industry

distributions shows that an increase in the fraction of immigrants in the

labor force translates to an approximately equivalent percentage increase

in the supply of labor to industries in which less-skilled natives are

employed. Based on this calculation, immigrant inflows of the magnitude

observed between 1970 and 1980 generated 1-2 percent increases in labor

supply to these industries in most cities. A comparison of the industry

distributions of less-skilled natives in high- and low-immigrant share

cities between 1970 and 1980 shows some displacement of natives out of low-

wage immigrant- intensive industries.

        We find little evidence that inflows of immigrants are associated

with large or systematic effects on the employment or unemployment rates of
                                          36

less-skilled natives. Our     estimates   of the effect of immigration on native

wage rates are sensitive to the choice of specification and estimation

procedure. However, when we consider first differences between 1980 and

1970 and use   an   instrumental variables estimation procedure to control for

endogeneity of immigrant inflow, we find that an increase of .01 in the

fraction of immigrants in an SMSA reduces legs-skilled native wages by

roughly 1.2 percent.
                                References


Bartel, Anne. "Where Do the New U.S. Immigrants Live?". Unpublished
     Paper Presented at US Department of Labor Conference on
     Immigration, Washington D.C., September 1988.

Borjas, George. "Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality, and Earnings
     of Immigrants". Journal of Labor Economics 3 (October 1985): 463.489.

                "Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants". Arnericax
    Economic Review 77 (September 1987): 531-553. (l987a).

                 "Immigrants, Minorities, and Labor Market Competition".
     Industrial and Labor Relations Review 40 (April 1987): 382-393.
     (198Th).

Card, David. "The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market"
     Working Paper No. 253, Industrial Relations Section, Princeton
     University. (May 1989)

Chiswick, Barry. "The Effect of Americanization on the Earnings of Foreign-
     born Men". Journal of Political Economy. 86 No. 5 (October 1978): 897-
     922.

_____________   "The Impact of Immigration on the Level and Distribution
     of Economic Well-Being", in Barry Chiswick, ed. The Gateway: U.S.
     Immiration Issues and Policies. Washington D.C.: The American
     Enterprise Institute, 1982.

General Accounting Office. Illegal Alliens: Influence of Illegal Workers
     on Wages and Working Conditions of Legal Workers. Washington D.C.:
     GPO, 1988.

Greenwood, Michael and John McDowell. "The Factor Market Consequences of
     U.S. Immigration". Journal of Economic Literature 24 (December
     1986): 1738-1772.

Grossman, Jean. "The Substitutability of Natives and Immigrants in
     Production". Review of Economics and Statistics 64 (November 1982):
     596-603.

Hamermesh, Daniel. "The Demand for Labor in the Long Run". In Orley
     Ashenf.lter and Richard Layard, eds. Handbook of Labor Economics.
     Amsterdam: North Holland, 1986.

Johnson, George. "The Labor Market Effects of Immigration". Industrial.
     and Labor Relations Review 33 (April 1980): 331-341. (l980a).

                  "The Theory of Labor Market Intervention".               47
     (August 1980): 309-330. (l980b).
                                       38


Kuhn,    peter and Ian Wooten. "Immigration, International Trade, and the
        Wages of Native Workers". Unpublished Manuscript, University of
        Western Ontario, September 1987.


Lalonde, Robert and Robert Topel. "Labor Market Adjustments to Increased
     Immigration". Unpublished Manuscript, University of Chicago Graduate
     School of Business, October 1988.

Muller, Thomas and Thomas Espenshade. The Fourth Wave: California's
     Newest Immirant5. Washington D.C.: The Urban Institute Press, 1985

Papadem.triOU, Demetrios, et. al. "The Effects of Immigration on the U.S
    Economy and Labor Market". U.S. Department of Labor Bureau of Inter-
    national Labor Affairs Immigration Policy and Research Report Number 1,
    May 1989.
                               ADoendices


Authors' Note: due to space limitations Appendices A, , C and D are
                not included. These appendices are available from
               David Card on request.
                                         Table 1

     Predicted Effect of an Increase in Im•igration on Unskilled Wage Ratesa'




 Ratio of Partial                            Partial Elasticity of Substitution
 Elasticities of          Labor Supply       of Skilled for Unskilled Labor (a)
Substitution with        Elasticity (E)'
Capital                                             .25     1.0        3.0
          kS"akU)

                                                    -——     —.31       —.42
1.      —.25                  .1
                             1.0                    -——     -.27       -.30


2.          0                 .1                   -.27     -.39       —.45
                             1.0                   -.29     -.30       -.31


3          .5                 .1                   -.42     -.46       -.48
                             1.0                   -.32     -.33       —.33


4.        1.0                 .1                   —.49     —.49       —.49
                             1.0                   -.34     —.34       —.34



'See text for notation and assuptlons.

'Share-welghted average of substitution elasticities of skilled and unskilled
  labor with capital is constrained to equal .6.

Labor supply elasticities of skilled and unskilled workers are constrained
     to be equal.
                                                          Table 2
                                           Descriptive Statistics for Native Samples




                                      White Male             White Females            Black Males          Black Females
                                       Dropouts               No College              No College             No College
                                   1970       1980          1970       1980        1970        1980      1970       1980

Demographic and Economic
  Characteristics:

 1. Age                           44.3        43.5         40.9       40.8         39.1        37.4      38.7       38.3

 2. Education                       8.5        8.8         10.6        11.0            9.2     10.2       9.6       10.4

3. Labor Force Participation      88.8        81.0         47.3       56.5         83.6        78.4      55.1       59.1
    Rate (x 100)
4. Employment Rate (x 100)        96.0        91.1         95.6       94.0         94.4        86.9      92.6       87.9

5. Employment Population Rate      85.2       73.7         45.2       53.3             78.9    68.3      51.1       52.1
    Census week (x 100)
6. Employment Population Rate     91.6        82.9         54.5       61.1         86.7        78.0      60.8       60.1
    Last Year (x 100)
7. Logarithm of Weeks Worked       3.81        3.75         3.57       3.60            3.77     3.69      3.58       3.60
    Last Year
8. Logarithm of Weekly Earnings    4.95        5.52         4.26       4.96            4.61    5.29       4.03       4.90
    Last Year (Current $)


9. Sample Size                    84,068     24,925       99.488     81,151       27,779      29,723    34,013     34,540


Notes: Samples consist of individuals age 16-64 in 120 major SMSA'S. Individuals enrolled in school in Census week are
       excluded. White male dropouts sample includes individuals with less than 12 years of completed education.
       Samples for other groups Include individuals with less than 13 years of completed education.
       See Appendix A for further Information.
                                                           Table 3

                         Distributions of Natives In High and Low Immigrant-Share   Industries:



                                                                       Percent
                                               Percent     Percent     of all                                                  b/
                                                                                        — Percent of Natives    In Industry
          Industry                            Immigrant   Immigrant   Immigrants             White     White   Black    Black
                                               1980        1970       in Industry      All   Males     Females Males   Females
High Immigrant-share Industries
   1. Apparel                                  38.4        21 .1         5.1          1.3         .6    2.0     .5      2.3
   2. Leather                                  27. 3       14.4           .6            .2     .3        .3     .1       .3
   3. AgrIculture—crops                        25.8        10.0          1.5            .6    1.2        .4     .5        .3
   4.  Furniture                               21.0        11.0          1.0            .4     .7        .4     .6       .4
   5. Misc. Manufacturing                      20.9        10.6          2.3          1.1     1.2       1.3    1.0      1.4
   6. Private Household Services               20.2         9.5          1.4           .7         .2     .8     .2      6.0
   7. Hotels and Motels                        18.2        10.6          2.2          1.2         .7    1.7    1.2      3,5
   8. Transportation Services                  15.8        11.2           .5           .3         .1
   9. Restaurants and Bars                                                                               .4     .1        .1
                                               15.6         9,3          6.4          3,9     2.5       7.6    3.1      5.5
  10. TextIle Mills                            15.6         8.8           .8           .5         .7     .7     .6       .8
         Total:   10 Industries                                         21.8         10.1     8.2      15.6    7.9     20.6
Low I..igrant—share Industries
   1.  Pipelines                                1.5         1.9           .0           .0         .0     .0     .0       .0
   2.  Govt.: Justice and Public Safety         2.8         2.3           .4          1.4         .9     .8    2.0      1.0
   3.  Govt.: Revenue and Taxation              2.8         3.4           .1           .4         .0     .5     .2       .5
   4. Coal Mining                               3.5         2.4           .0           .1         .1     .0     .1       .0
   5. Railroads                                 3.8         3.5           .3           .6     1.4        .1    1.1       .2
   6. Tobacco                                   3.9         1.8           .0           .1         .1     .1     .2       .2
   7. U.S. Post Office                          4.1         2.4           .4          1.0         .9     .4   2.6       1.3
   8. Oil and Gas Extraction                    4.2         2.0           .2           .4         .4    .2     .2        .1
   9.  Communications                           4.4         3.1           .8          1.7         .5   2.1     1.1      1.9
  10.  Govt.: Economic Programs                 4.5         2.9           .3           .6         .2    .5      .9       .8
         Total:   10 Industries                                         2.5           6.1     4.5      4.7    8.4       6.0


"Based    on the industry distributions of 19-64 year—olds in 120
                                                                  major SMSA's In the 1980 Census.
"A1.1 natives include all education groups.    Other groups are defined In the note to Table 2.
                                 Table 4

Estimated index of Labor Market Competition Between Immigrants and Natives




                                              High-        Low-
        Native Group          All           Immigrant    Immigrant
                             Cities          Cities       Cities
                          1970 1980        1970 1980    1970 1980


   1.   White Male
        Dropouts          1.06 1.00        1.09 1.03     .99   .85


   2.   White Female
        No College        1.09 1.08        1.05 1.03    1.10 1.12


   3.   Black Males
        No College         .94   .94        .97   .93    .91   .91



   4.   Black Females
        No College        1.24 1.15        1.28 1.06    1.20 1.16


   Note: See text for definition of index. High—immigrant cities
         include 20 SMSA's with highest fraction of less-skilled
         immigrants. Low—immigrant cities include 40 SMSA's with
         lowest fraction of less—skilled immigrants.
                                                          Table 5
                    Relative Industry Distributions of Natives    High and Low I.sigrant Cities: 19800/'


                                                Percent               Relative Share of Native Group:        High-Immigrant
         Industry                               of all       IjiEti-Immigrant  versus Low-Immigrant Cities       versus
                                              Immigrants       White         White      Slack       Black
                                              In Industry      Males                                         Low-Imalgr,nt
                                                                            Females     Males      Females      CitleeC

High Immigrant-share Industries
   I.  Apparel                                  5.1            1.43             .49     1.29        .44             2.64
   2.  Leather                                    .6           1.33             .71      .62        .97             1.40
   3. Agriculture-crops                         1.5             .56             .86      .84        .74             1.71
   4.  Furniture                                1.0             .64             .68      .68        .36              .94
   5.  Misc. Manufacturing                      2.3             .83          1.04        .65        .66             1.89
   6. Private Household Services                1.4             ---             .65      .35        .79             1.25
   7.  Hotels and Motels                        2.2            1.42             .91      .67        .54             1.25
   8. TransportatIon Services                    .5             .59          1.12        .09       1.33             2.29
   9. Restaurants and Bars                      6.4            1.32             .80      .95        .50             1.01
  10. Textile Mills                              .8             .73             .77     1.22        .65              .57

Other Major I..igrant Employers
   1.  Hospitals and Health Services            8.4            1.71             .89     1.48       1.07              .91
   2.  Construction                             5.7             .97          1.04        .83        .81             1.00
   3. Education                                 4.5             .94          1.15       1.07       1.00              .89
   4.  Business Services                        3.3            1.51             .81     1.18        .99             1.51
   5. Electrical Equipment                      3.3             .75          1.13        .61        .82             1.17
   6.  Machinery                                3.2             .91          1.62        .84       1.32              .68
   7. Transportation Equipment                  2.7             .78          1.52        .74        .72              .74
   8.  Grocery Stores                           2.6            1.61           .89       1.89        .98             1.03
   9.  Wholesale Trade: Nondurables             2.5            1.27           .94        .96       1.33             1.17
  10.  Food Products                            2.1             .81          1.35        .65        .70              .79


'Based  on the industry distributions of 19-64 year olds in 120 SMSAS in the 1980 Census. High-immigrant cities
  include 20 SMSAS with the highest fraction of less-skilled immigrants.  Low-immigrant cities Include 40 SMSA's with
  the lowest fraction of less-skilled immigrants.

'For  each industry and native group, the relative share is the proportion of industry employment contributed by the
  native group in high immigrant cities, divided by the same proportion in low immigrant cities. This ratio is then
  divided by the ratio of the shares of the native group in total employment in the two groups of cities.

'Ratlo  of industry share of total employment in high-immigrant cities to industry share of total              in   low--
                                                                                                  employment
  immigrant cities,
                                                         Table 6
              Relative Growth of Employment Shares of Natives in High and Low Immigrant Cities:      l9lOl98O'


                                              Relative Growth of Native Group:           Relative Growth of      Growth of
                                                                                    b/    Total Employment:        Total
                                         High—Immigrant versus Low-I..lgrant Cities
        Industry                          White       White     Black       Black        High versus Low         Employment
                                          Males      Females    Males      Females       Immigrant CltiesCI'     All Citiesd'

High Immigrant share Industries
   1.  Apparel                            1.73         .85        .82        .39              1.30                  .67
   2.  Leather                            1.33        1.72        .19        .43              3.10                  .62
   3.  Agriculture-crops                   .43         .72       1.29       1.45              1.88                  .95
   4. Furniture                             .77        .88       1.26       1.59              1.06                  .85
   5. Misc. Manufacturing                   .67        .91        .75        .33              1.11                  .96
   6. PrIvate Household Services            ---        .72        .38        .83              1.55                  .52
   7.  Hotels and Motels                  1.47       1.15         .71        .72               .93                 1.16
   8. Transportation Services               .61      2.23         .04       2.16               .68                 1.39
   9.  Restaurants and Bars               1.36        .97         .89        .98               .94                 1.05
  10.  Textile Mills                        .94        .88       2.01        .95               .82                  .56


Other Major Immigrant Employers
    1. Hospitals and Health Services       1.75       1.04       1.00       1.08               .91                 1.17
    2. Construction                         .89        .77        .77        .72              1.13                 1.03
    3. Education                           1.00       1.15       1.27       1.52               .82                  .89
    4. Business Services                   1.28        .89        .56        .67               .97                 1.32
    5. Electrical Equipment                 .60       1.08        .66        .64              1.38                  .75
    6. Machinery                            .79       1.05        .65        .52              1.40                  .93
    7. Transportation Equipment             .83       1.54       1.07        .87              1.11                  .78
    8. Grocery Stores                      1.33       1.04       1.15       1.14              1.07                  .92
                                    e/      ---        ---        ---        ---               ---                  ---
    9. Wholesale Trade: Nondurables
   10. Food Products                        .75       1.09        .89        .72               .93                  .78



'See   note to Table 5 for definitions of high-immigrant and low-immigrant cities.

See    text for formula.

"Relative ratio of 1980 to 1970 employment totals for Industry In high-immigrant versus low-immigrant cities.

4"Ratlo of   1980   to 1970 employment totals for industry In all cities.

"Data   for wholesale trade nondurables Industry not available.
                                   Table 7

      Effects of Immigration on Four Groups of Less-Skilled Natives

                                Pooled Sample

                     (standard errors in parentheses)


                          Cross—sectional           First-D if ferenced

                        1970           1980      1980-1970    1980-1970   IV
Outcome Variable:

1. Labor Force!        -.173          -083          .080         -.102
    Population         (.086)          (.049)      (.083)        (.122)

2. Employment!         - .240         -.054         .404          .085
    Population         (.074)          (.060)      (.097)        (.144)

   Employment/         —.109            .019        .461          .231
    Labor Force        (.036)          (.040)      (.077)        (.113)

4. Fraction Worked     -.161          -.158         .090         -.246
    Last Year          (.063)          (.050)      (.084)        (.125)

5. Log Weeks Worked    -.191          -.088         .232          .142
                       (.078)         (.061)       (.132)        (.193)

6. Log Earnings!        .467           .018       -.262         -1.205
    Week               (.165)         (.112)       (.228)        (.342)


      equations include the average education and age of the subgroup in
  the SMSA (with subgroup specific slopes and Intercepts), as well as
  total population in the SMSA. The sample size is 424.

"Esti.ated by instrumental variables. The change in the fraction of
  immigrants in the SMSA is instrumented with the fraction of immigrants
  In 1970 and its square.
                                             Table 8

 Effects of Immigration on Black Males with Less Than 13 Years Educationa'

                         (standard errors in parentheses)


                          Cross -   sectional                    First-Differenced

                        1970                 1980          1980-1970         1980-1970 ivb/

Outcome Variable:

1. Labor Force!     -.145                -   .136           -.040              -.273
    Population      (.126)               (.084)             (.170)             (.240)

2. Employment/      -.264                -.068               .658              .285
    Population      (.156)               (.115)             (.234)            (.234)

3. Employmenc/      -   .165                 .046            .864              .623
    Labor Force     (.090)              (.098)              (.210)            (.294)

4. Fraction Worked -.183                -    .214            .101             - .268
    Last Year      (.100)               (.081)              (.168)            (:168)

5. Log Weeks        -.154               -.051               -.447              .272
    Worked          (.121)              (.111)              (.252)            (.351)

6. Log Earnings!     .736               -    .153           - .806           -1.910
    Week            (.346)              (.248)              (.494)            (.706)

a/All equations include average age and education in the SMSA, as well as
  total population. The sample size is 91.

b/Estimated by instrumental variables.              See note to Table   7.
                                              Table 9

    Effects of Inmiiration on White Males with           Less    Than 12 Years Educational

                           (standard errors in parentheses)


                           Cross -   sectional                       Firs t-Differenced

                          1970                1980          1980-1970           1980-1970 1vb'

Outcome Variable:

1. Labor Force/       -   .193            -   .079               .066              .036
    Population        (.075)              (.083)                (.149)            (.231)

2. Employment!        -   .279            -   .159               .349              .109
    Population        (.101)              (.112)                (.186)            (.289)

3. Eniployment/       -   .107            -   .110               .343             .086
      Labor Force     (.053)              (.074)                (.134)           (.211)

1     FractionWorked - .151               -   .215              - .145           - .609
      Last Year       (.070)              (.078)                (.136)           (.211)

5. Log Weeks          -.223              -.312               - .018              - .190
    Worked            (.074)             (.106)                 (.211)           (.328)

6. Log Earnings!     -    .264           -    .178           - .356             -1.103
      Week           (.201)              (.212)              (.406)              (.637)

a/All equations include average age and education in the SMSA, as well as
  total population. The sample size is 120.

b/Estimated by instrumental variables.               See note to Table     7.
                                     Table 10

Effects of Immigration on Black Females with Less Than 13 Years Educationa/'

                         (standard errors in parentheses)


                         Cross -sectional                Firsc-Differenced

                        1970             1980     1980-1970       1980-1970

Outcome Variable:

1. Labor Force!     -.216           -.063          -.154            -.221
    Population      (.179)          (.119)         (.256)           (.357)

2. Employment/      -   .221          .003          .149             .032
    Population      (.192)           (.128)        (.269)           (.374)

3. Employment!      -   .037          .073          .457             .320
    Labor Force     (.105)           (.086)        (.186)           (.259)

4. Fraction Worked - .165            -   .127       .054            -   .219
    Last Year      (.169)            (.120)        (.272)           (.379)

5. Log Weeks        -   .247          .143          .735             .217
    Worked          (.232)           (.143)        (.387)           (.542)

6. Log Earnings!    1.213                .533      -   .838        -1.369
    Week            (.402)           (.236)        (.609)           (.848)

a/All equations include average age and education in the SMSA, as well as
  total population. The sample size is 94.

b/Estimated by instrumental variables. See note to Table 7.
                                     Table 11

 Effects of Immigration on White Females with Less Than 13 Years Educational

                         (standard errors in parentheses)


                          Cross-sectional              First-Differenced

                        1970            1980      1980-1970     1980-1970 IV'

Outcome Variable:

1. Labor Force/     -.037            .058           .273         -.044
    Population      (.144)          (.097)         (.137)        (.207)

2. Employment!      -   .095            .027        .420         -   .089
    Population      (.150)          (.105)         (.154)        (.240)

3. Employment/      -   .132        -.045           .306         -.017
    Labor Force     (.058)          (.045)         (.125)        (.190)

4. Fraction Worked - .047            .005           .189         -.162
    Last Year      (.145)           (.098)         (.146)        (.222)

5. Log Weeks        -   .094        -   .118        .133          .335
    Worked          (.170)          (.110)         (.270)        (.399)

6. Log Earnings/     .667            .397           .309         -.955
   Week             (.245)          (.132)         (.430)        (.663)

a/All equations include average age and education in the SMSA, as well as
  total population. The sample size is 120.

b/Estimated by instrumental variables. See note to Table 7.
