                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    ON THE SEQUENCING OF STRUCTURAL REFORSS




                              Sebastian Edwards




                            Working Paper No. 3138




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Masaachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  October 1989




Thia paper is a somewhat abridged version of a paper prepared for the Country
Studies and Economic Prospects Branch of the OECD Economica and Statistics
Department. I thank Dr. Hartmut Fest and the participants of a seminar at the
OECD for helpful comments. I am also grateful to Miguel Savastano for
excellent assistance and detailed comments. This paper is part of NBER's
research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3138
                                        October 1989


                    ON THE SEQUENCING OF STRUCTURAL REFORMS


                                   ABSTRACT

     Both OECD and developing economies have embarked on structural reforms
aimed at dismantling regulations and reducing the extent of distortions
affecting different sectors of their economies. Regardless of the marked
difference, both groups have to deal with the problems of the appropriate
sequencing and speed of reforms. This paper first critically reviews the LDCs'
related literature on sequencing and speed of structural reforms drawing Out
features which are of relevance for OECD economies. The paper then develops a
formal framework based on a welfare criterion for evaluating efficiency effects
of structural policies paying particular attention to the way in which
distortions interact both intra and inter-temporally. The framework is then
used to discuss some of the important issues such as the sequencing of micro
and macro reforms ("competition of instruments"), broad front versus sequential
reforms, and the role of policy credibility.




                                        Sebastian Edwards
                                        Department of Economics
                                        University of California
                                        Los Angeles, CA 90024
                                           1




                                    1. Introduction
      In the las: decade or so a large number of countries --      both developed
(i.e. ,   OECD) and developing --    have embarked on structural reforms aimed at
dismantling regulations and reducing the extent of distortions affecting the
different sectors of their economies. Although the ultimate motivation for
these reforms is similar -   - the    improvement of economic performance -   - the
OECD and the less developed countries (LDCs) face, in many respects,
different problems. The initial conditions, the institutional settings, the
extent of the distortions, and the macroeconomic environment in the OECD
countries are markedly different than in the LDCs. However, both groups of
nations have to deal with the problems of the appropriate sequencing and
speed of reform. Basically, there are two interrelated questions (1)            in
what order should markets be deregulated and liberalized; and (2) what is
the optimal speed of reform (i.e., overnight vs. gradual).
      The differences between the problems faced by DECO and LDC countries can
be illustrated with two examples. In many LDCs, the trade regime has many
times been liberalized without an' accompanying macroeconomic structural
reform which would ensure the necessary movement of the real exchange rate.
This has in some instances led to quite disastrous macroeconomic consequences
and a call for the policy to be ended. For OECD economies, in turn, micro-
structural reforms are the ones more urgently required. In these countries,
for example, privatization has in some instances not been accompanied
(preceded) by policies simed at changing the competitive environment through
the lifting of barriers to entry to the different markets, and/or by the
relaxation of restrictive trade policies.

     During the last few years a relatively large literature on the dynamics
of structural reform has developed) Most of this literature, however, is
concerned with the developing countries and sets the problem in a context
where severe macroeconomic diaequilibriu.ma coexist with serious microeconomic
distortions. The existing literature has mainly discussed problems related
to: (I) the order of liberalization of the capital and current accounts of
the balance of payments, and (2) the optimal speed of economic reform. A
small number of papers have dealt, in addition, with broader issues related


     1See, for example, the collection of articles in Chokai and
Papageorgiou (1986).
                                      2




to the design of structursl reforms in a setting involving a larger number of
markets.2
     In spite of its specificity, the LDCs related literature contains some
elements that are of help for the deaign, evaluation, and monitoring of
structural reform in more advanced economies auch aa those of the OECD
countries. For example, some of the more recent LDC related literature has
dealt with dynamic problems that explicitly highlight the roles of savinga
and investment in the adjustment process prompted by real shocks; also the
diacuasions on the optimal speed of reform and on the iasuea of credibility,
time conaistency and reputation contain insights that can be used, after aome
adaptations, in the analysis of OECD cases. Also the incorporation of
adjuatment coata and hysteresis effects are of relevance for the more advanc-
ed nations. Finally, the idea of "competition of instruments" is important
to understand the tradeoffs faced by policymakers in almost any setting.
     The purpose of this paper is threefold. First it critically reviewa the
LDC related literature on sequencing and speed of structural reforms. This
review tries to determine what elements from this literature can be used in a
broader analysis that is of relevance for the more advanced nations; alao
some of the empirical and policy applications of thia literature are discus-
sed. Second, this paper develops an analytical framework that is helpful for
analyzing the dynamics of structural reforms in the OECD countries. Here the
differences between OECD and LDCa countries regarding the macroeconomic
environment, the initial conditions and the prevailing distortions play an
important role. The framework is based on a welfare criterion for evaluating
different sequencing acenarioa. Although for tractability reasona the formal
model developed here ignores adjustment coats and uncertainty, we do provide
a fairly detailed discussion on how these iaauea could affect policy deaign
and evaluation. Moreover, in doing this we draw extensively from the experi-
ences of the developing countries both with unilateral reforms aa well aa
with liberalization attempts sponsored by the World Bank. The third
objective of the paper is to illustrate the uaefulnesa of this framework for
the case of the OECD economies. Although the formal analysis focuaea, almost
exclusively, on the microeconomic aspects of reform, we alao provide a
discussion of some of the more important policy aspects related to the


     2See, for example, Krueger (1986).
                                            3




sequencing of micro and macro reforms. Here the concept of "competition of
instruments" is developed. Finally, the paper contains two technical
appendices that provide the formal underpinnings of our analysis.3

           2. On the Secjuencinz and SDeed of Reform: A Critical Review
                              Of the LDCs Literature

     Traditionally,    researchers dealing with structural reforms in the LDCs
have addressed some of the problems related to the sequencing and speed of
liberalization. The discussion has focused on three issues:            (I) the order
of liberalization of the capital and current accounts of the balance of
payments; (2) the sectoral order of liberalization of the trade account
(i.e. .   whether tariffs should be reduced in all sectors simultaneously or in
some alternative way); and (3) the appropriate speed at which trade reform
should be carried out. However, most studies have ignored issues related to
capital markets and labor markets distortions.4 This section of the paper
reviews the more important analytical pieces that have dealt with the sequ-
encing problem, emphasizing their policy implications. A brief discussion of
some historical - -   or   empirical --   policy   applications of these principles in
a number of developing nations is then provided. Finally, the usefulness of
this literature for the case of more advanced nations, such as the OECD
countries, is critically evaluated.

Adjustment Costs and Capital Inflows

     Little, Scitovsky and Scott (1970) were the first to address some of the
issues related to the speed and order of liberalization. Their analysis was
mainly based on political economy considerations, and their basic recommenda-
tion was that structural reforms should be carried out gradually. The reason
for this resides on the role of adjustment Costs, and on the opposition to
the reform policy that these costs can generate. According to these authors
faster reforms will result in larger short term costs - -        including
                                                                         unemploy-
ment and bankruptcies - -    and   thus in a stiffer political opposition. Along
similar lines, Michaely (1982) has argued that in order to minimize the
political opposition to trade reform it is necessary to minimize the short


     3Available from the author on request.

     4Exceptions are McKinnon (1973) and Krueger (1986).
                                      4




run unemployment effects and other adjustment costs assotiated with these
polities. According to some authors, one way of reducing these adjustment
costs is by relying on foreign tapital during the transition. Clark (1986),
for example, has argued that the Egyptian structural reforms of the l970s
succeeded thanks to the ample availability of foreign funds that helped
achieve a smoother transition.

     Anne Krueger has also, and repeatedly, argued that an increased reliance
on foreign funds will greatly reduce the frictions that emerge during major
structural reforms.5 In fact, in her recent writings on possible solutions to
the debt crisis, Krueger has strongly argued that the multilateral institu-
tions should provide large financial assistance to those indebted developing
countries committed to reforming their external sectors (see Krueger 1988)
     A common thrust of the view that argues for financial assistance during
the transition is that since the adjustment cost associated to micro reforms
can be reduced by an increased availability of foreign funds, restrictions on
the importation of capital should be reduced before the trade reform takes
place.6 That is, in a way this view calls fcr a "capital account first"
sequence of structural reform.

Capital Inflows, the Real Exchanae Rate and Competitiveness

     Ronald McKinnon has, perhaps, been the strongest opponent to the view
that structural (and mainly trade) reforms should be accompanied by capital
inflows. In his classical study on the role of financial markets in the deve-
lopment process McKinnon (1973) provided the first significant and compre-
hensive analysis of the order of liberalization. His analysis focused on the
"competition of instruments" problem and greatly emphasized the role played by
the real exchange rate. McKinnon argued that capital account restrictions
should be relaxed only after trade and other industr-ial sector distortions had
been dismantled. The reason for this is that capital inflows will result in a


     5Krueger (1981, 1984).

     6The key here is the assumption that capital controls are precluding
capital inflows. This, of course, need not be the case. Moreover, it will
not be the case in those countries where the domestic financial sector is
repressed. Thus, the proposed sequencing assumes that the domestic
financial sector is liberalized before either the trade or capital account.
On this see, for example, Mathieson and McKinnon (1981) and Edwards (1984).
real exchange rate appreciation which, in turn, deprotects the tradables
sector at a tiae when, due to the tariff reduction reform, a real exchange
rate depreciation is needed.7 According to McKinnon, "unuaually large capital
inflows of foreign capital .   . . inhibit   the exchange rate to depreciate

aufficiently      (1973, p. 160). Thia problem ia compounded by the fact that
these flows are unsustainable in the long run. Consequently, he argues, a
atructural reform of the trade account should "deliberately avoid an unuaual
or extraordinary injection of foreign capital" (1973, p. 161).
     Edwards (l989b) haa recently developed a formal intertemporal real
equilibrium model to analyze the way in which the equilibrium real exthange
rate reacta to a reduction in tariffa and to a capital account liberalization.
He ahowa that in a world with three gooda (exportablea, importablea and non-
tradables) a reduction in tariffs can, in general, reault in either an equili-
brium real exchange rate depreciation or appreciation. Capital account liber-
alization, however, will unambiguously result in a real exchange rate appreci-
ation. This analysis, then, shows that theoretically there is some support
for McKinnon'a contentiona. Furthermore, Edwards (1989a) haa recently used a
12 LDCs data aet to empirically investigate the way in which the equilibrium
real exchange rate reacta to tariff changes and changes in capital flows,
among other variables. He found that higher tariffs resulted in an equi-
librium real exchange rate appreciation, as did increases in capital inflowa.
     In a number of later writings McKinnon has again addressed the general
isaues of sequencing and speed of structural reform. In his recent evalua-
tion of the overall experiences of the Southern Cone countries with
structural reform in the 1970a, McKinnon (1982) has argued that Chile's
superior performance was due to having maintained the capital account closed
while tariffs were reduced. He contrasted this case to Argentina'a diamal
performance and argued that the fact that Argentina had followed the opposite
aequencing was at the heart of the explanation. Moreover, he used these
epiaodes to conclude that trade liberalization should only take place after
the fiscal deficit ia eliminated. In this way the government will face no
need to borrow from abroad to finance its expenditure and, thus, the need for


     7The fact that capital inflows result in a real exchange rate
appreciation haa been investigated extensively within the context of the
Dutth-diaease effects of foreign aid. See, for example, van Wijnbergen
(1986).
                                      6




capital inflows during the transition will be reduced.

Welfare Effects and Credibility

     In a series of papers Jacob Frenkel (1982, 1983) discussed the approp-
riate order of structural reform. He emphasized the welfare consequences of
alternative orderings of liberalization as well as the different nature of
the adjustment of goods and capital markets. His discussion was partially
based on the Southern Cone reforms of the early 1970s. Frenkel made the
important point that goods and asset msrkets clear at different speeds.
While asset markets clear almost instantaneously, the attainment of equilib-
rium in the goods markets ususlly tskes some time. Thus, Frenkel argued, a
synchronization of the structural reform process will call for the goods
markets (i.e., the current account) to be liberalized before the capital
account. Also, Frenkel pointed out that from a purely welfare perspective,
second best considerations suggest that it is more advisable to open the cur-
rent account before liberalizing restrictions on capital mobility, Frenkel
says that "a comparison of the costs of distortions ...     supports      the proposi-
tion that the trade account should be opened first" (1983, p. 167). His
anslysis, however, does not include a formal discussion of this proposition.
     A common concern of most authors has to do with the survivability of a
structural reform attempt.8 An important determinant of such survivability
is the extent to which the reform program is credible. If there is no credi-
bility and the public expects the liberalization measures to be reversed, it
will sctually take steps that will undermine the effectiveness of the reform
program. Calvo (1983, 1987) and Stockman (1982) have dealt systematically
with the role of credibility in the liberslizstion process. In particular
Calvo (1987) has emphasized that if a specific reform is not credible to
economic agents, liberalizing other sectors may actually be welfare reducing.
A good example of this would be to liberalize the capital account at a time
when the public believes that the trade reform will be reversed --         that    is,
when the credibility of the trade reform is low. According to Calvo, under
these circumstances the public will use foreign funds - -   that   have been made
available through the liberalization of the capital account -      - to   import
larger amounts of goods, especially durables, than what would be called for


     8See, for example, Little et al. (1970), Michaely (1982, 1987).
                                       7




if the trade reform were credible. This "over-importation" will reault in
welfare losaea, since the lack of credibility has played the role of a dis-
tortion. Since under these circumstancea the liberalization of the capital
account magnifies the pre-existing distortions, (i.e., taxes or tariffs),
Calvo recommends that in countries where governments lack credibility,
capital controls should       be removed until the trade liberalization program
is fully consolidated.
     As has been said, moat of the studies reviewed above deal with the
rather narrow issue of the order of liberalization of the current and capital
accounts of the balance of payments, without addressing the sequencing
problem from a broader perspective. An exception to this is Krueger (1984,
1986) who provides a comprehensive discussion that deals with labor markets,
the agricultural sector and the trade and capital accounts. She argues that
the most serious problem with a liberalization program is the political
resistance that it generates. Economic agents can generally recognize the
short run adjustment costs associated with structural reforms, but uually
have difficulties perceiving its long run benefits. In terms of the
appropriate sequencing, Krueger is not fully committed. While, on the one
hand, she argues for increased capital inflows during the transition of a
trade-related structural reform, on the other, she points out that opening up
the capital account in the presence of trade distortions may result in a
serious misallocation of investment (Krueger 1986). Regarding the speed of
structural reform, however, Krueger is quite emphatic in advocating a rapid
dismantling of distortions. This recommendation, she argues, is dictated
both by welfare as well as credibility considerations.9

Macroeconomic Effects of Alternative SeouenL.....,

     More recently, a new dimension has been added to the pqlicy debate on
sequencing of liberalization in the developing countries. As a result of the
macroeconomic dislocations provoked by the debt crisis of the early l980s a
number of authors, and certainly the multilateral institutions, have begun to
investigate the interaction between structural reforms and macroeconomic


     9Recent work at the World Bank and IMF has also dealt with the
sequencing issue. The most important contributions are in Choksi and
Papageorgiou (1986). In a longer version of this paper these studies are
reviewed in detail.
stabilization programs. Most contributions to this emerging literature have
dealt with the sequencing of stabilization and liberalization polities, dis-
cussing whether liberalization should be undertaken before, simultaneously or
after disinflation is attained. As can be seen in Table 1, this literature
has provided a number of inaighta and a myriad of polity recommendations,
that go from "liberalize first" to "stabilize first".
     Those authors that favor the "liberalize firat" strategy or the simul-
taneous implementation of both polities include Krueger (1981, 1984, 1988),
Mithaely (1987) and Corden (1987) .   They argue that there is little connection
between disinflation and liberalization polities, and that the costs of trade
restrictions are too high to justify the postponement of liberalization until
the rnatroeconorny has regained equilibrium. They are careful to point out,
however, that in order to ensure the aucteas of the trade reform, it is cruc-
ial to avoid real exchange rate overvaluation. The supporters of the "stabil-
ization first" aequente include Saths (1987, 1988), McKinnon (1984) and
Fiather (1986, 1987). They have based their views on a number of tonaidera-
tiona, including the historical difficulty of avoiding overvaluation in count-
ries with high fiscal deficits, and the relation between inflation, relative
prite variability and resource allocation. A limitation of muth of this
literature, however, is that it is very general and that no systematic attempt
has been made to analyze the historical evidence. Moreover, most of these
studies have not made a clear distinttion between different degrees of trade
reform, or between different initial types of macroeconomic diaequilibria.

                3.   An Interteaporal Framework for Analyzing
                     The Welfare Effetta of Structural Reform
     The purpose of this settion is to present a aimple analytical framework
suitable for analyzing the welfare consequences of atructural reforms in
developed economies. The diatussion is quite general and avoids unnetesaary
tethnitalities; most of the analysis is, in fact, tarried out verbally and
with the aid of some diagrams. This general framework can then be adapted to
look at specific caaes of structural reform. In Appendix A, however, a
mathematical representation of this framework is provided, and some apetific
exertises are formally presented. This model is then used to discuss the
welfare implications of alternative sequentings of reform.
                                          9




                                       TABLE 1

              Schematic   View of the Literature On The Sequencing Of

                     Stabilization and Trade Liberalization



1.   Trade   Liberalization First

     Krueger (1981) If there are foreign funds available tariffs can be
          reduced without an accompanying real depreciation helping the
          stabilization effort by providing an anchor for (many) domestic
          prices.

2. Simultaneous Implementation of Both Policies

     Krueger (1981) In theory there is very little connection between the
          determinants of inflation and of the orientation of the trade
          regime. It is possible to attack both problems at the same time as
          long as we avoid real overvaluation.

     Krueger (1984) Postponement of liberalization implies prolonging
          inefficiency costs. Do it simultaneously following crawling peg
          and assuming that government will not resort to controls in an
          effort to curb inflation.

     Michaely (1987) Liberalization will only succeed with depreciated RER.
          This requires solving fiscal deficit pressures simultaneously.

     Corden (1987) As long as overvaluation is avoided it is possible to
          carry on both policies at the same time.

3. Stabilization First

     McKinnon and Mathieson (1981) Liberalization will have a better chance
          of succeeding if undertaken with a fiscal surplus. In this way we
          can assure that we will maintain a depreciated RER.

     McKinnon (1984) Main problem with aborted liberalizations is that they
          have been accompanied with massive capital inflows that resulted in
          real appreciation. Best way to avoid need for foreign funds is to
          achieve fiscal surplus prior to liberalizing.

     Fischer (1986, 1987) Since inflation generates serious distortions,
          liberalization will take place under inappropriate signals. Thus,
          inflation should be brought down first.

     Sachs (1987, 1988) Both policies result in a "competition for
          instruments   where what is required to succeed in one front is the
          opposite of what is needed to succeed in the other. Historical
          evidence from successful Asian exporters suggests stabilization
          should be consolidated before attempting trade reforms.
                                         10



      Since our analysis focuses on structural reforms, the framework
 presented emphasizes the microeconomic or efficiency effects of such polic-
 ies, giving a minimal role to macroeconomic aspects. This is, in fact, a
 fairly accurate representation of most of the OECD countries that have
 already attained macroeconomic stability. Macroeconomic aspects are
discussed in greater detail in Section 5 where some recent evidenceon World
Bank structural adjustment loans is reported. This section is organized as
follows: first the bare bones of the analytical framework are presented.
Second, we explain the key distortions considered in our analysis. Third, we
discuss how these different distortions interact among themaelves; here we
place special emphasis on the relation between intratemporal and intertempo-
tel distortions. And fourth, we discuss two important issues related to the
sequencing of reforms that are not captured in a formal way by our model:
the problem of competition of instruments and the role of credibility.

3.1 The Analytical Framework

     We will consider an open economy with three broad production sectors:
an import competing sector (N)        an exports aector (X) ;   and a nontrad-
ables sector (N) .    The latter can be interpreted as a service sector that
includes industries such as transportation and communications. Output of X,
N, and N is produced by many competitive firms. There are three factors
of production --   labor,   natural resources and capital -- and consumers in
this economy consume all three goodsJ0 We further assume that the   country
is small within the context of the world economy and, thus, that it faces
given world prices of importablea and exportables.11

     The simplest way to explicitly incorporate intertemporal effects of
different policies into this analysis is to consider the existence of two
periods -- the present (period I) and the future (period 2). Consequently,

all economic agents in this economy face an intertemporal budget constraint


     10Formally, consumers in this economy maximize a time separable
intertemporal utility function, where each subutility function depends on
that period's consumption of X, N and N.     See Appendix A.

     11lf alternatively, we assume the case of a large country we will need
to determine the price of X and N, as well as the interest rate.
endogenously. Although this implies a substantial complication in the
algebra, the main thrust of our arguments will not be affected.
                                          11




that restricts the present value of income to being equal to the present
value of expenditurea. In a particular period, however, income can exceed
(fall short of) expenditure; as a consequence in any one period the current
account of the balance of payments can be in deficit (surplus). The
intertemporal nature of the model allows us to focus formally on savings and
investment decisions and, thus, to define the current account as the differ-
ence between savings and investment. While the current account balance can
be different from zero in any period, the intertemporal budget constraint
requires that the discounted sum of the current account in both periods adds
up to zero. The nontrsdables goods sector, however, will be assumed to be

permanently (e.g. ,   in   every period) in equilibrium.

3.2 The Key Distortions

     We assume that distortions are present in four markets: (1) Imports
are assumed to be subject to (relatively low) tariffs (t) .   (2)   We assume
that the labor market is subject to some types of regulations. In terms of
our model the easiest way to think about this is by assuming the existence of
a rigid wage rate set above the msrket clearing wage rate. This can be
interpreted as having a union-determined or an administratively-set minimum
wage. Moreover, we assume that this minimum (or rigid) wage is set in terms
of the exportable good. This, in turn, can be interpreted as a 100% indexa-
tion mechanism where the price of X is used as the index for wage adjust-
ment.12 Naturally, all of this results in unemployment. In order to simpl-
ify the discussion, we follow the traditional international trade literature
and assumes that in each period the supply of labor is inelastic.1'3
Initially we will assume that this rigid or minimum wage (w) affects the
economy as a whole and that it is in effect in both periods. (3) We assume

     12
       On labor market regulations in OECD countries see Chan-Lee, Coe and
Prywes (1987). The assumption that the minimum wage is set in terms of the
numeraire is made for presentation convenience; it greatly facilitates the
diagrammatical analysis that follows. Alternatively one could assume that
the minimum wage is set in terms of a basket of goods. In this case Q —
where     is the change in the nominal wage and where      is the percentage
change in the (exact) consumption price index. The results obtained in this
case will depend on the weights given to the different goods in the price
index. See Edwards (l988a).

     1'3Assuming a positively sloped supply of labor will not change the
analysis in significant ways. See Edwards (l989d).
                                        12




that regulations on the nontradables sector take the form of a tax r, that
introduces a wedge between the producer and consumer prices.   (4)  Finally,
regulations in the financial sector are assumed to result in a domestic
(real) interest rate that differs from the world interest rate. The most
convenient way to formally deal with these types of regulstions is by
assuming that there are capital controls in the form of a tax on foreign
borrowing (a) .     Consequently the domestic (resl) interesr rate (r) will
be equal to the world rate (r*) plus this tax (r —        r*   +   a),   One of the
exercises to be performed below will consist then on a reduction of a. An
important characteristic of the domestic interest rste is that it is expres-
sed in terms of tradable goods and not in terms of a basket of all goods
consumed; as a result of this, there is a difference between the (real)
interest race r and the consumption rate of interest)'4
     The way in which these distortions affect the four markets can be
conveniently captured diagrammaticslly. In fact, as will be seen below, it
is possible to repfesent most of the welfare effects of different structural
reforms with the aid of these figures. The diagrammatical repreaencarions of
the importables and nontradables msrkets and of the saving-investment equili-
brium are the usual ones and are presented in Figure 1.        Panel A represents
the importablea market in period I where         is the domestic price of
importablea and p is the world price (pM_p'4-t))'5 Panel B is the non-
tradables market (in period i), where r is the tax on nontradables that
introduces a wedge between the production and consumption prices. Finally,
panel C shows the interaction between savings and inveatmenc, where r is
the (exogenoualy determined) world interest rate and r is the domestic real
rate. Naturally, these markets are interconnected through the different
general equilibrium links that are explained in Appendix A.
     The figure capturing the labor market is somewhat more complex. The
initial equilibrium in the labor market is represented in Figure 2, where the
horizontal axis measures total labor available in the economy, the vertical

     14
          See, for example, Dornbusch (1983a).

     150ur diacuaaion will focus on import tariffs but could easily deal with
the (realistic) caae of export subsidies. It should be noted, however, that
in an intertemporal setting with nontradablea, Lerner'a symmetry theorem does
not always hold.
                                5,,




     F,6utLt i.4:.                    M

                     .srJ




                                          p-I

F-
                            S




                                I
     fIL1PE _=1
     L
                            A




                            J




or             Ii
               '1•
                     (4n1
                            I
                            I1



     '4 't Z    La41y r-1a h G2L: 8J4' '1
                                     13



axis depicts the wage rate in terms of exportables and the downward sloping
schedules represent the value of marginal product of labor in the different
sectors. Demand for labor by the tradable gooda sectors (Lr) is equal to
the horizontal sum of the demand for labor by the exportables sector (La),
and the demand for labor by the importables sector (LM) (see Edwards,
1988a). Demand for labor by the nontradables sector is given by L.N.        If
there is a minimum wage rate equal to w, unemployment will result. The
amount of labor demanded by the nontradables sector is determined by point A
and is equal to the distance DM4; the amount of labor demanded by the ex-
portables sector is given by the distance              and that demanded by the
importables sector is equal to 4i4.       Initial   unemployment is, then, given
by the distance (414).16
     This stylized economy, characterized by distortions in the four key
markets forms the basis of our analysis. In the discussion of the welfare
effects of alternative structural reforms we will make some additional
simplifications, assuming, for instance, that some of these distortions do
not apply to the case at hand. In that way it will be possible to concent-
rate on specific iffects without being side-tracked by too many complica-
tions. However, the way in which all the distortions interact among
themselves will also be explained in some detail.

3.3 The Interaction of Key Distortions

     When designing structural reforms it is crucial to incorporate the
interaction between the different distortions existing in the economy.
Actually, not having taken these interactions into account has been at the
heart of the failures to sustain reforms in some of the LDCs.17 Unfortunate-
ly most of the traditional literature on the dynamics of structural reforms
has ignored some of the most important and complicated interactions that can


            type of diagram has been used by a number of other authors to
study the reaction of employment to a number of policies. See, for example,
Mussa (1974), Burda and Sachs (1987) and Edwards (1988a). Notice that the
analysis can be extended to the case where the labor market distortion
responds to factors other than minimum wages. One such case, which is
discussed in Appendix B, occurs when there is labor market segmentation, and
one sector (usually manufacturing) is subject to an above-market clearing
wage while the rest of the economy is uncovered.

     175ee, for example, the discussion in Edwards and Cox-Edwards (1987).
                                               14



occur between different types of distortions. As will be illustrated in this
subsection, these have to do with the way in which distortions to intertempo-
ral trade interact with distortions to intratemporal exchange.
       For instance, structural reforms that reduce import tariffs or taxes on
nontradables, will affect savings through their impact on the relative price
of future to present consumption, which we can call p. This relative price
determines the allocation of total wealth across present and future consump-
tion. An increase in p makes future consumption more expensive and gener-
ates an intertemporal substitution towards the present and, consequently, a
reduction in savings. This relative price can be written in the following
way:
                                 -12
                   —   (l+r)
                                                                                             (1)
                          it1'

where r is the domestic real rate of interest, and is equal to the world
rate r* plus the tax on borrowing a. Notice that r is expressed in
terms of the numeraire, which in our case are exports.             it2   is   a price index
of period 2 consumption and it1           is   a period 1 price index,   it1    and   it2,   in
turn, are functions of all domestic prices, including imports, in each period
and, thus, also depend on the other markets' distortions. Denoting the
domestic prices of imports and nontradables in period i by P and P,,
these price indexes can be written as positive functions of                    and

                  1— 111                 2 222
                                           —
                                            M'N                                              (2)


       To illustrate how intratemporal changes in distortions also affect
savings decisions, consider a case of an economy with capital controls (i.e.
with a tax on borrowing) that embarks on an anticipated structural reform
that will reduce both import tariffs and consumption taxes in period 2. This
means that both         and            will go down. As a result it2      will   decline
and so will p. Future consumption will become relatively less expensive,
and consumers will substitute away from current consumption. Savings, thus,
will increase as a result of the anticipated reform. However, since due to
the existence of the initial tax on borrowing a, consumption in period I
was initially too low, the increase in savings induced by the expected reduc-
tion in it2   represents         a neitative welfare effect: in the presence of a tax
on foreign borrowing an anticipated reduction in import tariffs and/or con-
                                     15




sumption taxes results in indirect welfare losses. In evaluating the reform
as a whole we should then contrast this effect with the direct welfare gain
resulting from the deregulation of the commodity markets in period 2. A
very important implication of the intertemporal aubstitution effect just des-
cribed is that the exoectations of future structural reforms many times will
suffice for generating non-trivial welfare effects (see Edwards (1989c)).
     The type of interaction between inter- and intratemporal distortions
will also be present in those reforms that imply a change in the extent of
capital controls. For example, the relaxation of capital controls that will
take place in the EEC in 1992, can be interpreted as a reduction in the tax
on borrowing a and, thus, in the domestic real interest rate. As a result,
the relative price p will drop and present consumption will become less
expensive. The resulting increase in period 1 expenditures will have a
number of effects in all markets in that period, generating a number of
indirect welfare effects (see Edwards and Ostry, 1989).
     Generally speaking, changes in import tariffs and in taxes to
nontradables will also have an impact on investment and through it they can
also affect welfare. In the first place, if capital goods are imported, a
reduction in tariffs will increase investment. On the other hand, structural
reforms will change intratemporal relative prices, reducing the price of
import competing, and possibly that of nontradables relative to that of
exports.18 Depending on the factor intensities in the different sectors,
this can result in an increase or decline in the economy's stock of capital,
and thus in additional indirect welfare effects. In most of the discussion
in Sections 4 and 5, however, we will ignore the effects on investment. This
means that we will assume the current account as being absolutely determined
by the amount of savings. A formal discussion of the effects of introducing
investment into the analysis is done in Appendix A.
     An important simplifying assumption adopted in this framework refers to
the absence of adjustment costs. These types of frictions can be introduced
in a number of ways. Perhaps the easiest way of doing it is by assuming that
in the short-run factors other than labor (i.e. ,   capital   and natural



     18Rigorously, the way in which the equilibrium price of nontradables
will evolve following a structural reform cannot be determined a orion.
See Appendix A.
                                     16



resources) are fixed in their sector of origin. These factors, however, can
be reallocated slowly and in the long-run they do flow to their more produc-
tive activity. In this setting we will have a Ricardo-Viner representation
in the short-run and a traditional Heckscher-Ohlin setting in the long run
(see Mayer 1974, Mussa 1974, Neary 1978). The transition can be modelled in
a number of ways, including the addition of a "moving industry", as in Mussa
(1978), that uses factors during the reallocation process.
     With this type of adjustment costs the short-run production
possibilities frontier will be on the inside of the long-run frontier except
at the initial equilibrium point, where they will be tangent (Mayer 1974).
It is easy to show that if tariffs are the only distortion, in this setting
it is still optimal to liberalize instantaneously: adjustment costs on their
own do not constitute a reason for gradualism. However, adjustment costs

combined with either price rigidities or uncertainty may, under some circum-
stances, dictate less than full and/or instantaneous liberalization. This is
discussed in detail in subsection 3.4.2 below.19

3.4 Extensions to the Basic Framework: Competition of Instruments and
     Credibility

     The framework presented above provides the more basic elements of the
(general equilibrium) model we will use to analyze the welfare consequences
of alternative structural reform programs. The model is deliberately simple,
and concentrates on the more relevant features of the problem at hand. In
this subsection we will expand the scope of our analysis of structural
reforms by dealing briefly with two important related topics not captured
directly by this framework:   (a) competition of instruments; and (b) the
role of credibility.
     3.4.1 Competition of Instruments
     An important aspect of broad structural reforms is that many times
significant policy tradeoffs will develop. The basic point is that the
attainment of a particular target may require some variables (either exogenous
or endogenous) to move in a particular direction while the attainment of other



     19Another useful simplification used in the text refers to the absence
of intermediate inputs. However, as discussed in Appendix A, they can
easily be introduced into our formal welfare framework for analyzing
sequencing issues.
                                       17




objectives will require those variables to move in the opposite direction.
This problem is in psrt related to the policy assignment problem discussed by
Tinbergen and Mundell in the 1960s. However, the currenc problem has a
broader dimension stemming from intertemporal and credibility considerations.
       Jeffrey Sachs (1987, 1988) has recently stressed in a forceful way the
issue of competition of instruments within the context of the sequencing of
structural reforms and stabilization programs. His main point is that
countries such ss Japan embarked on fundamental structural reforms geared
towards liberalizing markets only after they had stabilized the economy.
Based on this historical experience Sachs has argued that, analytically, when
discussing issues related to sequencing one of the most important considera-
tions has to do with the competition of instruments.20 Naturally, this
problem is not only present when discussing the sequencing of stabilization
and liberalization programs, but also when evaluating the appropriate order
of a liberalization program.
       In terms of our stylized model, real exchange rate behavior represents
an important sphere where competition of instruments is reflected. In this
model, the real exchange rate, or relative price of tradables to nontrad-
ables, plays a crucial role in the process of allocating resources. It can
be shown that, under most plausible circumstances, a trade reform will result
in (or "require") a real exchange rate depreciation, while a relaxation of
capital controls will cause (require) a real appreciation. As pointed out in
our review of the LDC literature, this has prompted a number of experts to
argue against the simultaneous liberalization of the trade and capital
accounts of the balance of payments.
       A second important dimension related to the competition of instruments
issue has to do with the effects of structural reforms on the sources used to
finance government expenditures. In most analytical models, however, this
issue has been set aside.21 The reason is that moat models used to address
the sequencing issue, including the one in Appendix A, have relied on the
traditional assumption that tariff and tax revenues are returned to the


     20Sachs specifically points out that "the instruments of stabilization
may well compete with the instruments of liberalization".      -



     21Surprisingly, perhaps, these effects have been ignored by most of the
LDCs related literature.
                                       10




public    in a lump sum fashion. In reality, of course, this is not the case;
governments use these revenues to finance their expenditures. In fact, when
a government budget constraint is incorporated into the analysis, important
policy dilemmas appear. For example, if government revenues are to be
maintained constant, a trade liberalization will require a hike in other tax
sources, and, thus, will result in an amplification of other distortions.
     This (simple) idea introduces some problems to the policy advice
received from the LDC-related literature. In fact, in that literature an
important principle in terms of sequencing of structural reform is that a
trade liberalization process, where tariff levels are reduced significantly,
should only be undertaken once the fiscal sector has been reformed and other
sources of revenue have reolaced imoort tariffs.22 Notice, however, that in
light of our previous discussion, this is by no means a trivial proposition.
Indeed, even from a purely theoretical point of view it is not clear that
reducing tariffs and increasing other taxes will be welfare improving. More-
over, at least at the theory level, it is not clear that welfare will
increase if, as liberalization advocates have sometime proposed, consumption
taxes are raised as tariffs are reduced.
     This proposition can be shown formally using the following simple
variant of the model described in Sections 3.1 and 3.2 and fully developed in
Appendix A. Consider a small country that produces three goods: export-
ables, importables of type A, and importablea of type B. Importablea of type
A are subject to an (specific) import tariff r, while type-B importablea
are subject to a consumption tax t. World prices of A are given and equal
to p*; world prices of B are given and equal to q*; and world prices of
exportablea are also given and taken as the numeraire. The government uses
tariff and tax proceeds to finance its own consumption (C). For simplicity,
and in order to focus on the diacusaion, we have abstracted from intertempo-
ral issues as well aa from those problems stemming from the existence of
nontradable goods (see, however, Appendix A).
     Using duality the equilibrium in this economy is fully deacribed by
equations (3)-(6), where p and q are domestic pricea of imports of types




     22
         See, for example, McKinnon (1984).
                                           19




A and B:23
                R(1,p,q*) —       E(l,p,q,W)                                  (3)


                 C —   r[Epp
                           -R ]   + tE                                        (4)
                                      q

                 pp*+r                                                        (5)


                 q —   q* + t                                                 (6)

Equation (3) is the economy's budget constraint, where R is the revenue
function and E the expenditure function; W is the level of utility.
Subjndexes denote partial derivatives; that is, R is the derivative of the
revenue function with respect to p. Notice that while q is an argument of
E( )   q*   is an argument of R, reflecting the fact that only consumption of
B is subject to a distortion. E and Eq are the compensated demand func-
tions for A and B; R              is the supply function for A; (E-R) are
imports of A. Equation (4) is the budget constraint of the government; its
consumption (C) is financed by tariff revenues r[ER]. and by revenues
from the consumption tax on good B, tEq• Equations (5) and (6) establish
the relation between world prices, the tariff, and the consumption tax. The
presence of the budget constraint (4) is the main difference between this
model and the one implicitly used in the traditional treatment of
liberalization issues.
       From equation (3) we obtain the welfare effects of unconstrained changes
in the distortions r and t. From (4), on the other hand, we obtain the
relation between r and t that yields a given government revenue. In fact,
by totally differentiating (4) we can obtain the combination of r and t
compatible with a constant level of government consumption. If, initially, the
import tariff is below the maximum revenue level, a reduction of       will
require an increase in t in order to satisfy the budget constraint. That is,

                 11
                 drJ       dC—O

       We want to perform the following experiment: reduce import tariffs
(i.e., liberalize trade) subject to the constraint that the government will


     230n the use of duality theory in open economy issues see, for example,
the textbook by Dixit and Norman (1980).
                                              20



still consume G in real terms. We have then two equations (3) and (4), and
two unknowns W and t. Totally differentiating (3) and (4) we obtain
(where, as before, subindexes refer to partial derivatives; and CA and C3
are pure income effects for A and B):

                                    dt1   1-czdr
                        1E       E. dW -(E -R ]dr
                             q    W          pp
where:

a —   ([E    -R ]   + tE + r(E -R ))
            p p         qp    pp pp
    — (rE        + tE
            pq       qq
1     (1CA + tC3) Ew.
From (7) it is easy to show that, if r is below the maximum revenue
tariff, then:


                        dr dG—0

This is, with a government budget constraint, it is not clear that a trade
reform will increase welfare in the country in question. The reason, of
course, has to do with the competition of instruments issue: a tariff reform
"competes" with the goal of reducing distortions in other sectors. Moreover,
if government expenditures are to be maintained constant, a reduction in
tariffs will generally require an increase in other taxes, with the final
welfare outcome being undetermined a priori.
       3.4.2 The Role of Credibility
      Most analyses on the sequencing of economic reform have based their
conclusions on macroeconomic or welfare considerations. In the latter case
the criterion used to choose a given course of action is simple: "sequencing
A is preferred to sequencing B, if social welfare under A exceeds that
obtained under 3'. Although in many ways, and especially in a theoretical
sense, this is a useful and powerful criterion it does not address the
important question of whether the government can equally precommit itself to
carrying Out both sequences. If this is not the case, then the two theoreti-
cal sequencings are not equally relevant from a practical point of view.
This issue of precommitment is related to the important question of
credibility of policy announcements which, in turn, is closely related to the
                                     21



question of what the public exDects the government will do.
     One of the most important developments of the last decade in the theory
of economic policy refers to the formal incorporation of credibility effects
into its analytical framework. A key implication of this literature is that
the absence of credibility is equivalent to a distortion; thus, we have to
contemplate the possibility that the "incredibility" distortion will
interact with the other distortions prevailing in the economy at the moment
a structural reform takes place.
     Traditional analyses of sequencing, including that developed in this
paper, assume that the government is precommitted to whatever sequencing it
announces. However, according to the modern theory of economic policy if the
government runs into precommitment limitations we will have time consistency
oroblems (see Kydland and Prescott 1977, and Calvo 1978). These types of
problems emerge when all sources of taxation are distortionary and when future
government actions affect the return of the assets held by the public. From
an analytical point of view, to find out whether there are time consistence
problems we should ask ourselves if in period 2 (the future) a benevolent
government has incentives to renege on the policies it announced in period I
(the present). If this is the case we say that the policy plan is time
inconsistent. Moreover, if private agents form their expectations rationally
they will understand that the government will indeed change (cx post) its
policy, and will act accordingly, frustrating the reforms themselves.
     It is easy to see that, generally speaking, some sequencing of
structural reforms are credible, while others are indeed time inconsistent.
For example, a reform based on the reduction of import tariffs is time
consistent, since tariffs are always (in every period) welfare reducing.
Consequently, once the government announces that it will liberalize trade, in
period 2 it has no incentive to renege on its promises. This, however, will
not be the case for reforms affecting the financial sector, such as the
relaxation of capital controls, or straight financial liberalization prog-
rams. The reason, of course, is that in period 2 bond holdings, and savings
and investment decisions will become predetermined. The government, then,
can deviate from its announcement without imposing welfare costs. However,
according to the new credibility literature, economic agents will know that
the government has this incentive to renege on its promises and will take
                                          22




this information into account when making their optimal decisions.24
     From a theoretical point of view, once time consistency issues are taken
into account, the "adequate" results regarding the sequencing of reforms may
differ from recommendations based on straightforward welfare considerations.
Researchers, however, have not yet been able to establish with precision how
important these effects can be in real world situations. For this reason,
the analysis of Section 4 will assume that the authorities do have the
ability to precommit to any possible sequencing; thus, we will base our
analysis and recommendations on intertemporal welfare considerations.
     On the other hand it should be noticed that the recent literature on the
credibility and sustainability of structural reforms has emphasized the role
of investment and of adjustment costs.25 Much of this research has incorpor-
ated the role of hysteresis into the analysis (Dixit l987a,b).26 The main
idea behind this approach is that in the presence of adjustment costs,
exogenous shocks - -   such   as tariff liberalization, privatization or related
policy measures -   - will affect   the (steady-state) equilibrium of the economy.
In other words, in the presence of exit costs, barriers to entry, or other
forms of adjustment costs, the behavior of the private sector can be affected
by uncertainty, even when economic agents are risk neutral (Dixit (1987b)).
This view has obvious implications for the evaluation of structural adjust-
ment programs in the absence of full credibility: to the extent that the
private sector attaches a positive probability to policy reversal, its behav-
ior will greatly differ from what it would have been under policy certainty.
More specifically, we can face situations where the lack of credibility -     -
reflected   through a positive probability of a change in policy -   - will
prevent the private sector from investing in those sectors that become more
profitable after the structural reform. Of course, to the extent that
investment in the sectors with comparative advantage is not forthcoming the
success of the reform program as a whole will be in jeopardy. This is
because the main objective of these policy packages is to reallocate


     240n this see, for example, Calvo (1987, 1988).

     255ee, for example, Dornbusch (1988) and Rodrik (1989).
     26
       In the 1960s Robert Mundell was an earlier proponent of using the term
hysteresis in economic analysis.
                                         23



resources towards more efficient activities. If this does not happen the
reform as a whole would have failed.27
     Recently, Rodrik (1989) has developed a formal model to analyze how the
interaction of credibility problems and adjustment costs affect the outcome
of a structural reform program.28 In this model private investors have to
decide whether to maintain their capital stock in the traditional (i.e.,
protected) sector or to move it to that sector favored by the structural
reform (the "new" sector). Although the economic return in the "new" sector
is higher than in the traditional sector, there is a probability 'r of
policy reversal. Given the existence of adjustment costs - -    which   in this
model take the form of an exit and an entry cost -    - once the policy reform is
enacted, it is not obvious that it will pay to invest in the new sector. The
reason, of course, is that if the policy is actually reversed those that have
indeed reallocated capital will incur a cost. Rodrik computes the "required"
return differential that, on the margin, will make investors indifferent
between maintaining their capital in the traditional sector and moving it to
the new sector. Not surprisingly, this required return differential will be
higher the larger the adjustment costs and the larger the probability of
reversal (w). That is, the less "credible" the reform is, the lower
investment in the "new" sector will be.
     A logical extension of this simple model is to endogenize the
probability of reversal by making   ir    a function of how much investment takes
place in the "new" sector: the larger the investment and the capital reallo-
cation, the lower the probability of policy reversal and, thus, the higher
the credibility of reform. Once this is done Rodrik shows that the system
will exhibit two equilibria: a "good" one with a high degree of credibility,
and a "bad" equilibrium with low credibility and low investment.
     A direct, and not surprising, policy implication of Rodrik's model is


          is interesting to contrast the implications from hysteresis models
to those of earlier work on adjustment costs such as the studies of Mayer
(1974) and Mussa (1974, 1978) discussed above. In these earlier models
adjustment costs took the form of fixed capital in the short run (i.e.,
Ricardo-Viner behavior). In that case, with slow reallocation of capital it
was still optimal to eliminate tariffs instantaneously.

     28Dornbusch (1988) has developed models on a similar framework for
analyzing the role of credibility in stabilization programs.
                                     24



that achieving credibility is a crucial component of a successful structural
sdjustment. He correctly points out that policy unpredictability and uncert-
ainty are highly detrimental for achieving high investment ratios and healthy
growth rates. Rodrik then goes as far as stating that auatainability (or
predictability) is in itself more important than the elimination of
distortions and the liberalization of the economy.29 Interestingly enough,
Rodrik'a model with adjustment cost doea     provide a case for gradual
reforms. Quite on the contrary, in this model (as in that by Muaaa (1984))
the government ahould act rapidly by providing a subsidy for inveatora to
move into the "new" aector. In this way the apprehensions stemming from the
lack of credibility will be compensated.
     Nevertheleaa, building credibility is easier said than done. Despite
some simple time consistency rules, at the present time a formal framework
for analyzing credibility issues is still in their infancy. There is,
however, a growing agreement that maintaining a set of macroeconomic policies
consistent with the liberalization reforms is a necessary condition for
enhancing credibility (Edwards 1989d).3° In fact, we can now point to a
number of recent historical episodes where macroeconomic mismanagement has
led to a lack of credibility, which in turn haa resulted in policy reversals
and in failed structural adjustment programs. Perhaps the better known case
is that of the liberal reforms in the Southern Cone in the late 1970s. At
that time the authorities in Argentina, Chile and Uruguay embarked on ambiti-
ous programs to liberalize their economiea by greatly reducing trade controls



     291n making this point Rodrik fails to address the important iaaue of
the initial conditions. Within his framework we can think of economies that
are initially so distorted that, even with a fairly high probability of
reversal, it will pay to liberalize. Of course this point builds on the fact
that the larger the initial distortions, the lower will be the rate of return
to investment in the illiberal scenario.

     30Strict political considerations are also important for determining the
degree of credibility of a reform program. For example, new theoretical work
combining economics with these type of considerations has suggested that the
degree of efficiency of the taxation system (including import tariffs) is -
used by governmenta as a strategic variable. Countries with more stable
political systems and less polarized constituencies will be more prone to
introduce far-reaching structural reforms and will have greater credibility;
see Cukierman, Edwards and Tabellini (1989).
                                       25



and relaxing the scope of domestic microeconoinic distortions.31 These
policies were attempted at the same time as major stabilization programs
aimed at reducing high triple-digit inflations were enacted. Although the
macroeconomic packages implemented in these countries differed markedly, in
all three cases a preannounced rate of devaluation (the so-called tablita)
was adopted as a way to help reduce inflation. This devaluation scheme
resulted, in the three nations, in steep real exchange rate overvaluatians
that cast serious doubts on the sustainability of the structural reforms. As
the public realized that the real exchange rate overvaluation was inconsist-
ent with a lowering of import tariffs it    began   to expect a reversal of the
liberalization reforms.32
     The way in which macroeconomic inconsistencies affected credibility was
particularly important in Chile, the country where the trade reforms went the
furthest.33 Starting in the late 1980s, as the degree of overvaluation
became more and more unsustainable, expectations of devaluation experienced a
significant increase, Of course, to the extent that this devaluation would
imply a real exchange rate realignment, the public expected that the real
exchange rate would increase in the future. As the public became more
convinced of the unsustainability of the external situation, the credibility
of the overall liberalization strategy was reduced. Indeed in late 1981 an
increasingly large number of people began to expect a collapse of the
external sector policy, including a reversal of the tariff liberalization.
As a way to cover themselves from these expected hikes in (domestic) import
prices the private sector increased significantly its imports of durable
goods. While in other countries of Latin America the loss of credibility in
government policies resulted in outright capital flight, in Chile the
drainage of international reserves took the form of huge jumps in the imports
of automobiles and electronics. The loss of credibility in the government
commitment for maintaining an open external sector was partially confirmed
when in November of 1982 a number of imports became subject to an import


     3tSee Corbo and de Melo (1987).

     32See Edwards (1985), Corbo and de Melo (1987).

     33Between 1975 and 1979 Chile eliminated all quantitative restrictions
and reduced tariffs from an average of 100% to a flat 10% level.
                                      26




surcharge that fluctuated from 4 to 28 percent. Later in June of 1983 import
tariffs were raised to a uniform 20 percent, and in September of 1984 they
were further increased to 35 percent.34
     The lack of credibility also played an important role in the failure of
the Argentinian liberalization attempt under Minister Martinez de Hoz. In
this case the private sector assigned a very high probability to the reversal
of the tariff reduction policies and, thus, borrowed heavily abroad in order
to finance what they considered to be temporary losses stemming from the
(perceived) temporary liberalization. As Carlos Rodriguez (1983, p. 28) has
put it: "As a consequence of the lack of credibility many firms --       which
would have disappeared due to the tariff reductions -   - decided   to go into
debt in order to keep operating while waiting for a change in economic
strategy". Of course, given the macroeconomic inconsistencies, the agents'
expectations proved to be correct and both the "tablita" and the structural
adjustment program had to be abandoned in early 1981 (see Calvo 1983, 1986,
and Corbo and de Melo 1987).
          4. Welfare Effects of Structural Reforms: Some Illustrations
             Based on OECD-Tyre Economies

     The purpose of this section is to illustrate the working of our
framework, and to highlight, with two specific examples, the different
channels through which structural reforms will affect social welfare. We do
this by considering two reform measures in hypothetical economies that, in
some way, resemble two types of OECD countries. Our first example is a
micro-oriented reform aimed at reducing import tariffs in an economy with
labor market distortions and service sector regulations. Our second example
deals with the relaxation of capital controls in an economy that also has
labor market distortions. These examples allow us to better understand the
dynamics of reforms in an intertemporal general equilibrium setting, and thus
provide important information for the analysis of sequencing strategies of
Section 5. The discussion that follows is supplemented by a formal analysis
of the welfare consequences of these two policies presented in Appendix A.




     34On the details of this partial reversal see Edwards and Cox-Edwards
(1987). It should be noted, however, that in 1986 tariffs were again reduced
to 20%.
                                       27



4.1 The Dynamics of Structural Reforms of Product Markets
     In this subsection we discuss how structural reforms geared at reducing
distortions in the products markets affect social welfare in a highly simplif-
ied fictitious economy that resembles the most advanced OECD economies. This
fictitious economy, which we will call a G-type economy is characterized by
extensive regulation of labor and some product markets, freedom of capital
movements, relatively few but specific barriers to trade, anda floating exch-
ange rate. The reforms are focused on reducing the extent of regulations in
specific sectors (some of them services), including trade barriers. Another
goal of the reforms is to reduce the extent of labor market distortions. In
terms of our stylized model of Section 3 this means that only 3 of the 4 mar-
kets considered are distorted; since there are no capital controls, intertemp-
oral decisions are not assumed to be affected. Using the framework discussed -
above, and fully developed in Appendix A, we first analyze the case of tariff
reduction. This exercise provides a clear flavor of the dynamics of reform.
We next discuss the effects of a deregulation of a service sector.           -




     In    order to organize the discussion it is useful to distinguish between
three different types of welfare effects that will be generated by structural
reforms:
(1) Direct welfare effects that accrue in the reformed market. These basic-
     ally correspond to efficiency gains and are the conventional Harberger-
     type triangles. Depending on when the reform takes place (period 1 or
     period 2) these direct effect will be present in one or more periods.
(2) Indirect jn..temporal welfare effects. These arise from the interac-
     tion of two or more distortions in the same period, and take place when
     the reform in one market spills to other distorted market. In terms of
     traditional welfare economics, these indirect effects correspond to
     welfare "rectangles" (see Harberger 1971a).
(3) Indirect jjitemporal effects. These are due to the dynamic inter-
     temporal nature of our model. These kinds of effects will be present
     when a reform in, say, period 1, alters the equilibrium in distorted
     markets in period 2.
     4.1.1 Anticioated Tariff Reductions
    We first analyze the welfare consequences of a structural reform that
consists of a reduction in import tariffs. In order to highlight the role of
intertemporal channels and of expectations we will analyze the case of a
                                           28



preannounced (and fully anticipated) reform that will take place in the
fucure (second period). In our analysis we will focus on the 3 types of
effeccs described above.
        i) Direct Welfare Effects
        Figure 3.A captures the direct welfare effects of the anticipated tariff
reform. They correspond to the traditional textbook triangles A and 3.
Since these efficiency gains take place in period 2, in our computation of
the total welfare consequences of this reform we have to discount them back
to the present. Consequently the direct welfare effects (DWE) are

(approximately) given by:

                  DWE —   5*[gain   in consumer surplus in period 2 +

                      + gain   in producer surplus in period 21,

where     5* is the appropriate discount factor.
        ii) Intratemooral Indirect Effects
        We now deal with the interaction between the reduced distortion in the
current account in period 2 and the other two distorted markets in that
period. The lower domestic price of importables will generate a series of
cross demand effects in other sectors. If we assume that importables and
nontradables are substitutes, the demand curve for the former will shift
backwards generating an indirect welfare loss. The magnitude of this loss ia
captured by the shaded area in Figure 3.3. The reason for this indirect
welfare loss is that "too little" was already being consumed of N in period
2; the tariff reduction in the M sector has thus amplified a preexisting
distortion. Naturally, if instead of assuming substitutability we assume
complementarity in consumption between N and M, instead of a welfare baa
we would have a welfare gain.
        This indirect intratemporal effect is (approximately) given by:




     35This, of course, is a partial equilibrium approximation. In fact,
rigorously it is not completely correct to refer to this effect as being
purely intratemporal. As is shown in Appendix A, what matters is the change
in the price of N in period 2, as a result of the anticipated tariff
reduction. The change in this price is, in turn, the result of combined
inter and intratemporal forces. What we are implicitly assuming here is
that the intratemporal forces dominate. For a detailed discussion see
Edwards (1989a,c). For the general equilibrium expression see Appendix A.
                           s,'1




    t
I




            F'6U1Lc 3.4.




        \

                                  N

             Th6u.E
                                       29



                Indirect Effect 1 —   tax on nontradables x

                [change in equilibrium consumption of N)

    Notice from Figure 3.8 that an important effect of the trade reform is
that, under our specific assumptions, it results in a reduction in both the
producer and consumer prices of nontradables (q2 and p2). As will become
clear later, these changes in the relative price of nontradables (or real
exchange rate) play an important role in evaluating the welfare consequences
of alternative sequencings of liberalization.
     Let us now focus on the interaction between the trade and labor market
distortions. In order to organize the analysis we will proceed by steps,
assuming first that other factors (capital and natural resources) are speci-
fic to their sector of origin.36 We then will discuss what happens when
these factors are allowed to reallocate across sectors. The question we want
to answer is what will be the effect of the tariff reform on aggregate
employment in period 2. Since due to the pre-existing distortion employment
is too low any reform in other sectors that generates an increase (decline)
in aggregate employment will generate an indirect welfare gain (loss).
     The tariff reduction itself will result in a lower domestic price of
importables and will, thus, generate a downward shift of the value of
marginal product schedule for M. In Figure 3.C this is captured by the
leftward shift of the L.r curve to 4.       On the nontradables side something

aiisilar will happen. The reason is that, as shown in Figure 3.8, the reduc-
tion in the tariff will result in a lower (product) price for nontradables.
This, in turn will result in a reduction in the demand for labor for use in
the N sector. This effect is reflected in Figure 3.C by the downward shift
of schedule L.N    to L. As can be seen from Figure 3.C, under the assump-
tion of no reallocation of other factors, these two effects amount to an
increase in the level of unemployment in this economy. The reason, of
course, is that the existence of a rigid wage in real terms will preclude the
full adjustment of the labor market.                 -




     It   should be noted, however, that this is the final outcome under the
rather restrictive assumption of a Ricardo-Viner model. If, alternatively, it



      36That is, we will proceed as if we were dealing with a Ricardo-Viner
model.
                           Li




(A)                        Li




           Ff(1LQe—
           -        3.C.
      La,y t(a42.4
                                     30



is assumed, that factors are free to move across sectors, we will observe cap-
ital and natural resources moving out of the sector(s) with reduced "competit-
iveness" and into that (those) sector(s) where competitiveness has increased.
     As this process of reallocation take place, our labor demand schedules
in Figure 3.C will shift around: upward in thoae sectors that experience an
inflow of factors, and downward in those sectors that release factors,
Naturally, the final equilibrium will depend on the magnitude of these
shifts. These, in turn will depend on the relative factor intensities of the
three aectora and, thus, on the nature of the Rybczynski effects.     It turns
out that in our (3x3) model it is not trivial to determine the signs of
these Rybczynski terms (in Appendix A we provide a discussion of this prob-
lem). Here, however, and in order to simplify the discussion, we will assume
that the import competing sector has the highest capital labor ratio and that
exportables have the highest natural resources labor ratio. Nontradablea, on
the other hand, have the lowest of both intensities.37 Under these assump-
tions, the effect of the tariff reform will be that the      curve will shift
further back to L, while the         curve will shift up to 4. Thus, as
can be seen in the diagram, the tariff reform will provoke a decline in
unemployment in period 2. This, of course, means that the tariff reform has
generated a positive intratemporal indirect effect through the labor market.
This effect can be captured by:

              Indirect Effect 2 — Saw x [change in employment in period 2[38

     iii) Intertemooral Indirect Effects
     The results sketched above are quite standard and can be obtained from
traditional trade models. However, once intertemporal links are introduced a
number of additional possibilities emerge. In particular, as explained in
Section 3.3 above, an anticipated tariff reduction will result in an increase
of the consumption rate of interest and in substitution away from present
consumption and into future consumption. This change in the intertemporal


     37Denoting capital, labor and resources by K, L, and R, we are
assuming that (R/L) > (R/L)N and that (K/L)M >         >
                                                   (K/L)    (K/L)N.
-
     38The reason why in this expression we have the rigid (minimum) wage
w is that we have assumed an inelastic labor supply. If, instead, we
aaaum€. r' upward sloping supply of labor, the expression would have the
differene. between the minimum wage and the aupply price of labor.
                                        31




profile of consumption will not only affect the economy in the period when
the reform takes place (period 2 in our case), but also in the other periods.
     In the case of a G-type economy, we will have three intertemporal
indirect effects; one affecting each distorted market in period 1. We will
first have an indirect effect on the amount imported in period 1. The
expected reduction in tariffs in period 2 will induce (intertemporal) substi-
tution away from imports in period 1. Since due to the tariff the economy
was already importing too little in that period, this substitution will
represent a negative effect which will be given by:39
               IIE1 —   tariff   in period 1 x

               [change in period 1 imports induced by expected reform[

     The second type of indirect effect is related to the behavior of the non-
tradables market in period 1. Since part of the lower expenditure in period 1
will come from lower consumption of nontradables this market will also be
affected and the sign of this effect will also be negative. The reason, once
again, is that the anticipated reform will induce s reduction in the level of
activity in a market that, due to existing distortions, was already producing
too little.40 This indirect effect will be given (approximately) by:

               11E2 — Tax on Nontradables x

                        [Induced Change in Consumption of N in period 1]

     The third effect is, as before, related to the labor market. Now,
however, all the action will come from the change in the price of nontrad-
ables in period 1.   Since the anticipated reform has resulted in a reduction
in the price of nontradables in period 1, the direct effect will be that the
demand schedule for labor in N will shift downward. Furthermore, under our
assumptions of factor intensities the final effect will also be a reduction
in period 1 employment. This, of course, will impact negatively on welfare.
Formally, the (approximate) magnitude of this effect will be given by:

               11E3 — w x [Induced Change in Employment in Period 1]


     391n terms of notation IIEi stands for "Intertemporal Indirect Effect
number i".

     40Naturally, if instead of a tax we assume that the nontradables sector
is subject to a subsidy, the indirect effect would be positive.
                                          32




       The total welfare effect of this snticipated tariff reduction will,
then, be given, by the sum of the discounted value of the direct efficiency
gain (DWE), uii      the   discounted sum of the two intratemporal indirect welfare
effects,         the sum of the three intertemporal indirect welfare effects.
Naturslly, in this exercise there is no guarantee that the total welfare
implication of this (anticipated) structural reform will be positive. In
fact, it may very well be negative, indicating that this partial reform is

na worthwhile     undertaking. This, of course, is not surprising. It is noth-
ing more than an application of the generalized theory of the second best.
       It should be noticed that the approach taken here -    - and especially the
organization of the effects into three different categories -      - can be applied
to advantage to any combination of reforms and thua can, in principle, be used
to evaluate any sequencing or speed of structural reform. Moreover, at this
level of analysis -    - diagrammatic   and partial equilibrium -   - there   is no
problem in expanding the horizon of the discussion to three or more perioda.41
       4.1.2 Derezulation of the Nontradables Sector
       me dynamics of the welfare effects of a reform aimed at reducing taxes
in the services sector in a C-type economy is perfectly analogous to that of
the imports sector which we discussed above. For this reason there is no
need to repeat here all the mechanics involved in such an exercise. There
is, however, one important difference between these two cases which is worth
emphasizing. While changes in import tariffs will affect, via a number of
channels, the equilibrium prices of nontradables, the converse is not true.
That   is,   reforms that alter taxes, and thus prices in the nontradables
(services) sectors, will           change the domestic price of importables àr
exportables. The reason for this is straightforward and is related to our
small country assumption. This means, then, that when the reform takes
place in the nontradables sector there will be one channel of transmission
less than when it occurs in the trsdables sector.

4.2 Relaxing Capital Controls
  -
       Our previous discussion has completely ignored the role of capital
controls. The reason for this is that we have focused on what we have called


     41However, as pointed out in Appendix A, the extension of the formal
general equilibrium framework to anything more than two periods makes things
rather cumbersome.
                                     33




a C-type economy, where impediments to capital movements have no practical
relevance. Within the OECD, however, there is another group of countries for
which slightly different problems than those faced by the C countries, are
important. These economies, which we can call NZ-type economies, are charact-
erized by micro and       structural problems, balance of payments difficult-
ies, large stock of foreign debt, controls on capital movements, and regula-
tions to the financial market. In this prototype economy the focus of reforms
is broader than in C-type countries, and also includes the relaxation of
capital controls and a more generalized trade liberalization. There is also a
need to attain macroeconomic equilibrium. However, we will relegate the
discussion on the relation between macroeconomic stabilization and structural
reforms to Section 5 and we will briefly analyze here the important issue of
the welfare effects of relaxing of capital controls. In order to focus the
discussion we will abstract from distortions to the tradables and nontradables
sectors. We will consider the case of an economy that limits capital mobility
via a tax on borrowing and faces labor marKet distortions of the form of real
wage rigidity. Furthermore, in order to focus even more on the analysis, we
will assume that the wage rigidity (or the minimum wage) is restricted to per-
iod 1 only. Naturally, given these assumptions, we will not have all three
types of welfare effects discussed in the previous section. In fact, we will
only have a direct effect stemming from the relaxation of the capital
controls, and an intertemporal indirect effect related to the interaction
between the capital controls and the minimum wage in period I.
     In its simplest form our question can be posed as follows: What will be
the welfare effects of decreasing the extent of capital controls in an
economy with labor market distortions in period 1?
     The reduction of the tax on foreign borrowing will tilt the
intertemporal allocation of expenditure towards the present. A proportion of
the increased expenditure in period 1 will fall on nontradables. This will
result in an increase in the price of N in period 1 (a real appreciation in
period 1) and, thus, will generate an increase in the demand for labor in the
nontradables sector in that period. Since employment in that period was
initially "too low", the reduction of the tax on foreign borrowing will tend
to reduce that distortion, generating a positive welfare effect. As before,
however, the story does not end here, since the increase in the relative
price of noncradables will trigger a reallocation of the flexible-price
                                    34



factors from the X and M sectors to the N sector.          Depending on the
relative labor intensities across sectors this reallocation effect may result
in a net reduction- or a net increase in aggregate employment. If we assume
that the tradables sectors (exportables and importables) are as a zrouo, less
labor intensive than the N sector, the factor reallocation effect will work
in the sane direction as the real exchange rate effect and, as a consequence
of the relaxation of capital controls, total unemployment in period 1 will
decline. As a result, in this case the net effect of the reduction of taxes
on foreign borrowing has been welfare increasing. More generally, what this
means is that the existence of unemployment and (real) wage rate rigidity in
period 1 provides no justification for capital controls.
     In fact this analysis has a fairly startling corollary: in an economy
characterized by (a) a minimum wage in terms of exportables in period 1
only, (b) no initial distortions on capital flows, and (c) nontradables
being more labor intensive than tradables as a group, a small subsidy on
foreign borrowing will be welfare-improving. The intuition is straightfor-
ward: the minimum wage has resulted in a lower than optimal level of employ-
ment in period I. The subsidy on foreign borrowing will tilt expenditure
towards period 1; part of this extra expenditure will fall on nontradablea,
driving their prite up and thus generating an increase in employment in that
period. Moreover, since we assume no initial tax (or subsidy) on borrowing,
the small subsidy will not generate a first order welfare effect. The effect
of this small subsidy on foreign borrowing on the labor market is captured in
Figure 4, where the shift of L, to 4 is the result of the real exchange
rste effect of a higher 6, and the shifts of 4 to 4 and of                 to

4 are the consequences of the reallocation of the cooperative factors.
Given our assumptions regarding labor intensities, the net effect on
employment of this reallocation is positive.42   -




     This discussion, then, provides additional elements for a general
application of our framework to the question of the consequences of alterna-
tive sequencings. Notice that, as before, one of the key determinants of the
direction of the welfare changes was the assumption regarding factor
intensities of the different sectors.


     42Edwards and Ostry (1989) provide a detailed discussion in a similar
context. See also Appendix A.
       j L,-              p.1   I        w
      LT\                 /
                      /
                  /


0r                                  .— 0A!




         -/6"a 4
     La4- M a2 /2Z    CI-÷



              .
     to - Sat// ScJ, O
     F0 n--
                                        35



4.3 Synthesis

       The analysis presented above has shown the way in which different distor-
tions interact in our intertemporal general equilibrium framework. The class-
ification of these effects into three distinctive categories --     direct   effect,
intracemporal indirect welfare effects, and intertemporal welfare effects --
provides   a useful organizing framework for analyzing, at least qualitatively,
the welfare consequences of alternative structural reform packages.
       In terms of possible empirical applications of this framework, the ex-
amples presented above indicate that data on a number of key parameters would
be required before being able to compute any magnitudes in terms of welfare
changes. First, it    is   necessary to have data on intertemporal substitution
elasticities. These are required to deal with all our intertemporal effects.
Second, our examples suggest that, both in G and NZ type economies, one of
the most important determinants of the welfare effects refer to the induced
changes in employment. As argued above, in order to have a clear idea of the
direction these effects will take, it is first necessary to know the relative
factor intensities of the different sectors involved. In addition, informa-
tion on the elasticities of labor demand would be required. Moreover, once
the framework is extended to allow for an upward sloping supply of labor,
knowledge about the elasticity of this supply would also be needed.
       Another important principle that emerges from the examples presented
above is that in a sequential reform, as more and more markets are freed of
distortions, successive reforms will generate fewer and fewer intratemporal
indirect effects. This simple principle provides an argument for placing up
front in the reform sequence the liberalization of those markets with
substantial positive indirect intratemporal effects. Alternatively this
principle states that, with other things given, the reform of those markets
with large negative intratemporal indirect effects should take place towards
the end of a reform sequence.
       In terms of our examples, the above considerations suggest that, under
our assumptions of substitutability and relative factor intensities, it      would
be   more prudent to postpone the liberalization of the trade sector until the
                                          36




services markets have already been reformed.43 Likewise, our previous examp-
les suggest that it is prudent to relax capital controls before eliminating
labor market distortions. It should be stressed that in the above assertions
we have deliberately used the word orudent when referring to the more approp-
riate sequencing. By using this word we want to make clear that we are not
stating any theorems, but rather organizing and summarizing what our analysis
suggests would be the more plausible Outcome for most countries if a serious
numerical exercise on the matter is undertaken. Notice that in the preceding
analysis we have assumed that the intertemporal effects of specific reforms
are particularly important for evaluating their welfare consequences. How-
ever, in a number of cases - -    and   in particular in the case of future reforms
-   - these   intertemporal effects will only take place if the private sector
indeed expects the reforms to take place in the f'.jture.      If, however, the
authorities do not announce the future reforms, or if the announcements ik
credibility,      these intertemporal effects will either be absent, or will be
substantially weakened. This consideration, then, suggests that when deciding
on the sequencing of reform the role of intertemporal effects stemming from
future reforms should be looked upon with some skepticism, and that the credi-
bility issue, and especially the precommitment aspect discussed in Section 3,
should be considered very seriously. In the actual case of the EEC nations,
however, the fact that (some) reforms are part of an international agreement
does indeed provide at least a partial precommitment technology.
        5. General Features of Alternative Seouencing Stratefies. Policy
            Imtlications and Recouimendations for Future Work

       The purpose of this section is threefold. It first aims at putting the
previous analysis in perspective and providing some general policy recommend-
ations regarding reform sequencing. Second, we deal with the important
question of the interaction between structural reform policies and macro-
stabilization programs. In doing this we discuss the recent World Bank
experience with trade liberalization in countries suffering from macroecono-
mic disequilibrium. Finally, the section ends with a discussion of how to
proceed with this type of research. In particular we focus on possible ways


     43it is very important to stress that this and the following statements
assume that a simultaneous reform that eliminates all distortions is not
feasible. As is discussed below in this model this simultaneous sequence
constitutes the first best solution.
                                         37




of instrumentalizing and empirically applying this framework.

5.1 Broad Front vs. Sequential Concentrated Approaches

     In most OECD countries welfare considerations provide the relevant
criterion for deciding on the appropriate sequencing of reform.44 Within the
context of our intertemporal equilibrium framework, and at a very general
level, the answer to the sequencing problem is rather simple --        or   even
trivial. The sequence that results in the highest social welfare V should
be adopted. That is, if we consider four possible sequences A, B, C and D
this principle states that sequence A is preferred to all the others if:

               V(A) > V(B);

               V(A) >     V(C);   and

               V(A) > V(D),

     Moreover, speaking at a strictly theoretical level, within the context
of our model - -   or   of most general equilibrium fully optimizing models -      - the
preferred sequence will be one where all markets are reformed simultaneously.
The reason for this rather impractical result is that in this model (as in
most models used for similar analyses) we assume that the existing
distortions are government-imposed rather than structurally inherent to the
country.45 Of course this answer --       reform   all markets simultaneously -    - is
not only not realistic, but also trivial. For this reason, in order to give
some structure to our sequencing question it is necessary to first assume
that, for one reason or another, not all distortions can be eliminated simul-
taneously. This, in fact, has been the way in which the LDCs literature on
the subject has usually proceeded (see Edwards 1984).
     In the case of most of the OECD nations the most reasonable assumption
seems to be that labor market distortions are the most difficult to eliminate.


     44An exception to this are those countries that resemble what we have
called an NZ-economy. In this case, in addition to-welfare considerations,
macroeconomic conditions should also be taken into account. See subsection
3.3 on how issues concerning micro reforms and macro adjustment can be
combined.

     451n rigor, not even in the case of structural market failure can we
escape the advice of taking all the measures -       - in
                                                   this case reforms-cum-
intervention to correct the failure -- simultaneously. This, of course,
assumes away the hysteresis case discussed in Section 3.4.2.
                                     38



Thus we can restate our sequencing question within a second best context,
asking what is the optimal sequence for reforming the nontradables (or serv-
 ices) and importables sectors under the assumption that the labor market will
be reformed last. Alternatively, we can pose the question as follows: are
there any welfare reasons that suggest that in an economy with labor market
distortions it is optimal      to implement all other reforms simultaneously?
That is, are there welfare reasons to think that a sequential concentrated
approach is preferable to a broad front approach?46 Naturally, the assumption
that the labor market will be the last to be deregulated already suggests that
the answer to this question will be closely related to uhether the reforms
increase or decrease the level of employment in the economy.
     As was suggested above, and as it is shown formally in Appendix A. given
our assumptions about intertemporal substitutability and relative factor
intensities, there is a presumotion that if all markets cannot be liberalized
simultaneously, the reforms of the domestic (nontradables) sector should
precede that of the importables sector. But at this stage this is nothing
more than a presumption. In order to have a more clear and definitive
answer, it is necessary to push our framework further and to move closer to
empirical applications. That is the subject of Section 5.4 below.

5.2 Abrupt or Gradual Reforms?
     For many years the issue of gradualism vs. abrupt reforms was discussed
in an ad-hoc manner, without relying on a formal framework rooted in optimiz-
ingintertemporal models.47 The model developed in this paper, however,
provides the minimal rigorous framework to address this speed issue. From a
welfare point of view the factors that should be taken into account in
analyzing the optimal speed problem are virtually the same to those


     461t is very important to notice that this framework is general enough
as to allow us to evaluate any combination of reform sequencing. For in-
stance the sequencing of liberalization of the capital and current account
which has occupied much of the attention of the policy literature in the
LDCs. Since in our case we have assumed that the labor market remains
distorted, an interesting question is what is the "shadow price" of this
remaining distortion when other sectors are liberalized. If our model is
parameterized and simulated an exact answer to this important question can
be found.

     47This applies especially to the discussions on the appropriate speed
of stabilization in Latin America.
                                    39




considered in the optimal sequencing discussion.
     In the absence of market failures or distortions, the answer to the
optimal speed question is again rather trivial. All markets should be
reformed y. For this reason this question is interesting only if criteria
other than welfare are considered or if we assume that for political or other
reasons, not all markets can be reformed simultaneously.
     Possibly the simplest way to rigorously approach this question is to
follow the methodology proposed by Edwards and van Wijnbergen (1986, 1987b).
In these papers the authors build a two-period model of a fully optimizing
economy with tradable goods only and assume that a tax on foreign borrowing
for investment purposes is maintained throughout. They then ask what is the
optimal speed of trade reform. Formally they analyze this question in the
following way: they assume that an abrupt liberalization implies zero
tariffs both in periods 1 and 2, while gradual reform implies a positive
tariff in period 1 and a zero tariff in period 2. Given this setting they
then ask what is the optimal tariff in period 1. They find that indeed a
positive (but not very high) tariff in period 1 with       tariff in period 2 is
optimal in a second beat sense. This, of course, supports the idea that with
an intertemporal distortion of the type considered by them it is optimal to
implement a gradual reform. Naturally, this type of analysis can be easily
undertaken with our model. The specific results will depend on the
particular assumptions made about the non-removable distortion.

5,3 Where Do We Go From Here?

     Although the model presented in this paper provides a very general
framework for analyzing some of the moat important welfare ramifications of
structural reforma, it falls short of providing detailed and unequivocal
evaluations of specific aequencinga. In order to accomplish this goal we
suggest that, as a first and crucial step in the process of policy evalua-
tions, models similar to the one presented here are built so that they could
be calibrated and simulated for alternative sequences. In this way it would
be possible to have a clear sense of the final effects of alternative reform
strategies. The simulation of these fully optimizing welfare based models
could be considered as the first step in a process consisting of the
construction of a family of models. As newer models are built, more subtle
aspects of the discussion, such as the existence of tradeoffs between macro
                                          40



and micro goals and the existence of credibility problems, could be added.
     We believe that undertaking simulations with models based on the one
presented here -   - in   fact, maybe with a three period extension of the model
derived in Appendix A - -    has   a number of advantages over the other alternat-
ives available at this time. First, this type of model is truly
intertemporal in a way that most Computational General Equilibrium (CGE)
models are not.48 Second, recommendations stemming from this type of model
are strictly and rigorously based on welfare considerations, in a way that
macro simulation models such as those developed by Khan and Zahier (1983,
1985, 1987) are not. In fact, most macroeconomic models of that type are
based on highly ad-hoc assumptions. Finally, the simplicity of our model is
another of its virtues. It is, in fact, the minimal formal welfare framework
that can be seriously used for this kind of analysis. Seing simple, however,
implies that it is         a black box and that we can provide serious and
meaningful interpretations to every one of the channels and effects involved.
As more sophisticated models are built, it would be advisable to first add
adjustment costs. A second promising extension would be to introduce
uncertainty regarding the sustainability of the policy reforms. The combina-
tion of adjustment costs and lack of credibility would allow us to deal with
the type of result currently discussed in the hysteresis literature. Finally
the models would greatly benefit from the addition of a monetary sector.
Unfortunately, this is not an easy thing to do in an optimizing framework.
     Naturally these types of simulations will require the gathering of a
number of key information, including intertemporal elasticities of substitu-
tion in consumption, factor intensities, intratemporal elasticities and so
on. The task of obtaining these coefficients is not easy; however, it should
be kept in mind that similar requirements are also present in alternative
approaches. Finally, it is worth emphasizing again and again that the result
obtained from simulations using this, or for that matter any other, model
should be taken with one (or more) grains of salt. After all, reality is
always much more complicated.




     48
          See Dervis, de Melo and Robinson (1981).
                                           41




                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY

Aizenman, Joshua and Jacob A. Frenkel, "Wage Indexation, Supply Shocks, and
   Monetary Policy in a Small, Open Economy," in S. Edwards and L. Ahamed,
   eds. , Economic Adlustment and Exchange Rates in Developing Countries,
   Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986.
Balassa. Bela The Process of Industrial Development and Alternative
   Development Strategies, Princeton Essays in International Finance no. 141,
   Princeton: Princeton University Press, December 1980.
     _____ Develooment Strategies in Semi-Industrial Economies, Oxford:
   Oxford University Press, l982a.
_________   "Structural Adjustment Policies in Developing Countries," World
   Development, January 1982b, 10, 114-36.
___________ "The Interaction of Domestic Distortions With Development
   Strategies,' World Bank Development Research Department, Discussion Paper
   no. 249,   February      l987a.

_________   "The Effects of Exchange Rate Changes in Developing Countries,"
   World Bank Development Research Department, Discussion Paper no. 291, May
   1987b.

Baghwati, Jagdish. Anatomy and Consequences of Exchange Control Regimes, New
   York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1978.
__________    ed.   ,   Import Competition and Response, Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press, 1982.
            "Export-Promoting Trade Strategy: Issues and Evidence,' World Bank
   Research Observer, January 1988, 3.
Bhattacharya, A. , and J. Linn, "Trade and Industrial Policies in the Develop-
   ing Countries of East Asia," World Bank Discussion Paper No. 27;
   Washington, DC, 1988.
Bleler, Mario and Silvia Sagan, "The Structure of the Banking Sector and the
   Sequencing of Financial Liberalization,' in M. Connolly and C. Gonzalez,
   ads. Economic Reform and Stabilization in Latin America, New York:
   Praeger, 1987.
Brecher, Richard and Jagdish Bhagwati, "Immiserizing Transfers from Abroad,"
   Journal of International Economics, August 1982, 13, 353-64.
Burda, M. and J. Sachs (1987) "Labor Markets and Unemployment in Germany,"
   NEER Working Paper.
Calvo, Guilermo A.," On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary
   Economy,' Econometrica, 1978, 46, 1411-28.
           "Trying to Stabilize: Some Theoretical Reflections Based on the
   Case of Argentina," in P. Aspe, et al. (eds.) Financial Policies and the
   World Capital Market, University of Chicago Press, 1983.
_________ "Fractured Liberalism: Argentina Under Martinez de Hoz," Economic
   Dveloprnent and Cultural Change, April 1986, 34, no. 3, 511-33.
_________ "On the Costs of Temporary Liberalization/Stabilization
   Experiments," in M. Connally and C. Gonzalez, ed. , Economic Reform and
                                        42




   Stabilization in Latin America, New York: Praeger, 1987.
              "Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of Expectations," American
   Economic Review, 18, September 1988.
Chan-Lee, James, David Coe and Menahem Prywes "Microeconomic Changes and
   Macroeconomic Wage Disinflation in the 1980s," OECD Economic Studies,
   Spring 1987.
Choski, Armeane and Demetris Papageorgiou (eds.) Economic Liberalization in
   Developine Countries, Oxford: Blackwell, 1986.
Clark, Paul, "Step-by-Step Liberalization of a Controlled Economy: Experience
   in Egypt," unpublished ms. , 1986.
Cline, William R. , Trade Policy in the 1980s, Washington: Institute for
   International Economics, 1983.
Connolly, Michael and J. McDermott, ads., The Economics of the Caribbean
          New York: Praeger 1985.
Cooper, Richard N.," Currency Devaluation in Developing Countries," Princeton
   Essays in International Finance, no. 86, Princeton: Princeton University
   Press, June 1971.
Corbo, Vittorio, "The Use of the Exchange Rate for Stabilization Purposes: The
   Case of Chile," in M. Connolly and C. Gonzalez, eds. , Economic Reform and
   Stabilization in Latin America, New York: Praeger, 1987.
__________ and Jaime de Melo, "Liberalization and Stabilization in the
   Southern Cone of Latin America: Overview and Summary," World Development,
   August, 1985, 13, 5-15.
__________ and _________ , "Lessons From the Southern Cone Policy Experiments,'
   World Bank Research Observer, July 1987, 111-43.
Corden, W. Max, "Protection and Liberalization: A Review of Analytical
   Issues," IMF Occasional Paper 54, Washington, DC, August 1987.
__________ and R. Findlay, "Urban Unemployment, Intersectoral Capital Mobility
   and Development Policy," Economics, 42: 59-78, 1975.
Cox-Edwards, Alejandra, "Economic Reform, External Shocks and the Labor
   Market: Chile 1974-1983," paper presented at World Bank Conference on
   Adjustment of Labor Markets in LDCs, June 1986.

Cuddington, John T., "Capital Flight: Estimates, Issues, and Explanations,"
   Princeton Studies in International Finance, no 58, Princeton: Princeton
   University Press, 1986.
Cukierman, Alex, S. Edwards and C. Tabellini, "Political Instability and Seig-
   norage," paper presented at the NBER Conference on Political Economy, 1989.
de Melo, Jaime, "Financial Reforms, Stabilization, and Growth Under High
   Capital Mobility: Uruguay 1974-1983," in M. Connolly and C. Gonzalez, eds.
   Economic Reform and Stabilization in Latin America, New York: Praeger,
   1987.
Dervis, Kemal, Jaie de Melo and Sherman Robinson, "A General Equilibrium
   Analysis of Foreign Exchange Shortages in a Developing Economy," Economic
   Journal, December 1981.
                                       43



Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos F    "Trade Policies and Economic Development," in P.S.
   Kenen, ed. ,   International
                              Trade and Finance: Frontiers for Research,
   Csinbridge,UK: Cambridge University Press, 1975.
_________     "Southern Cone Stabilization Plans," in W.R. Cline and S.
   Weintraub, eds. , Economic Stabilization in Develoying Countries,
   Washington: Brookings Institution, 1981.
            "Good-bye Financial Repression, Hello Financial Crash," Journal of
   Development Economics, January 1987, 19, 1-24.
Dixit, A. ,"Entry and Exit Decisions of Firms With Fluctuating Real Exchange
   Rates," Working Paper, Princeton University l987a.
—________ , "Hysteresis, Import Penetration and Exchange Rate Pass Through,"
   Working Paper, Princeton University, 1987b.
_________     and V. Normsn, Theory of International Trade, Cambridge University
   Press, 1980.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Tariffs and Nontraded Goods," Journal of International
   Economics, August 1974, 177-85.
__________ "Stabilization Policies in Developing Countries: What Have We
   Learned?" World Development, September 1982, 10, 701-3D.
__________ "Resl Interest Rates, Home Goods and Optimal External Borrowing,"
   Journal of Political Economy, February 1983a, 91, 141-53.
________      "Remarks on the Southern Cone," IMF Staff Papers, March 1983b, 3D,
   173-76.

_________    "External Debt, Budget Deficits, and Disequilibrium Exchange
   Rates," in C. Smith and J. Cuddington, eds. , International Debt in the
   Developing Countries, Washington: World Bank, 1985.
_________   "Inflation, Exchange Rates, and Stabilization," Princeton Essays
   in International Finance no. 165, Princeton: Princeton University Press,
   1986.

              "Notes on Credibility and Stabilization," MIT Working Paper, 1988.
Edwards, Sebastian, "The Order of Liberalization of the External Sector in
   Developing Countries," Princeton Essays in International Finance no 156,
   Princeton: Princeton University Press, December 1984,
___________ "Stabilization with Liberalization: An Evaluation of Ten Years of
   Chile's Experience with Free Market Policies," Economic Development and
   Cultural Change, January 1985 33, 223-54.
___________ "The Liberalization of the Current and Capital Accounts and the
   Real Exchange Rate," NBER Working Paper no. 2162, February 1987.
_________   "Terms of Trade, Tariffs and Labor Market Adjustment in Developing
   Countries," World Bank Economic Review, 1988a, 2, 165-85.
_________ Real Exchange Rates. Devaluation and Adiustment: Exchange Rate
   Policy in Developing Countries, MIT Press, 1989a, forthcoming.
_________  "Tariffs, Capital Controls and Equilibrium Real Exchange Rates,"
   Canadian Journal of Economics, 22, 1989.
                                            44



 __________ "Macroeconomic Environment and Trade Policies," paper prepared for
    World Bank Trade Policy Department, UClA, 1989c.
 __________ and Alejandra Cox-Edwards, Monetarjsm and Liberalization: The
    Chilean Experiment, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, 1987.
__________ and Sweder van Wijnbergen, "The Welfare Effects of Trade and
   Capital Market Liberalization: Consequences of Different Sequencing
    Scenarios," NBER Working Paper no. 1245, December 1983.
 Fischer, S.," Issues in Medium Term Macroeconomic Adjustment," World Bank
    Observer, July 1986.
_________    "Economic Growth and Economic Policy," in V. Corbo (et al.)
    Growth-Oriented Adjustment Programs, Washington, DC: IMF-World Bank, 1987.
Frenkel, Jacob A. , "The Order of Economic Liberalization: A Comment," in K
   Brunner and A.H. Meltzer, eds. , Economic Policy in a World of Change,
    Amsterdam: North-Holland 1982.
__________     "Remarks on the Southern Cone,' IMF Staff Papers, March 1983, 30,
    164-73.

Harberger, Arnold, "Three Basic Principles on Applied Welfare Economics,"
   Journal of Economic Literature, 9, September 197la.
__________ "On Measuring the Social Opportunity Cost of Labor," ILO Review,
   103, no. 6: 559-79, 197lb.
__________ ,"The Chilean Economy in the 1970s: Crisis, Stabilization,
   Liberalization, Reform," in K. Brunner and A.H. Meltzer, eds. , Economic
   Policy in a World of Change, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1982.
_________ "A Primer on the Chilean Economy," in M. Connolly and C. Gonzalez,
   eds. , Economic Reform and Stabilization in Latin America, New York:
   Praeger, 1987.

Harris, John and M. Todaro, "Migration, Unemployment and Development: A Two
   Sector Analysis," American Economic Review, 60: 126-142, 1970.
Johnson, Harry G. , "Optimal Trade Intervention in the Presence of Domestic
   Distortions," in R. Caves et al. , eds. , Trade. Growth, and Balance of
   Payments, Chicago: Rand McNally, 1965.
___________ "The Possibility of Income Losses From Increased Efficiency or
   Factor Accumulation in the Presence of Tariffs,' Economic Journal, 1967,
   77, 151-54, 1967.
Khan, Mohsin S. ,"Macroeconomic Adjustment in Developing Countries: A Policy
   Perspective," World Bank Research Observer, January 1987, 2, 23-42.
__________ and Malcolm D. Knight, "Stabilization Programs in Developing
   Countries: A Formal Framework," IMF Staff Payers, March 1981, 28, 1-53.
__________ and Roberto Zahler, "The Macroeconomic Effects of Changes in
   Barriers to Trade and Capital Flows: A Simulation Analysis," IMF Staff
   Papers, June 1983, 30, 223-82.
Kiguel, Miguel A. , and Jose S. Lizondo, "Theoretical and Policy Aspects of
   Dual Exchange Rate Systems," World Bank Development Research Department
   Discussion Paper no. 201, October 1986.
                                      45



Kim, KS., and D.F. Ruccio, eds. , Debt and Development in Latin America, Notre
   Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1985.
Krueger, Anne 0. , Foreizn Trade Regimes and Economit Development:
   tion Attempts and Consequences, New York: National Bureau of Economic
   Research, 1978.
___________ "Interactions Between Inflation and Trade-Regime Objectives in
   Stabilization Programs," in W.R. Cline and S. Weincraub, eds. , Economic
   Stabilization in Developing Countries, Washington: Brookings Institution,
   1981.
     _____    "Problems of Liberalization," in A. Harberger, ed. , World Economic
   Growth, San Francisco: ICS Press, 1984.
_________     "How to Liberalize a Small Open Economy?" in M. Connolly and J.
   McDermott, eds. , The Economics of the Caribbean Basin, New York: Prseger,
   1985.

_________   "Problems of Liberalization," in A. Choski and D. Papageorgiou
   (eds.) Economic Liberalization in Developing Countriea, Oxford: Blackwell,
   1986.

_________ "Resolving the Debt Crisis and Restoring Developing Countries'
   Creditworthiness," paper presented at the Carnegie-Rochester Public Policy
   Conference, Univ. of RoOhester, April 1988.
Kydland, FE. , and E.C. Prescott, "Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Time
   Inconsistency of Optimal Plans," Journal of Political Economy, 1977, 85,
   473-92, 1977.
Lal, Deepak, "The Real Aspects of Stabilization and Structural Adjustment
   Policies: An Extension of the Australian Adjustment Model," World Bank
   Staff Working Paper no. 636, March 1985.
_________ "Comment," in A. Choski and D. Papageorgiou (eds.) Economic
   Liberalization in Developine Countries, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1986.
_________ and Ssrath Rajapatirana, "Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Growth
    in Developing Countries," World Bank Research Observer, July 1987, 2, 189-
   218.
Leamer, Edward E .,"Welfare Computations and the Optimal Staging of Tariff
   Adjustments in Models with Adjustment Coats," Journal of International
   Economics, February 1980, 10, 21-36.
__________   "Paths of Developaent in the Three-Factor, N-Goods General
    Equilibrium Model," Journal of Political Economy, 95, October 1987.
Little, Ian, Tibor Scitovaky, and Maurice Scott, Industry and Trade in Some
   Developing Countries: A Comparative Study, London: Oxford University
   Press, 1970.
Mathieaon, Donald J    "Financial Reform and Capital Flows in a Developing
   Economy," IMF Staff Papers, September 1978, 25, 450-89.
__________ and R. McKinnon, "How to Manage a Repressed Economy," Princeton
   Essays in International Finance, no. 145, Princeton: Princeton University
    Press, December 1981.
                                        46



Mayer, Wolfgang, "Short Run and Long Run Equilibrium for a Small Open
   Economy," Journal of Political Economy, 82, 1974.
McKinnon, Ronald I., Money and Capital in Economic Development, Washington:
   Brookings Institution, 1973.
__________    "International   Transfers and Non-traded Commodities: The Adjust-
   ment Problem," in D.M. Leipziger, ed. , The International Monetary System
   and the Developing Nations, Washington: Agency for International
   Development, 1976.
             "Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development: A Review
   Article," Journal of International. Economics, 1979, 9, 429-52.
___________ "The Order of Economic Liberalization: Lessons from Chile and
   Argentina," in K. Brunner and A.H. Meltzer, eds. , Economic Policy in a
   World of Change, Amsterdam: North Holland, 1982.
___________ "The International Capital Market and Economic Liberalization in
   LDCs," The Developing Economies, December 1984, 22.
Michaely, Michael, "Exports and Growth: An Empirical Investigation," Journal
   of Development Economics, March 1977, 4, 49-54.
__________ "Trade Liberalization Policies: Lessons of Experience," paper
   presented at the conference "For a New Policy Towards Foreign Trade,"
   Brazil, April 1987.
__________ Armeane Choski and D. Papageorgiou, "The Phasing of a Trade Lib-
   eralization Policy: Preliminary Evidence," paper presented at the Annual
   Meeting of the American Economic Association, New Orleans, Dec. 1986.
Mussa, Michael, "Tariffs and the Distribution of Income: The Importance of
   Factor Specificity," Journal of Political Economy, November 1974, 82,
   1191-203.
_________ "Government Policy and the Adjustment Process," in J. Bhagwati,
   ed. , Import Competition and Response, Chicago: University of Chicago
   Press, 1982.
___________ "Macroeconomic Policy and Trade Liberalization: Some
   Guidelines," World Bank Research Observer, January 1987, 2, 61-78.
Neary, Peter, "Short-Run Capital Specificity and the Pure Theory of
   International Trade," Economic Journal, September 1978, 88, 448-510.
__________ "On the Harris-Todaro Model With Intersectoral Mobility,"
   Economica 48: 219-234, 1981.
            "Capital Mobility, Wage Stickiness and the Case for Adjustment
   Assistance," in J. Bhagwati, ed., Import Competition and Response,
   Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982.
___________ "International Factor Mobility, Minimum Wages and Factor Price
   Equalization: A Synthesis," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1985, 100.
Obstfeld, Maurice, "Capital Flows, the Current Account and the Real Exchange
   Rate: The Consequences of Stabilization and Liberalization," in S.
   Edwards and L. Ahained, eds., Economic Adjustment and Exchanme Rates in
   Develoming Countries, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986.
                                          47



Rodriguez, Carlos A., "Politicas de Estabilizacion en la Economia Argentina
   1978-1982," Cuadernos de Economia, April 1983, 19, 322-40.
Rodrik, Dani, "Trade and Capital Account Liberalization in a Keynesian
   Economy," Journal of International Economics, August 1987, 23.
__________ "Liberalization, Sustainability and the Design of Structural Ad-
   justment Programs," J.F. Kennedy School, Harvard Working Paper 177D,
   1989.

Sachs, J .,"Trade and Exchange Rate Policies in Growth-Oriented Adjustment
   Programs," in V. Corbo, et al. (eds.) Growth-Oriented Adjustment Programs
   IMF-World Bank, 1987.
__________  "Conditionality, Debt Relief and the Developing Countries' Debt
   Crisia," NBER Working Paper No. 2644, 1988.
Sargent, Thomas, "Stopping Moderate Inflations: The Methods of Poincaré and
   Ms. Thatcher," in T. Sargent Rational Expectations and Inflation, Harper
   and Row, 1986.
Sell, Friedich, "True Exposure: The Analysis of Trade Liberalization in a
   General Equilibrium Framework," Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv Band 124,
   Heft 4, 1988.

Sjaastad, Larry A. ,"Failure of Economic Liberalization in the Southern Cone
   of Latin America," World Economy, March 1983, 6, 5-27.
Smith, G. ,   and J. Cuddington, eds. ,   International   Debt in the Developing
   Countries, Waahington: World Bank, 1985.
Stiglitz, Joseph and Andrew Weiss, "Credit Rationing in Markets with
   Imperfect Information," American Economic Review, 1981, 71, 393-410.
Stockman, Allan, "The Order of Liberalization: Comment," in K. Brunner and
   A. Meltzer (eds.), Economic Policy in a World of Change, Amsterdam:
   North-Holland 1982.
Svensson, Lars, "Oil Prices, Welfare and the Trade Balance," Ouarterlv
   Journal of Economics, 99: 649-72, November 1984.
_________ and A. Razin, "The Terms of Trade and the Current Account: The
   Harberger-Laursen-Meltzer Effect," Journal of Political Economy, 91: 97-
   125, February 1983.
van Wijnbergen, Sweder, "Interdependence Revisited: A Developing Countries
   Perspective on Macroeconomic Management and Trade Policy in the
   Industrial World," Economic Policy, November 1985, 1, 81-114.
__________ "On the Macroeconomic Aspects of Foreign Aid: The Two-Gap Model
   Revisited," Journal of International Economics, July 1986.
