NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A FRAMEWORK FOR STUDYING MONETARY NON-NEUTRALITY

Robert E.

Hall

Working Paper No. 3145

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1989

Lecture 3 of the Arthur Okun Memorial Lectures, Yale University. October 1988.
This research was supported by the National Science Foundation. This paper is
part of NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #3145
October 1989

A

FRAMEWORK FOR STUDYING MONETARY NON-NEUTRALITY

ABSTRACT

This paper sets forth a simple general structural model of
aggregate output, the interest rate, and the price level. The core

of the model is the determination of the level of output as a
product-market equilibrium, either competitive or oligopolistic,

possible indeterminate because of thick-market externalities.
Monetary non-neutrality can affect either product demand or
product supply. In either case, monetary policy has leverage over

output as well as the price level. The paper develops a twodiagram analysis intended to replace the aggregate demandaggregate supply diagram.

Robert E.

Hall

Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA

94305

Construction of general equilibrium models of the volatility of
output and employment has becn dominated by the real business
cycle models in the past few years. The prototypical real business
cycle model posits a source of noise—usually vibrations in the
production function —and a propagation mechanism — usually high

elasticity of labor supply. As Prescott [1986] has shown, such a
model is capable of explaining the observed volatility of output.
By invoking a sufficiently high elasticity of labor supply, Prescott
shows that the observed fluctuations in productivity are big enough

to stimulate flucutations in employment and output of realistic
magnitude. Other types of noise1 such as shifts in preferences, can

help explain the volatility of output within fairly simple aggregate
models -

Though the recent upsurge of interest in real business cycle

models has called attention to the importance of real sources of
fluctuations, monetary non-neutrality and the corresponding importance of monetary sources of fluctuations remain a central topic in

macroeconomics. Research on monetary non-neutrality has had
two branches. One, best represented by Robert Lucas's [1972]

celebrated model of limited information, derives non-neutral
outcomes by making highly specific assumptions within an
economic model based on otherwise standard principles. The
outcome can properly be described as a full economic equilibrium;

within the specified restrictions, there are no unexploited
opportunities for trade, Interestingly, although Lucas's paper is
among the major landmarks of recent macroeconomics, there has
been relatively little additional work .on monetary nonneutrality in

the equilibrium mode.

Equilibrium analysis has become

increasingly popular, but almost always "without some features of
the payment and credit technologies," in Edward Prescott's [1986]
phrase.

The second branch starts from the observation that prices
appear to be unresponsive to monetary developments in the short

Whereas models along the lines of Lucas's derive the

run.

unresponsiveness as a feature of general equilibrium, work in the
second branch portrays rigidity as rational behavior at the level of

the firm. A huge literature, starting from the Phelps volume
[1970], has sought to rationalize the following model: Sellers of
products or labor services enter into call option contracts with

The contracts predetermine a price in money terms.
Later, when information about demand becomes available, the
buyer chooses the quantity. Plainly, such contracts create

buyers.

monetary non-neutralities during the period when money prices are

predetermined. The question addressed by the research is why
rational parties would enter into such contracts.

My purpose in this lecture is to set up a simple general
framework for thinking about both real and monetary sources of
output volatility. The goal is to be sufficiently general to
encompass real business cycle models and models with monetary
non-neutrality in both the Lucas and option-contract styles. The
framework I develop attempts to push the textbook "aggregate
demand-aggregate supply" apparatus to the next stage of analytical
development. The most important modification is to relax a very

strong assumption of the AD-AS model, that product supply is
completely inelastic with respect to all relative prices. Because
high elasticity of supply is at the heart of the real business cycle
view, there is a fundamental disagreement between the AD-AS
2

model and that view. Of course, the• elasticity of supply is an
empirical issue and the AD-AS model is vigorously defended by its

proponents as making a realistic assumption that the elasticity is
low.

The general model developed here is a simple equilibrium
model with two markets—one for produced goods and one for the
monetary instruments of the government. Product supply, product

demand, and money demand all may contain monetary nonneutralities. In the model, a non-neutrality appears simply as the
presence of the money price of goods in the supply and demand
functions for goods and its presence with an elasticity different
from one in the demand functjon for money. The model does not

commit itself to any particular theory of nonneutrality—that
property could arise from misperceptions or from precommitments

to nominal payments. In the latter case, the real effects of
nominal precommitments could result from option contracts as in
the standard model of price rigidity or from the distributional
effects of efficient nominal contracts.
One of the clearest ways to see the generalization of the ADAS model achieved here is to consider the impact of an exogenous

rise in product demand on the price level. In the AD-AS model,
such a rise shifts AD to the right and leaves AS unchanged. The

price level rises.

In an equilibrium model with monetary

neutrality, on the other hand, the price level falls, because output
rises and the money stock remains the same. In the general model
developed here, the impact of an increase in product demand on
the price level is ambiguous. If product supply is inelastic, then
the price level rises. But if product supply is somewhat elastic,

then an exogenous increase in product demand will raise
3

equilibrium output and ma result in a lower, not a higher price
level.

1.

The model

The model deals with three jointly determined variables:
output, y. the price level, p, and a relative price, r, which may be
the real interest rate, the real wage, or the relative price of two
kinds of output. The government sets the quantity of its monetary
liabilities, M, exogenously. The model is set forth first in general

terms; a completely specific example with preferences and
technology described in detail will follow. The demand and supply

functions have the usual form and interpretation for a general
equilibrium model—they characterize the choices made by price-

taking actors who can buy and sell the quantities they. choose,
given preferences, technology, and existing contracts. Throughout

the discussion, I will make the simplifying assumption that the
government pays interest on money at a rate equal to the market
nominal interest rate less a constant. This assumption rules out
the type of non-neutrality considered by Tobin [1965]. It also
makes it possible to give a sharp definition of monetary nonneutrality in terms of the presence of the price level in the supply or
demand functions. The service price of money is always equal to
the constant chosen by the government, so it need not appear
explicitly in the model.
The product demand schedule is

y=

D(r,p)

4

(1.1)

Demand arises from consumption, investment, and government
purchases. If demand depends on the money price level, p, there is

a non-neutrality in demand. For example, if nominal contracts
have the effect of redistributing income from actors who tend to
hold physical wealth to those who tend to hold financial wealth
when the money price level changes, p will appear in the demand
function.
The product supply schedule is
y

= S(r,p)

(1.2)

Because the labor market does not appear explicitly, S
characterizes choices about the amount of work as well as the
technology. Again, p enters if there are non-neutralities. These

could arise, for example, from employment contracts that
predetermine nominal wages and let firms choose the level of
employment subsequently.
Figure 1—1 shows the equilibrium in the goods market. I will
adopt the convention of requiring that the economy operate at the
intersection of the supply and demand schedules. This is rio more

than a convention because any considerations of price rigidity or

non-market-clearing can be built into the supply and demand
schedules. I do not mean to suggest that the point of intersection
in Figure 1—1 has any of the favorable properties such as efficiency

that occur in an idealized competitive equilibrium. In particular,
the equilibrium in Figure 1—i may well involve under-employed

labor because the supply schedule does

not reflect the

fundamental preferences of workers. Although Figure 1—i's use of
5

Figure

1—1

The goods market

Relative price, r
Supply

Demand

Output, y

a supply curve suggests competition, the analysis developed here
applies in non-competitive cases as well. Absent competition,

Figure 1—1 should be replaced by an analysis of the joint
determination of the quantity of output and the relative price. If

the seller is a monopolist, for example, the analysis would
presumably describe the outcome of profit maximization.

The supply and demand schedules in Figure 1—1 are
perturbed by the money price level, p. In addition, a vector of real
determinants of output, r, shifts supply and demand. The vector r
includes

shifts of technology, preferences, government purchases
and taxes, and noise variables. The equlibrium output in Figure
1—i can be written as a function of p and r: y*(p,r). Monetary
neutrality holds when equilibrium output is independent of the
price level, p. The case of non-neutrality is shown in Figure 1—2.

The EQ curve shows that equilibirum output level depends
positively on the money price level. The EQ curve will have the
same role that the aggregate supply curve does in the standard
analysis. However, I will stress that the EQ curve is perturbed by
all of the real disturbances, z. For example, the EQ curve will
shift to the right if the government raises its purchases of goods.
Standard analysis usually teaches that AS is a stable curve that
depends only on a narrow range of factors considered by firms in
setting prices and determining output.
In models with non-neutrality, considertion of the determinants

of the price level is required to complete the model of output
volatility. Let the money demand schedule be

=

F(r,p,x)

7

(1.3)

Figure 1-2. The EQ curve
Price level, p
EQ

outputp y

Although it is conventional in macroeconomics to state the
demand for money conditional on the choice of the level of
consumption or labor supply, the convention of general equilibrium

is to put only prices on the right-hand side. In accord with the
latter convention, the interest rate or other relative price, r, in
F( r,p,x) is not the service price of money (which is a constant
determined solely by government policy) but rather the relative
price is the determinant of the levels of consumption and labor
supply, against which money is held. Again, the presence of p in F
is a sign of monetary non-neutrality.
Define the MD curve as the combinations of p and y along

which the interest rate or relative price associated with money
demand is equal to the interest rate associated with product
demand:
Given p. solve

= F(r,p,x) for r and tnsert r znto D(r,p) to

get y

Note that the logic of MD is essentially that of finding the
intersection of the IS curve (product demand) and the LM curve
(money demand). In standard macro analysis, the result is the
aggregate demand (AD) schedule. However, I think "aggregate
demand" is a misleading term for MD. MD is not the product
demand function. Product demand enters the MD schedule only
to solve out the relative price variable. It would make just as

much sense to use product supply to solve out r.

Monetary

equilibrium is at the heart of the MD curve.
Figure 1—3 shows the EQ and MD curves in one diagram for the
general case of monetary non-neutrality. Under the assumptions
9

Figure 1—3. Equilibrium
Price level, p
EQ

MD

Output, y

that higher prices stimulate higher supply (S increasing in '4 and

higher demand (D increasing in p), the EQ curve must slope
upward. Absent strong non-neutralities in product demand or
money demand, MD slopes downward. On the other hand, if the
money price level has a positive effect on product demand, MD is
flatter or even upward sloping. This possibility calls attention to a

subtle difference between MD and AD. MD is derived from
standard demand functions which are defined AS the amount
demanded conditional on selling endowments at the given price.
AD assumes that the proceeds from sales of endowments is the
variable y. At the intersection with EQ or AS, the two
assumptions about resources available for consumption are the

same, so the difference is one of definition, not substance.
However, the definition of the AD curve is confusing to the
economist trained in standard general equilibrium.
The comparative statics of Figure 1—3 are reasonably obvious.

Au increase in the money stock, M, shifts MD to the right and
raises p and y. An exogenous increase in product supply raises y
and lowers p. An exogenous increase in product demand shifts

both EQ and MD to the right, since both schedules involve the
product demand function. Output rises but the effect on price is
ambiguous. The last property is the only respect in which MD- EQ

differs from AD-AS. The reason is the exclusion of product
demand from AS, as a result of the very strong assumptions
underlying AS.

11

2. Aggregate supply as a special case of EQ

The EQ curve is the centerpiece of the equilibrium real
business cycle model, where it describes the level of output
resulting from the equalization of product supply and demand by

the real interest rate. Product demand has an equal role with
product supply. On the other hand, in the AD-AS literature, AS is

The student in intermediate

strictly a matter of supply.

macroeconomics learns about long-run AS as determined by the

labor force and the capital stock, and about short-run AS as a
Phillips curve, but gets no hint that movements in product
demand might affect short-run AS.
The assumption of AS is the exclusion of the real interest rate

or other relative price and the real disturbances, x, from the
product supply function:
y = S(p)

(2.1)

Under this assumption, 5(p) is the EQ curve by itself; product
demand D(r,p,.r) simply determines r. The assumption justifies
calling EQ the AS curve. Empirical evidence on real interest rates

and product or labor supply is mixed and inconclusive. The
evidence is strong that exogenous increases in product demand
such as military buildups cause increases in output. Within the
assumptions of the equilibrium real business cycle model, the
evidence calls for positive real interest rate effects on product
supply. However, non-neutralities in product supply, as set forth
in the standard AD-AS model, are a competing explanation of the
12

same facts.

The evidence suggests that temporal agglomeration should
be taken seriously in a macroeconomic model.
Either
intertemporal substitution is very, high or thick-market effects are

strong enough to overcome workers' dislike of irregular work
schedules. The research of West [1986] and Ramey [1988] shows
persuasively that producers accept wide fluctuations in the level of
output in spite of their ability to offset these fluctuations in part
through inventory accumulation and decumulation. Rather than
build inventories at times when future increases in output are foreseeable and then draw inventories down when sales become strong,
producers generally do the opposite. They accumulate inventories

most aggressively when sales are at their peak.

The only

reasonable conclusion is that producers do not perceive
diseconomies of production in occasional bursts. On the contrary,
they appear to favor the bunching of production. Their behavior

suggests increasing returns, as in the temporal agglomeration
model.

If intertemporal substitution in production is high, a
substantial interest-elasticity of output is indicated. Producers are
indifferent to the timing of output on the cost side; when a high

real interest rate rewards early sales in relation to later ones,
current production should rise. On the other hand, if the
irregularity of output represents the victory of thick-market effects
over preferences for smooth work schedules, the interest-elasticty of
product supply need not be large. The observed relation of market
real interest rates and production confirms this proposition leaves
the issue largely unresvolved. The world-wide rise in real interest

rates over the past decade did not coincide with any dramatic
13

acceleration of output. I think the most favorable case for elastic
supply is the following. Interpret r not as the market real interest
rate, but as the underlying shadow real cost of delaying production.

When an increase in product demand raises that shadow cost,
producers respond vigorously. The market real rate is such a poor

measure of the shadow cost that the supply effect is hard to
observe directly. Agency and information problems block the arbitrage of variations in the shadow cost relative to market rates.
3. Monetary policy

Few central banks keep their portfolios on an exogenous path

as assumed in the previous discussion. Instead, they react to
current economic developments.
A simple and broad
characterization of policy is that the bank has chooses a line in y-p

space describing the combinations of y and p it considers
satisfactory for the period. Presumably the line slopes downward;
if higher prices are to be tolerated, real activity must be depressed
so as to push for lower prices or at least less inflation in the future.

Call this line the MP curve. If the bank adjusts its portfolio as
necessary to keep the economy on the MP curve, the MP curve
takes the place of the MD curve in the analysis described earlier.
Everything else remains the same.

One example of an MP curve is the rectangular hyperbola
corresponding to a policy of stabilizing nominal income. In this
setting, I pose the same question as at the outset: What happens

to the price level and output if there is an exogenous rise in
product demand? With the AS assumption, the answer is
immediate. Product demand has no role in either the AS curve or
14

the MP curve, so the price level and output must remain
unchanged. With a more general EQ curve, the EQ curve will shift

outward, output must rise, and the price level must fall. In an
economy where it was known that central bank policy stabilized
nominal income, the positive association between exogenous
demand and output would be a strong indication that supply was
elastic.

4. Noncompetitive, equilibrium models

The analysis described earlier in the paper assumes competition
in the product market, else the concept of a supply function would

not be well defined. But recent research in noncompetitive,
equilibrium models is easily accommodated. Define the EQ
schedule as the output resulting from the interaction of the sellers
and buyers when the money price level is p. If demand arises from
price-takers alone, keep the definition of the MD schedule from
earlier. If not, it is reasonable to define the MD schedule in terms

of the real interest rate for the same level of output on the EQ
curve. If policy can be summarized in an MP curve, these
questions about MD do not arise. Then the comparative statics
proceeds as described for the competitive case. A noncompetitive

economy does not have an aggregate supply curve, but it has a
perfectly well defined EQ curve.

15

5.

Simple fully-developed models

In this section I will lay out a sequence of simple models in
which preferences and technology are completely spelled out.
First, consider an economy with no intertemporal trading
opportunities. In each period, labor can be used to produce output
at a constant ratio of one to one. Consequently, the real wage is
always one. Worker-consumers have Cobb-Douglas preferences
over goods consumption, real monetary services, and leisure, with
shares a, fi and 1— a — fi respectively. The government provides

money in quantity M

and

charges a fixed rental price of, t per

period for it. The government uses the proceeds to finance govern-

ment purchases of x, with any deficit or surplus covered by a
lump-sum tax or rebate.
Let z be the real proceeds from the rental of money:
=

(5.1)

The public's income after taxes is
(5.2)

and its real spending on monetary services is

z=

—x

16

+

z)

(5.3)

Thus

=

1—5(1_i)

(5.4)

The EQ schedule is just the demand schedule for goods:
y

= a(1—r+z)+r

(5.5)

—
a +1_a_fl '
— 1—fl
i—fl

This is also the labor and product supply schedule because there is

no operational relative price. Note that an increase in product
demand—in the form of higher government purchases, x—shifts the

EQ schedule to the right. This represents the operation of an
income effect in labor supply.

Because there is no interest rate or other relative price
determined in the goods market, the MD curve can be derived
simply by equating money demand to money supply:

x) =

(5.6)

or

p=

(5.7)

17

The price level is proportional to the money stock and depends
positively on government purchases as well. Figure 5—1 shows the

vertical EQ and horizontal MD schedules.

The model has

monetary neutrality.
To introduce non-neutrality in the most transparent way, 11
will make labor supply and product demand depend on the money
price level. Obviously this does not do full justice to theories

based on contractual commitments—it is closer to a theory of
money illusion. Let the share a depend on the price level in the
following way:

a=
The share is ci when p is at a predetermined level, , and is higher
when p is higher. People work harder and consume more when the

price level rises. Standard macroeconomics would say the price
level rises when output and employment are high, but it comes to
the same thing.
The EQ schedule in this setup is

y=

ae

+x

(5.9)

It remains true that government purchases shift EQ to the right
through an income effect. Putting in monetary non-neutrality does

not eliminate the role of the variable that was important in
18

Figure 5—1. Equilibrium in the example
Price level, p
EQ

MC

Output, y

determining output in the case of full neutrality.
The MD curve is unchanged for the case of non-neutrality.
Figure 5—2 shows the upward-sloping EQ schedule and flat MD
schedules for the case. It shows that an increase in the quantity of
money, Al, will shift MD upward and raise output, thanks to the
non-neutrality reflected in the slope of EQ.

6. Intertemp oral substitution

Next I will consider a two-period version of the previous
model with an explicit interest rate. Because there are no physical
opportunities to trade between time periods, the real allocations in
this model are the same as in the previous model. However, the

existence of a credit market with an interest rate permits an
interpretation of output movements as responses to the interest
rate as well as income effects. Further. the new model serves as a
Lull illustration of the derivation of the EQ and MD schedules.
Let intertemporal utility be the sum over two periods of the

log-utilities implicit in the previous thodel. Let H be the market
discount rate: H = 1/(1±r), where r is the interest rate. Then full
wealth (the value of endowments at market prices) is

W(R) =

1 — x1 + z1 + 11(1 — x2 + z2)

Solving as before for z yields
z

=
20

Figure 5—2. Equilibrium in the 2nd example
Price level, p

EQ

MD

Output, y

Then full wealth is
z

=

The product demand schedule is
y

= W(R)

+;

(6.4)

Demand is an increasing function of R, that is, a decreasing
function of the real interest rate. The product-labor supply
function is
y

=1

—

(6.5)

which is an increasing function of the real interest rate. The
intersection of demand and supply is exactly as given earlier in
equation 5.5. To derive the MD schedule, I start with the money
demand function,

= W(R)

(6.6)

Then I use the product demand schedule, equation 6.4, to replace
W(R) by a function of y:

pi =

(6.7)

22

or

— ap
jI ____
Yr'i
—

Note that this version of MD has the customary downward slope,
whereas the previous version was flat. Both versions intersect EQ
at the same price level. This one contemplates the level of output
that would be demanded if the interest rate were at a level that
induced individuals to seek intertemporal trades, whereas in the
earlier case, individuals were aware of the impossibility of such
trades. In equilibrium no intertemporal trades occur, which is why
the two MD curves intersect EQ at the same point.

Nonneutrality in product demand

In the following example, nonneutrality in product demand
is a result of distributional effects from nominal precommitments.

Firms agree in advance with their workers to provide a fixed
nominal level of compensation, independent of the actual amount
of work. That is, compensation is a guaranteed annual amount.

The guarantee is in nominal terms because the parties view the
monetary unit as the natural way to express forward obligations.
Were monetary policy approximately optimal, nominal forward
contracts would be correspondingly approximately optimal. The
employment contract does not grant to employers the right to
choose the level of employment without regard to the labor supply
of the workforce. Rather, employment is set at the efficient level.
The effect of the nominal precommitment is to make a lump-sum
23

transfer of wealth to management if the price level is unexpectedly
high. Management places all incremental wealth in goods. Hence

there is a distributional effect of the price level. A higher price
level raises product demand through the assumption about management. It raises labor supply through a negative income effect.
Hence a higher nominal price level raises equilibrium output. In

the earlier model, there was exact proportionality between the
nominal incomes of workers and the money stock. If contracts
predetermine nominal incomes, then there is no freedom ex post for

the money stock to differ from the level needed to ratify the
predetermined income level. To get an interesting model, it is
necessary to change the money demand assumption. A simple and
standard assumption is that money is demanded in proportion to
nominal GNP:

Al =

Opy

Under this assumption, it is unnecessary to posit any rental
earnings on money by the government. The consumption share of
monetary services, 3, is also taken as zro.

The derivation of equilibrium output is straightforward
because the stabilization of compensation by management has the

same effect in the model as the taxing and spending of the
government. The government makes a lump-sum transfer from
workers to itself and uses all of the proceeds to purchase goods. It
is only necessary to link the level of the transfer, r, to the amount

If the nominal
commitment is p, then it is fr/p in real terms. Planned real
of the nominal compensation commitment.

compensation is a. Actual real compensation falls in proportion to
24

the excess of p over p. Thus the employer takes back x in real
terms from the workers, where
a(i — ç)

(6.10)

Recall that the EQ curve is
y = a(i—x) + z

(6.11)

With the transfer, r, as in equation 6.10, the non-neutral EQ curve
is

y=

[1

+

(i-a)(i- ç)]

(6.12)

The MD curve is just a rewriting of equation 6.9:
—

Al

Figure 6—i shows the upward-sloping EQ curve and the downward

sloping MD curve. An increase in M raises output. Again, the
mechanism is distributional —an increase in nominal demand shifts

the distribution of income toward managers, because of thc
nominal wage commitment. Managers place all of their earnings ir

goods, so there is a stimulus to goods demand, which raise
equilibrium output just as an increase in government purchases
would.

25

Figure 6—1. Nonneutrality in
product demand
Price level, p
EQ

MD

Output, y

7. ConcLusions

Models of the determination of equilibrium output need not
lead separate lives from models of the short run, where nominal
precommitments are important. Rather, nominal influences should

be built into the product supply, product demand, and money
demand functions of the equilibrium model. The resulting model
can accommodate a wide spectrum of views about macroeconomics.

At one end is the price-rigidity model, where sellers make call
option contracts with their customers with nominal striking prices.
In that model, the EQ curve simply describes the call option and is
• the same as the aggregate supply curve of standard expositions of
price rigidity. At the othetr end is the real business cycle or pure
equilibrium model with complete monetary neutrality. The
analysis leading to the vertical EQ curve contains all the features
of that model. The EQ-MD diagram shows how the price level is
determined, an issue usually neglected in the real business cycle
literature.

In between these two polar cases lies a wide variety of
interesting macroeconomic models. The analysis of all types of
noise in product or labor demand—government purchases,
unpredictable agglomeration in the business sector, or shifts in
consumer behavior—needs the full treatment underlying the EQ
curve. The call-option hypothesis needed to justify the AS curve is
too restrictive to describe the determination of total output, even ii
it is a helpful idea in understanding some sectors.
Analysis of monetary non-neutrality has been stagnant in
recent years. The general framework outlined in this lecture calls
attention to the great variety of ways that non-neutrality can enter
27

a macroeconomic model. In addition to call options with nominal
striking

prices in product and labor markets, nominal

preconirnitments in bonds, mortgages, dividends, and long-term
employment compensation generate important non-neutralities
through distributional effects.

28

References

Lucas, Robert J. "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money."
Journal of Economic Theorp 4(1972): 103-124.

Phelps, Edmund S., et al., Microeconomic Foundations of
Employment and Inflation Theory. New York: W. W. Norton and
Co., Inc., 1970.

Prescott, Edward C.

"Theory Ahead of Business Cycle

Measurement." In Real Business Cycles, Real Exchange Rates and
Actual Policies, Volume 25 in the Cargegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy, edi'ted by Karl Brunner and Allan Meltzer.
Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1986, pp. 11-44.

Ramey, Valerie A. "Non-convex Costs and the Behavior of
Inventories." Department of Economics, University of California
San Diego, June 1988.

Tobin, James. "Money and Economic Growth." Econometrica 33
(October 1965): 671-84.

West, Kenneth D. "A Variance Bounds Test of the Linear
Quadratic Inventory Model." Jountal of Political Economy
94(April 1986): 374-401.

29

