                          NBER WORICING PAPER SERIES




                     MEASURABLE DYNAMIC GAINS FROM TRADE




                               Richard Baldwin




                            Working Paper No. 3147




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  October 1989




This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #3147
                                       October 1989


                     MEASURABLE DYNAMIC GAINS FROM TRADE


                                   ABSTRACT

     Productive factors such as human and phyaical capital are accumulated and
trade can affect the steady-state levels of such factors. Consequently, trade
liberalization will have dynamic effects on output and welfare as the economy
moves to its new steady state, in addition to its usual static effects. The
output impact of this dynamic effect is measurable and appears to be quite
large. The welfare impact of this dynamic effect is also measurable. The size
of this dynamic gain from trade depends on the importance of external scale
economies.




                                       Richard   Baldwin
                                       Columbia University Business School
                                       611 Uris Hall
                                       New York, NY 10027
                                        FAX: (212)864-4857
     Empirical researchers have consistently found that even major trade liberalizations raise

aggregate income by an amount that is somewhere between negligible (0.1 percent: Deardorif and

Stern 1979, 1981) and rather small (8.6 percent: Harris and Cox 1982). The oral tradition in

international trade has long countered this "flarberger triangle problem" with the assertion that

the most important gains from trade are dynamic, not static.            Empirical studies of trade

liberalizations ignore such factors since dynamic trade effects are poorly understood and

supposedly impossible to measure.

     This paper exposits and measures one type of dynamic effect of trade liberalization. The

results confirm the oral tradition: Dynamic output effects are large — perhaps several times
larger than the static allocation and strategic effects that existing studies have focused on. The

source of this dynamic effect is simple. Trade liberalization may, ceteris paribus, raise the

marginal productivity of capital. In virtually any model where the capital—labor ratio is
endogenous, this will in turn raise the steady—state capital—labor ratio (even if it has no effect on

the long—run growth rate). As the economy moves toward its new steady state, output rises more

than the static effect alone would imply. The welfare gain from this additional output depends on

the divergence between the social and private marginal productivity of capital.

Ricardiaa Dysamic Trade Effedi
     The Heckscher—Ohlin model explores the effects of factor supplies on trade. R.icardo (1815)

focuses on the reverse causality. In R.icardo's model the steady-state growth rate is zero, due to




                                                     1
diminishing returns in agriculture. Trade postpones the arrival date of the steady—state as,

"England's agriculture is stationary but Manchester and Birmingham make her the workshop of

the world which pays in food and primary products for the expanding output of the workshop."1

Thus trade affects the supply of productive factors (wage labor and farm land) employed in

steady—state, but not the steady—state growth rate. R.icazdo's model has little direct relevance to

the modern world. Yet the link between steady—state factor supplies and trade is important.

Factors such as labor skill and physical capital are accumulated. Since trade can affect factor

rewards, it almost surely affects the steady—state level of such factors.

     This Ricardian dynamic trade effect is related to, but quite distinct from, the important
                                                                                           2
dynamic effects stressed m the Grosaznan—Helpman literature on trade and growth.               The
Grossrnan—Helpman dynamic effect focuses on the link between trade and the rate of
accumulation of factors of production (be it knowledge or varieties of specialized inputs). They

show that trade may raise or lower this rate and thereby permanently raise or lower the long—run

growth rate of output. By contrast, in the Ricardian model (and the neoclassical growth model)

the rate of growth eventually returns to a steady—state rate determined by technology and tastes.

Thus the Ricardian dynamic effect focuses on the link between trade and the steady—state level of

factors of production. Another way to see the distinction between the two effects is to note that

the Grossman—Helpman models are part of the new growth literature, in which the long—run

growth rate is endogenously determined.3 The Ricardian effect is present even in the simplest

Solow growth modeL

     More closely related is the extensive literature on trade and growth surveyed by Smith (1984)

and Findlay (1984). Most of these models impose a constant savings rate. Stiglits (1970),

Srinivasan and Bhagwati (1980), Fried (1980), Manning and Markusen (1989), Galor (1989) and

Galor and Lin (1989) allow for endogenously determined saving. None of these studies quantify

dynamic gains from trade.



                                                      2
      Section 1 presents the basic model.          Section 2 investigates existence, stability and
convergence properties of the model. Section 3      presents   comparative steady—state analysis of a

trade liberalization. Section 4 rnmines the welfare consequences. Section 5 quantifies the output

and welfare effects for specific functional fornis. Section 6 contains a snmmJ'y, concluding

remarks and directions for future research.



1. The Ricardian Dynamic Trade Effect

      The Ricardian effect is first rRnined in a   fkmi1ir trade   model. The analysis focuses on the

short and long run effects of protection on the capital rental rate and the steady—state
capital—4abor ratio.

      Consider an integrated world economy with two goods (1 and 2) produced with two factors

(capital K and labor L) under constant returns to scale by price—taking firms. The fixed
coefficients technology (identical in all countries) relates the output of the goods, x1 and x2, to

inputs at all points in time (continuous time is employed; the time index is suppressed where

clarity permits):

(1)             x1 am     I
                               L1
                                    ,
                                        K1
                                              I,
                                                           .
                                                      x2= ala I
                                                                 i l.         K2
                              (alL/A) a j                          (a2L/A)    a21
Labor   augmenting technology advances according to: A(t) = A(O)e where 17 is the exogenous

rate of technological progress. Good 2 is relatively capital intensive, so S2KS1L> a2LalK.
Neither good is storable. There are no adjustment costs.4

      In the spirit of the Solow growth model, investment is forgone consumption, so:

(2)                                     I=(I1)h12(12)h12
where I is investment, I and 12 are the amounts of goods 1 and 2 devoted to making new capital

instead of consumption. Depreciation is ignored.

      The infinitely—lived representative consumer chooses consumption to mim'e:




                                                      3
(3)                  U=
                          ((/)) fe't [cl(t)h/2C2(t)h/2]11Idt,
subject to a lifetime budget constraint (a dot over a variable indicates a time derivative, e.g., =

dx/dt):

          = (1/P(t))(w(t)A(t)L+r(t)K(t))             —   c(t), subject to 1i K(t)—+XO.
                                                                                t .4
Here p and o are the discount rate and intertemporal elasticity of substitution, X is an arbitrary

finite constant, c(t) is defined as (c1(t))h/2(c2(t))'2 and the index P equals 2(p1(t)p2(t))'2

where p1 and p2 are the prices of goods 1 and 2. It ii useful to define an index for aggregate

output, X, such that X(t) is (x1(t))h/2(x2(t))Y2

      it is easily shown that utility maximization implies:

(4)                              (t)/c(t) = o[r(t)/P(t)_P]
Also, defining the optimal expenditure level as E(t), consumption and investment demand

functions are:

(5)                 c1(t) = (p1(t))4(E(t)/2),             c2(t) = (p2(t))'(E(t)/2),
                =   (p1(t))1(Y(t)_(t))/2, and                        =
       11(t)                                                 12(t)       (p2(t))''(Y(t)__E(t))/2.
Clearly, p1x1 = p2x2 at every instant, and expenditure is exactly equal to c(t)P(t). From (2) and

(5), we have:

(6)                                       K = 1(t) — c(t).
Additionally world income, Y(t), equals w(t)A(t)L + r(t)K(t).                Income equals output in

equilibrium soY equals x1(t)+ p2(t)x2(t) which equals P(t)X(t).

      Prices, factor rewards (w for wages, r for the rental rate) and outputs at all times satisfy:

(7)                                1             = (alL/A)v +a11r
                                            p1
                                                 =
                                                                 +alir
(8)                                         A(t)L= alLxl +a2Lx2
                                            K = a11x1 +ax2


                                                         4
The matrix of aU's is assumed to be non—singular; good 1 is the numeraire.

       Equations (1), (5), (7) and (8) define the instantaneous equilibrium prices and outputs.

Equations (4) and (6) describe the evolution of the economy through time. For convenience we
take 17 equal to zero, and A(0)L equal to one, so the two state variables are c and K. c can jump,

K cannot. Their steady—state values (denoted with a bar) are such that r equals p, and
consumption equals output. Namely, K is such that:

               :a1L 2K
                     a   —a2LK     a2L
(9)        p = —.—j (  —       ) + —s-—, where                  LA   — alKa2L — a2KalL,
                         a1LK — alK
and is such that:

(10)                     c = (—1
                         —            \1           —       —          11/2
                                         l(a2Ka2LK)(a1LK_alK)J
Note that K is unique, so that there is only one steady—state capital—labor ratio for which

non—specialization occurs. Baldwin (1989b) shows that this system is characterized by saddle

path stability, and converges to K and .

        sad Proteciioa

       Any division of factors among countries would reproduce the integrated world equilibrium,

as long as the relative "endowments" are similar enough so that no country specializes. Any such

division would be time—invariant due to factor price equalization. To be concrete we consider two

such divisions. First suppose the home country is "endowed" with a capital—labor ratio, ç°,

which is less than the world steady—state capital—labor ratio (call this ), so the home country

imports good 2. To keep the dynamics simple, we rely on the convenient fiction that the home

country is small in the sense that its output does not affect world prices. The phase diagram

describing this situation is given by Figure

       Consider the effects of a permanent home tariff. On impact the tariff raises p2 and r and

lowers w. With fixed input coefficients, there is no immediate output response. The jump in r

raises the return to foregone consumption leading home consumers to optimally accumulate



                                                    5
capital.   This rise in K increases good 2 production at the expense of good 1 production

(Rybcsynski effect) — reducing both imports and export.. Due to the small, open economy
assumption the initial rise in K has no effect on the return to foregone consumption. Therefore K

continues to increase. Indeed, a. long as the tariff is effective, r will be above p so K will continue

to rise. When the home capital—labor ratio reaches , imports cease and the tariff becomes
irrelevant. This is a new steady—state. More formally, the economy jumps from                 to B, in

Figure 2, and converges to B' along SS.

     A trivial implication of this is that the Stolper—Samuelson effect does not hold in the long

run in this model.6       Instead the tariff induces what might be called factor endowment
equalization. For the purposes of our analysis the only important points are that in this case the

return on foregone consumption is ceteris paribus increasing in the tariff, and the tariff raises the

home steady—state capital—labor ratio.

     Next consider the case where the home country is "endowed" with ic greater         than , so it
imports good 1. Again mmine the effects of a home tariff. On impact the tariff lowers r and

leads to a fall in K. As before, K continues falling until the home country's capital—labor ratio

equals       Parenthetically, we note that the Stolper—Samuelson effect again incorrectly predicts

the long—run effect of protection on factor rewards. The relevant aspect, however, is that in this

case the tariff lowers r at the initial c, and reduces the home steady—state capital stock. It is a

straightforward exercise to work out the exact adjustment with a diagram similar to Figure 2.

      To summarize, protection affect, a country's rental rate and thereby its steady—state
capital—labor ratio. The direction of the effect in this simple model depends solely on factor

intensities. It is well—¾nown that in more general models the link between prices and factor

rewards is ambiguous. Next we use these results to direct our investigation of the Ricardian effect

in an implicit model.

1.1 Anlmp&itMod4


                                                       6
       Trade barrier. may raise or lower r, thereby inducing a Ricardian dynamic effect which
exaggerate. or mitigates the standard output effects of protection. The simple model above leads

to the extreme result that protection raises home production of the imported good to the point of

self sufficiency. We now turn to a more general modeL

       Suppose the world's real gros. national product (GNP), y, is given by (or at least can be well

approximated by): F[K,L,ij, where K and L are the world capital stock and labor force, and T is

an index of global trade barriers.7 The dynamic effects we address involve the accumulation of

capital. To highlight this, L is assumed to be time invariant. For notational simplicity we
suppress L and work with:

(11)                                     y(t) = f[K(t),r].
The function i. assumed to be increasing in K and decreasing in T. Note that with L fixed K is

proportional to the capital—labor ratio.

       Investment ii foregone consumption, so:

                                              K= y   — C,

where   c is consumption. Depreciation is ignored. Furthermore, aume that capital is the only

means of carrying over income between periods. The real rate of return on foregone consumption

i related to trade barriers and K by:

(13)                                       r(t) = r[K,r]
If we assume perfect competition and constant returns to scale, r[K,ij i. the partial derivative off

with respect to K. However, we wish to allow for a divergence between social and private rate. of

return due to external economie. of scale. Thus we assume only that rK[K,rj (subscript denote

partial derivative.) 1. negative and the partial of r(K,'rj with respect to T may be positive or

negative (both cases are considered below).

       The representative, infinitely—lived consumer nynies:

(14)                        U=




                                                      7
subject to a lifetime budget constraint:

(15)        k     v(t)L+r(t)K(t)—c(t)                 where 1i.K(t)X, s.t.E>XO.

The Hamiltonian for      this problem   is:                                       + A(wL+rK). The optimal

consumption path ii characterized by       (12) and     the   necessary   conditions:   e_c_(1'0 A and

A = —Ar.     To make the analytics more intuitive, we work with K and c as the state variables,

instead of K and the co—state variable, A. The necessary conditions imply:

(16)                                             = o (r(t) —
Equations (12) and (16) describe the dynamics of the model.



2. Stability, Conver9ence and Existence ofthe Steady State in the Wor'd Economy

       The dynamics of this system are simple and can be analysed with Wilson—Dornbusch

techniques.8 The steady—state c and K satisfy:

(17)                           r(,r] p                 and        f[,r] =
       To characterize the dynamics out of steady state, we use a phase diagram (Figure 3). We

plot the locus of c and K for which k equals sero as k = 0. It is upward sloped since the marginal

product of capital is positive. We plot the locus of c and K for which c             equals zero   as c = 0. It is

vertical since there is only one capital—labor ratio at which r equals the discount rate. Equations

(12) and (16) describe the laws of motion off the            = 0 and k = 0     schedules.   For all pairs of c and

K to the left of c = 0, c will be increasing; all points to        the right   correspond to falling c. These

observations are depicted in Figure 3         with   arrows. Points below K =0 correspond to rising K;

points above it correspond to falling K. Again these laws of motion are shown with arrows.

       This system displays saddle path stability. That is, there is a unique locus of initial values of

c and K, drawn as SS, for which the economy would converge to the steady state. The capital

stock changes continuously with time but the consumer can choose c freely. Thus c may make




                                                              8
discrete jumps. The consumer would choose c to be somewhere on the saddle path, since
otherwise consumption will eventually fall to zero; if he chooses c too low, capital accumulates

forever as consumption trails off to zero; if he chooses c too high, the capital stock ii eventually

run down to zero. In other words, any other choice would violate the transversality condition in

(15). More formally, stability ii analyzed by linearizing (12) and (16) around the steady state and

investigating the sign of the eignvalues of the resulting Jacobian. These ale equal to:
fK± (fK2_40rK)"2/2. Since r is decreasing in K, there are two real roots of opposite sign.

This ensures the existence of a unique saddle path.



3. Comparative Steady St ate Analijsis of MtdtiiateroJ Liberalization
       Consider the long—run output effects of lower global trade barriers as captured by the index

r. In our model, a liberalization has two effects. A static effect on world GNP, and a dynamic

effect via an induced change in the steady—state capital stock (i.e., capital—labor ratio since L is

fixed). To see this we totally differentiate the steady—state conditions (17) to get:

(18)                                      (4r" ())                   ()
The second term captures the usual static effects of a liberalization: by removing distortions, the

same amount of capital and labor may be combined more efficiently, producing more output. In

general a liberalization affects the rate of return on capital.         This in turn, leads to the
accumulation or decuinulation of capital. If the trade barrier reduction leads to a ceteris paribus

rise in r, the dynamic effect amplifies the static effect. That Is, consumers find it optimal to

accumulate capital until the capital—labor ratio is sufficiently high to return r back to its

steady—state value, p. Alternatively if r7 is negative, consumers will find it optimal to reduce



capital stock. In this case the Ricardian output effect tends to offset the static effect. This

indirect effect of trade on factor endowments is captured by the first term. The quotient in large



                                                      9
parentheses gives the proportional change in K resulting from the liberalization. The output

effect of this change in K is determined by the capital—output elasticity of the GNP function.

     The adjustment path can be seen in Figure 4. Here the liberalisation shifts the new
steady—state point from E°to H'. The new saddle path is shown as SS'. Consumption jumps

from the old steady—state point H°, to point B and the economy moves along SS' to H'.

     Since steady—state output equals consumption, (18) also gives the comparative steady—state

increase in consumption. The welfare interpretation of this change is subtle. From the point of

view of the infinitely—lived consumer, the rise in steady—state consumption due to the
accumulation of capital is largely or entirely offset by the foregone consumption that was
necessary to accumulate the capital.



4. Welfare: Dynamic Gain3 from Trade
     The   most straightforward approach to gauging the welfare implications of trade
liberalizations would be to solve explicitly for the adjustment path of c and evaluate this with the

utility function. The problem is that (12) and (16) are non—linear in the state variables, so an

analytic solution for the saddle path is impossible. We could linearize the system around the

steady—state and work with the resulting system of linear differential equations. This is only

correct for very small changes in c and y. Since one of the points of this paper is to show that

dynamic effects are large, the linearization approach is unsatisfactory.

     As it turns out, we do not need to get an analytic solution to the consumption path in order

to find the welfare effects. To see this, note that the optimal consumption path is a function of

time and implicitly of r. Differentiating (14) (evaluated at ) with respect to r, we see that

dU/dr is: ()       0Jetc1.(t)dt. In other words, the welfare impact depends on the Laplace
transform of the induced change in the consumption path. This comment is germane since Judd

(1985) shows that it is much easier to deal with the Laplace transforms of state variables' paths



                                                     10
than with the paths themselves.

       To keep the analysis as general as poesible, we consider a general form of changes in T over

time. That is, we multiply r by (1+Eh(t)) throughout (12) and (16), where h(t) is a known,
arbitrary time path (usually a step function). This allow, us to consider a broad class of trade

policy changes. To determine the welfare effect of small change. in 7 over a time path described

by h(t), we differentiate the altered differential equations with respect to and evaluate the result

at E equal to zero. In matrix form this yields:


(19)
                              c   +
                                       roh(t)rT.         where   .1 =
                                                                             0
                                                                                 car1
                                                                                  f
                              1        rh(t)f7                              —1


The Jacobian matrix is evaluated at the steady—state levels of c and K.

       Next we multiply (12) and (16) by e integrate over time, and then integrate the left hand

aide by parts. This yields the Laplace transform of (19):

                          C (w)                   1   raH(,4r7+cE(0)
(20)                      K(w) =(wI—J)                TH(W)fr
where C€(c), KE(w) and H(w) are the Laplace transforms of cE, KE and h€ (e.g., C6(w) equals

           cE(t)dt). Notice that the integration by parts has turned the system of differential
0Je
equations into an algebraic system in Laplace transforms. The only unknown in (20) i. the size of

the consumption jump at time zero, c(O), since we used the fact that capital does not jump to set

K€(0) equal to zero..

       To determine, c(0) note that by the transversality conditions KE(w) must remain finite for

all value, of .    Consider   w equal to the positive eigenvalue of J (call this /).    Since /hI—J is

singular, it must be that (see Judd 1985 for details):

                               car7H(p) + cE(0) — prH(p)f7        =     0

Using this in (20), taking w equal top, yields the welfare impact:

(21) (du/dc)/(Y
                     1            K                                              carK
                          = r{(———) [car7(H(p)_H(/L))+ HJL)f1JL] + (.___) (f7.Hp),



                                                      11
where L ii the determinant of (pI—J), and all partiala are evaluated at and K. For many policy

changes, h(t), it is possible to obtain a closed form solution for H(w). For such h(t), it is a
straightforward exercise to evaluate (21).

Welfare Impact of a Oe-offRedaeiion 1* Trade Barriers

    Consider   a one—off change in r (i.e., h(t) equal to unity for all t). In this case the

proportional change in welfare, normalised by the marginal utility of consumption, is:


(22) ()/() = {(____)()]                      +
                                                 [(
This expression is easy to interpret. The first term is equal to the present discounted value of the

static gain. The second term captures the welfare effect of the Ricardian dynamic trade effect. If

there are no external economies of scale in the employment of capital, then r[K,11 = fK[K,hl   = p.

Consequentially the dynamic welfare effect, (i.e., the dynamic gain from trade) is zero. In other

words, although the Ricardian dynamic effect leads to a larger output effect, it does not
contribute to welfare. Intuitively, think of this result as an application of the envelope theorem.

The consumer is optimizing (taking r as a parameter) between consumption today and savings

which will yield consumption in the future. The change in the objective function with respect to

r is the same with and without reoptimizing on K.
     However, if there are external economies of scale, the social marginal product of capital may

exceed the rental rate. Thus there will be dynamic gains from trade due to the Ricardian dynamic

effect. To see this, note that with external economies r(i,ij need not equal the social marginal

product of capital, fK[I1 (Section 5 considers an explicit example of this). Consequentially p
can be less than K1'1• The determinant of (p1—3) is negative and the positive eigenvalue of 3 is

greater than r[,rj, so the second term in (22) has the same sign as r7.(,11. To summarise this

discussion:
Proposition 1 (neceary condition foe dynamic gains from tiade): If the social
and private marginal product of capital are identical, the Ricardian dynamic



                                                      12
trade effect ha. no impact on welfare. If the social rate exceeds the private
rate then the Ricardian dynamic effect has a positive welfare effect only if
the liberalisation raises the return to capital. If the liberalisation lowers the
return to capital, the Ricardian dynamic effect tends to offset the static gains
from trade.
     The result that the Ricardian effect may tend to lower welfare should be interpreted in the

light of the theory of the second best. External economies drive a wedge between the private and

social rates of return. In all such cases, many types of intervention may improve welfare. The

best policy (ignoring the efficiency cost of government revenue) is to remove the wedge at its

source. In other words, the best policy mix with external economies of scale ii to subsidize capital

formation directly      liberalize trade.

Dynamic Gsuisfrom Trade for Large Po&y Canges
     Equation (22) gives -the exact welfare impact of small changes in trade barriers, and can be

used to find a first—order approximation of the welfare impact of large policy changes.
Evaluating the exact impact of a large policy change would involve solving for the Laplace

transform of the actual adjustment path. The difficulty with this is that it would require us to

solve non—linear differential equations. In the above procedure, .1 was a matrix of scalars which

posed no problem when we took the Laplace transform of the system.

     What all this goes to say is that in general, it is not possible to solve for the exact welfare

impact of large policy changes. Nevertheless, we can show that even when the social and private

return to capital coincide, a large liberalization may lead to dynamic gains from trade. The

argument is illustrated in Figure 5. The outer curve in the diagram represents utility when the

capital stock is optimally adjusted. The inner curve plots the utility when the capital stock is held

constant, lip =            then the curves are tangent at the initial T since the private and social

planner's problems are identical. Small changes in the tariff lead to the same welfare impact with

and without a re—optimization of the capital stock. This is the envelope theorem. Yet for a big

change in r, say to   r' in Figure 5, the re—optimization of the capital stock is not negligible. In



                                                     13
other words, the Ricardian dynamic trade effect would lead to positive dynamic gains from trade,

even in the absence of external economies of scale.



5. Meaeunng the Ricardian Dynamic Trade Effect

       This section adopts simple functional forms that enable quantification of the positive and

welfare impact of the Ricardian dynamic trade effect. The functional form for the GNP function

implies that r is everywhere decreasing in r. We think of this as capturing the effect of a

worldwide liberalization of intra—industry trade in capital intensive goods (say manufacturing).

Here r    captures foreign and domestic tariffs, and we presume that a multilateral reduction in

trade barriers in the sector raises the rate of return on capital. Of course, one can construct

models where a multilateral liberalization of manufacturing would have exactly the opposite effect

on r. As Section 1 pointed out the effects work in the opposite direction if r is increasing in r.

A Specific Fnaciional Porn&

       Suppose the GNP and r functions are:

(23)      y(t) = flA(t)(K()aLl_a),             and     r(t) =
where f3 equals          )   and A is total factor productivity. The true determinants of total factor

productivity are not well understood. On one hand, the neoclassical growth model assumes it is

driven by exogenous technological progress. On the other hand, the new growth theory attempts

to endogenize the advancement of primary factors productivity (e.g., Rorner 1983, Grossman and

Helpman 1988). The R.icazdian dynamic effect demonstrated by this paper does not depend on

the exact source of the productivity growth. Rather than tie our model to a specific school of

thought, we assumed that:

(24)                    A(t) = B(t)K(t)9L,            whereB(t) = B(O)e.
Here B represents the state of basic scientific knowledge, and i      is   the exogenous rate at which

disembodied technology advances (due, say, to human curiosity). 0 captures the external



                                                      14
economies in the usage of capital. Finns are assumed to take the path of A as given.

       There are several possible interpretations of equation (24). The moat straightforward is that

                   the standard external economies of scale. Thus the production function for a

typical firm employing K. and L units of capital and labor is: YKLa, where ' is a measure
of the external scale economies.        In this came, a+9      equals a/(1—*) and 1—a+çQ equals

(1—a)/(1—). Alternatively, Rower (1987) argues that external economies are entirely captured

by Kf and v and         are sero. Lastly the Solow model is where U and            equal sero. Unless

a+9 < 1, steady—state K and c do not exist. We therefore restrict our attention to (+9 < 1. For
convenience we take L equal to one and set 7 equal to sero. Allowing for exogenous technological

progress is a straightforward exercise (define new state variables, c/B and K/B, and proceed as

before).

Comjssranc Steadp-S1ae Asaipsi.: OvipvA 2ff ads
       With these additional assumptions, the proportional rise in y due to a liberalization is (using

Jonesian hat notation, i.e., x dx/x):

(25)                                  =(      1
                                                   1)           +

where fi equals the static output effect of the liberalization considered (the increase in GNP with

no change in the capital stock). Clearly it is extremely simple to measure the size of this output

effect. Only two readily available estimates are required. The capital—output elasticity of the

GNP function (i.e.,          and an estimate of the size of the static gain (i.e., fi). To illustrate the

measurement of the R.icaidian dynamic trade effect, we take the BC's 1992 program as an

example.

       The sise of a-f-U is an unsettled empirical question. Prior to the new growth literature, it was

widely assumed that a-i-U equaled capital's share of income (or one minus labor's share of

income). This is an implication of perfect competition and constant returns to scale much




                                                       15
exploited by the growth accounting literature. The first four rows of Table 1 reproduce a number

of such estimates for France, Germany, the Netherlands and the UK. The numbers range from

0.446 to 0.222. A recent survey, Maddison (1987), takes 0.3 as the consensus figure.

     Econometric estimation of the GNP function ii problematic due to simultaneity between

optimal factor choice and random productivity shocks. Hall (1989), and Caballero and Lyons

(1989a, b) have pioneered new techniques to skirt this problem. Using these techniques, Caballero

and Lyons (1989b) estimate the sum of capital and labor output elasticities for France, Germany,

Belgium and the UK. To recover a+ 0 from the Caballero and Lyons numbers, we must multiply

their aggregate number by capital's cost share. Since the authors use panel data on capital's coat

share, it is not possible to recover the exact a-i-0. We get a rough approximation by multiplying

the Caballero and Lyons' aggregate number by Maddison's consensus 0.3. To test the results for

sensitivity to the estimates, we do the same calculation for their points estimates plus and minus

one standard error. Rows five through seven of Table 1 list the resulting numbers.

     Equation (25) shows that the R.icardian dynamic output effect can be thought of as a

multiplier on the static effect. The site of this Ricardian output multiplier can by itself tell us

how important the R.icardian dynamic effect is. For instance take the low estimate of a+0 for

France from Table 1, 0.23. In this case the multiplier equals about 0.3. In other words, by

ignoring the fact that the capital stock is endogenously determined, empirical estimates of the

static effect alone underestimates the total output effect by at least 30 percent. Table 2 presents

the multipliers that correspond to the high and low values of a-f 0 from Table 1 for each country.

They range from 24 to 136 percent. Baldwin (1989a) attempts to establish an upper bound on

this type of gain by using an ordinary least squares (OLS) estimate of the GNP function. The

OLS estimate of o+0 (which is obviously upward biased) is 0.975. This value of a-i- 0 yields a

multiplier of 38.

     To get estimates of this dynamic effect of the 1992 program, we multiply the various



                                                   16
estimates of the multiplier by an estimate of the static output impact of 1992. Rere we employ

the Cecchini Report's estimate that 1992 will lead to a once—off increase in EC GNP of between

2.5 and 6.5 percent. We take the high and low estimates of the multiplier for each country from

Table 2, and multiplied these by the high and low estimates of the static effect from the Cecchini

Report. The results axe listed in Table 3. The first and second rows in Table 3 presents 1992's

effect on EC GNP (in percentage points) due solely to the Ricardian effect. Of course there would

be no Ricardian effect without the static gain, so the total effect (the static range of 2.5 to 65 plus

the high and low estimates from the first row) of 1992 on EC GNP is presented in the third and

fourth rows of Table 3.

       The moat robust conclusion from(Table 3 is that the indirect effect is considerable in all

cases. At the very least, it means the endogenous rise in capital will boost EC GNP by an extra

0.6 percent. The largest numbers in this table are large by comparison with the Cecchini Report

range. They axe all about twice the size of the high end of the Cecchini Report range.

Rcardiaa Welfare Meliip&r
       For the functional form adopted the proportional change of r and y with respect to r are

identical, so:

(26)                                   =                   +              where
                                           [

                            —
                                s
                                               0
                                               + O/ 1'
                                                           (i  p
                                                                   —   1  1'
and the positive eigenvalue of J, u, equals:

                          (p/2a) [a+0 + (      (a+ + 4ao(1—--8) )1/2 3.
The term,          represents the static impact of trade liberalisation on GNP (this is what existing

empirical studies of trade liberalisations measure). Consequently, it may be useful to think of 4) as

a multiplier. That is, in addition to the well—known static gains from trade, the Ricardian effect




                                                      17
leads to a further welfare gain that      ii proportional to the static gain. We now turn to
approximating the size of this R.icardian welfare multiplier.

     Estimates of all the parameter, in the multiplier are readily available in the literature. Table

4 presents the calculated value, of the Ricardian welfare multiplier for the Caballero and Lyons'

capital—output elasticities (and these estimates plus one standard error). In all cases, we take the

discount rate equal to 0.05, the intertemporal elasticity of substitution as 0.1 (this is the consensus

figure from Hall 1988), and C equal to Maddison's consensus 0.3.

     The main point to emerge from Table 4 is that this dynamic gain from trade is not
insignificant. For France, Germany, the UK and Belgium the multiplier ranges from 0.17 to 0.87.

That is, the Ricardian effect accounts for an extra rise in welfare of that is somewhere between 15

and 90 percent of the static output effect of the liberalization. However, the increase in welfare

due to the Ricardian effect is small relative to the welfare contribution of the static effect. The

welfare impact of the static effect is the percent rise in output (holding K constant) multiplied by

something like 20 (for p = 0.05). The welfare impact of the dynamic effect is the output effect
multiplied by a number that is close to unity. Intuitively, this reflects the fact that the static gain

is "for free" while the dynamic gain is largely offset by the foregone consumption necessary to

build the capital stock.



6. Condusion and Directions for Ftrther Research

     Productive   factors such as human and physical capital are accumulated. Since the
steady—state levels of such factors are determined endogenously, trade policy can affect these

levels. A trade liberalization therefore has a dynamic effect on output and welfare as the economy

moves to its new steady state. This paper show that both the positive and normative impact of

this dynamic effect are measurable. The extra output response due to this dynamic effect appears

to be quite large. The size of the welfare impact depends on the degree of external economies of



                                                      18
scale in the economy. Note that this dynamic effect is not dependent on the new growth models;

it is present even in the Solow growth modeL R.icardo (1815) first explored the effect of trade on

steady—state factor supplies.

     This paper suggests that further work be done on estimating the aggregate capital—output

elasticity.   This is not an easy task (see Caballero and Lyons 1989a,b). From the theory
standpoint, it may be worthwhile allowing more than one factor to accumulate. Since a country'.

supply of skilled labor has played an important role in the standard trade model (Baldwin 1971),

this is probably a reasonable candidate. Moreover, if it turns out that external economies are

important empirically, it would be useful to explicitly model the externalities as in the

Groasman—Helpman literature.

      Lastly, it is important to note that the Ricazdian effect detailed in this paper is but one of

many dynamic effects of trade. Indeed, although the state of economics allow. straightforward

evaluation of the Ricardian effect, other dynamic considerations may well turn out to be even

more important empirically.




                                                     19
FOOTNOTES

J.a44 ae4aa4ar r y,senh asd&I,p4hz4 d/&IakZ4z
                      Va.tseass, /isr 4aAii,ss, %z .%toada, 3 TzaIh4,
           d'A4z4.s                  (.iAa4A rd,l2ka'A1e oe a/.24i Ieaszo/a4iu
                                                            '2k29Xi.C ?Y'Z.?4 iir
                                                            11
1.   Findlay (1984) page 190.

2. The seminal papers in this effort are Grossman and Uelpman (1988, 1989a, 1989b), Krugman

(1988), and Murphy, Shleifer and Vishney (1988).

3. Romer's 1983 PhD thesis i considered the seminal paper. Also see Shleifer (1986), Romer

(1986, 1987a, b) and Lucas (1988).

4. See Mussa (1978) for a thorough treatment of adjustment, costs.

5. The slope of K = 0 depends on whether X is increasing or deceasing in K. This curve will have

a bell shaped. More formally, note dX(t)/dK equals (1/2L)((a2K_a2LK)(alLK__alk))_h/2
times (alLa2K+a2LalK.-.a1La2L2K), where            is the determinant of the a.. matrix. Define a
range of K equal to (alK/alL)+v, v 0. The range of K for which this derivative is positive, for

any given set of a..'s, ii defined by those v which satisfy: (1/2) (3   —        > v.        that this

                                                                                        aJ
set is not empty since if the integrated world equilibrium is to be non—epecialised, —> K >—.
                                                                                 a2L      alL
The range of K'. for which the derivative is negative (and K ii in the diversification cone) is given

by those vu for which (1/2)(__) <v and v < (___!).                               The saddle path is

positively sloped whether the steady state is located on the rising or falling portion of K=0.

6. Capital and labor are often taken as the two factor, in the Heckscher—Ohiin model. Stolper

and Samuelson (1941) were careful to refer to their factors as labor and land.




                                                     20
7. See Dixit and Norman (1980) for a discussion of the existence of GNP functions.

8. The Wilson (1979) reformulation of the Dornbusch (1976) overshooting model led to the

widespread adoption of these techniques.




REFERENCES
Baldwin, R.ichazd (1989a) "On the Growth Effects of 1992," forthcoming, Economic
        2liL Fail 1989.

Baldwin, Richard (1989b) "The Stolpcr—Saznuelson Theorem Reconsidered," NBER working
        paper
Baldwin, Robert (1971) "Determinants of the Commodity Structure of US Trade,"
       American Economic Review , 6t, pp 126—146.

Caballero, Ricardo and Lyons, Richard (1989a) "The Role of External Economies in
        in US Manufacturing," NBER working paper 3033.

Caballero, Ricardo and Lyons, Richard (1989b) "Increasing Returns and Imperfect
        Competition in European Industry," Columbia University working paper.

Cecchini Report (1988) The European Challenge 1992, Cower.

Deardorff, Alan and Stern, Robert (1979) "An Economic Analysis of the Effects of the
       Tokyo Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations on the US and Other
       Major Industrialised Countries," MTM Studies No.5.

Deardorff, Alan and Stern, Robert (1981) "A Disaggregated Model of World Production and
       Trade: An Estimate of the Impact of the Tokyo Round," Journal of Policy Modeling,
        3, 2, pp 127—152.

Dixit, Avinash and Norman, Victor (1980) Theory of International Trade, Cambridge
        University Press.

Dornbusch, Rudiger (1976) "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of
        Political Economics, 84, p1161—1176.

Findlay, Ronald (1984) "Growth and Development in Trade Models," in Handbook of
        International Economics, volume 1, R..Jones and P.Kenen (ads.), Elsevier.

Fried, J. (1980) "The Intergenerational Distribution of Gains from Technical Change and
         International Trade," Canadian Journal of Economics, 13 pp 65—81.

Galor, Oded (1989) "Tariff, Income Redistribution and Welfare in a Small



                                                   21
       Overlapping—Generations Economy," Brown University Working Paper.

Ga.lor, Oded and Lin, S. (1989) "Trade Patterns in a Two—Sector Overlapping—Generations
        World," Brown University Working Paper No. 89—18.

Grossman, Gene, and Helpman, Elhanan (1988) "Product Development and International
      Trade," Princeton University Working Paper.

Grossman, Gene, and Helpman, Elhanan (1989a) "Endogenous Product Cycles," Discussion
       Paper in Economics 144, Princeton University.

Grossman, Gene, and Helpman, Elhanan (1989b) "Comparative Advantage and Long Run
       Growth," NBER working paper 2809.

Hall, Robert (1988) "Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption," Journal of Political
       Economics.

Harris, Richard and Cox, David (1982) Trade. Industrial Policy and Canadian
         Manufacturing, Ontario Economic Council, Toronto.

Judd (1985) "Short—Run Analysis of Fiscal Policy in a Simple Perfect Foresight Model,"
        Journal of Political Economy, 93, 2, pp 298—319.

Krugman, Paul (1988) "Endogenous Innovations, International Trade and Growth," Working
      Paper presented at SUNY—Bufalo conference on development.

Lucas, Robert (1988) "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of Monetary
        Economics 22, pp 3—42.

Maddison, Angus (1987) "Growth and Slowdown in Advanced Capitalist Economies," Journal
       of Economic Literature.

Manning, Richard and Markusen, James (1989) "National Product Functions in Comparative
      Steady—state Analysis," University of Western Ontario Working Paper No. 8808C.

Murphy, Kevin, Shleifer, Andre and Vishney, Robert (1988) "Income Distribution, Market Size
       and Industrialization," University of Chicago working paper.

Mussa (1978) "Dynamic Adjustment in the Heckscher—Ohlin—Samuelson Model," Journal of
Political Economy, 86, pp 671—682.

Ricardo, David (1815) "Essay on the Influence of a Low price of Corn Upon the Profits
       of Stocks," in The Works and Correspondence of David Ricardo, 1951, P. Straffa
       (ed), Cambridge University Press.

Homer, Paul (1983) "Dynamic Competitive Equilibria with Externalities, Increasing Returns
       and Unbounded Growth." PhD thesis, University of Chicago.

Romer, Paul (1986) "Increasing Returns and Long Run Growth," Journal of Political Economy.




                                                 22
Romer, Paul (1987a) "Crasy Explanations for the Productivity Slowdown," NBER. Annual.

Rome; Paul (198Th) "Growth Based on Increasing Returns to Scale Due to Specialisation,"
       American Economic Review.

Srinivaaan, T. and Bhagwati, 3. (1980) "Trade and Welfare in Steady State," in
        Chiprnan, 3. and Klndleberger, C. (eda.) Flexible Exchanze Rates and the
        Balance of Payments: Essays in Honor of Baon Sohmen, North—Holland.

Shleifer, Andre (1986) "Implementation Cycles," Journal of Political Economy, 94, pp
        1161—1191.

Smith, M.A.M. (1984) "Capital Theory and Trade Theory," in Handbook of
       International Economics, volume I, R.Jonea and P.Kenen (ed.) Elsevier.

Stiglita, Joseph (1970) "Factor Price Equalisation in a Dynamic Economy," Journal
         of Political Economy, 78, pp 456—488.

Stolper, W. and Samuelson, P. (1941) 'Protection and Real Wages," Review of Economic
        Studies, 9, 58—73.

Wilson, Charles (1979) "Exchange Rate Dynamics and Anticipated Diaturbances," Journal of
       Political Economics, 79, pp 639—647.




                                                 23
                     Table 1: Fitimatei d Aggregate Capita1—Output Eaaticity(+O):


Source          France      Germany      Netherland.                  Bdgium

Denison            .23      .263         .26                 .222

Maddison           .305     .3           .296                .255
(1987)

Kendrick           .382     .349                             .348


Christensen        .403     .386         .446                .385
Cummins and
Jorgenson


Caballero          .366      .477                            .339     .426
and Lyons
(1989)
Minus one          .288      .39                             .195     .276
Std Error
Plus one           .444      .564                            .483     .576
Std Error
Source: First four row, reproduced from Maddison (1987), Table 8; see same for reference..
Fifth row reproduced from Caballero and Lyons (1989) taking 0.3 as capital'. share of income.




                                                 24
                       Table 2: Underestimate i GDP Rile by Ignoring Indirect Effect
                                                 (Percent)

          Prance       Germany            Netherlands                 Belgium

Low       30           36                 35                    24    38

Hi        80           129                124                   93     136

Source: Author's calculation.
The percent underestimate is 100 times (a+/(i—a—.9).




                                   Table 3: Eventual Increase in GDP due to 1992

                      Indirect Effect on GDP due to rise in Steady—State Capital Stock
                               (Percentage Points to be Added to Static Range)

      Prance                Germany                Netherlands                          Belgium

Lo    .8 to 2               .9   to 2.3            .9 to 2.3          .6 to 1.6         ito 2.5
Hi    2 to 5.2              3.2 to 8.4             3.1 to 8.1         2.3 to 6          3.4 to 8.9

                                            Total Effect (Static plus Dynamic)
                                            (Percent rise in GDP due to 1992)

Lo    3.3 to 8.5            3.4 to 8.8             3.4 to 8.8              3.1 to 8.1      3.5 to 9

Hi    4.5 to 11.7           5.7 to 14.9            5.6 to 14.2        5.8 to 12.5       5.9 to 15.4


source: Author's calculation based on Table 2
and Cecchini Report's estimate of static effect.




                                                        25
                            Table 4: Sise of the Ricaidian Welfxe Multiplier

                            Welfare Multiplier due to Ricardian dynamic effect
                            (Numbers to be multiplied by static effect on GNP)

                  Prance             Germany                  UK        Belgium

                                  Caballero and Lyons estimates of a-s-O
                  .29               .64                    .17           .50

                  .37                .48                      .34        .43

                           Caballero and Lyons estimates plus one standard error
multiplier        .53                .83                   .64          .87

                   .44                .56                     .48        .58
(a-i-O)


source: Author's calculation and rows 5 and 6 from Table 1.




                                                 26
     Figure 1




                'I




                     K
 0
I'




     27
                 Figure 2




                c=o


          4J           4—
                                K=O




0
    •1•




    k      0•               k




                28
               .LL U




         e=o

                       1
                       S




4J




     S



L

         K




         29
     Figure 4




                  =0

                       4-;
                             K=O
                       SI



Ii

     S


L
                                   K
     old K




             30
Figure 5




     S

     S




     S




           .7.


    r




    31
