                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DEMOGRAPHICS, FISCAL POLICY, AND U.S. SAVING IN THE 1980s AND BEYOND




                               Alan J. Auerbach

                            Laurence J. Kotlikoff




                            Working Paper No. 3150




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  October 1989




We thank Jinyong Cai, Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Manjula Singh for helpful comments
and excellent research assistance. We are also very grateful to Alice Wade of
the Social Security Administration for providing population projections and the
National Institute of Aging and the National Bureau of Economic Research for
providing research support. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in
Aging, Taxation, and Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3150
                                        October 1989


     DEMOGRAPHICS, FISCAL POLICY, AND U.S. SAVING IN THE l98Os AND BEYOND


                                   ABSTRACT

      This paper focuses on U.S. saving, demographics, and fiscal policy. We
use data from the Consumer Expenditure Surveys of the l980s to consider the
effect of demographic change on past and future U.S. saving rates. Our
findings indicate that demographic change may significantly alter the U.S.
rate of national saving and current account position over the next 50 years.
The gradual aging of the population is predicted to lead to higher saving
rates over the next three decades with declines in the rate of saving
thereafter. Associated with these predicted saving rate changes is a
predicted improvement in the U.S. current account position is the 1990s, with
a very gradual deterioration during the subsequent decades. While
demographics is a potentially very important factor in explaining saving, it
 does not appear to explain the drop in the U.S. saving rate in the l980s.
What happened to U.S. saving in the l980s remains an intriguing puzzle.




     Alan J. Auerbach                   Laurence J. Kotlikoff
     NBER and                           Boston University and
     University of Pennsylvania         NBER
     Department of Economics            1050 Massachusetts Ave
     160 McNeil Building                Cambridge, MA 02138
     3718 Locust Walk
     Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
                                          —1—




     Like virtually all developed economies, the United States is projected to

experience a dramatic demographic transition over the next fifty years. By

2040 31.   percent   of the U.S. population will be 55 and older compared to 21

percent today (see Table 1). Most of this aging will occur among the older

old with the fraction of the population over 65 predicted to almost double.

While the burden on the working population of supporting dependents will be

reduced somewhat due to the lower projected ratio of children to middle aged

adults, the overall dependency ratio (the ratio of those under 18 plus those

65 and older to those 18 to 64) will rise from its value of .616 in the 1980's

to .730 in the 2040's.

      A higher dependency ratio leads to more consumption relative to output

and a lower saving rate. For the U.S. • which has been experiencing a

remarkably low rate of saving in the 1980s, the prospect of even lower saving

rates in the future is daunting indeed. Since saving represents the increase

in capital, the saving decline would spell a decline in the capital—labor

ratio were it not for the fact that the demographic transition also involves

slower growth in the nation's labor supply. On balance, capital—labor ratios

are likely to rise in the developed economies (see, for example, Auerbach,

et.al. 1989). Higher capital—labor ratios will alter factor prices by raising

real wages and lowering the real return to capital. These changes in factor

prices will redound to the benefit of workers in the first half of the next

century, but to the detriment of contemporaneous retirees who will receive

lower returns on their savings. This intergenerational "incidence" of the

demographic transition will mitigate, somewhat, the increased fiscal burden

expected to fall on future workers.
                                         —2—


     The size   of   the burden on future workers will depend, of course, on the

fiscal policy response to the demographic transition. With the very

significant 1983 Social Security Amendments (that raised the Social Security

retirement age and made Social Security benefits taxable under the income tax)

the retirement\disability portion of the Social Security payroll tax appears

to be in long run financial balance. In contrast, the medicare component of

Social Security is slated to require additional funds or benefit cuts around

the turn of the century. These projections reflect the Social Security

Administration's (SSA's) intermediate actuarial assumptions. According to the

SSA's pessimistic projections, the combined retirement\disability and medicare

programs will be in significant financial trouble by 2020. Even the

pessimistic projections assume the accumulation of a substantial Social

Security trust fund over the next two decades which will help pay for the

retirement benefits of the baby boom generation. If the federal government

responds to the near term Social Security receipts by reducing payroll or

other taxes, as is now being done implicitly by including social security

surpluses in meeting the Cramm—Rudman—Hollings deficit targets, the result

will be even larger burdens on the children and grandchildren of the baby

boomers.

     A related concern about fiscal policy has to do with the growing

political power of the elderly. While the elderly, defined here as those 55

and older, currently represent one fifth of the voting age population, they

will represent almost a third of potential voters by 2020. In exercising

their increased political power the elderly may seek additional transfers from

the government, which ultimately means from young and future generations, or,

what amounts to the same thing, the elderly may seek to reduce their tax

obligations to the government. A recent example of this process is the
dispute over the Medicare surcharge introduced in 1988 to pay for the

catastrophic health care for the elderly.

     Since the elderly, as a group, appear to consume a greater fraction of

their wealth annually than the young (Abel, Bernheim, and otlikoff 1989) and.

certainly, than unborn generations, additional redistribution toward the

elderly will mean additional downward pressure on the U.S. saving rate.

     This paper focuses on U.S. saving, demographics, and fiscal policy. It

addresses the following questions: First, what has been the pattern of

postwar U.S. saving rates —   specifically,   have saving rates declined in the

1980s and by how much? Second, is the apparent drop in the saving rate

dependent on how one defines saving? Third, is demographic change responsible

for low U.S. saving in the l980s? If not, what is? Fourth. how are the

projected demographic changes over the next fifty years likely to affect

saving rates during this period? Fifth, since the time path of saving rates

is critical to the time path of current account deficits in an open economy

such as the U.S., how will the demographic transition influence future current

accounts? Sixth, how do fiscal policy and demographics interact in affecting

saving, i.e., how much more detrimental to saving are policies that

redistribute toward the elderly if they occur at a time when the population is

quite aged?

     The next section of this paper describes recent U.S. saving behavior,

pointing out that saving has declined in the l980s according to a variety of

alternative measures of saving and income. Section II uses data from the

Consumer Expenditure Surveys of the l980s to consider how demographics may

affect saving rates. The analysis uses the age—consumption, age—earnings, and

age—capital income profiles observed in these data and asks how saving rates

in the past as well as the future would have looked and would look were these
                                      —4—


profiles time—invariant. This experiment asks, then, how saving rates respond

to changes in the age distribution of the population holding all else

constant. The analysis leads to a prediction of higher saving rates in the

1990s, but steadily declining rates of saving thereafter. The results also

suggest, rather strongly, that demographics cannot explain the low rate of

U.S. saving in the 1990s, nor, indeed, the postwar pattern of U.S. saving.

Section III considers the interaction of future fiscal policies and

demographics with respect to future U.S. saving. We show that changes in the

age distribution of the population are likely to have Only minor effects on

government consumption and U.S. saving given the current pattern of government

consumption expenditures by age. In contrast, intergenerational shifts in the

burden of fiscal policy may shift the age—distribution of private consumption

and have important effects on future saving rates, with these effects

accentuated by the aging of the population.

     Section IV turns to the question of future current account deficits. The

analysis here is partial equilibrium in nature in the sense that the world

interest rate is taken as given. Still, the results seem interesting. Our

calculations lead to the prediction of positive, but declining current

accounts (surpluses) over the next fifty years. Section V returns to the

question of saving in the 1980s, discussing other explanations for its

decline. Section VI summarizes and concludes the paper by pointing Out that

our approach toward understanding the effects of demographic change on saving

is only one of many that could and should be considered.



I. Recent Saving Behavior in the United States

     £ meaningful discussion of the level and determinants of the U.S.

saving rate requires care in defining saving. In general terms, saving equals
                                          —5—


income less consumption, but one must resolve various ambiguities concerning

the measurement of income and consumption. There are a number of different

measures of aggregate saving, some of which bear little relationship to an

economist's notion of saving. In this section of the paper, we review and

evaluate the alternative measures commonly used and discuss their performance

during the past decade. This will provide a clearer picture of the recent

decline in the U.S. saving rate. Our analysis indicates that while the rate

of saving may depend heavily on one's definition, measurement issues alone do

not alter the conclusion that the rate of U.S. saving declined significantly

during the 1980s.

      Before discussing these findings, it will be useful to review some

national income definitions and accounting identities. Because we are

interested in net additions to national wealth, we begin with the aggregate

income measure that excludes depreciation from Gross National Product (GNP),

Net National Product (NNP). Other income measures include disposable National

Income (DNI), equal to NNP    plus   government transfers (R) less taxes paid (T):


(1)        DNI—NNP—T+R
and disposable personal income (DPI), equal to disposable national income less

undistributed corporate profits, usually referred to as business saving:


(2)        DPI — DNI — BS


Each of these measures of income, NNP, DNI, and DPI, is commonly used as a

base for measuring saving. (Note that, according to government accounting

procedure, transfers R include interest payments on the national debt to U.S.

households and businesses.)

      In addition to different measures of income, alternative saving

measures are based on different notions of consumption. The most basic
                                        —6—


measure is household consumer expenditures from the national income accounts,

C. A broader measure would include government expenditures, C. To correct

for the fact that some household expenditures on consumer durables really

represent investment, and that, likewise, some government spending should

really be categorized as investment (there is no official government capital

account) one can adjust these measures by subtracting the investment component

of current expenditures, CI, and adding back in the imputed rent on such

expenditures, GIR.


(3)        CC — C — CI + CIR

(4)        GC—G—GI+CIR
      Making these corrections also alters the corresponding measure of

aggregate income. Aggregate investment spending rises by CI +     CI,
exceeding the decline in measured consumption by CI?. + CI?..   To maintain the

consistency of the national income identity that net national product equals

consumption plus net investment plus government spending plus net exports, one

must therefore add the imputed rent on consumer and government capital to net

national product:


(5)        NNPC — NNP + CIR + CIR


      With these definitions of income and consumption, we now discuss recent

trends in U.S. saving behavior. Table 2 provides annual values of several

different measures of saving over the past decade. The first column presents

the personal saving rate, perhaps the most coonly cited measure of saving.

This is the fraction of their disposable income that households save,


(6)        HSR — (DPI—C)/DPI — MS/DPI


      It averaged 6.8 percent during the 1950s, 6.7 percent during the 1960s,

and 8.0 percent in the l970s.       Annual values for the period 1980—82 fall
                                       —7—


among these averages. Since then the personal saving rate has fallen

considerably, averaging less than 4 percent during the period 1985—88. While

the personal saving rate has risen slightly in 1988, it is still well below

the averages of previous decades.

      Though popular, the personal saving rate has several shortcomings that

raise questions about its usefulness. First, a significant fraction of saving

has traditionally been done by business, so looking only at personal saving

may provide a misleading picture of the overall saving rate. Second,

empirical research (David and Scadding, 1974 and, more recently, Auerbach and

Hassett, 1989) has suggested that personal and business saving are closely

related, that personal saving decisions respond to those of business and

cannot be understood in isolation. Third, the accounting conventions used to

define personal income and saving are of necessity arbitrary. For example,

though they are essentially equivalent transactions, the payment of dividends

reduces business saving and increases personal disposable income and saving,

while a redemption of corporate shares does neither. A rise in nominal

interest payments by corporations to households caused by an increase in the

inflation rate also increases measured household income and saving at the

expense of corporate saving, without anything real having happened. Since the

1980s has been a period during which the inflation rate and the mix of

dividends and share repurchases among corporate distributions has changed

significantly, these accounting conventions may distort one's inferences about

recent saving.

      Moving to the private saving measure, which includes household and

business saving, eliminates these problems. Such a measure is given in the

second column of Table 2. This private saving rate,


(7)        PS?. —  (DPI+BS—C)/(DPI+BS) — (DNI—C)/DNI — PS/DNI — (HS+BS)/DNI
                 — (NNP—T÷R—C)/(NNP—T+P.)
                                        —8—



is essentially equal to the fraction of private sector disposable income not

consumed by households. It is higher than the personal saving rate but shows

the same drop in the 1980s. The private saving rate is more indicative of the

rate of household wealth accumulation than the personal saving rate because

households own businesses. If businesses accumulate assets, these assets

belong to households, and should therefore be included in our measure of

saving. A similar argument may be made with respect to government saving.

Accumulations of assets by the government increase national wealth, just as

private accumulations do. While the rights to such accumulations may be less

easily assigned to any one group of households, they certainly represent

additions to the wealth of the population (current and future) as a whole,

since the population controls (owns) the government. Like the personal—

private saving distinction, the distinction between government and private

saving is, according to much of economic theory, entirely arbitrary. For

example, a decision by the government to call social security contributions

"loans to the government", rather than "taxes", and social security benefits,

"repayment of these loans," rather than "government transfer payments" would

dramatically alter the reported values of private and government saving, but

should not alter the sum of government plus private saving. As before, this

point argues for a broader measure of saving including public as well as

private accumulations. Such a measure, defined by

(8)       NSR — (DNI+T—R.—C--G)/(DNI+T—R)   —   (NNP—C—G)/NNP


is given in the third column of Table 2. This national saving rate equals the

fraction of net national product not devoted either to consumption or

government spending.
                                                 —9—


       Like the personal and private saving rates, the national saving rate

declined during the 1980s. However, the drop was more precipitous, with the

national saving rate averaging just 3.2 percent during the period 1985—8.

       A final measure of national saving incorporates the corrections for

household and government investment discussed above:

            NSRC — (NNPC—CC—CC)/NNPC         —
(9)                                              NSC/NNPC


This   measure,   given in the fourth column of Table 2, in general shows much

higher levels of national saving than the uncorrected measure in column 3.

This indicates that a considerable amount of national saving occurs through

the usually ignored channels of household and government purchases of capital

goods. However, the correction further accentuates the decline in national

saving in the l980s. While the average uncorrected national saving rate in

the 1980s was 3.5 percentage points lower than in the l970s, the average

corrected measure fell by 4.6 percentage points.

        In sunary, the measures of the U.S. saving rate presented in this

section vary considerably in their estimates of the fraction of income saved

in the l980s. However, all measures of the saving rate indicate a very clear

decline during the l980s.



II.    Demographics   and   Saving   Rates

        Several   researchers have remarked about the relative stability of the

shape of U.S. cross section age—consumption and age—earnings profiles in the

postwar period (Kotlikoff and summers, 1981 and Carroll and Summers, 1989).

The stability of these profiles suggests asking what saving rates would be in

the future if these profiles retain their shapes and current levels; i.e.,

suppose consumption, earnings, and capital income at each age as well as the
                                      —10--



 age—pattern of government consumption expenditure Stayed the same, how would

saving rates evolve over time as the age distribution of the population

changes? The methodology underlying this exercise is described in detail in

the Appendix. The population data used in this analysis come from the Social

Security Administration and represent historical figures and projections based

on intermediate assumptions. The relative age—sex consumption, earnings, and

capital income profiles were derived based on data from the 1980 through 1985

Consumer Expenditure Surveys (CES) of the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.2

The method used to determine the age—pattern of government consumption

expenditure is described in Auerbach, et. al. (1989).

     Table 3 reports the average decade saving rates that are predicted based

on equation (1) for five different base years: 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, and

1987. There are several striking features of this table. First, for each of

the base years the saving rate is predicted to rise over the course of the

next three decades and then decline somewhat over the following three decades.

Taking 1987 as the base year, the predicted saving rate in the 1980s is 1.4

percent; it is 5.3 percent in the 1990s, rises to 6.5 percent in the period

2010—19, and then declines to 2.6 percent in the 2040's. The predicted

pattern of saving rates reflects the aging of the population coupled with the

fact that the difference between average (over males and females) earnings and

average consumption at a given age is, in the case of the 1987 base year,

negative for ages 20 and below, positive between ages 20 and 58, and negative

after age 58. Figure 1 plots the difference between average age—earnings and

age—consumption profiles for the base year 1980. The corresponding figure for

other base years is quite similar. Figure 1 can be compared with Figure 2

which plots the age distribution of the population for a select set of years.
                                                                       —IOa—
                      I
         N)
         o
                  —
                  0                                                                                     0              0   0
                                                                                                                           0
         oo       0                                                                                     0
                                                                                                        0              0
                                                                                                                       0   0
                  0                                        0                                            0              0   0
         o        0
                                          +
                                          +
                                                                                        /
                                          +
                                          +
                                          4
                                          *
                                      +
                                          .4.
                                                                                        \
                              +++
                                                               .                            \
                                          ++
                                            +
                                                                               -..     .
                                                      ++
                                                           ++
                                                                       +
                                                                           ++
                                                                                   +
                                                                                        +
    w                                                                                   +
    o
                                                                                                +
                                                                                                 +
                                                                                                  +
                                                                                                  +
                                                                                                   +
                                                                                                   +
    a                                                                                               +
    o
                                                                                                  +
                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                 +
o
1                                                                                               +
                                                                                                 +
                                                                                                +
                                                                                            +
                                                                                          +
    o                                                                                   .7
                                                                                       +
                                                                                    +
                                                                                   +
                                                                               +
                                                                           +
                                                                       +                                         1-'
    0)

                                              +
                                                  +
                                                           +
                                                               +
                                                                                                            //1
                                          +
                                      4

    —3
                          +
                          +
                              +
                                  +
                                                                                            /
                  +
                      *
                  +                                                     I.
              +                                                     •                                       Jo
                                                                   •
                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                            Jo

    a
    o
              4'I
              +0
              +0
                                                                   :
                                                                   '0
                                                                   I

                                                                   '00
                                                                        tO
                                                                        31                                  IC

                                                                                                             0
                                                                           0                                IC
              +                                                    I
              +
              +
              +
              +
    0'        *
                                              Figure   2
SHARE OF TOTAL POPULATION AT PARTICULAR AGE
  0.024
  0.023
  0.022
  0.021
  0.020
  0.019
  0.016
  0.017
  0.016
  0.015
  0.014
  0.013
0.L 0.012             ——
 7 0.011
    0.010
    0.009
    0.008
    0.007
    0.006
    0.005
    0.004
    0.003
    0.002
    0.001
    0.000                                                         I    I    I    I
            0    10       20       30          40            50   60   70   80   90
                                                       ACE
                                     —11—


    A second important feature of the table is that the predicted pattern of

saving rates in this decade and the previous three decades do not match up

very veil with the observed pattern of saving rates. Prom demographics alone

one would have predicted high saving rates in the l950s and 1980s and low

saving rates in the l960s and l9lOs. Clearly, much more than demographics

appears to be at play in the data. Further research is needed to determine

the precise explanation for the failure of Table 2's predicted time pattern of

saving rates to match the actual post var pattern.3 Still, the table suggests

that demographic change can, itself, have very powerful effects on national

saving rates.



III. Future Saving Rates and the Interaction of Fiscal Policy and   Demographics
     The saving rate simulations of Table 3 implicitly hold constant fiscal

policy. This section considers how possible changes in government consumption

and intergenerational policy affect the predicted saving rates. We consider

first the question of government consumption spending, holding fixed the age—

consumption, age—earnings, and age—capital income profiles. With these

household profiles held fixed, Table 4 asks how the predicted national saving

rates would be affected by a change in our assumption about the response of

government spending to demographic shifts.

     The calculations reported in Table 3 assumed a constant age—specific

pattern of government consumption spending. Table 4 presents simulations

based on the alternative assumption that government consumption per capita

remains fixed through time at the various base year values. That is, we hold

constant government spending per capita rather than government spending per

member of particular age groups. Under our previous assumption, increases in

per capita spending would automatically have been predicted by a shift (from
                                     —12—


the base year) in the share of the population accounted for by those groups,

such as the elderly, who individually receive substantial levels of government

services.

     A comparison of Tables 3 and 4 shows that assuming fixed per capita

government consumption expenditures leads to only slightly lover predicted

saving rates over the next fifty years. At least one reason for this is that

the increases in per capita government spending anticipated in the simulations

reported in Table 3 are not that significant. Although the elderly receive a

disproportionate share of government spending, so do the young (primarily on

education); as the population ages, the decline in spending on the young

partially offsets the increase in spending on the old in the simulations

reported in Table 3.

     Table 5 considers a related, but more extreme policy change. Suppose

that all funds spent on age—specific government items in the base year had

been directed toward the elderly, and that the level of this spending per

elderly person were kept fixed even as the fraction of elderly in the

population increased over time. This experiment reflects the potential shift

in government spending that would result were the elderly able to redirect all

age—specific spending toward themselves and maintain such spending levels over

time; it surely represents the largest plausible estimate of the possible

impact of population aging on government spending.

     Since the predicted saving rates in Table 5 incorporate this very strong

assumption, comparing Table 5 with Table 3 indicates the maximum saving affect

likely to arise if the elderly, because of increased political influence, were

able to redirect all of age—related government consumption expenditure (which

excludes defense, etc.) to spending on themselves. Indeed, such an outcome

would have a significant impact on national saving. As the population ages, a
                                     —13—


large increase in government spending per capita would occur under the

assumptions used to produce Table 5. This leads to a significant fall in

predicted saving rates after the turn of the century. For example, using 1980

as the base year, we find that the predicted national saving rate for the

decade beginning in 2020 falls from 11.9 percent in Table 3 to 5.5 percent in

Table 5.

     In addition to changes in government consumption, a second important

dimension of fiscal policy that can affect saving is the government's

intergenerational policy, by which we mean the extent to which the government

places the burden of paying for its consumption on different age groups. If

the growing political power of the elderly leads to reduced taxes on the

elderly and more transfers to them, this should have the effect of rotating

the age—consumption profile toward more consumption of the elderly and less

consumption of the young. Table 6 considers the effects of such a rotation on

the predicted saving rates. Specifically, we adjust the benchmark profile of

consumption by age (keeping base year consumption constant) by increasing the

relative consumption of those over 65 relative by 5 percent and reducing the

relative consumption of those under age 45 by 5 percent. Roughly speaking,

one may view this as simulating the effect of cutting taxes on the elderly by

5 percent of income and raising taxes on the young by 5 percent of income.

     As a comparison of Tables 3 and 6 indicates, altering the age consumption

profile in this manner leads to somewhat higher predicted saving rates from

now through 2030 and lower saving rates thereafter. For example, in Table 3

the 1987 base case predicted saving rates for the 2010's and 2040's are .065

and .026 respectively; the corresponding Table 6 values are .059 and .016.
                                        —14—


IV.   The Demographic Transition and   Future   Current Accounts

      Given the openness of the U.S. economy, the significant saving rate

changes predicted by the simulations presented in Tables 3—6 imply potentially

large international capital flows and movements in the U.S. current account.

The current account is a closely—watched measure in the area of international

trade and competitiveness.

      The current account surplus equals the difference between the

accumulation of assets by Americans (including the government) and investment

in the United States by Americans and foreigners. This difference, referred

to as net foreign investment, indicates, if it is positive, that Americans

are, on balance, saving enough to finance not only all investment in the

United States, but also some investment abroad. If, on the other hand, net

foreign investment is negative, saving by Americans is insufficient to finance

all current investment in the United States and some current U.S. investment

must be financed by foreigners. The implication of running current account

deficits (having negative net foreign investment) is, therefore, that more of

the capital at work in America will be owned by foreigners. Concern about

foreigners buying up American capital has heightened in the l980s as the

nation ran quite substantial current account deficits when measured relative

to net national product.

       The demographic transition is likely to affect significantly future U.S.

current account deficits both by altering U.S. saving and, therefore, the

accumulation of assets by Americans and by altering the amount of investment

in the United States. In the presence of significant international capital

mobility, U. S. investment is determined, at the margin,      not by the amount of
U. S. saving, but rather by the international capital market. Given the rate
of return that can be earned by investing abroad, investment will take place
                                        —15—


domestically up to the point that the return to capital in the United States

equals the internationally determined rate of return. The domestic rate of

return to investment will depend on the ratio of capital to labor; hence, it

is this capital—labor ratio that will adjust until the return to investment at

home equals the return to investment elsewhere in the world. Given the-supply

of U. S. labor, which is determined in large part by demographics, investment

(changes in capital) will occur up to the point that the U.S. capital—labor

ratio is such as to yield the internationally determined rate of return. Thus

demographics, by affecting the supply of labor, influence the amount of U. S.

investment as well as U.S. saving. Since the current account deficit is the

difference between U.S. investment and U.S. saving, demographics influences

the current account as well.

     Section II demonstrated that the demographic transition is likely, over

time, to lower the rate of U. S. saving. Since the growth rate of U. S. labor

supply will also decline, demographics will also lover the rate of U. S.

investment (measured relative to NNP). The question is whether demographics

will reduce saving by more than it reduces investment.

     Table 7 presents the predicted values of the current account deficits for

the next six decades divided by predicted net national product. The first

three columns of the table provide estimates based on the assumption of

constant world interest rates of 10, 7.5 and 5 percent, respectively. Each of

these columns shows large predicted current account surpluses throughout the

period, reversing the experience of current account deficits in the 1980s.

The trend is toward improvement in the current account surpluses over the next

30 years and a gradual deterioration thereafter.

     Such simulations may   overstate   the likely current account surpluses,

because they ignore the demographic shifts that will be occurring
                                     —16—


simultaneously in other countries. Many of the mature Western economies will

also experience population aging and associated increases in saving rates.

Together, these increases in saving worldwide can be expected to depress world

interest rates and reduce the outflow of funds from the United States. To

consider this issue, we repeat the current account calculations just

presented, this time assuming that the world interest rate falls gradually by

3 percentage points between 1990 and 2050 from the value initially assumed for

the simulation. However, even such a significant drop in world interest rates

only slightly diminishes the predicted surpluses over the period.



V. Alternative Explanations for the Recent Decline in U.S. Saving

     While the demographic factors discussed in the previous sections may help

predict the behavior of saving in the future, and may have contributed to the

determination of saving in the past, they clearly cannot explain the behavior

of saving in the l980s. If our characterizations of the impact of

demographics is correct, then there must have been other, major determinants

of the rate of saving that pushed in the opposite direction during the 1980s,

to offset the rise (relative to the 60's and 70's) in saving one would have

predicted on the basis of demographic factors alone. This section of the

paper briefly considers several alternative explanations that have been

proposed for the decline in saving during the 1980s.



Government Consumtt ion

     One potential explanation for low U.S. saving in the 1980s that can be

dismissed is that increased government consumption is to blame. Table 8

presents the ratio of government consumption to net national product based on

both the corrected and uncorrected data. The corrected data indicate that the
                                           —17—


ratio of total government (federal, state, and local) consumption to NNP was

Only one half a percentage point higher (22.5 percent versus 22.0 percent)

during the first half of the 1980s than it was during the period 1950 through

1979.

        To measure the contribution of this small increase in the share of

government spending Out of NNP      to   the observed decline in the national saving

rate, it is useful to consider the impact on national saving had the ratio of

private consumption, C, to the fraction of output            absorbed by the

government, NNP—C, remained the same. That is, we may define a saving rate

out of private sector resources, which we shall, for convenience, call the

nongovernment    saving   rate (NGSR).




(10)         NGSR — (NNP—C—C)/(NNP—G),




and    consider the impact of the increase in G/NNP holding this saving rate

constant. This saving rate differs from the private saving rate defined above

if the government's budget deficit, equal to government spending plus

transfers less taxes, C + R — T, is not zero (see equation 7).

        The nongovernment saving rate seems to be the appropriate measure of

private saving to consider in thinking about changes in government consumption

assuming 1) that government consumption is not a close substitute for private

consumption and 2) that changes in government consumption are not associated

with changes in the intergenerational distribution of the burden of paying for

government consumption.
                                         —18—


       Under these assumptions one would not expect a change in the fraction of

output absorbed by government spending to affect the rate of private

consumption Out of national output left over after government consumption (NNP

—C). If, instead, government consumption were a close substitute for private

consumption, increases in government consumption would likely be offset by

decreases in private consumption, leaving a smaller total impact on national

consumption and saving. By making the first assumption, that the

nongovernment saving rate is fixed, we are, therefore, biasing our analysis

toward a larger impact of government consumption expenditure on national

saving.

       Changes in the intergenerational distribution of the burden of paying for

government consumption that accompany changes in government consumption

represent another reason that the nongovernment saving rate might change with

changes in government consumption. We have discussed above the impact that

such intergenerational changes might have on future saving, and will consider

them again below. However, making the second assumption, and thereby ignoring

the effects of such changes in the intergenerational distribution of the

fiscal burden, seems most appropriate for discerning the effect of increased

government consumption, per Se, on total national saving.

       It is easy to see that the small rise in the ratio of government saving

to NNP could not, in itself, have had a very large impact on the national

saving rate. Using the definitions of the national saving rate (NSR) given in

expression (8) and the nongovernment saving rate (NCSR) given in expression

(10), we   have   the relation




(11)        NSR — NGSR * (1 — (G/NNP)]
                                     —19--




Expression (11) shows that a one percentage point increase in the ratio of C

to NNP, holding the nongovernment saving rate constant, would reduce the

national saving rate by only NGSR, or roughly one—tenth of a percentage point.

Had the nongovernment saving rate remained constant in the l980s at its

average level for the period 1950—79, the rise in government consumption to

NNP in the l980s would have reduced the uncorrected national saving rate for

the l980s from .089 (the average rate observed during the period 1950 through

1979) to .088. Hence, the nongovernment saving rate must also have declined

substantially during the l980s for national saving to have declined as it did.

Table 8 presents corrected and uncorrected measures of the nongovernment

saving rate, also repeating for convenience the national saving rates given in

Table 2. Regardless of whether one corrects the basic data for consumer

durables and government investment, the nongovernment saving rate has fallen

dramatically in the l980s. According to the corrected data, it averaged 16.2

percent over the period 1950 through 1979, but only 9.3 percent from 1980

through 1985.



Deficits and Intereenerational Fiscal Policy

     While the government did not consume much more of NNP in the l980s than

in the previous three decades, many contend that the government, by running

large deficits, shifted the burden of paying for government consumption from

current to future generations. Such generational policy, the argument goes,

should induce a spending spree by current generations in response to their

reduced tax bill. As an explanation for the observed decline in saving,

however, this view encounters several problems.
                                     —20-—



     The first problem concerns the measurement of the deficit itself. While

there is no doubt that the official government deficit rose more rapidly in

this decade than in any recent peacetime period, there is reason to doubt that

the government's generational policy was, on balance, as redistributive to

current generations as is commonly believed. A closer look at

intergenerational policy shows that a good deal of what the federal government

gave current generations with its right hand during the 1980s, it took away

with its left. For example, the 1983 Social Security amendments reduced the

future benefits of current young and middle age generations by an amount, in

present value, roughly equal to their gain from the income tax Cuts. If

current young and middle age generations understand this change and expect it

to be sustained in the future, they should view this loss in future income as

requiring them to consume less now and save more for their old age.

     Even if one doubts that most individuals make the kind of rational,

present value calculations necessary to "see through" reported budget deficits

to the underlying effects of current and expected future fiscal policies,

there are other reasons to doubt that the deficit is to blame for our low rate

of national saving.

     The strongest case for deficits leading to reduced national saving can be

made from a Keynesian perspective. The Keynesian argument goes like this.

Households base their consumption decisions on current disposable income.

Since the household saving rate is very close to zero, increases in disposable

income associated with increases in government transfers or decreases in taxes

will increase consumption nearly dollar for dollar, thereby reducing national

saving considerably.

     One problem with the Keynesian approach is that it does not provide a

strong justification for the assumption that consumption is based primarily on
                                             —21—


current disposable income. One possible argument for such an assumption is

that American households are liquidity constrained, which in everyday language

means    they have f cv   liquid   assets and consume everything they can get their

hands on. Hence, if the government takes less from them in the form of taxes

they viii consume today every dollar that would otherwise have gone to taxes.

However, essentially every study of liquidity constraints has demonstrated

that at moat 20 percent of American households are liquidity constrained; such

liquidity—constrained households probably account for, at most, 10 percent of

total U.S. consumption.

        A second reason to doubt the importance of liquidity constraints is that

the growth of consumption expenditures, at least in the last five years, has

not been limited to nondurables and services, as one would expect if liquidity

constrained households were the cause of the increased consumption spending.

(They would not choose to provide for future consumption by purchasing

durables). The average over the last five years of the annual share of total

expenditures accounted for by durables is slightly higher than it was in the

period 1950 through 1979.

        A third reason why the liquidity constraint argument doesn't square with

the facts has to do with the composition of the reported deficit. Interest

payments comprised much of the Federal deficits in the 1980s. For example, in

1985 $130 billion of the $196 billion Federal deficit represented interest

payments. Since liquidity—constrained households obviously aren't bond

holders, the key variable to consider for such households is how the

difference between taxes and transfers (excluding interest payments) changed

in the 1980s compared to the earlier period. And one should consider not

simply how Federal taxes less transfers have changed, but how this difference

has changed for all governments combined. For all (federal, state, and local)
                                          —22—


governments the ratio of taxes plus transfers to NNP averaged .220 between

1980 and 1987. It averaged .226 for the 1970's, .239 for the 1960s, and .224

for the 1950s. Hence, the share of taxes less transfers to NNP was only

slightly lover in this decade than in the previous three decades. In

considering these figures it is also worth noting that the very slight decline

in the 1980s in the ratio of net taxes to NNP primarily reflects a decline in

corporate taxation (which should not affect liquidity—constrained households)

In the l980s corporate taxes represented only 8.1 percent of total government

taxes. In comparison, they represented 15.2 percent of total taxes in the

1960s.

       Finally, even if one ignores the problems with the liquidity constraint

argument (that would suggest omitting the interest component of the deficit)

and adopts the Keynesian assumption of a high marginal propensity to consume

additions to disposable income caused by budget deficits, this still fails to

explain the extent of the observed decline in the national saving rate. To

see that this is so, it is useful to note that the national saving rate (NSR)

as defined in (8) is related to the deficit, D (—       C   + R — T) and the private

saving rate (PSR) defined in expression (7) by the following identity:




(12)        NSP. — PSR   * [1. — (G/NNP)] — (1 — PSK) * (D/NNP)




Given the near constancy of the ratio of government consumption to NNP over

the past several decades, one can conclude that, holding the private saving

rate fixed, a one percentage point increase in the deficit—net national

product ratio would decrease the national saving rate by l—FSB., or about nine—
                                     —23—


tenths of a percentage point. Given the increase of 2.7 percentage points in

the deficit ratio during the 1980s over its average for the period 1950—79,

had the private saving rate remained constant at its 1950—79 average of 10.9

percent. the national saving rate should have declined by about 2.4 percentage

points during the 1980s. In fact, the national saving rate fell by much more,

about 4.5 percentage points, from the period 1950—79 to the l980s.

     This greater decline in saving is evident from the sharp declines in the

personal and private saving rates during the 1980s, already shown in Table 2.

Even if deficits relative to NNP had not increased in recent years, this

pattern of private saving rates would have led to substantial declines in

national saving.

     To summarize, even under the most extreme Keynesian view of deficits, one

that has weak theoretical justification, one can attribute only part of the

recent decline in national saving to government budget deficits. Under more

realistic views of the Keynesian model or other, more plausible, theories of

consumption, notably the Life—Cycle model, one would expect deficits to have

much smaller effects on saving, since households would be predicted to consume

only a small fraction of the increase in current disposable income provided by

the tax Cuts (Auerbach and Kotlikoff, 1987, Poterba and Summers, 1988).



Savins Disincentives

     It is hard to argue that saving disincentives are responsible for the

decline in saving in this decade since in the first half of this decade the

Federal government reduced many saving disincentives. Foremost among these

was the steady reduction in marginal tax rates on household capital income.

from a top rate of 70 percent in 1980 to33 percent in 1988.
                                      —24--



      Some of the policies used to promote savings, such as the IRA5, were,

unfortunately, poorly-designed to produce new saving and quite possibly

reduced rather than increased saving. Others, such as the move toward a

consumption oriented tax base associated with the adoption of the Accelerated

Cost Recovery System were not in place for long enough to have had a

significant effect on saving; simulation studies (e.g., Summers, 1981 and

Auerbach and otlikoff, 1987) indicate that many government policies aimed at

stimulating savings can have significant effects that are observed only after

decades, rather than a few years.



Increases in the Stock Market

  -
      Most theories of consumption predict that households will increase their

spending in response to an increase in wealth. Since the l980s witnessed a

significant increase in stock market wealth, this may have led to additional

consumption. Because the increases in wealth are themselves excluded from

national income account measures of income, this, in turn, would overstate the

ratio of consumption to true income, and hence understate the true saving

ratio.

      Bowever, the increases in consumption that may have occurred in response

to the rising stock market can explain only a small part of the declining rate

of national saving. By far the largest increase in real stock market wealth

during the 1980s occurred in 1985, when household equity increased in value by

$449 billion in excess of the inflation rate. For the period 1981—6 as a

whole, the cumulative increase in stock market wealth was roughly double this,

about $900 billion. Assuming that households consume 3 percent of their

wealth each year, a reasonable estimate based on past economic research, this

would have accounted for an increase of consumption equal to $27 billion, or
                                     —25—


.6 percent of NNP, in 1986, with smaller increases in earlier years and

(because of the crash in 1987) later years as well.

     However, this estimate for the effect of wealth changes on U.S. saving- is

too high for the following reason. The stock market represents less than 15

percent of total U.S. wealth; for other assets there have, on net, been

offsetting capital losses over the 1980s. If one adds together capital gains

and losses for all U.S. assets net of liabilities over the period 1980 through

1988 the total capital gain is only $260 billion measured in 1988 dollars.

This represents only 1.7 percent of total 1988 U.S. net wealth. In the

absence of this cumulative capital gain the 1988 rate of private saving would

have been 6.5 percent rather than 6.3 percent, a very modest difference

indeed.



A Decline in Precautionary and Becuest Savin2?

     Another potential explanation for the decline in private saving may be

the expansion of insurance which reduces the need for precautionary savings.

The government today provides disability insurance, unemployment insurance,

survivor insurance, earnings insurance (through the progressive tax

structure), life span insurance (through its social security annuities), old

age health insurance, nursing home insurance (through Medicaid) and poverty

Insurance (through its welfare programs). Economic research suggests that

each of these forms of government insurance, while of great economic value,

can have the undesired side effect of greatly reducing national savings.

Untangling the savings effects of the provision of each of these forms of

insurance is a formidable task, and one that is not likely to yield conclusive

answers.
                                     —26—


    A related explanation for the decline in saving is a reduction in saving

for bequests, which may tie in with the decline in the birth rate. At least

half and possibly as much as two thirds of U.S. wealth can be traced not to

life cycle saving for retirement, but rather to private bequests and other

intergenerational transfers. It is hard to assess whether there has been a

decline in the bequest motive for saving, but such a decline would not be

surprising given the general deterioration of the family in the U.S. as

evidenced by the dramatic post war rise in the fraction of marriages ending in

divorce and the dramatic post war decline in the fraction of the elderly, even

the infirm elderly, living with their children.

     Much of the saving associated with bequests that occurred prior to 1970

may have reflected the absence of significant annuity insurance. In 1960 old

age annuities were only a small component of retirement finances. Today,

social security and private pension annuities are, more often than not, the

major component of retirement finances. Annuitizing one's resources

eliminates the possibility of leaving such resources to the next generation.

In other words, many of the bequests that occurred in the past may have been

unintended, and with annuity instruments now widely available, there is less

scope for unintentional bequests. The counterpart of fewer unintentional

bequests and the availability of annuity insurance is that one can consume

more since annuities have eliminated the concern about spending one's

resources too quickly; i.e., the availability of annuities may have reduced

significantly precautionary savings in response to life span uncertainty.



Other Factors

     There are several other factors that can be dismissed as possible

explanations of the decline in U.S. saving in the l980s. The business cycle
                                      —27—


is one such factor. While, as one would expect, each of the different saving

rate measures was low during the recessionary period 1981—1983, the rate of

saving did not recover during the subsequent and ongoing boom. For example,

the national (uncorrected), private, and personal saving rates in 1987 were

each lower than they were in 1982.

      A second possible explanation is a reduction in income inequality in the

1980s. According to the Keynesian view a reduction in income inequality would

shift more income to the liquidity constrained poorer segment of society and

induce greater national consumption. The problem with this line of argument

is that income inequality increased rather than declined during the 1980s.

According to the Congressional Budget Office (1987) the share of total U.S.

disposable income received by the five percent of families with highest

disposable incomes was 18.9 percent in 1977, 20.1 percent in 1980, 23.2

percent in 1984, and 23.5 percent in 1988. The share of disposable income

received-by the poorest 30 percent of U.S. families was 8.6 percent in 1977,

8.5 percent in 1980, 7.6 percent in 1984, and 7.6 percent in 1988.

      A third factor is the increase in female labor force participation that

occurred during the 1980s. This factor should, however, have increased

saving, since one would expect part of the increased earnings of females to be

saved. The saving rate should also have increased since, at least in the life

cycle model, the saving rate depends of the fraction of workers, who save, to

retirees, who dissave. An offsetting possibility is that increased female

labor force participation reduced the precautionary saving needed by single

earner couples in the event the single earner becomes unemployed.



VI.   Summing Up
                                     —28—


     This paper suggests that demographic change may significantly alter our

rare of national saving and our current account position over the next 50

years. The gradual aging of the population is predicted to lead to higher

ssving rates over the next three decades with declines in the rate of saving

thereafter. Associated with these predicted saving rate changes is a

predicted improvement in the U.S. current account position is the 1990s, with

a very gradual deterioration during the subsequent decades.

     While demographics is a potentially very important factor in explaining

saving, it does not appear to explain the drop in the U.S. saving rate in the

1980s. Indeed, based on demographics alone one would have predicted saving

rates to be high and roughly equal in the 1950s and 1980s and considerably

lower in the 1960s and 1970s. What happened to U.S. saving in the 1980s

remains an intriguing puzzle.
                                        —29—


                                       Table I

             Population Age   Distributions      for the U.S. by Decade


Aae Grorn    1.Qs jQ's 7Q's 19j.'s                      jQ's    ZQQQ's
  0 —   17   .329    .356      .318        .268          .256   .239
 18 — 25     .109    .114      .143        .140          .111   .110
 25 — 34     .133    .109      .125        .156          .146   .120
 35 — 54     .256    .240      .220        .228          .277   .299
 55 — 64     .090    .088      .092        .092          .083   .103
 65 PLUS     .084    .093      .102        .116          .126   .1.29




ge Group     ZQQ's   2020's     2030's           ZQQ's
  0   — 17   .222     .216      .210             .207
 18   — 24   .106     .097      .097             .096
 25   — 34   .123     .117      .111             .113
 35   — 54   .269     .253      .255             .249
 55   — 64   .132     .128      .113             .120
 65   PLUS   .148     .188      .214             .215
                                        —30—



                                      Table 2

                     Post War Saving Rates in the United States


         Years      Personal         Private           National    National,
                     (HSR)            (PSR)             (NSR)     Corrected
  1950—1959           6.8             10.4               9.2         13.3

  1960—1969              6.7          11.2               8.9         13.0

  1970—1979              8.0          11.1               8.5         11.8

         1980            7.1           8.9               6.8          8.4
         1981            7.5           9.3               7.4          8.9
             1982        6.8           7.6               3.2          4.7
         1983            5.4           7,8               3.3          5.5
         1984            6.1           9.3               5.7          8.6
             1985        4.4           7.8               3.6          7.1
             1986        4.0           7.2               2.8           na
             1987        3.2           5.6               2.7           na
             1988        4.2           6.3               3.8           na

na —   not   available

Sources: 1950—87: Economic Report of the President, 1989;
         1988: Survey of Current Business, June 1989

Imputed rent on an asset is calculated as annual depreciation plus 3 percent
tines the stock of the asset. Annual depreciation of consumer durables and
government nonmilitary tangible assets as well as the stocks of consumer
durables and government tangible assets are reported in the U.S. Dept. of
Commerce's Fixed Reproducible Tan2ible Wealth in the United States. 1925—85.
                                         —31—


                                        Table 3

   The Affect of Demographics on Saving Rates for Fixed Age—Earnings, Age—
            Consumption, and Age—Government Consumption Profiles


                             Predicted Savin2 Rates

                                   Base Year
                                                                 Actual U.S.
 Decade      Jj      12.Q        121Q             12.Q          Saviua Rates

  1950—59     .013   .090        .128             .110   .117         .092

  1960—69   —.041    .042        .082             .064   .074         .089

  1970—79   —.037    .045        .084             .066   .075         .085


  1980—89     .014   .090        .128             .109   .115         .044*

  1990—99     .053   .125        .160             .142   .147

  2000—09     .068   .139        .173             .156   .161

  2010—19     .065   .137        .170             .154   .160

  2020—29     .045   .119        .151             .136   .146

  2030—39     .030   .105        .136             .122   .133

  2040—49     .026   .101        .132             .118   .129


* This   average is over the period 1980—88.
                                     —32—


                                     Table 4

  The Affect of Demographics on Saving Rates for Fixed Age—Earnings and
   Age—Consumption Profiles and Fixed Percapita Government Consumption


                          Predicted Savin2 Rates

                                Base Year
                                                                Actual US.
Decade      1987              1970             1960   1950      Savinz Rates

1950—59    .016    .088       .123             .107   .118          .092


1960—69   —.031    .045       .081             .066   .080          .089


1970—79   —.029    .042       .083             .068   .081          .085


1980—89    .016    .088       .123             .107   .117          .044*

1990—99    .050    .120       .154             .138   .147


2000—09    .063    .132       .165             .151   .161

2010—19    .059    .130       .162             .149   .150

2020—29    .043    .115       .147             .136   .140

2030—39    .030    .130       .136             .124   .140

2040—49    .025    .099       .131             .120   .136



This average is over the period 1980—88.
                                          —33—



                                         Table   5

         The Affect of Demographics on Saving Rates when All Age—Related
         Government Consumption Expenditures Are All Spent on the Elderly


                              Predicted Savins Rates

                                    Base Year
                                                                    Actual U.S.
 Decade        1987    jQ         1970               1960   1950    Savina Rates

 1950—59       .046    .110       .135               .113   .114        .092

  1960—69     —.007    .060       .084               .063   .068        .089


  1970—79     —.013    .054       .077               .056   .062        .085

  1980—89      .019    .083       .105               .083   .089        .044*

  1990—99      .045    .107       .127               .106   .112

  2000—09      .056    .118       .137               .117   .125

  2010—19      .037    .101       .117               .099   .111
  2020—29     —.012    .055       .065               .049   .070

  2030—39     —.047    .022       .029               .012   .040

  2040—49     —.053    .016       .022               .007   .034


* This   average is over the period 1980—88.
                                          —34—


                                          Table 6

               The Affect of Demographics on Saving Rates When the
            Age—Consumption Profile is Rotated in Favor of the Elderly


                               Predicted Savin2 Rates

                                     Base Year
                                                                    Actual U.S.
 Decade        1987                1970             1960   1950     Savin2 Rates

 1950—59      .013     .091        .129             .091   .116          .094


 1960—69     —.041     .042        .082             .044   .073          .089

 1970—79     —.038     .044        .084             .046   .1.13         .085


 1980—89      .014     .090        .128             .090   .144          Q44*

 1990—99      .052     .124        .160             .124   .156

 2000—09      .065     .136        .171             .138   .154

 2010—19      .059     .132        .165             .135   .137

 2020—29      .038     .112        .144             .117   .123

 2030—39      .021     .097        .128             .103   .119

  2040—49     .016      .092       .124             .099   .136



* This average is over the period 1980—88.
                                 —35—



                                Table 7

            Predicted Current Account Surpluses Relative
                  to Predicted Net National Product


                                        World Interest Rate
                           Constant                     Gradual Decline
Decade           .10     .075         .05            jQ       .075         .05

1990—1999       .027     .025         .023          .025      .023        .021

2000—2009       .052     .050         .049          .050      .048        .047

2010—2019       .062     .062         .062          .061      .061.       .060

2020—2029       .047     .047         .047          .045      .045        .045

2030—2039       .030     .029         .029          .028      .028        .027

2040—2049       .025     .025         .025          .024      .023        .023
                                      —36—



                                     Table 8

                   Net National and Nongovernment Saving Rates
                            Corrected and Uncorrected



                Corrected Xeasures**               Uncorrected Measures*
            National     Nongovernment         National     Nongovernment
  Period    Savin2 Rate   Saving Rate QL       ____________
                                               Savinz Rate Saving Rate

1950—1959     .133         .167         .203      .092           .116       .211

1960—1969     .130         .166         .215      .089           .116       .226

1970—1979     .118         .152         .223      .085           .109       .222

1980—1985     .072         .093         .230     .050            .064       .223

1980—1988     na            na          na       .044            .057       .225

na not available
                                     —37—


                                     Notes



1. The corrected net national product measure adjusts the National Income
Accounts measure of net national product by 1) adding the imputed rent on
consumer durables and government tangible assets, excluding military equipment
(expenditure on which is treated as current consumption) and 2) subtracting
the depreciation on the stock of consumer durables and government tangible
assets (excluding military equipment). Corrected private consumption meast.re
equals private consumption expenditure on goods and services plus the imputed
rent on consumer durables. Corrected government consumption equals the
National Income Account measure of government consumption less government
expenditures on (nonmilitary) equipment and structures, plus the imputed rent
on government equipment (nonmilitary) and structures.

2. For the consumption profile the procedure began with an allocation of total
consumption reported by CES households to members within the household. Some
of the household consumption expenditure, such as child's clothing, could be
allocated more accurately than general expenditures such as food. Such
general expenditures were divided evenly among adults (individual's over 18)
and children, but under the assumption that each child's consumption of
general expenditures is one third of that of an adult. The resulting data,
which consisted of individual consumptions indexed by age and sex, were next
used to form the weighted (based on CES population weights) average value of
average consumption by age and sex for the quarter in question. These values
were then divided by the corresponding quarter's weighted average of
consumption of 40 year old males. The resulting relative consumptions indexed
by age, sex, and quarter were then regressed against fifth order polynomials
interacted with sex dummies. The predicted values from this regression
provide the values of the RC8 m     and the RCa f '• The method of deriving
the values of the Re m      aid'the Rca f     i ssentially the same except
for the fact that rep6ried earnings are'ainuai and there is no problem of
allocating earnings to the correct individual. The same general method is
also used to derive the Rka m     and the Rka f     profiles. However, rather
than using reported capital'iitcome which is lIkly to greatly understate true
capital income, we used the CES asset data to form annual observations of
weighted average net worth by age and sex. Netvorth is the sum of financial
assets, such as stocks, bonds, and checking accounts, real estate, less
mortgages and other liabilities. A description of the networth calculation is
provided in Abel, Bernheim, and Kotlikoff (1989).

3. A better fit does not arise from assuming that the ratio of child to adult
consumption of general consumption expenditures (those that can not be
identified in the CES data as child or adult—specific) is one half rather than
one third.
                                     —38—



                                    References

Abel, Andrew, Douglas Bernheim, and Laurence, J. Kotlikoff, "Do the Average
and Marginal Propensities to Consume Rise with Age?" in progress, Fall 1989.

Auerbach, Alan J. and Kevin Hassett, "Corporate Saving and Shareholder
Consumption," in D. Bernheim and J. Shoven, eds. The Economics of Savin2,
University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.

Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Dynamic   Fiscal   Policy, Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press, 1987.

Auerbach, Alan J. ,Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Robert P. Hagemann, and Giuseppe
Nicoletti, "The Economic Dynamics of an Aging Population: The Case of Four
OECD Countries," OECD Staff Pagers, 1989.

Congressional Budget Office, The Chaneine Distribution of Federal Taxes: 1975—
j9.Q, Congress of the United States, October 1987.

Carroll, Chris and Lawrence H. Summers, "Consumption Growth Parallets Income
Growth: Some New Evidence," mimeo, 1989.

David, Paul and John Scadding, "Private Savings: Ultrarationality,
Aggregation, and 'Denison's Law," Journal of Political Economy, March/April
1974, vol. 2, Part 1, pp. 225—49.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Lawrence H. Summers, "The Role of Intergenerational
Transfers in Aggregate Wealth Accumulation," Journal of Political Economy,
 1981.

 Poterba, James and Lawrence H. Summers, Journal of Monetary Economics, "Finite
 Lifetimes and the Effects of Budget Deficits on National Saving," Se/pt. 1987,
 pp. 369—391.

 Summers, Lawrence H., "Capital Taxation and Capital Accumulation in a Life
 Cycle Growth Model," American Economic Review, September l98la, vol 71, no.4,
 pp. 533—44.
                                           —39—



                                         Appendix

Al. Simulating the Effects of Demographics on Saving Rates

     The method used to simulate the effects of demographic change on saving

rates can be understood more precisely by looking at the following formula for

the national saving rate in year t, St.


                      120
             c4OmbEfRamOant + Ra,f8a,f,t] + y,by,t'
S_l_               120                                    120
                          B a,m,t+Rka,mS a,f,t ]+e 40,m,bE[Ra,m 8a,m,t +Ra,f9a,f,t
                                                            e            e
         k          E(Rka,m
             40,m,b a—0                                 a—0

The first term in the numerator of the ratio        in (Al) is   percapita private
consumption    in base year b. This is expressed as consumption per forty year

old male in year b, C4Omb multiplied by a summation. The terms Rcam and

Rc5f in the summation are, respectively, the ratios of average male and

average female consumption at age a relative to the average consumption of a

40 year old male. And the terms 8a,m,t and 8a,f,t are, respectively, the male

and female shares of the population age a in year t.            The two terms in the

denominator of the ratio in (Al) are defined symmetrically, except that the

first deals with capital income and the second deals with labor earnings. The

terms g7.             g0, and 8b are, respectively, the ratio of government

consumption expenditure per young person (age 0 to 18), per middle age person

(age 19 to 64), per old person (65 plus), and per capita. Finally, the terms

                            are, respectively, the fraction of the year t population
y,t' m,t and
that are young, middle age, and old.

     Given base year values of 8yb' gm,b' 8o,b' 8b' C4Omb. e4Om,b,and

k40mb and the values of the relative age—sex consumption, earnings, and

capital income profiles (the RCamts Rc,fCcs, Re.s, Rkaf,ts
                                              —40—



       ci
                 and Rka f          one can use equation (1) to determine how saving

rates would change with changes in the age—sex composition of the population

(the                                                             The procedure for
                       9a,ft'' y,t'S Bm,t3 and B
determining base year values of c4Ob, e4Ob, and k4ob is provided in

equations (A2) through (A4).



                              120
(A2)            Cb —   c40b    E IRmPamb +        RafPafb]
                              a—0


                              120
(A3)            Eb C4Omb Ea—0
                           a,mPa,m,b +            RafPafbJ

                              120
                                                  Ic
(A4)           YK.0— k4Omba—0
                           E [RmPamb +           RafPafb]

Equations (A2) indicates that total consumption in year b, Cb, can be

expressed as the product of c4ob times the sum of the products of the age—

sex consumption ratios and the levels of population in year b in a given age—

sex category (the Pamb'S)• Equations (A3) and (A4) are the analogous

expressions relating e4omb to total labor earnings, Eb and k4ob to total

base year capital income, YKb. Given values of Cb. Eb, and b as well as the

terms within the summations of equations (A2), (A3), and (A4), these three

equations can be solved for c4Ob, e4Ob, and k4ob.

            The procedure for finding r,b' a,b' g0,b' and gb is similar.

Specifically, we used Auerbach et. al.'s (1989) age—decomposition of

government consumption expenditure to determine the values of ,b' 8fl,b' 8ob

and           which stand, respectively, for government consumption per person age

0—24, government consumption per person age 25—64, government consumption per

person age 65+, and percapita non—age—specific government consumption, g.
                                        —41—


Government consumption percapita in year t is then determined by multiplying

these four values by their corresponding populations in year t and dividing by

the total population in year t. Unfortunately, data is available only to

calculate values of 8y,b' m,b go,b' and b for the period of the mid l980s.

Hence, in the calculations presented below, these values are used regardless

of the base year indicated.

       For each base year the value of total private consumption (used in (A2)

to solve for c4omb) corresponds to the National Accounts figure (unadjusted

for durables) for that year. In addition, base year net national product

(again unadjusted) is divided between labor and capital income using the

national accounts data on employee compensation and proprietorship income and

assuming that the share of proprietorship income that represents payments for

labor is the same as the ratio of aggregate labor income to net national

product.



A2. Simulating the Effects of Demographics on the Current Account

       To simulate the effects of demographics on the current account we begin

by assuming a value, r, of the world interest rate. Dividing 1987 capital

income from the national income accounts by r gives us an estimate of 1987

U.S. assets, A1987.    To find A1988, A1989, through A2050 we use the following

formula:


(A5)        At+l —   A+   5't
In (A5) At is assets at year t (e.g. 1987),         is the year t saving rate as

calculated in Section II above with 1987 as the base year, and NNPt is net

national product in year t, which is also calculated as in Section II above

with 1987 as the base year; i.e., it is the sum of 1) average capital income
                                             —42--



of a 40 year old male in 1987 times the summations of the cross products terms

(the K'maOmat's and the Rkf a9fat'S) plus 2) average labor income of a 40

year old male in 1987 times the summations of the cross product terms (the

Rem a9m,a,t' and the RCfa9fats)•
       The level of the capital stock at time t is determined by assuming a

Cobb—Douglas net (of depreciation) production technology for U.S. domestic

output, d.

               —
(A6)                DK:L°
where D is a coefficient whose value is determined in equation (Al), a is

capital's share of net national product, and Lt is the supply of labor in year

t. The value for a was determined from the national accounts data. The value

of      is given by the second summation in the denominator of equation (10).

Since the marginal product of U.S. capital must equal the world interest rate

r, we have:
                        1—a
                    L
(Al)                           —r
            aD [—--1


Given a value for r and K1987 we insert the 1987 value of Lt and use (Al) to

solve for D. The value of K1987 is determined from the 1987 current account

reported in the national accounts. Specifically, r(K1987—A1987) is set equal

to the 1987 current account deficit less the 1987 trade account (exports minus

imports). This equation is then used to solve for K1987. Having determined

the value of D in (Al), we use (Al) to predict values of K1988 through K2050

by inserting the predicted values of Lt for the appropriate year in question.

Since the current account deficit in year t, CA, is defined as:

                           —        — [K+i    —
(A8)        CAt —   [K+i                          A1J
                                     —43—


we simply insert the predicted time paths of capital stocks and assets to

determine the time path of CAt.
