                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        INTERNATIONAL TAX COMPETITION AND GAINS FROM TAX HARMONIZATION




                                  Assaf Razin

                                 Efraim Sadka




                            Working Paper No. 3152




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 October 1989




This paper is part of NBER's research programs in International Studies and
Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3152
                                        October 1989


        INTERNATIONAL TAX COMPETITION AND GAINS FROM TAX HARNONIZATION



                                   ABSTRACT

In a world economy there are two types of distortions which can be cauaed by
capital income taxation in addition to the standard closed-economy wedge
between the consumer-saver marginal intertemporal rate of substitution and the
producer-investor marginal productivity of capital: (i)international
differencea in intertemporal marginal rates of substitution, implying an
inefficient allocation of world savings across countries; and (ii)
international differences in the marginal productivity of capital, implying an
inefficient allocation of world investment across countries. The paper focuses
on the structure of taxation for countries which are engaged in tax competition
and on potential gains from s tax harmonization. We show that if the competing
countries sre sufficiently coordinated with the rest of the world then tax
competition leads each country to apply the residence orinciole of taxation and
there are no gains from tax harmonization. If, however there is not sufficient
coordinstion,tax competition leads to low capital income taxes and the tax
burden falls on the internationally immobile factors. The outcome is
nevertheless still efficient relative to the available constrained set of tax
instruments.




     Assaf Razin                        Efraim Sadks
     Department of Economics            Department of Economics
     Tel Aviv University                Tel Aviv University
     Tel Aviv 69978                     Tel Aviv 69978
     ISRAEL                             ISRAEL
1. Introduction

     In a world with international capital nobility, the equality

between saving and investment need not hold for each country separately,

but rather for world aggregate saving and investment. This separation

brings out new issues of taxation in theory and practice. In a closed

econmy a tax on capital income drives just one wedge between the

consumer- saver marginal intertemporal rate of substitution and the

producer-investor marginal productivity of capital. In a world of open

economies there are two more types of distortions which can be caused by

capital income taxation:       (i)      international     differences   in

intertemporal marginal rates of substitution, implying an inefficient

allocation of world savings across countries;      (ii)      international

differences in the marginal productivity of capital, implying that world

investment is not efficiently allocated across countries.

     In an international context, there are two polar principles of

taxation: the residence (of the taxpayer) and the source (of income)
principles.        According to the first principle, residents are taxed on

their world-wide income equally, regardless of whether the source of the

income is domestic or foreign.' A resident in any country must earn the

same net return on her savings, no matter to which country she chooses

to channel her savings (the rate-of-return arbitrage). If a country

adopts the residence principle, taxing at the same rate capital income

from all sources, then the gross return accruing to an individual in

that country must be the same, regardless of which country is the source

of that return. Thus, the marginal product of capital in that country

will be equal to the world return to capital. If all countries adopt

the residence principle, then capital income taxation does not disturb

the equality of the marginal product of capital across countries which

is generated by a free movement of capital. However, if the rax rate is

not the same in all countries, then the net returns accruing to savers

in different countries vary and the international allocation of world

savings is distorted.

     According to the second principle, residents of a country are not

taxed on their income from foreign sources and foreigners are taxed

equally as residents on income from domestic sources. Now, suppose that

all countries adopt this principle. Then a resident of country            H

earns in country F the same net return as the resident of country F

earns in country F. Since a resident in country H must earn the same

net return whether she channelled her savings to country        H    or to

country       F,   it follows that residents of all countries earn the same

net return. Thus, intertemporal marginal rate of substitution are

equated across countries, implying that the international allocation of
world savings is efficient. flowever, if the tax rate is not the same in

all countries, then the marginal product of capital is also not the same

in all countries. In this case the international allocation of the

world stock of capital is not efficient.

      Although       there   are two extreme principles of international

taxation, in reality, countries adopt a mixture of the two polar

principles.           Accordingly,   in practice, countries partially tax

foreign-source income of residents and domestic-source income            of

non-residents, in which case both the international allocations of world

savings and of world investments are distorted.

      These issues are of particular relevance for Europe of 1992. The

creation of a single capital market in the European Community raises the

possibility of tax competition among the member countries, in the

absence of a full-fledged harmonization of the income tax systems.

Also, the possibilty of capital flight from the EC to low-tax countries

elsewhere has strong implications for the national tax structures in the

EC.       These developments renewed the interest among public finance and

 international finance economists in the issues of tax harmonization and

 coordination, tax competition, the international structure of taxation,

etc. 2


         In   this paper we focus on the structure of taxation for countries

 which are engaged in tax competiton and on the potential gains from tax

 harmonization among them. Tax competition among countries obviously

 raises the possibility of terms of trade manipulation. This issue,

 however, has been exhaustively studied by now and we do not wish to

 address it here any further.            Ye are rather interested here in
highlighting the distortions and inefficiencies of the international

allocations of world savings and investments that are caused by capital

income taxation.       Ve show that if the competing countries         are

sufficiently coordinated with the rest of the world so as to be able to

effectively tax their residents on their income from capital in the rest

of the world, then tax competition leads each country to apply the

residence principle       of taxation and the equilibrium outcome is

efficient. Thus, there are no gains from tax harmonization.

     If, however, there is not sufficient coordination with the rest of

the world to allow each country to tax its residents on their income

from capital in the rest of the world, then tax competition leads to no

tax whatsoever on capital income. All the tax burden falls in this case

on internationally immobile factors of producton, such as labor or land,

(more generally, it seems that the lower is the tax that can he

effectively levied on residents on income from capital in the rest of

the world, the lower would be the tax rate on income from capital from

sources within the competing countries.). The outcome in this case is

also efficient, relative to the constrained set of available tax

instruments. Thus, in this case too there are no gains from tax
harmonization.     Naturally the outcome of tax competition in the case in

which the countries cannot tax their residents on capital income from

the rest of the world is welfare-inferior to the case where they can.

Thus, there are gains for the competing countries from tax coordination

with the rest of the world.
                                          5




2.    A Stylized lodel of International Tax        Competition
       International tax   competition,       or any fiscal policy competition for

that matter, has major efforts on the resource allocation across

countries as well as within each country. For example, the aggregate

(world-wide) level of savings as well as its cross-country composition

may be distorted by such competition; similarly, the aggregate level of

investment and its international allocation may become inefficient.             In

general, these effects on resource allocation can be decomposed into two

elements.      One concerns the indirect manipulation of the international

terms of trade by various fiscal measures (other than explicit trade

barriers such as tariffs and quotas) which is akin to the familiar

"trade wars." The second element which received less attention concerns

the international and domestic misallocation of resources that is

generated by tax   competition   for given terms of trade.

       This paper focuses on the second of these two elements since the

first one has been exhaustively studied and has become by now a textbook

case. Ve therefore set up a stylized model in which tax competition

within the group of countries that we analyze cannot effect their terms

of trade. This is accomplished by assuming that this group of countries

is small relative to the rest of the world which effectively sets the

international terms of trade.

       To simplify the exposition we assume that the competing group

consists of two small countries, denoted by superscripts H (for Home)

and      F    (for Foreign). An asterisk (*) stands for the rest of the

world. Suppose that all the countries agree on full integration of the

capital markets (as in Europe of 1992). That is, there exist totally
free international movements of capital. There is also another factor,

labor, which is assumed to be immobile internationally.

    Ve describe a representative (small) country, say country II.

Consider a stylized two-period model with one composite good, serving

both for (private and public) consumption and for investment. In the

first period the economy possesses an initial endowment of           the

compositive good.       Individuals can decide how much of their initial

endowments to consume in the first period and how much to save.   Saving

is allocated to either domestic investment or foreign investments. In

the second period, output (produced by capital and labor) and income

from foreign investments are allocated between private and public

consumption. For the sake of simplicity, we assume that government

spending takes place in the second period. The government employs taxes

on labor, taxes on income from domestic investments, and possibly taxes

on income from investments abroad in order to finance optimally its

(public) consumption.

     For simplicity, while still capturing basic real-world features, we

assume that government spending on public goods does not affect

individual demand patterns for private goods or the supply of labor.

That is, only the taxes that are needed to finance these expenditures

affect individual demands and supplies, but not the expenditures

themselves.    Formally, this feature is obtained by assuming that the

utility function is weakly separable between private goods and services

on the one hand, and public goods and services, on the other hand. That

is, the representative individual in country H has a utilty function of

the form:
                                            7




(1)        U11(c, 4, L1, G11) =        u11(c, 4, LH) + mH(Gll),


where uH and mH are the private and public components of the utility

function, respectively; 4, 4 and                       are first-period consumption,

second-period        consumption        and       (second-period)         labor    supply,

respectively; and G11 is (second-period) public consumption.

      Denote saving in the form of domestic capital by S, saving

exported to country F by                   and saving exported to the rest of the

world by S .        The budget constraint of the representative individual

(the private sector) in the first period is:



            H  HR HF
(2)        c1-s-S +S +SH* =1,
                            H




where 1H is a fixed endowment.

      In the second period the private sector finances its consumption

from labor income which is taxed at the rate 4 and its capital income

which stems from one domestic source and two foreign sources, from

country     F       and from the rest of the world. The gross returns on
                                                                      *
capital   income from these sources are r ,
                                                   H
                                                         rF   and r ,        respectively.3
These sources may be taxed domestically and/or by the foreign countries.

Ve use the following notation for the rates of tax on capital income

imposed in country i (i =



(i)         taD -    the   tax rate levied on domestic residents on their

                     domestic- source income,
                                                   8




(ii)         t -      the   tax      rate   levied on domestic residents on their

                      foreign- source income,

(iii)       tgD - the tax rate levied on non residents on their domestic

                      capital.



        Thus, the private sector faces the following budget constraint in

the second period:




(3)          c =    (1-t)       wULK +     S[1 + (1-tD)r11]

                + 511F[1    +
                                    (1-4A)(1-tKD)r"]

                + SH*[1     +
                                    (l4A)r*],

where      wK       is the real wage rate (in terms of                   second-period

consumption).

        Since a resident in country K is free to invest domestically, or in

country F, or anywhere else in the world, and assuming that in the

equilibria analyzed here she exercises this possibility of portfolio

diversification, then it must be the case that she earns the same net

(after-tax) return everywhere. That is:



             (1 -               = (1   -
(4a)                tRD)r                  tRA)r
and

                                                       -
             (1 -
                    tA)(l 4gD)r'-             =
                                                  (1
which upon cancellation of the common term 1 -                                        becomes
                                                                                4A'

                     F                       *
            (1
                 -
                     tNRD)r
                                  F
                                      =   r


Hence, the second-period budget constraint may be rewritten as:



                         -                                             -
(5)         c = (1               t)w11L1'
                                                 +   sHEl     +   (1       tRD)r],
where

(6)         SH =SHR +SHF +5H*

is the aggregate saving of the private sector in country H.                                     Now, the

budget constraints for the first and second periods ((2) and (5)) may be

consolidated into one present-value life-time budget constraint:




(7)         4 + qc =                  1H +
                                                 qLH,
where

                         + (1         -
(7a)        q = [1                        t11)r'1]

                             -
                 =
                     [(1          t)w11][l           +   (1
                                                              -
                                                                  tD)rH]l

are the present-value, (post-tax) consumer prices of second-period

consumption and labor, respectively.

        Maximization of the utilty function (1) subject to the budget

constraint (7) yields the demand for private consumption in the first

period, the supply of saving in the second period, and the supply of

labor by the private sector in the second period respectively: c(q,
                                                           10




q      jil), 4(q, q, III), SH(q, q, jH) and L11(q, q, Is).
the indirect utility function is defined by:



             1111         II    11        11
(8)         v(q,q,I,G)=

            u11(c(q, q, i) c(q, q, Ii), L11(q, q, 111)) +                                                  m11(G11).




This comprises the consumption-labor supply side of the economy.

       Domestic output                    (Y11)       of the composite consumption good in the

second-period is produced by capital                             (K11)       and labor (LH),           according

to a neo-classical, constant-returns-to-scale production function:




(9)
                = FH(KH,        L11).




        The stock of domestic capital is composed of the saving by domestic

residents channelled to domestic uses                                          (S1111),      the saving by the

residents of country F channelled to country II                                           (Sfl) and saving by

the rest of the world channelled to country 11                                     (S ).      That   is:




(10)        KH =SHH +SFH +S IE

                = S
                      H   -
                               [(S
                                     HF
                                           + S11* )    - (SFH      + S
                                                                         *11
                                                                              )J




where    use is made of equation (6).                                    Put differently, the domestic

capital stock is equal to aggregate domestic saving                                            (S11) less net

                                               + S     -             +   S
capital exports (i.e., S                                    (S                  )).
                                                      11




      The    marginal productivity conditions determine the (pre-tax)

interest rate and the wage rate:



             H RH LH
            r =
                   FK(K        ,        )




            wH =    RH LH
                   FL(K        ,        ),




where a subscript          i denotes a partial derivative with respect to

variable i, i = K,             L.

      As usual, the equilibrium conditions (or resource constraints) in

country H require that supply demand for first-period consumption, and

similarly for second-period consumption, will be:



            c =     1H -

and

            C +
                   c = FH(KH,                LH) + KR +


                                                          *
                                   HF
                           (S           +5H")(i+r)

                           -
                                    (5FH +     5ll) [1    + (1   -
                                                                     tNRD)rl.


Note that S
                  HF+ SH                is the saving of the residents of country H which

is invested abroad and thus earns a social (i.e., before tax) return at
             *
the rate of r ,          no matter whether invested in the rest of the world or

in country          F.             The sum        SFR+ S*H           is foreign saving invested in

country H. It earns the domestic rate of return rH, but the foreign
                                                         12




residents can extract from country H only a net of tax return (1 -

            because a tax tNRO (per unit) remains in country H.
tNRD)r,
       Country F is similar to country H, so that the equations for

country F are exactly like those described above for country H, except

that the superscripts F and H are interchanged.

        Of particular interest now are the rate-of-return                               arbitrage

conditions (4a) and (4b) which become (assuming interior solutions):



            (1 -              = (1    -
(15a)              tao)r                      tkA)r
and

            r* =         -
(15b)              (1        tNLD)r.


Since (15a) and (15b) imply that (1 -                              tp)rH =    r,   it follows upon

consolidation of the first-period and the second-period equilibrium

conditions for country H (i.e., equations (13) and (14),) that country H

faces the following future-value, life-time equilibrium condition:




(16)
               +
                    c(q,       q, JH) = FH{IH
                                                              -
                                                                  c(q,   q, 1H)


                                          -
               -
                    [(5HF + 5Ht)               (5FH +         s*H)], LH(q, q, JH)}

                                          H
               +    I
                    II
                         -    fl,H              I
                                                    II




                                                                    *
                         HF      Ht                 FH        tH
                   +[(S +S )-(S +S )]r,
                                                         13




where use is made also of equation (10). This condition merely states

that total private and public consumption in the second-period (i.e.,

        +
             c)         must be equal to the sum of: (i) output generated by

domestic capital, which is financed by domestic saving (i..,                                       c)
less net capital exports (i.e., gross capital exports, S                                 + S   ,
                                                                                                   less
                                    FR            ll
gross capital iports, S                     + S     ),        and labor; (ii) domestic capital;

and (iii) the return on net capital exports. Notice that by Vairas's

Law the government budget constraint in each country is automatically

satisfied at equilibrium.

            The stylized model of international tax competition works as

follows.            Each government designs its fiscal policy so as to maximize

the welfare of the representative resident. In so doing, it obviously

takes into account the equilibrium and arbitrage conditions set forth by

adherence to a market economy, and also takes as given the fiscal

instruments employed by the government in the other country. This leads

to a Nash-equilibrium between the two countries.



3. Tax Competition with Effective                      Enforcement of Taxes on Income from
     the Lest of the Vorid.

            Suppose that fiscal policies are not harmonized internationally, so.

that the two countries are engaged in tax                                competition.   However, some

minimal degree of coordination among the two countries and the rest of

the world prevail, so that they can effectively tax, should they wish,

their residents on foreign-source income.

            In   this   case the government in country H,                    for   instance, chooses

                                        -   (SFH +                ri',   h
 G11,
            q,    q, (Silk' +   Sil*)                     s*H),                    tLD, tNRD and tRA
                                                   14




so as to maximize the utility function (8), subject to the equilibrium

condition (16), the definition of q and q in (7a) and (7b)
respectively, and the relevant arbitrage conditions (4a) and (15b).

Notice that the other two arbitrage conditions (4b) and (15a), are

irrelevant for country 11 because they have no effect on its economy

(formally the endogenous variables in (4b) and (15a) appear nowhere else

in the equations describing the economy of country K). In addition,                     r11



and w11 are given bythe marginal productivity conditions (ii) and (12).

       This optimization can be simplified a great deal by solving it in

two stages. First, choose public consumption (G11), consumer prices of

second-period consumption and labor (q andq, respectively) and net

capital exports (S             +     S        -
                                                   (S   +   S   ))   so as to maximize the

indirect utilty function (8), subject to just one constraint:                          the

resource constraint (16).                 Then, in the second stage set r11 and w11

from (11) and (12), respectively; tD from (7a); t from (7b);                          1NRD
from (15b) and tRA from (4a).

       Carrying out the first stage of this optimization process it

follows (from the first-order condition for net capital exports) that

the marginal product of capital, F should be equal to the world rate

of interest r .     Since          FK =   r   ,   by (11), we thus have:



(17)       F =   r11 =   r*.

This gross rate-of-return equalization (which, for the same reasons,

must hold also in country F) implies that physical capital must be

efficiently allocated among country K, country F and the rest of the
                                          15




world,     even though we are at a second-best situation where many other

distortions exist both within and across                        countries           (e.g.,          the

saving- consumption tradeoffs, the consumption- leisure tradeoffs) .

     Since      r =   r,   it follows from (15b) that tNRD = 0.                       Also, (4a)

implies that tD = tRA.       Thus, country H should not tax foreigners on

their income from capital in country U and it should tax its residents

uniformly on their capital income from all sources, domestic as well as

foreign.      Naturally, a similar result holds for country F as well.

Thus, each country should employ the residence (or world-wide) principle

for the taxation of income from capital.

     Now we shall address the issue of whether this tax competition

Nash-equilibrium is a second-best optimum (i.e., relative to the tax

policy tools). Or, can there be gains from concerted tax harmonization?

Consider, say, country H.      Notice that in the optimization problem

carried out by the government of country H, the only variables that

pertain to country F           s'                  s'11.        However, country H is

indifferent between S        and S            and between S              and S            ,     as long
                                     HF         11*   -      FH         *fl
as net capital exports,          S        +    S           (S     + S         ),   stay       constant.

Therefore, country B can readjust capital exports with the rest of the

world in order to offset any fiscal policy that country F may implement.

That is, country F has no effect on country II; and vice versa. Thus,

there is nothing that can be gained from tax harmonization and tax

competition therefore leads to a second-best opti.u.
                                                  16




4.    Tax Competition without Enforceable Taxes on Income from the Rest
      of the Vorld



       In order to implement effectively a policy of taxing world-wide

income, a considerable degree of coordination among countries is

required, such as, for example, an exchange of information among the tax

authorities, withholding arrangements, loosening bank secrecy laws, etc.

Suppose now that countries F and H can reach such coordination which

enables each to effectively tax its residents on their income from

capital invested in the other country, even though they continue to

engage in tax competition.                    However, they cannot tax the income from

capitalinvested in the rest of the world, as they have no coordination

agreements.          This seems a rather interesting and realistic case which

captures the essence of a problem hindering European integration, that

of capital moving to low-tax countries in the rest of the world.

         The arbitrage conditions (4a)-(4b) and (15a)-(15b) now become:




 (4a')        (1 -
                     tRD)r
                               =   r*,

 (4h')        (1 -
                     titi)(1
                               -
                                   tg0)rF
                                              =   rt,
                                    *
 (15a')       (1 -
                      F
                     tao)r
                          F    =   r
and

 (15b')       (1 -
                     tKA)(1
                               -
                                   tRfl)r11
                                              =   r*.

         Now, if there is an interior solution for capital invested by the

 rest of the world in countries H and F, it must also be the case that
                                                1?




                                                          *
the rest of the world earns a net return of r                 on such investments.

That is:




(18)          (1 -
                     tND)r   =   r   = (1   -
                                                tNRD)r.


Then (18), (4b') and (15b') imply that



(19)         tA = tLA =


That is, when countries F and H cannot tax their residents on income
from capital invested in the rest of the world, then the rate-of-return

arbitrage prevents each one of them from taxing its residents on their

income from capital invested in the other country, even though their tax

authorities can cooperate on such things as tax withholding, etc. This

may explain why the EC dropped the idea of imposing a withholding tax on

capital income.

         Ve now turn to the Nash-equilibrium resulting from tax competition

in this case. Consider one of the two competing countries, say country

H.        As in the preceding section, the government in country H faces the

same optimization problem, except that constraints (4a')                 and (15b')

replace (4a) and (15b), respectively. Here too, it follows from the

first-order condition for net capital exports, that F =             r.    Since F
= r11,     by (11), we thus have (with similar reasoning applying to country

F):




(20)          F=r11=r=r=F.
                                       'a




       Again, this equalization of the domestic productivity of capital in

country II (and in country F) to the world rate of interest generates a

world-wide efficient allocation of physical capital. From (4a') and

(15a') we then conlude that



               taD =          =
(21)                   tft0


       Also,    it follows from (19), (4b') and (15b') that



(22)           tNRD = tNRD =



That is, no capital income tax whatsoever is imposed by either country.
All of the tax burden falls on the internationally immobile factor, i.e.

labor. Again, as in the preceding section, it is straightforwarded to

show that the countries F and ft cannot gain anything from a concerted

tax harmonization. That is, tax competition is a comstrained optimum,

relative to the set of tax instruments that is available. Notice that

since this set is more restricted than that of the preceding section

(where taxes on income from sources in the rest of the world were

enforceable), then the constrained optimum in this case is inferior to

the second-best optimum o the preceding section.

       In conclusion, when the two countries are not coordinated with the

rest of the world and cannot effectively tax their residents on their

income from capital invested in the rest of the world, then tax

competition leads to a full exemption from tax for the mobile factor

(i.e., capital), placing all the tax burden on the immobile factors,
                                        19




such as labor, land, etc. Furthermore no gains can be obtained from tax

harmonization.



5. Extensiom: Equity Considerations

        We have dealt so far with a representative individual in each

country,        thereby   abstracting        from    any   intra- country        equity

considerations. Nevertheless, while in general the size of government

and the structure of taxation depends on equity considerations, the

results obtained in the preceding sections do not.             Specifically, the

optimality of the residence principle in the case where each country can

tax its residents on their capital income from the rest of the world,

the optimality of not taxing capital income in the case where it cannot

andthe redundancy of tax harmonization in both cases, all hold for many

consumer economies as well.

        To see this, notice that with many consumers the indirect utility

function v11(q, q, 1H) of country H, for instance, is replaced by an

indirect social welfare function V'1(q, q, I,. .            . ,I
                                                               II
                                                                    )    which depends,

in addition to prices, also on the distribution of initial endowments

I,. .   . ,IH   among the n11 consumers of country H.                   Similarly, each

individual demand or supply function is replaced by an aggregate demand

or supply function. [For example, the demand function for first-period

consumption of the representative individual in country H, namely

4(q, q, ii), is replaced by an aggregate demand function C(q, q,

         'n =                q, I), where c(.) is the demand function

of individual i;          and so on.     ]     It   is straightforward to see that
                                  20




carrying out this extension alters none of the results of the preceding

sections.
                                     21




                                 FOOTNOTES



    A credit is given against taxes paid abroad on foreign- source

    income in order to avoid double taxation.
2
    See, for instance, Alworth (1988), Bovenberg (1988), Giovannini

    (1988, 1989a, 198gb), Gordon (1986), tazin and Sadka (1988, 1989),

    tazin and Slemrod (forthcoming), Sinn (1987) and Slemrod (1988).

    Since the rest of the world is passive in this framework we denote
                          *
    for simplicity by r         the world-rate of interest that accrues to

    residents in countries 11 and F, after whatever taxes are withheld

    by the rest of the world.

    This result is essentially an open-economy variant of the aggregate

    production efficiency theorem in optimal tax theory (e.g., Diamond

    and Iirrlees (1971), Sadka (1977), and Dixit (1985).)
                                    22




                                 IEPER!NCES




Alworth, J.S. (1988), The Finance, Investment and      Taxation    Decisions

    of lultinationals, New York, Basil Blackwell.

Bovenberg, A, Lars (1988), "The International Effects of Capital

     Taxation: An Analytical Framework," mimeo, International Monetary

     Fund.

Diamond, Peter, A. and James Mirrlees (1971), "Optimal Taxation and

     Public Production I:     Production Efficiency," American Economic

     Review, 61, 8-27.

Dixit, Avinash (1985), "Tax Policy in Open Economies," in Auerbach,

     Alan and Martin Feldstein (eds.), Handbook on Public Economics,

     chapter 6, 314-374, North Rolland.

Giovannini, Alberto, (1988), "International Capital Mobility and Tax

                             Graduate    School   of   Business,    Columbia
     Avoidance," mimeo,

     University.

                         (1989a), "National Tax Systems vs. The European

     Capital Market," Economic Policy, October.

                         (198gb), "International Capital     Mobility    and

      Capital-Income Taxation:       Theory and Policy," mimeo, Graduate

      School of Business, Columbia University.

 Gordon, Roger, II. (1986), "Taxation of Investment and Savings in a

      Vorld Economy," American Economic Review, 76, 1087-1102.
                                      23




Razin, Assaf, and Efraim Sadka (1988), "Integration of the International
     Capital Markets:      The Size of Government and Tax Coordination,"

     Vorking Paper No.32-88, The Foerder Institute           for   Economic

     Research, Tel-Aviv University, December, to appear in Razin Assaf

     and Joel Sleinrod (eds.), International Aspects of            Taxation,

     University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.

                                    (1989), "Optimal Incentives to Domestic

     Investment in the Presence of Capital Flight," International

     Monetary Fund, Research and Fiscal Affairs Departments, Vorking

     Paper No.81.

Razin, Assaf and Joel Slemrod (eds.) International Aspects of Taxation,

     University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.

Sadka, Efraim (1977), "A Note on Producer Taxation and Public Produc-

     tion, Leviev of Econo.ic Studies, 44(2), 38-387.

Sinn, H.V. (1987), Capital Income Taxation and Resource Allocation,

     Amsterdam: North Holland.

Slemrod, Joel, (1988), "International Capital Mobility and the Theory

     of Capital Income Taxation," in il.Aaron and           H.Galper,    and

     J.Pechman,     eds.   Uneasy    Compromise:    Problems of a hybrid

     Inco.e-Consu.ption Tax, Vashington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
