                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




COMMODITY PRICES AND INFLATION: EVIDENCE FROM SEVEN LARGE INDUSTRIAL COUNTRIES




                               James M. Boughton
                              William H. Branson

                               Alphecca Muttardy




                            Working Paper No. 3158




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 November 1989




We would like to thank Richard Baillie, Chris Gilbert, Tim Jenkinson, Anne
McGuirk, and David Vines for a number of helpful commenta and suggestions; and
Ximena Cheetham and Tom Walter for extensive research assistance. The study
benefitted from comments in seminars at the IMF, CEPR in London, the Banks of
Italy and Spain, and the lIES in Stockholm. This paper is part of NBER's
research programs in Economic Fluctuations and International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                       NER Working Paper #3158
                                       November 1989


                   COMMODITY PRICES AND INFLATION: EVIDENCE
                     FROM SEVEN LARGE INDUSTRIAL COUNTRIES


                                   ABSTRACT

     This paper examines the relationships between movements in primary
commodity prices and changes in inflation in the large industrial countries.
It begins by developing a two-country model in order to examine the theoretical
effects of monetary, fiscal, and supply-side diturbances on commodity and
manufactures prices and on exchange rates. It is shown that if monetary shocks
dominate, then commodity prices should lead general price movements, and the
level of commodity prices should be correlated with the general inflation rate.
Non-monetary shocks generally weaken these relationships, but such disturbances
may cancel out for broad indexes covering a wide range of commodities.
     Country-specific commodity price indexes are developed for the major
industrial countries. The weights assigned to different commodities vary
substantially across countries. Nonetheless, when the indexes are expressed in
a common currency, they tend to be highly correlated over time, except when
sharp movements occur in certain commodity prices. The major source of
contrast across countries in the behavior of the indexes derives from exchange
rate movements.
     Several empirical tests broadly support the conclusions of the theoretical
model, with relatively few differences across countries. Three main tendencies
may be cited. First, low inflation in industrial countries has tended to be
associated with low levels of commodity prices, and conversely; commodity-price
levels are cointegrated with consumer-price inflation rates. Second, there has
been some tendency for movements in commodity prices to precede changes in
general inflation rates by a few months, although it is not clear whether this
tendency is strong enough to be a reliable aid in forecasting the rate of
inflation. Third, there is a strong and fairly reliable tendency for turning
points in general inflation rates. Commodity prices thus appear to contribute
to predictions of turning points in inflation, predictions of inflation rates
but more strongly to predictions of turning points in inflation.




     James M. Boughton                  William H. Branson
     Alphecca Muttardy                  Woodrow Wilson School
     Research Department                Princeton University
     IMF                                Princeton, NJ 08544
     Washington, DC 20431               (609)258-4828
     (202)623-7477
                      I. Introduction and SummarY

    Considerable interest has arisen regarding the relationship between

commodity prices and broader measures of inflationary pressures. An

earlier paper (Boughton and Branson, 1988) argued that a conventional

trade-weighted index of world commodity prices contains useful information

about future changes in the average inflation rate in large industrial

countries. This paper extends that research in two directions: (I) by

developing a theoretical open-economy model in which countries differ in

the role that is played by commodity prices; and (2) by deriving commodity

price indexes that are specific to each country and testing the relation-

ships between those indexes and inflation in the countries concerned.

     Section II describes the theoretical model and suggests a number of

hypotheses to be tested. A conclusion of this section is that commodity

price movements should lead general price movements as long as

disturbances are predominantly monetary. If commodity prices jump in

response to such disturbances, while other prices respo more gradually,

then the level of commodity prices should be positively correlated (and

cointegrated) with the rate of inflation in manufactures prices. These

conclusions should apply more to broad commodity price indexes, on which

the effects of supply shocks to specific commodities are relatively weak,

than to narrow indexes. Even so, unaccommodated fiscal policies and other

general real disturbances could create substantial noise in the

relationships between general price inflation and movements in broad

commodity price indexes.

     The new commodity price indexes are presented and discussed in

Section III. The distribution of weights among commodities varies
                                   -2-


markedly across countries, but as long as the indexes are denominated in

the same currency the variation in their intertemporal movements is

limited. The major source of contrast in the behavior of the individual-

country indexes derives from exchange rate movements.

     Empirical tests of the relationships between the commodity price

indexes and general inflation rates are the subject of Sections IV and V.

Section IV presents some cointegration tests that suggest the possibility

that the level of commodity prices may be cointegrated with the rate of

inflation in consumer prices; that is, low inflation in industrial

countries appears to be associated with low levels of commodity prices,

and conversely. Various single-equation tests of predictive power

indicate that there is some tendency for movements in commodity prices to

precede consumer price changes and to contribute to inflation predictions;

this tendency, however, is not observed in all countries, nor in all time

periods. Commodity price indexes have a stronger predictive relationship

with turning points in consumer price inflation than with the level of the

inflation rate.

     Section V discusses evidence regarding the relationship between

commodity prices and output deflators. No evidence is found to support

the hypothesis that the linkages with output deflators are stronger in

countries that have a relatively large share of output attributed to

primary commodities. In general, commodity prices contribute to

predictions of output deflators with slightly less power than in the case

of consumer prices. The paper concludes with a brief discussion of some

econometric model simulations that broadly confirm the major predictions

of the theoretical model and the single-equation tests.
                                  -3-


     II. A Two-Country Model of Commodity Prices, Exchange Rates,
                              and Inflation

     This section presents a dynamic model of commodity and industrial

prices in a framework of two goods and two countries. The goods are

commodities and manufactures, with their prices determined in a world

market in a common currency, the Group Currency Unit (GCU). jJ The two

countries have a floating exchange rate and different structures of pro-

duction. The exchange rate of each against the GCU translates the prices

of the two goods into the home currencies. The weights of the two goods

in production and consumption in each country then determine the movements

of the GNP deflator and the CPI, respectively. The model has two levels.

The world market (subsection 1) determines the relative goods prices,

while a relative monetary model (subsection 2) determines exchange rates.

The two together give home-currency prices.

1.   World model of commodities and manufactures Drices

     This subsection discusses a dynamic model of the interaction of

commodity and manufactures prices at the level of the world market.

Commodity prices are determined in flexible world markets with forward-

looking expectations. Manufactures prices are set by sellers and adjust

gradually. The model is essentially the same as the one presented in

Boughton and Branson (1988), interpreted now as a world model in GCU.

     Equilibrium in the world money market is described in the standard

form of equation (1):




  1/ Conceptually, the GCU is an implicit weighted average of the two
currencies. It is defined for the general multi-country case in Boughton
and Branson (1988).
                                             -4-


(1) m-apm- (1- a)pC—y- Ai.

Here m, p, P and y are the logarithms of nominal world money, the price

of manufactures, the price of commodities, and world real output, all

expressed in GCU; i is the average world nominal short-term interest

rate; and a is the share of manufactures in world output, and in the world

CPI. Coimnodity price inflation and the interest rate are related by the

arbitrage condition:


(2) ic+b,
where b is the real return to holding commodities for final use, net of

storage costs, and c is the exDected rate of change of the commodity

price. Substitution of equation (2) into (1) yields the first dynamic

equation:


(3) m - apm   -
                  (l   -
                           a)pc —    y   -
                                               + b).

The downward-sloping locus of points where c — 0 is shown in Figure 1;

its slope is -(1 -         a)/a.
     For a point above the               — 0 line to be consistent with money market

equilibrium, Pc must         be    expected to rise. This is because above the line,

c is higher, and real balances are lower, than on it, so the interest

rate must exceed b, and c must therefore be expected to rise. If expec-

tations exhibit perfect foresight, Pc must actually be rising above the

line. These dynamics of the GGU commodity price are summarized by the

horizontal arrows in Figure 1.
                                              — 45 —




COMMODITY AND MANUFACTURES PRICES
 WORLD EQUILIBRIUM AND DYNAMICS                             WORLD MARKET RESPONSE TO VNANTICII'A lED
                                                                     MONETARY EXPANSION




                                                       p.

  \                                                                                       //
                                       p. 0
                                                                                      ///
                                                                                     /

                                                                    //
                                                                      /
                                                                   ,
                                                               ////
                                   p. 0
                                                            /,
                                                              /
                                          p




               F—.'
   WORLD MARKET RESPONSE TO REAL
DISTURBANCE ALTERING RELATIVE PRICES                            EQIJrL1BR?IJW RETEEN COUNTRIES




      \                                                                                            =0




                                p. 0                                            \                0

                                                                                                   E
                                                            -5-


     The supply of real industrial output y is assumed to be- constant.

Demand is assumed to be an increasing function of the price of commodities

relative to manufactures, c/m' and a decreasing function of the real

interest rate in terms of manufactures. Thus demand is given by


(4) d — 6(Pc        -
                            Pm)         a(i -      m) +


where g is the logarithm of exogenous expenditure, which can represent

aggregate world fiscal policy. We assume that a fiscal expansion

increases the relative demand for industrial goods.

     The price of manufactures is assumed to adjust gradually to eliminate

,excess demand:



(5) m [5(Pc -                     Pm)
                                         -
                                             o(i   -
                                                       m)   + g   Ym]


The terms in Pm can be consolidated to yield the second dynamic equation:


(6) m '7[6(Pc -                   Pm)
                                         -   i   + g - ym]


where y   — ir/(l       -
                            ira).       This term must be positive if a positive shock to

excess demand is to raise the price of manufactures.

     The positively sloped jim. —                      0 line in Figure 1 is the locus of points

along which excess demand for manufactured goods is zero, given the value

of the world money stock, which influences the world nominal interest

rate i. The slope is less than unity because an increase in the price

level raises the interest rate and reduces the demand for manufactured

output, At points above the ji — 0 line, there is an excess world supply

of manufactured goods, and their CGU price is falling, assuming t > 0.

Below the line, there is excess demand and the price is rising. The
                                     -6-


dynamics of adjustment of the GCTJ   manufactured price are summarized by the

vertical arrows in Figure 1.

     The intersection of the two equilibrium lines in Figure 1 gives the

equilibrium pair of GCU world prices for given world money stock, fiscal

policy, and real supply conditions. ),j Dynamic adjustment to the equi-

librium proceeds along the stable saddle path as. This path has two

essential properties: it leads to the equilibrium (technically satisfies

the transversality conditions implicit in the model), and along it the

expected rate of change of the commodity price is realized. All other

paths with expectations realized from period to period explode away from

the equilibrium; they are speculative bubbles. The assumption that the

market seeks out the stable ss path following a disturbance is the same as

assuming that speculative bubbles are unsustainable.

     The model of Figure 1 can be used to show the potential usefulness of

movements of commodity prices as an indicator of future inflation. Con-

sider an unanticipated increase in the world money supply, originating in

either country. In the long run, both prices would increase proportion-

ately in GCU. Thus in Figure 1 both the        — 0 and the    — 0 lines shift

out, so that the long-run equilibrium moves out proportionately. This is

shown as the movement from point 0 to point 2 in Figure 2, which also

shows the new ss path into the new equilibrium. The commodity price can

adjust instantaneously to reflect the expected inflation, while the manu-




  ],./ There is a difficulty in interpreting the model's equilibrium as a
steady-state position, because interest rate data tend not to be
stationary. Specifically, while money stocks, GNP, and GNP delators are
generally integrated of degree zero, interest rates may be integrated of
degree one.
                                    -7-
 faccures   price can adjust only over time. Thus in Figure 2, the flexible

 commodity price jumps Onto the new ss path at point 1, and then the two

prices adjust gradually along the ss path to point 2. In response to an

unanticipated monetary shock, commodity prices jump and overshoot, and

lead the subsequent inflation in industrial prices.

     In response to repeated monetary shocks, jumps in the level of com-

modity prices would lead changes in the rate of inflation of industrial

prices. This should produce a positive correlation between the j

of world GCU commodity prices and the subsequent rate of inflation of

manufactures prices if repeated monetary disturbances are empirically

important. Cointegration of the level of commodity prices and the rate of

inflation in consumer prices is not rejected in the statistical tests in

Section IV (Table 4), below.

     The effects of an unanticipated real disturbance that changes the

equilibrium relative price Ps/Pc are shown in Figure 3. There we assume

that the disturbance increases the equilibrium relative price. This could

be due to a supply shock that increases commodity supply relative to the

supply of manufactures; for example, an innovation in commodity produc-

tion. It could also result from a shift in demand toward manufactures;

for example, a fiscal expansion. This disturbance shifts the   Pm — 0 line

up along the     — 0 line to a new long-run equilibrium at point 2, which

lies on a steeper ray from the origin that characterizes a higher Pm/Pc

ratio. If there is no monetary accommodation to the disturbance, the

    0 line does not move. The result is that the commodity price jumps

down onto the new ss path at point 1, and then continues to fall, while

the industrial price rises to the new equilibrium at point 2. The corn-
                                  -8-


modity price undrshoots in response to a real disturbance. It moves

before the industrial price, but in the opposite direction. With no

monetary accommodation, for the m/c ratio to rise, m must increase and

   must fall.

     It could appear from this analysis that commodity prices would not

be a useful indicator of future inflation in the presence of unaccommo-

dated real disturbances. In fact, in this model, as long as the real

disturbance is not accommodated, there is no general inflation. As one

price rises, the other falls to keep the weighted CPI in GCU constant.

Thus a stochastic series of aggregate real shocks would produce stochastic

behavior of the commodity price with no general inflation. If in empiri-

cal implementation we use an index of a variety of commodity prices, real

supply shocks would come from differing sources, depending on the commod-

ity. To the extent that these are independent, offsetting negative and

positive disturbances at the individual coimnodity level would minimize

the contribution of supply shocks to the variance of the index. Thus the

path of the index would be dominated by monetary disturbances, with real

disturbances producing noise around that path. The contribution of real

supply shocks to the variance of the index would be minimized to the

extent that they are uncorrelated. This would improve the usefulness of

the index as an inflation indicator.

     At this point we can summarize the results from the world model of

commodity and manufactures prices in GCU. Monetary disturbances lead to

jumps in the commodity price index, followed by gradual movement in the

manufactures price in the same direction. The long run movement of both

prices is proportional to the monetary disturbance. Thus a series of
                                    -9-


positive monetary shocks would produce a series of jumps in the level of

commodity prices and smoother inflation in manufactures prices, with a

common trend to both. Real disturbances yield jumps in the commodity

price, followed by gradual movement of the manufactures price in the

opposite direction. If the real disturbances are not accommodated by

monetary policy, they have no long-run effect on the CPI, but they produce

noise in the commodity price series. If the real disturbances have in

them a trend that raises the relative price of manufactures, they will

generate noise around that trend.

2.   Relative model of prices and exchanae rates

•    The world model gives us the movements of commodity and manufactures

prices in GCIJ, as functions of world monetary and real disturbances. To

translate these into domestic price indexes in individual countries, we

can use a model of the exchange rate and relative price levels between

two countries. This will give us the relative effects of disturbances,

depending on the country of their source. The relative effects can then

be combined with the world effects in GCU to obtain the results for CPIs

and GDP deflators in home currencies. The relative model is an applica-

tion of Aoki's (1981) average and difference method to the Dornbusch

(1976) model of prices and the exchange rate.

     We begin by defining relative variables between two "representative"

countries as the differences between the logarithms of the variables for

the domestic GNP deflators, money stocks, CNPs, and fiscal variables; and

the aritbmeticdifferences for interest rates, with each relative variable

being the standard mnenonic with a subscript "r". Thus for relacive
                                              - 10   -




prices,   we have


     Pr — lnP         -    lnP*

where P and               are the home and foreign GNP deflators, respectively.

Relative money stocks (mr), real GNP (yr)' and fiscal variables (ge) are

similarly defined. Each country's GNP will be a combination of commodity,

manufactures, and services output, and its CNP deflator will be the

corresponding weighted average.               The interest differential, equal to the

expected rate of change of the nominal exchange rate, E, is


          —   i   -         — e.


In equilibrium with — 0, ir would also be 0. jJ

     The model of relative prices and the exchange rate is specified

similarly to the model of manufactures and commodity prices described

above in subsection 1. Here the exchange rate is the forward-looking

variable that jumps in response to unanticipated disturbances, and the

relative GNP deflator adjusts slowly to relative excess demand. The

relative equilibrium condition for the money market is


(7) mr -      Pr —        Yr r —          -




using   the uncovered interest parity condition to substitute             for r.




  / A risk premium related to relative stocks of outstanding assets
could be added to the interest differential. While that extension might
provide additional insights, especially regarding the longer-run effects
of fiscal policies, it would complicate the analysis without modifying the
qualitative conclusions regarding the model's dynamics.
                                                       - 11   -




We can set      — 0 (or i — 0) in equation (7) to obtain the                           — 0 line in

Figure 4, which shows the relative price Pr that would clear the money

market for given values of mr and Yr                              In contrast to the c — 0 line in

Figure 1, the               — 0 line here is horizontal. For a point above the                  — 0

line to be consistent with money-market equilibrium, E must be rising.

This is because Pr jS higher than on the line, so 1-r must be positive

above the line. This would mean that E would be expected to rise (so                                 is

positive), and on the assumption of perfect foresight, E would actually

rise. This reasoning is exactly the same as that behind the P dynamics

in Figure 1.

     Relative demand, dr, for the two real GNPs is specified as


(8) dr — 8(e        -
                            Pr)     -
                                        °(r        Pr) +


As in the earlier model, the relative GNP deflator adjusts gradually to

excess demand, so that


(9) r (1r - Yr).

Substituting (8) into (9) and solving for r yields the second dynamic
                                               -
equation,


(10) r — v(6(e              -
                                 Pr)    -
                                            °r +    g Yrl'

where —     ir/(l       -
                                ira),   which is required to be positive. Setting r                  in

equation (10) yields the positively sloped r — 0 line in Figure 4, for

relative GNP deflator equilibrium. As long as                              is positive, Pr adjusts

toward the Pr = 0 line.
                                 - 12   -




    The two equilibrium lines in Figure 4 show the equilibrium relative

price, measured in the ratio of the two currencies, and the equilibrium

exchange rate at point 0 for given relative money stocks, fiscal posi-

tions, and supply conditions. Dynamic adjustment to equilibrium proceeds

along the saddle path ss, as in the earlier model of Figure 1. The only

analytical difference between Figure 1 and Figure 4 is the slope of the

curve representing monetary equilibrium. In both models, the saddle path

is negatively sloped, and the flexible price jumps horizontally onto the

saddle path following an unanticipated disturbance, while the sticky price

adjusts gradually along the saddle path.

     The effects of a strictly relative monetary disturbance (an increase

in the money supply in the home country and a decrease of the same percent

in the foreign country) are shown in Figure 5. There is no change at the

world level of subsection 1, since there is no effect on the world money

stock. But in the relative model, the long run equilibrium moves Out pro-

portionately to point 2 in Figure 5, with the exchange rate and relative

price both increasing in proportion to the change in the relative money

supply. The home price level rises and the foreign price level declines.

The home currency depreciates against the GCIJ and the foreign currency

appreciates. In the short run, the exchange rate between the two coun-

tries jumps to point 1 on the new ss path, and then the exchange rate

falls and the relative price rises to point 2. This is the basic result

from Dornbusch (1976) for two countries.

     The effects of a strictly relative fiscal disturbance, an increase

in gr in equation (10), are shown in Figure 6. We assume that the home

government increases, and the other government decreases, expenditure on
                                                  —       —




 RFLAFIVF EFFECTS OF N1S)NF1 SRY FNIANSTS)N                              ISItAIIVE FIIF( IS OF   1-ISCAL 31511 RLIASCE




       /
 ///
/



                                        RELA1IVE EFFECTS OF SUPPLY DISiL RISASCE


                                   P.




                                                                \
                                                                    \\
                                 - 13   -




manufactures by the same amount. There is no change in the world market
in manufactures or commodities, but in the relative model, the r — 0

line in Figure 6 shifts up. The equilibrium relative price level of the

home country, where the fiscal expansion took place, increases for a given

level of the exchange rate.    There is no shift of the   — 0 line, since

the fiscal variable does not enter the money-market equilibrium condition,

equation (7). As a result, the exchange rate falls in a jump from point

o to point 1 in Figure 6. The home currency appreciates by enough to

offset the effect of the fiscal shift on relative demand, with no effect

on either price level in home currency. The nominal appreciation of the

home currency produces a real appreciation of the same amount. This

result is implicit in Dornbusch (1976), and explicit in Mundell (1963).

3.   The two models combined

     The model of the world markets in commodities and manufactures in

GCU and the relative model of exchange rates and relative prices in home

currencies can now be combined to analyze the effects of the various types

of unanticipated disturbances originating in one country. We will

consider, in turn, monetary, fiscal, and supply shocks.

Monetary ExDansion in One Country

     First we illustrate the effects of an unanticipated monetary expan-

sion in one country. At the level of the world model of commodity and

manufactures prices, the results are illustrated in Figure 2. Measured in

GCU, the commodity price jumps, and then the mawfactures price rises

gradually, as the commodity price falls. The jump in the level of the

commodity price leads the gradual increase in the manufactures price.
                                    - 14   -




Eventually   both prices rise proportionately to the increase in the money

stock, all measured in GCU.

      The relative effect is shown in Figure 5. The exchange rate of the

expanding country against the second country jumps from point 0 to point

1; that is, the expanding country's currency depreciates. Subsequently,

that country's price level in home currency rises and its exchange rate

falls, converging to point 2. In the new long-run equilibrium, the

exchange rate and the price level in the expanding country rise

proportionately to the monetary expansion.     -




Fiscal   Exysnsion in One Country

      The interesting case of an unanticipated fiscal expansion is one that

alters world relative demand for manufactures snd commodities, as well as

the real exchange rate as shown in Figure 6. To use a specific example,

consider a fiscal expansion in the manufacturing country that increases

the world relative demand for manufactures. As a convenient simplifica-

tion, think of this country as Japan, and the other country, specializing

in commodities production, as Italy. j/ The effects at the world level

in CCIJ are shown in Figure 3. The commodity price jumps down, and then

declines gradually further as the manufactures price rises. At the new

equilibrium point 2, m has risen and c has fallen, in GCU.

      The relative effects are shown in Figure 6. With no direct represen-

tation of the fiscal variable in the financial equilibrium equation (7),

the    — 0 line does not move. The fiscal expansion in Japan shifts the



  j/ Table 9 below shows that among the large industrial countries, Japan
is the least intensive in production of primary commodities, and Italy the
most.
                                  - 15   -




  — 0 line left, moving the equilibrium point from 0 to 1 in a jump. The

home real and nominal exchange rates appreciate, with no change in rela-

tive GDP deflators, in home currency. The appreciation of the yen just

offsets the increase in m in GCIJ, and the depreciation of the lira just

offsets the fall in c     GCU.

     The effects of the fiscal expansion in the manufacturing country on

prices in all three currencies are summarized in panel (a) of Table 1.

m is up and c is down, in GCU. m in lira rises both because of the

increase in GCU and because of the depreciation of the lira against the

GCU, while in yen m is unchanged. Pc is unchanged in lira, while it

falls in yen both from the fall in GCU and from the yen appreciation.

Thus if both countries consume both goods, the CPI will fall in Japan and

rise in Italy, reflecting the terms-of-trade effect, with both GDP

deflators unchanged.

SupDly Expansion in One Country

     A supply shock also alters the world relative prices, as in Figure 3,

and the equilibrium real exchange rate. The analysis is slightly more

complicated than that of a fiscal expansion, though, since both equilib-

rium lines in Figure 6 shift with a supply shock. Consider an increase in

productivity in the commodity-producing country (Italy) that increases the

world relative supply of commodities. The effects at the level of the

world market in CCIJ are again shown in Figure 3. The commodity price

jumps down from point 0 to point 1 when the supply increase becomes known

to the market. Then Pc falls gradually as m rises to point 2. In GCU

the price of commodities falls and the price of manufactures rises.
                                                 - 16      -




        Table   1. Theoretical Effects on Prices from Various Disturbances J



                      (a)                                                   (b)

Responses to a Fiscal Expansion in the                      Responses to a Supply Increase in the
Manufactures -Producing Country (Japan)                     Commodities-Producing Country (Italy)


                        Measured in:                                              Measured in:
Effect on       GCU         Lira            Yen             Effect on   GCU           Lira        Yen


   m                        ++               0                 "m                      ++
   PC
                 -           0              --                 c

                                                     (c)

            Summary of Effects of Disturbances on Home-Currency Prices

                                             Ffts nn                 Pr(ee in
                                 Orizinatina Country                        Other Countries

Shock                                                          CPI      c           m       CPI


Increase in Money Stock
  in Either Country              +               +             +        0          0          0

Fiscal Expansion in
  Manufactures Producer             -            0              -       0          +          +

Supply Increase in
  Commodities Producer              -            +              ?       -          +          ?



  )J Price   increases are denoted by +              and     decreases by -; 0 indicates no
change. The symbols +       + and       -   indicate        relatively large changes.
                                       - 17


         The relative effects are shown in Figure 7, with Italy as the home

country. The productivity shock increases Yr in both equations (7) and

(10), shifting both equilibrium lines down. The r — 0 line shifts down

by a factor of -1/8 from equation (10), and the — 0 line shifts down by

-       from equation (7). If the shift in the r — 0 line is sufficiently

larger than the shift in the — 0 line, the new saddle path will pass to

the right of the original equilibrium point 0, as shown in Figure 7. This

would be the case if the supply shock's effects were felt mainly in the

goods markets, compared with the effects in the money market via an

increase in income. In this case, the exchange rate of Italy would jump

up to point 1, and then rise further as r falls to point 2. That is, the

lira would depreciate in both nominal and real tens against the CCU.

          One cannot rule Out the possibility that the downward shift in the

    —    0 line would be large enough that the new saddle path would pass to

the left of point 0.       In that case the exchange rate could jump down, and

then rise as 1'r fell to the new equilibrium. Equation (10) shows that in

the new equilibrium the real exchange rate (e -           p)   must rise with an

increase in Yr by d(e -      pr)/dyr   —   1/6.   We know, therefore, that in Figure

7, along the new equilibrium line r — 0 the lira has depreciated in real

terms, regardless of the direction of its original jump. So the result

from the relative model is that the real. exchange rate of the country with

the positive supply shock rises (home currency depreciates) relative to

the CCU, and the other country's real exchange rate falls.

          The results for the positive supply shock in the commodity-producing

country are summarized in panel (b) of Table 1. The price of commodities

falls and the price of manufactures rises in GCIJ. With the lira
                                   - 18   -




depreciating   in real terms, the lirs price of manufactures rises even

more, and the lira price of commodities falls less than in OCU. As the

yen appreciates in real terms, the yen price of commodities falls even

more, and the yen price of manufactures rises less, than in CCU. With the

two prices moving in opposite directions in both currencies, the effects

on the two CPIs are ambiguous. However, since the movement in the real

exchange rate adds to the downward movement in commodity prices inJapan,

and to the upward movement of manufactures prices in Italy, it seems

likely the the CPI would fall in Japan and rise in Italy.

Summary

     The effects of the unanticipated disturbances in single countries are

summarized in panel (c) of Table 1. The effects of an unanticipated

expansion in the money supply are familiar. In the home country, prices

rise proportionately to the expansion. The currency of the foreign

country appreciates, and local currency prices in the foreign country are

unchanged. In this case the commodity price jumps and leads a general

inflation in the home country.

     The effects of a fiscal expansion or a supply shock are less

familiar. A fiscal expansion in the manufacturing country that raises

world relative demand for manufactures raises the CCU price of manufac-

tures and reduces the GCU price of commodities. It also appreciates the

currency of the expanding country and depreciates the currencies of the

others, in nominal and real terms. The result is a negative effect on the

CPI in the expanding country and a positive effect on the others, owing to

the movement of the exchange rate. This is similar to the effect of the

fiscal expansion in the United States on the U.S. inflation rate via the
                                  - 19   -




dollar   exchange rate in the early 1980s. In this case the downward jump

in the commodity price following the disturbance contains no general

signal for inflation unless it includes a general shift in monetary

policy. If unaccommodated fiscal disturbances are randomly distributed

across countries and over time, they will create noise in the relation

between commodity price movements and subsequent inflation.

     Finally, a positive supply shock lowers the price of the good whose

supply has increased and depreciates the currency of the suppliers in real

terms. The net result is to reduce the price of the good in question, and

increase the prices of the others, in all currencies. The effects on

home-currency CPIs deperd on the weights of the goods in the CPI. In this

case the initial downward jump in the GCU commodity price also contains no

signal for subsequent inflation. By using an index over a large number of

commodities, individual supply shacks such as these are averaged Out to

some degree in the empirical work that follows.

              III. Country-Specific Commodity Price Indexes

     The empirical tests developed in Sections IV and V of this paper

evaluate the relationships between general movements in world prices of

primary commodities and inflation in the large industrial countries. In

order to isolate the effects of global developments on individual coun-

tries, it is necessary to develop separate commodity-price indexes for

each country. This task has two disensious: determining the weights that

each commodity should have in a country's index, and denominating the

index in that country's currency. The first dimension is at least poten-

tially important in order to take account of variation between countries

in the shares of key commodities in consumption patterns; the second
                                    - 20 -




ensures that the commodity-price and general-price indexes are denominated

in the same currency units.    -.




     The commodity-price indexes have been constructed using spot prices

for major commodities and weights that reflect the pattern of consumption

of these commodities in each country. A large number of price quotations

are included (thirty-one primary commodities represented by thirty-six

international price quotations), in order to minimize the effects of price

fluctuations caused by supply shocks or other real disturbances in

individual commodity markets. Weights are based on consumption, rather

than production or imports, since these relate most directly to movements

in the consumer price index.        -                                 -


     Table 2 provides a comparison of patterns of consumption of primary

commodities in the seven major industrial countries. ./ These data

indicate that the portion of total private consumption attributed to the

consumption of primary commodities J is quite uniform among countries, at

about 8 percent (second row of Table 2). Consumption of individual

commodities, however, varies substantially from country to country. For

example, while the consumption of grains is relatively constant as a share

of primary consumption for most countries (about 14 percent except for

Germany), the composition of grain consumption is more diversified.

Weights representing the consumption of wheat in France, Italy, and the

United Kingdom (each 10 percent); maize- in the United States (11 percent);


  ]./ Data sources and methodology are described in an appendix, available
on request.
      This statement refers to the ratio of the value of consumption of
the 31 selected primary commodities to the value of total private
consumption.
                                                         — 21 —


                                   Table   2.   Consigtion of Primary Coummdities in Major
                                                 Industrial Couitries, 1983-85




                                                                                     United    United
Conmadity                           Canada      France   Germany   Italy    Japan    Kingdom States      G-7


Total, AU Primary Cosmsodities

  in miLLions of U.S. doLLars
    (yearly average)          17,515            27,749   36,225    24,545   55,566    22,284 183,172 367,055
  in percent of total
    consuiption                  9.0               8.9      9.7      9.4       7.5      8.1        7.5    8.0

Weights (in percent)

  Cereals                              10.5       14.0      6.5      16.3     15.5      11.3      15.4    14.0
    Wheat                              4.2         9.8      5.3      9.6      2.2       10.1      3.3     4.7
    Maize                              6.2         4.0      1.1      s;i      4.1        1.1     11.1     7.3
    Rice                               0.1         0.2      0.1       1.7     9.2       0.0        1.0    2.0
  Vegetable oiLs                       3.1         4.3      4.4      4.1      3.6       3.0       5.7     4.8
    Soybeans                           0.8         0.3      0.8      0.7       1.3      0.3       1.9     1.4
    Soybean meaL                       1.5         3.0      2.1      2.2      1.2       1.5       2.0     1.9
    Soybean oiL                        0.6         0.2      0.8      0.7      0.8       0.6       1.5     1.1
    Palm oil                           0.1         0.1      0.2      0.2      0.2       0.5       0.1     0.1
    Coconut oil.                       0.1         0.2      0.3      0.1      0.1       0.1       0.2     0.2
    Grouiut       oil                  0.0         0.5      0.1      0.1      0.0       0.0       0.0     0.1

  Meat                                14.5        18.6      9.7     16.2      2.6      15.1      14.9    12.9
    Beef                              14.3        17.0      9.4     15.5      2.4      11.7      14.8    12.4
    Lath                               0.2         1.6      0.3      0.6      0.3       3.4       0.2     0.5
  Sugar                                0.7         2.5      2.3      2.5      0.7       4.0       2.0     2.0
  Bananas                              0.5         0.5      0.5      0.5      0.4       0.5       0.5     0.5
  Beverages                            2.2         3.9      6.2      3.8      1.9       4.8       2.4     3.0
    Coffee                             1.4         2.8      3.8      2.9      1.1       1.3       1.6     1.9
   Cocos                               0.6         1.1      2.2      0.8      0.3       1.6       0.7     0.9
    Tea                                0.2         0.1      0.1      0.0      0.5       1.9       0.1     0.3
  Agricultural.    Raw Materials      19.1        15.2     24.8     14.8     21..t     8.4       11.5    15.5
   Tither                             16.1         9.9     20.3      5.9     153       12.7       7.7    10.8
    Fibers                             0.6         2.2      1.5      3.1      3.0       27        1.3     1.8
      Cotton                           0.5         1.0      1.0      15       2.?       0.4       1.1     1.2
      wool                             0.1         1.3      0.6      1.3      0.9       2.4       0.2     0.6
   Natural. ri.Eber                    0.5         0.5      0.5      0.4      0.9       0.5       0.4     0.5
   Tobacco                             1.4         1.5      0.9      1.9      1.2       1.2       1.0     1.2
   Hides                               0.5         1.0      1.5      3.4      0.6       1.2       1.1     1.2
 Metals and Phosphate Rock             8.4         9.7     13.3      8.2     16.4       8.7       7.4     9.7
   Copper                              1.8         2.1      3.1      2.1      3.3       2.3       1.6     2.1
   ALi.uiim                            2.2         2.7      3.9      2.3      3.8       1.9       2.9     3.0
   iron ore                            2.2         2.2      3.3      1.9      5.8       1.8       1.0     2.2
   Tin                                 0.3         0.4      0.4      0.2      0.7       0.5       0.3     0.4
   Nickel                              0.2         0.6      1.0      0.4      1.1       0.6       0.4     0.6
   Zinc                                0.7         0.8      0.9      0.7      1.1       0.7       0.4     0.7
   Lead                                0.2         03       0,4      0.4      0.3       0.5       0.3     0.3
   Phomçiiat. Rock                     0.7         0.7      0.2      0.3      0.2       0.3       0.5     0.4

 PetroLei.. if                        41.0        30.9     32.5     33.8     37.9      34.2      40.2    37.6


 Sources: see text and Appendix I (avaiLable on request).
 1/ 1986 date.
                                    - 22   -




and rice in Japan (9 per"ent) are significantly higher than average

consumption of these commodities by the group of seven countries.

        Similarly, beef consumption is relatively low in Japan (2.4 percent)

and Germany (9.4 percent), compared with the group (12.4 percent); these

two countries consume relatively more seafood and pork products, respec-

tively, which are not included in the indexes. j/ Tea consumption, as

might be expected, is relatively high in the United Kingdom (1.9 percent),

as is coffee consumption in Germany (3.8 percent). The relatively low

level of consumption of timber products in Italy (5.9 percent) reflects a

preference for stone and cement in housing construction, compared with a

greater preference for timber in construction in Germany (20.3 percent).

        There is remarkable consistency in the share of consumption of pri-

mary commodities attributed to petroleum, which- -at roughly 38 percent- -    ia
the largest of any commodity by far. Weights for petroleum were based on

consumption and import unit values in 1986, rather than the 1983-85

average that was used for all other commodities. This ad hoc procedure

is intended to avoid overstating the importance of petroleum, in light of

the very sharp decline in oil prices that occurred in 1986 and again in
                               -
1988.

        A caveat on the estimates of the pattern of consumption in the large

industrial countries relates to the difficulty in separating end-use

consumption of primary commodities from intermediate use in the production

of other primary commodities or manufactured products for export. Some


  j,J Broadly representative and timely price series are not available for
seafood or pork products.
  / The use of average 1983-85 data would give a weight to petroleum of
around 50 percent in each country.
                                 - 23


adjustments were made to consumption values to avoid double counting of

commodities at various stages of production, such as in the production of

soybean and timber products. j/ It was not generally possible, however,

to adjust for the consumption of one commodity in the production of

another. Hence there is some double counting for all countries, on account

of maize and soybean meal used as cattle feed, and phosphate rock used in

the production of grains, soybeans, and fibers.

     Consumption weights also may be overestimated for a few commodities

in countries where there are significant exports of finished manufactures.

Relatively high weights for metals in Japan (16.4 percent) and Germany

(13.3 percent) compared with the group average (9.7 percent) reflect a

greater rate of production of automobiles, more than half of which are

exported. Relatively high weights for hides in Italy (3.3 percent) and

sugar and cocoa in Germany (about 2 percent each) reflect the production

of shoes and confectionery for export in these countries. The bias in

the indexes caused by overestimated weights may not extend to the esti-

mation of weights for the group of countries, however, since manufactures

exported by one country are often imported by another country in the

group. In addition, some underestimation of weights occurs, when commod-




 J    The consumption weights in Table 1 were modified to prevent double
counting of soybeans and soybean meal production; logs, timber, plywood,
and paperboard production; and tobacco and cigarette production. The last
two adjustments were needed to account for the export of commodities at a
higher value-added level (principally plywood and paper exports from
Canada and cigarette exports from the United States).
                                   - 24   -




ities   are imported at an advanced stage of production from outside the

group of seven countries. j/                  -




     A comparison of commodity price indexes, using weights from Table 2

and denominating commodity prices in a common currency, is presented in

Chart 1. A casual inspection reveals the indexes to be quite similar,

despite the differences in weights used to construct them. In particular,

indexes for all countries that include large, similar weights for petro-

leum are found to he roughly identical, with only minor variations evident

in the indexes that exclude petroleum. These variations, in turn, are

caused by the presence or absence of large weights for commodities whose

prices moved differently than did prices of the group.

     As examples of differences in movements in prices, indexes for most

countries rose in 1973-74 to 80 percent or more of their respective 1980

levels, largely owing to a more than doubling of grain prices from 1972.

The exception to this was the price index for Germany, which remained

below 80, on account of a weight for grains equal to roughly one half of

that in other countries. Other distinctive movements in Germany's index

include a sharp, extended rise in the index during 1978-80, owing in part

to a doubling of the internationsl price of logs, and a subsequent rise in

1988, to well over 100 percent of the 1980 level, again related to a rise


 /    An example of underestimation of weights is given by iron ore, which
is often imported and consumed as steel products. An adjustment to the
iron ore weight to account for the import of steel products is difficult
because of the variety of these products and their high value-added
component; the value of steel at an advanced stage of production (cold
rolled steel) is ten times that of iron ore. The United States is a
significant importer of semi-finished and finished steel products, with an
apparent consumption nearly equal to that of Japan, im tonnage terms; this
compares with an estimated weight for iron ore consumption in the United
States that is about one fifth that in Japan.                      -
                                        — 24a -

       Chart 1. Seven Large Industrial Countries: Commodity Prices,
                      In a Common Currency, 1957—88.

                            (Index: 1980=100)
120

100

80

 60

 40

 20


                                                                      120
120

                                                                      100
100

                                                                      80
 @0


 so                                                                   60

 40                                                                   40

 20                                                                   20



120

100

 80

 60

 40

 20


                                                                      120
 120

 100
                                                                      100

                                                                      @0
 80

 60                                                                   60

  40
                                                                      40

  20                                                                  20
                                     — 24b —


 Chart 1 (continued). Seven Large Industrial Countries: Commodity Prices,
                     In a Common Currency, 1957—88.
                           (Index: 1980=100)
                                                                      120

100                                                                   100

 80                                                                   80

 60                                                                   60

 40                                                                   40

 20


120                                                                   120

100                                                                   100

80                                                                    80

60                                                                    60

40                                                                    40

20                                                                    20


                                                                      120

                                                                      100

                                                                      80

                                                                      60

                                                                      40

                                                                      20


[20

100

80

60

40

20
                                VI. CONCLUSION



   This psper hss illustrated the tradeoffs policy makers would face when

choosing the width of a band, or when converging to an extremely narrow band

in order to shift to a unique currency. These tradeoffs concern the degree of

exchange- rate, interest-rate and fundamentals variability. They depend on the

assumed process (constant drift or mean reversion) for the disturbances which

affect money demand and/or supply.

   They also depend on the type of coordination which would take place in case

of foreign exchange crisis. In this last respect, we have been careful to make

Assumption 2 so as to avoid altogether the problem of speculative attacks and

needed reserves. We have assumed that central banks credibly and

unconditionally intervene so as prevent speculative attacks. Indefinite

intervention is possible if the central bank of the currently strong currency

supports the other currency by printing money.

   We have generalized the result of Svensson (1989) that the variability of

the exchange rate is translated into variability in the interest rate

differential.

   We have also found that the degree of fundamentals variability which would

be tolerated by the market when a target zone is extremely narrow is very

large (a difference of two orders cf magnitude) in the case of a constant

drift disturbance and in the case of mean reversion with a band exactly

centered on the reversion point. The result is lost if the band is not

precisely centered there.




                                      21
                                               APPENDIX A

                                        MODEL INTERPRETATION

     It is conceivable to interpret v either as a supply or a demand shock.

Consider the following two-country log-linear monetary exchange rate model

which has been extensively used in recent work (see for example Delgedo and

Dumas (1990) and all the references given there).



                                                                                           (Al)
     m—.Qn(D+R)+z1—m+z1

                                                                                           (A2)



                                                                                           (A3)
     m-p—y--yi+z2
     -*      *   *            *     *
     m     -p —*y                 +12                                                      (A4)


     i —   i*   + E(dS I '(tfl/dt +
                                          13                                               (AS)




All starred variables are the foreign variables corresponding to the non-

starred domestic variables. 21 being a multiplicative shock which affects (D +

R) and is assumed to follow a geometric Erownian motion process, z is the log
of              m is the total money supply that can be broken down into two

components, m the controllable money supply, and 11 the uncontrollable

component. The right-hand sides of equations (A3) and (A4) are money demands;


12 and 4
                 are   money demand shocks. p is the price level. y is domestic output.

i is the domestic interest rate.

     E is the expectations operator. '(t)               is   the information set used by



     In the classic speculative attack literature [Rrugman (1979) and Flood
and Carber (1983); see also Dornbusch (1984) and Claessens (l98(A3)], shoc4
came from growth in domestic credit. In our formulation, the terms   and
are shocks applied to the sum of R end D, not to D.


                                                   22
     (1989a, b) put it, all information regarding not only the evolution of the

     variables in the system (Al)-(A5), but the implicit as well as explicit
If
     government policies regarding exchange rate regimes in particular and monetary

     policy in general. Of impottance for our purposes is the market perception

     that once the central bank whose currency is weak runs out of reseves, the

     other central bank will continue intervention to support the weak currency.

        Subtracting (A3) from (A4) and replacing (Al), (A2) and (A3) we can obtain

     equation (1), where v —
                               (z1
                                     -
                                         4)   +   (y    -
                                                             y*)   (z2 -   4)   +
                                                                                    z3
                                                                                         is a cumulative

     shock. Given that v includes terms in                  and    it can be interpreted as

     either a demand or a supply shock to money.




                                                   23
                                                       APPENDIX B

                                MONOTONIC RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN

          THE BAND ON FUNDAMENTALS AND THE BAND ON THE EXCHANGE RATE




For simplicity    let's define the following functions:




      -           aX-fiX-                    aX-fiX                    (a-fi)X
  NF(X,X) —    -fie                     oe               + (a+fi)e                                      (El)




      -           oX-fiX             oX-fiX                            (a-fi)X
   HC(X,X) — oe                 + fie                    -
                                                             (a+fi)e                                    (82)




                       oX-fiX                        oX-fiX
   DF(X,X) — -afi(e                          -   e            )                                         (B3)


   F(X,A;S,) — - X +            S   -
                                                 + NF(X,X)/DF(X,A) — 0                                  (84)



   C(XX;S,S) —        -X   + S      -
                                         - + NG(X,X)/DF(X,X)               — 0                          (BE)


   Using the implicit function theorem for F(.) — 0 and G(.) —                             0   we can

obtain the two derivatives aX/a and                                    which we are looking for.

   Defining the following functions



           —   BF(•)/PX                                                                                  (BE)

           —   aF(•)/3                                                                                   (B7)


   Cl(s) — dG(•)/BX                                                                                      (88)

   02(5) — aG(.)/3X                                                                                      (89)

           — BF(')/3S                                                                                   (810)

           —   3F(•)/8      ,                                                                           (811)


                                                              24
we can determine the signs of the following expressions


                    F         F
                        sl        x2
   OX/aS —                             /J   a 0                          (312)

                    C         C
                        sl        x2




                    Fxl       Fs2

                                       /Ja0                              (513)

                    C         C
                        xl        s2


where:



           F            F
               xl        x2
                                  >0                                     (514)

           C
               xl
                        Cx2



   Replacing all definitions in (512) and (513), and remembering that 1/a -

1/fl   — -yp, we obtain the signs of the partial derivatives. Q.E.D.




                                                  25
                                                 APPENDIX C

                                    ASYMPTOTIC BEHAVIOR POR WIDE BANDS

                                           UNDER CONSTANT DREFT




Let   us call S the joint asymptotic value of the distance of it from the

diagonal line and of the distance of                  from the free-float line; let us also

call 2 the width of the exchange rate band, S —
                                                                  S+   c and S —
                                                                                   S   -
                                                                                           r.   We

have:



   it   — So       +C +S


                         --yp-5            and


   X — X       -
                   2(c   + 5)   -




   To study the behavior of wide bands we can substitute these relationships

into (14), simplify, and neglect terms that approach zero as we make 5, c -.

We obtain a simple relstionshipH2




      S—c -        -yp+l/a=c+l/                                                                  (Cl)

Q.E.D.




     12Svensson obtained a similar relationship for the special case of zero
drift (ji — 0) in which the two roots are of equal magnitude: m        The
distance from the free-float (confounded in his case with the 45 line) was
1/a — -1/fl.

                                                     26
                                        APPENDIX D

                        CUBIC RELATIONSHIP FOR NARROW BANDS BETWEEN

                THE BAND ON FUNDAMENTALS AND THE BAND ON THE EXCHANGE RATE

                                   UNDER CONSTANT DRIFT



To obtain the relationship between the widths of the bands for small widths we

are going to use a linear approximation to the exponential function:



                1 + Ax + (Ax)2/2! + (Ax)3/3! +   ...                         (Dl)


   The expansion is carried out as far as is needed. Additional terms are

added if the prior order terms vanish or lead to an identity.

   We proceed with the linearization around S. The four variables with

respect to which the linearization is to be performed can be written as:



       —         + c                                                         (02)
           5o



                                                                             (03)




                                                                             (04)


  ASe-A                                                                      (05)



   Replacing (02)-(D5) in (A14)-(A15) the system is written as:




   -       -           -e° + - oe0L + fl + (o+)e(°Th8                        (06)
                               oS + 6 - (aL + $6))

                                            27
                                      +
                                              +
                      _________________________________________
                                                                   +         -
                                                                                 (a-I-)e°                    (D7)
                                              a       +                e-(a6—    +   6) )

   The last two equations can also be written in matrix form as




   11               + -1
                      8           1
                                  le
                                     a
                                          —
                                                  e
                                                          —
                                                                  1
                                                                      1/a 0 IiFe
                                                                                       —

                                                                                            e
                                                                                                    lii
                                                              Ii
                                                              I




         —                                                                                      I    I   i   (08)

                                                      j [o l/j Le e j [ij
                          I—1—

   H         L - i Fe     I       i




   Using    -ip —   1/a       -   l/      and expanding                 (08), the following expression is

obtained:




         (+    $)( + /l2                                                                                     (09)




Q.E.D.




                                                                        28
                                      REFERENCES


(   Abramowitz, Milton and Irene A. Stegun editors, Handbook of Mathematical
    Functions, New York: Dover, 1972

    Claessens, Constantijn, "Balance of Payments Crises," Unpublished
    Dissertation, University of Pennsylvania. 1986

    Delgado, Francisco and Bernard Dumas, "Monetary Contracting Between Central
    Banks and the Design of Sustainable Exchange-Rate Zones," Working Paper No.
    3440, NBER. September 1990.

    Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Collapsing Exchange Rate Regimes," Working Paper, M.I.T.
    September 1984.

    Dumas, Bernard, "Hysteresis in Capital Formation," Wharton School working
    paper, July 1988, revised as: "Perishable Investment and Hysteresis in
    Capital Formation," Working Paper NO, 2930, NBER. April 1989.

    Flood, Robert P. and Peter M. Carber, "A model of Stochastic Process
    Switching," Econometrica Vol. 5, Number 3, May 1983, pp 537-552.

    Flood, Robert P. and Peter M. Carber, "The linkage Between Speculative Attack
    and Target Zone Models of Exchange Rate," Working Paper NO. 2918, NBER. April
    1989.

    Froot, Kenneth A. and Maurice Obsfeld, "Stochastic Process Switching: Some
    Simple Solutions," Working Paper NO. 2998, NBER. June 1989, Econometrica
    forthcoming.

    Froot, Kenneth A. and Maurice Obsfeld, "Exchange-Rate Dynamics under
    Stochastic Regime Shifts: A Unified Approach," Mimeo IMF, June 1989.

    Krugman, Paul, "A Model of Balance-of-Payments Crisis," Journal of Money
    Credit and Bsnkina, Vol. 11 NO. 3, August 1979, pp 311-325.

    Krugman, Paul, "Target Zones and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 1990.

    Krugman, Paul and Julio Rotemberg, "Target Zones With Limited Reserves," Mimeo
    M.I.T. August 1989, revised August 1990, this volume.

    Lewis, Karen, "Occasional Interventions to Target Rates with a Foreign
    Exchange Application," working paper, New York University, 1990.

    Miller, M. and P. Weller, "Target Zones, Currency Options and Monetary
    Policy," Mimeo 1988, University of Warwick.

    Svensson, tars E. 0. , "Target Zones and Interest Rate Variability: Where does
    the Variability Go, and Is a Fixed Exchange Rate Regime The Limit of a Narrow
    Target Zone," Mimeo, Institute for International Economic Studies, University
    of Stockholm. August 1989.



                                          29
                                                                                             )
                                Legends for figures



Figure 1: Tsrget zones of different widths

The figure is constructed by changing the width of the band around S —          4.5.
This means solving the system (14)-(l5) for different values of S and S

positioned symmetrically around S0. The two straight lines in the middle are

the 450 diagonal line which contains the fixed exchange points, and the free

float. The thick line is the locus of tangencies implied by the smooth

pasting conditions. Points above S are pairs (X,); points below S are

pairs (X, s.).    Numerical values of parameters are: 2 — 0.25, p — 0.5 and y —

0.5.   Units on the two axes are not the same.



Figure 2: Extreme values of interest rate differential

The figure is constructed by changing the width of the exchange rate band

symmetrically around S —     4.5.   Points above o have abscissae equal to i and

ordinates equal to the interest rate differential (assumed equal to the

conditionally expected exchange rate change) reached when X — X. Points below

   have abscissae equal to X and ordinates equal to the interest rate

differential (assumed equal to the conditionally expected exchange rate

change) reached when X —     . Numerical     values of parameters are: 2 —   0.25,     p —

0.5    and 7 —   0.5.


Figure 3: Exchange rate and interest rate differential

When the band is wide as in the case of this figure ( — 1.999,          —    7.001),
the exchange-rate curve follows the free-float line and the interest-rate

curve is flat over most of the range of allowed variations. Numerical values

of parameters are: a — 0.25, p —       0.5   and y —   0.5.


                                             30
Figure 4: Exchange rate and interest rate differential

When the band is narrow as in the case of this figure ( — 4.4999,             —


4.5001),      the exchange-rate curve is S-shaped and is situated far from the

free-float line. The interest-rate curve is practically a straigtht line

reflecting      the imminent intervention. Numerical values of parameters are:
0.25, p — 05 and y        —   0.5.


Figure 5:      Target   zones of different widths: mean reverting case; symmetric
solution with      reversion point A0 —    7.8.
The figure is constructed by changing the width of the band around             —        —
                                                                                   A0
7.8.    This means solving the system (26) for different values of S and S

posicioned symmetrically around S0 —
                                             A0. The two straight lines in the middle
are    the   450 diagonal line which contains the fixed exchange points, and the

free    float which is not at a      450 incline in this case. The thin curve is an

example of an exchange rate curve. The thick line is the locus of tangencies

implied by the smooth pasting conditions. Points above o         are   pairs (X, 5);

points below o are pairs (,          ). Observe   the flatness of the locus around

7.8. Numerical values of parameters are: p — 0.5, a2        — 0.2, A0 — 7.8   and -y —

0.5.    Units on the two axes are not the same.



Figure 6: Target zones of different widths: mean reverting, non-symmetric

csse.

The figure is similar to Figure 5. While the reversion point A0 is still equal

to 4.8, the center of the exchange rate band is now at o         — 9. The free-float

line and the 450 line would intersect at 7.8. The thin curve is an example of

an exchange rate curve. The thick line is the locus of tangencies implied by

the smooth pasting conditions. Observe that the locus is not flat around the

central point S — 9.

                                             31
                                    In




Co
=
I-
ID
                                     (0


zLu
I—



LU
U-                                       LU
ID
U-

CO
                                     N




                               -J
               COO


                I0


      1LV 3ONYHOX3 NO siirin
           EXTREME VALUES OF INTEREST RATE DIFFERENTIAL
     0.9

     0.8

     0.7
-J
     0.6




                              3                   4.5     5                         7
              LIMITS ON FUNDAP.ENTALSON THELEFT   A     ThE RIGHTOF CENTEROF ZONE

                                      FIGURE        2
          EXCHANGE RATE AND INTEREST RATE DIFFERENTIAL
                        WIDE BAND OF WIDT)t7.001/1.999
     8-
     7
-j
     6
tu

U-                                                       Exchange Rate
U-   5
     4.
                                    FX
(0




                         Interest Rate Differential
I
                                                          -
     0
w
     —1



     -2
                    3                       5                  7             9
                                FAM91TALSX
                                 FIGURE         3

                                                                         S
       EXCHANGE RATE AND INTEREST RATE DIFFERENTIAL
                             NARROWBAND OF WIDTH: 4.5001/4.4999
      4.5001
               -                                                                         0.1
     4.50009
                                                                                         0.09
     4.50008
                                                                                         0.08
     4.50007
                                                                                         0.07
     4.50006                                                                             0.06
     4.50005                                                                             0.05    z-l
     4.50004                                                                             0.04
     4.50003                                                                             0.03    m
                                                                                                 (I,
Ui                                                                                               -I
     4.50002                                                                             0.02
     4.50001                                                                             0.01
w
C       4.5                                                                              0       0
z                                                                                                11
     4.49999                                                                             -0.01
C)
Ui   4.49998                                                                             -0.02   m
     4.49997                                                                             -0.03
     4.49996                                                                             -0.04   I-
     4.49995                                                                             -0.05
     4.49994                                   INTEREST RATEDIFFERENTIAL                 -0.06
     4.49993                                                                             -0.07
                                                                                         -0.08
     4.49992
                                                                                         -0.09
     4.49991
                                                                                         -0.1
      4.4999
               4.45   4.47             4.49            4.51                4.53   4.55
                                      FUNDAMENTALS X

                                       FIGURE     4
TARGET ZONES OF DIFFERENT WIDTHS: MEAN REVERTING CASE
                 SYMMETRIC SOLUTION Ao =7.8
    8

 7.95

  7.9
              S

 7.85

        -
  7.8

 7.75

  7.7

 7.65

  7.6                                  TI
        7.3       7.5         7.7            7.9   8.1   8.3
                        LffS ON FUNDAMENTALS (X)
                             FIGURE 5
                TARGET ZONES OF DIFFERENT WIDTHS
                      MEAN REVERTING NON-SYMETRIC CASE
 10
9.9
9.8
9.7
9.6
9.5
9.4
9.3
9.2
9.1
 9
8.9
8.8
8.7
8.6
8.5
8.4
8.3
8.2
8.1
 8
      8   8.2   8.4   8.6    8.8     9       9.2    9.4   9.6   9.8   10
                       LIMITS ON FUNDAMENTALS (X)

                             FIGURE      6
