                            NBER WORKING PAPER. SERIES




              INTERNATIONAL TRADE EFFECTS OF VALUE ADDED TAXATION




                                  Paul   Kruginan

                                Martin Feldstein




                             Working Paper No. 3163




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge. MA 02138
                                  November 1989




Paper prepared for the NBER Conference on International Taxation, Nassau.   This
paper is part of NBERs research programs in International Studies and
Taxation.  Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper #3163
                                          November 1989


                INTERNATIONAL TRADE EFFECTS OF VALUE ADDED TAXATION


                                     ABSTRACT

     The actual value added tax systems   used in many countries differ
significantly  from the completely general VAT that has been the focus of most
economic analyses. In practice, VAT systems exempt broad classes of consumer
goods and services. This has important implications for the effect of the VAT
on international trade.
     A value added tax is sometimes advocated as a way of improving a country's
international competitiveness because GATT rules permit the tax to be levied on
imports and rebated on exports.   This leads to political support for the VAT
among exporters and producers of import-competing products.
     For a general VAT on all consumption, this argument is incorrect except in
the very short run because exchange rates or domestic prices adjust to offset
the effect of the tax on the relative prices of domestic and foreign goods.
When prices or exchange rates have adjusted, a general value added tax will
have no effect on imports and exports.
     In practice, the value added tax frequently exempts housing and many
personal services.   The VAT thus raises the price of tradeables relative to
nontradeables and induces a substitution of housing and services for tradeable
goods.  Since this implies a reduced consumption of imported goods, it also
implies a decline in exports.   The most likely effect of the introduction of a
VAT would thus be a decline of exports.




    Paul Krugman                          Martin Feldstein
    Department of Economics               NBER
    Room E52-383                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
    MIT                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
    50   Memorial Drive
    Cambridge, MA 02139
        There is a well-understood economists' case for a value-added

tax (VAT).      As a consumption tax, a VAT would not impose the bias
against saving that is        inherent in income taxation,          and could
therefore help to promote capital formation and economic growth.
Against this advantage must be weighed possible disadvantages
resulting from higher administrative costs and greater difficulty
in providing an acceptable degree of progressivity to the overall
tax-and—transfer structure, as well as the possible political costs

(or benefits, depending on one's point of view) of a tax that is
relatively invisible and thus easy to raise.
        Among many businessmen, however, the case for a VAT is often

stated quite differently.           They view such a tax as an aid to
international competitiveness, since VATS are levied on imports but

rebated on exports.         The case is often stated as follows:              an

income tax is paid by producers of exports, but not by foreign
producers of the goods we import, while a VAT is paid on imports
but not on exports.     Surely, say the proponents of this view, this

means    that   countries    that   have   a   VAT   have   an   advantage    in

international     competition over countries that            rely   on    income

taxation.

        In fact, this argument is wrong.        A VAT is not, contrary to
popular belief, anything like a tariff-cum-export subsidy.               Indeed,

a VAT is no more an inherently pro-competitive trade policy than
a universal sales trx, to which an "idealized" VAT, levied equally

on all consumption, is in fact equivalent. The point that VATs do
not inherently affect international trade flows has been well
                                              2


recognized in the international tax literature.1 This point is also

familiar to tax policy practitioners; McClure (1987), to take a
recent example, dismisses the competitive argument for a VAT as
evident     nonsense.        Yet    the   belief           that    VATs     are    important
determinants     of     international             competitiveness         persists     among
laymen.

        In large part the belief that VATs are trade distorting
policies reflects        a    failure on the part of non—economists to
understand the basic economic arguments. There is also another
factor, however:        in reality VATs will not be neutral in their
effect on trade,        for at least two reasons.                   First,        VATs are a
substitute for other taxes,               especially income taxes, which
affect trade.     Second,          in practice a VAT will not be neutral;
concern over distributional               issues,      as well as administrative
difficulties,     inevitably          leads       to   a     tax    whose     rate    varies

substantially across industries.

        To acknowledge that in practice a VAT will indeed affect trade

flows is not the same as saying that the lay view is right. In
fact, the widespread view that a VAT enhances the international
competitiveness (in some sense) of the country that adopts it may
well be the reverse of the truth. To the extent that a VAT taxes
traded goods more heavily than nontraded, which is normally the
case,    a VAT in practice probably tends to reduce rather than



       An early treatment is Shibata (1967). For a modern and
especially neat statement of the point, see Grossman (1980); for
a brief statement, see Dixit (1985).
                                       3


increase the size of a country's traded goods sector. Against this

may be set the favorable impact on saving and hence on a country's
trade balance in the short run of substituting a consumption tax
for   taxes,   like    the   income   tax,   that       distort     intertemporal

consumption choices.

      The purpose of this paper is to lay out a simple analytical
approach for thinking about the effects of a VAT on international
trade.   The paper begins by laying out a simple three-good, two-
period model that has the minimal elements necessary to discuss the

international trade effects of a VAT.           The first section describes

the model, and shows how equilibrium is determined in the absence

of taxation.      The second section introduces a VAT, and demonstrates

in the context of our model the well—known fundamental point that

an    idealized     VAT   that   is    levied      on     all     production     is

nondistortionary, in particular having no effect on the allocation

of resources between tradeable and nontradeable sectors.                   We can

also show that such an idealized VAT would leave nominal factor
prices measured in foreign currency unchanged; this argues, in
effect, that even in the short run under fixed exchange rates a VAT

should not be expected to have any effec€ on trade.

      We show next that the absence of distortioriary effects from

a VAT depends on precisely the feature that is often alleged to
constitute     an   unfair   trade    advantage,    namely        the   rebate   of

value—added taxes on exports.         In the absence of an export         rebate,
a VAT would act like an export tax —— which in general equilibrium

is equivalent to an import tariff.              Thus the export rebate is
                                    4


necessary if a VAT is not to be protectionist.
     The remainder of the paper is devoted to reasons why in
practice the introduction of a VAT may not be neutral in its trade

effects.    First, a VAT may substitute for an income tax; since an
income tax is not neutral in its effects, the substitution will
have allocative effects, tending other things equal to improve the

trade balance in the short run.     Second, and offsetting this effect

in the short run and persisting in the long run, a VAT in practice

will tend to be levied more heavily on traded than on nontraded
output,    and will therefore tend to shift resources out of the
traded goods sectors.

     On balance,    the substitution of value-added taxation for
income taxation is likely to have an uncertain short—run effect on

a nation's net exports but is likely to reduce net exports in the

longer term.    This does not constitute an argument either for or

against    introducing   a   VAT;   indeed,   even   if   the   effect   on

competitiveness were unambiguous,       it is by no means clear what
policy moral ought to be drawn.     The point of this analysis is more

modest; we want to show that the common belief that a VAT is a kind

of disguised protectionist policy is based on a misunderstanding.
                                   5


1.   A Basic Model
     The analysis of the international impact of a VAT has several

strands. These strands dictate the necessary content of our model.

First, a VAT is often alleged to favor traded goods production over

nontraded goods in general; thus we need to have a model in which

some goods are nontraded.       Second,     the apparent differential
taxation of exports and imports resulting from export rebates has
been praised and attacked; thus we need to make the distinction
between importables and exportables.        Finally, a consumption tax

like a VAT differs from an income tax in its effect on the choice
between consumption and saving; thus we need to have a model that

allows interteinporal tradeoffs.       Putting these together, in order

to discuss the international economics of a VAT we need at minimum

a model with three goods (exports, imports, and nontraded) and with

two periods (present and future).       At times it will be helpful to

consider more collapsed models,         aggregating the two tradeable
sectors or eliminating the time dimension; however, a three—good,

two-period model will be our base in this paper.

      Consider, then,   a country that produces and consumes three

goods:    an exported good X, an imported good N, and a nontraded

good N.   The economy lasts for two periods,       1 and 2.   The country

will be assumed to be small on both world goods mark9ts and world

financial markets,     in the sense that it can trade X for M at a
fixed relative price in each period and can borrow or lend at a
fixed real interest rate in terms of traded goods.

      The technology    of production      is   assumed to    be   standard
                                                      6

neoclassical, with perfect competition prevailing.                                        In the first
period the economy's production possibilities may be summarized by
a tradeoff among the outputs of the three goods:

                                                      1       1     1

      (1)                                 T




            Some    first-period production may be used to form capital,
which expands production possibilities in the second period.                                          It

is unnecessary to define a capital aggregate; we can simply define

K1,    I = X,M,N as the quantity of each good set aside to enhance

second-period            production.              The             second—period          transformation
function may thus be written

                                          2       2       2
      (2)                          T2         'M ''N ,K,K,,,K,1)               = 0




            Turning next to the demand side, we ignore issues of income
distribution and treat the economy in terms of the income and
tastes         of    a   representative           individual.                  Preferences     of   this

representative individual may be written in terms of a welfare
function,

                                              ¶       1       I            2    2    2
      (3)                       W=U(Cx,CM,CN)+ &.J(CX,C,,CM)



            Like the production technology,                             this welfare function         is

assumed to exhibit all the usual properties.
                                                7


      The country is assumed to be a price—taker on world markets.
With slight loss of generality, we assume that nominal prices of
X and N in foreign currency are constant:



(4)                             —   E'         I — X,H    t —   1,2
                            I            I




      The loss of generality here lies not in the absence of foreign

inflation, which could be introduced without any change in results,

but in the assumption that our country's terms of trade are the
same in both periods.      This assumption could be relaxed without any

significant change in our analysis, but it saves on complexity and
notation.

      We also assume that the country can borrow or lend freely at
an interest   rate   r*.


      Now let us consider the equilibrium conditions of the model.
In each period the consumption of nontraded goods must equal
production,   less that part of production which                        (in the   first

period) is set aside for investment.                     Thus we have



(5)                                          C'—Q'-Iç,

(6)                                           C2—Q2



      For traded goods the constraint is much looser, since the
country can both exchange goods within each period and borrow or
lend across periods.       The only constraint is that the present value
                                                     8

of traded goods production that is not invested must equal the
present value of traded goods consumption:



(7)            P'(Q'   -         +   P1(Q'       -           +   (l+rY'[PQ        +P2Q21


                     — P2C2 +        P2C2 +          (1+rY'(p2C2         +P2C2)



      To solve the model, we must determine prices.                                     In the absence

of taxation, the prices of the traded goods are simply determined

by their international prices:



(8)                                      P1          — P2 — P
                                             I           I       I



      The price of the nontraded good is determined in each period
by the requirement that supply equal demand.                                 Supply is determined

by maximization of the present value of marketed production,



(9)                    V —     P'(QK)            +   P'(Q'-Iç)       +   P(Q.1ç1)

                           +   (l÷r*Y1)[P2Q2             +   P2Q2 + P2Q2j



      Demand is determined by maximization of                                     (3)   subject to the

budget constraint.
      Equilibrium may be usefully illustrated using Figure 1.                                       On

the axes are the nominal prices of the nontraded good in each
period.   The curve N1N1 represents points consistent with market

clearing for N in period 1; it is downward sloping under the usual
                                        9

assumption that excess demand for the good is decreasing in its own

price and increasing in prices of substitutes.                The curve N2N2
similarly represents points consistent with market clearing for N
in period 2.    we show NN1 steeper than N2N2, which will be the case

as long as ItOWflU   effects   are larger than "cross" effects.             (This

assumption about relative slopes may also be thought of as a
stability condition, since it is necessary for convergence under
most quasi—dynamic stories about price adjustment.)                Equilibrium

is where the curves intersect, at point E.

     We now have a basic model of resource allocation in a trading

economy, both across sectors and over time.           We can now introduce

a value—added tax, and examine its effects.


2.   Effects of an Idealized Value—Added Tax
     We now consider the effect of introducing a value—added tax
into this economy.     This tax will be "idealized," in the sense that

it will be assumed to be successfully levied at a flat rate on all

production for consumption.        In       reality, VATs do not meet this

ideal,   both   because   of    legislated      differences   in    rates    and

exemptions and because of the impossibility of actually taxing
important parts of production.      Although these departures from the

ideal are of critical importance in evaluating the likely effects
of an actual VAT, the idealized VAT is a useful reference point
with which to begiii our analysis, since such an idealized VAT is
implicit in most economists' discussions of the effects of a VAT

on international trade.
                                          10

       We suppose, then, that any firm selling a good domestically
must pay taxes at a rate        r    on the value of the good, less any
value-added taxation that the firm can demonstrate has been paid
on productive inputs.          Investment goods are included in this
deduction, so that in effect investment is exempt from the VAT.
Sales of imported goods must pay the full tax rate                          .   Exported
goods, since they are not sold domestically, are not subject to the

tax;   thus   exporters receive       a        full           rebate.   Tax revenue   is

redistributed to consumers in a nondistorting fashion.

       Let us define the prices of goods to domestic consumers as



                               I —   X,M,N            t —      1,2.


       The price of imported goods is simply the international price
plus the tax:



(10)                            — P(l+i-)         t       —   1,2.


       Since a producer of export goods must be indifferent between
selling the goods domestically or on the world market, and since
tax is paid on domestic but not foreign sales, the internal price
of the exported good must also equal the international price plus
the tax:



                          pt
(11)
                           x
                               — XP(l+)               t   —    1,2.
                                               11

        The price of N in each period continues to be determined by
market- clearing.           Supply, however, now reflects the presence of
the VAT:       firms will maximize the value of output net of taxation,



(12)                  V —   (1+rY'('(Q'-Iç)     +    '(Q'-1ç)   +   (Q-Iç1)
                            +   (1+r'Y)[P2Q2    + P2Q2   + P2Q21)



        We may now assert the following:                 imposition of a VAT at the
rate r will raise the consumer price of the nontraded good in each
period by       the    fraction      i,   thus       leaving all        relative prices
unchanged;      as a result there will be no change in either the
allocation of resources or in welfare.                      Figure 2 illustrates what
happens:       when equilibrium is illustrated in terms of a diagram
with consumer prices of N on the axes, the effect of a VAT is to
shift    both NN1 and N2N2 out, to N1N1 and N2N2, respectively; the new
equilibrium      is at E, with the price of the nontraded good increased
by a fraction r in both periods.

        To see why this must be true, we first note by inspection of
(12)    that    if    consumer prices           of    all    goods     rise   exactly   in

proportion to the VAT, there is no effect on production incentives.

So if all prices rise so as to offset the VAT, there will be no
change in the allocation of resources or production.

        Second, we argue that under the hypothesized solution there
will be no effect n demand.               The simplest way to see this is to
notice that the welfare function (3) implies a set of compensated
                                     12

demand functions,



(13)            C — H(p,W)            I — X,M,N            t —    1.2


where p     is the vector of present-value consumer prices.                 The

functions H(.)     are homogeneous of degree zero in p; so if all
consumer prices rise in the same proportion, while welfare is
unchanged, then demand will be unchanged.           But if nothing changes,

nothing changes, including welfare; so when all prices rise by r,
the market for nontraded goods continues to clear in each period.

       An   idealized VAT,   then,   has   no     allocative     effects.    In

particular,    it is neither pro—competitive nor anti—competitive;
whatever your definition of competitiveness, it has no effect at
all.

       Many general equilibrium results, such as the equivalence of
a VAT without an export rebate to an import tariff, to which we
will refer in the next section, depend on the assumption that
nominal price levels do not matter.        Thus their practical relevance

depends either on price flexibility or on an appropriate exchange

rate adjustment.     The assertion that a VAT is neutral with regard

to competitiveness does not,         however,      require even this much
defense.     Because consumer prices rise precisely in proportion to

the tax, the net prices to producers are unchanged.               The marginal

revenue product of factors of production must also be unchanged.
So (to step slightly outside the model), even if factor prices
and/or producer prices are sticky and the exchange rate is fixed,
                                      13

a VAT will still have no competitive effect.
      Perhaps   the   surprising point          is    that this absence         of   a

competitive effect occurs despite the rebate of VAT on exports,
which is widely regarded as a kind of export subsidy.                 In fact, as

we show in the next section, in the absence of an export rebate a
VAT would distort allocation, definitely reduce export production,

and probably shift resources on net away from traded goods sectors.



3.   The Role of Border Tax Adjustments


      The   controversy    over   VATs     is        largely   generated   by    the

impression that the border tax adjustments ——              the   fact that imports

are subject to the tax, while exports have the tax rebated --
constitute   a policy favoring a country's traded goods sectors. It
is therefore interesting to ask how a VAT would function without
these adjustments.
      Perhaps the simplest case would be a system with no border
adjustments at all —-     i.e.,   no VAT collected on imports, no rebate

on exports. This would in effect shift the tax from a "destination"

basis to an "origin" basis. The effects of such a system may be
derived immediately by the following observations.                     First,    the

prices to consumers of exports and imports will clearly remain
unchanged; thus the price to producers net of taxation must fall

in proportion to the VAT rate.             Clearly,       if the price of the
nontraded good also remains the same to consumers, i.e., if the
price net of taxes to firms falls by the size of the tax, then
                                       14

producers will have no incentive to change their output mix. At the

same time, if no relative prices change, then at unchanged utility
consumers will also leave their choices unchanged. But if nothing

happens, nothing happens; so the VAT without border tax adjustments

is neutral in the same way as a VAT with these adjustments.2
      The difference in this case is, of course, that the nominal
marginal product of factors of production in foreign currency
falls. Thus in the case without border tax adjustments, there must

either      be   price   flexibility   or   (more   plausibly)   a   currency

depreciation in order for the neutrality of the VAT to hold. This
in turn helps explain why in practice VATs do in fact include
border adjustments.

       It   is   also true that given the general preference among
authorities for a subtraction method of administration, it would
be awkward to exempt imports from the tax. Firms would be given an
imputation of taxes paid on imports, as opposed to showing proof
of actual payment on domestic inputs; this would raise the odd
prospect of firms preferring to use imports because of the lower
administrative costs. Partly fo this reason, it seems likely that

a   country pressured     into avoiding any border adjustments would end


     2
       Hamilton and Whalley (1986) have pointed out that given the
non—uniformity of tax rates across goods in practice, there is a
difference between destination and origin systems. To take an
extreme example, imagine a country that places a VAT on importables
but not exportables. In a VAT with border tax adjustments, such a
system is in effect a consumption tax on the importable, with no
tax on domestic producers; without the border adjustments, it
becomes a production tax, with no tax on consumers. We abstract
from this issue in this paper; Hamilton and Whalley demonstrate
that it is relatively unimportant quantitatively.
                                      15

up without an export rebate but would still tax imports. In this
case, the VAT would have a distortionary effect on the allocation
of resources.      Perhaps surprisingly, this effect is essentially
protectionist -- a VAT without an export rebate is equivalent to
an import tariff.

     The difference between a VAT with and without an export rebate
may be seen in the export pricing condition.            Without the rebate,

arbitrage will ensure that the consumer price of exportables equals

the world price because the producer pays the tax whether the good
is exported or sold domestically.          Thus,

                         t_
    (14)
                          x
                              P
                                  x
                                                   t   — 1.2




Comparing this with (11) we see that the rebate—less VAT leads to
a lower export price.     This is not surprising, since we have in
effect added an export tax to the idealized VAT described before.

     The internal price of exports relative to imports is of course

lower in this case --    or to reverse th point, the relative price
of imports is higher.     It is a general proposition, the so—called

Lerner symmetry theorem, that an export tax and an import tax are

equivalent in their general equilibrium effects.               So an ideal VAT

without an export rebate is like a protectionist policy.

     We should note, however, that the equivalence between import
and export taxes i.    one of those propositions that depends either

on nominal prices not mattering or on an appropriate exchange rate

adjustment.     Note that the effect of a VAT without a rebate is to
                                  16

lower the price to producers of the exported good, when measured
in foreign currency; a tariff would of course raise the price of

the imported good instead.    Thus these are only equivalent, either

given an exchange rate adjustment or sufficient price flexibility.

       We see, then, that a VAT without an export adjustment would

in effect be a protectionist measure.    Will it increase or decrease

"competitiveness" as measured by the size of the traded goods
sector?    The answer is ambiguous, but a presumption may be offered

that size of the traded goods sector as a whole will decrease.     To

see this, it is helpful to collapse the model into a single period,

ignoring the interteinporal aspect (which is in any case unimportant

for this question).     Equilibrium in the one-period version of the

model may be analyzed using      a diagram suggested by Dornbusch
(1974), and shown in Figure 3.    On the axes are the consumer prices

of X and N,     relative to the consumer price of N.    The curve NH

represents a locus of points for which the market for nontraded
goods clears:      it is downward sloping because a rise in either
traded good's relative price will shift demand onto and resources

out of the nontraded sector.     The ray OT has a slope equal to the

consumer price of imports relative to exports, which is determined

by world prices and the tax system.     Equilibrium occurs where this

ray crosses NH, at E.
       Now suppose that the rebate on exports were to be removed from

a VAT.    Then the ratio of import to export prices would rise by the

fraction i,   corresponding to a counter-clockwise rotation of OT to
OT'.     Equilibrium would shift from E to Et.
                                    17

     Clearly the resulting rise           in M/W would tend to         shift

resources out of the nontraded sector, while the fall in P,/P would

tend to shift resources into N.         The overall effect on the size of
N is therefore ambiguous.      However, we may offer a presumption that

the net effect on N is positive, and therefore that the net effect

on traded goods sectors as a whole is negative.

     The reason for this presumption is the probable relative
importance of demand and supply adjustment in the exporting and
import—competing sectors.      A tariff reduces exports and imports by
an equal amount.     On the import side, the reduction comes about
through a combined reduction in demand and increase in supply for
the importable;    on the export side,           through a combination of
increased demand and reduced supply.          Initially, however, demand
exceeds supply for the importable, while supply exceeds demand for
the exportable.    Thus more of the exportable side will tend to come

from supply and less from demand than on the import side -—            i.e.,
we would expect exportable production at world prices to fall more

than import-competing production rises.            Thus, the size of the
tradeable sector as a whole will typically fall.

     A specific example may make the point.            Consider an economy
that produces but does not itself consume its export good, and
which consumes but does not produce its import good —— an extreme
form of the general proposition that countries must have excess
supply for exportables and excess demand for importables.               Wlien

such an economy imposes a tariff or export tax, the export sector
necessarily   shrinks   and,    since    there    is   no   import—competing
                                  18

production, the nontraded sector expands.      Thus, in this extreme

case, the effect of a tax on trade, such as a VAT without an export

rebate, will unambiguously be to shrink the size of the traded

goods sector.     Adding some import-competing production and some
domestic demand for exportables will remove the certainty of this

outcome, but it will still be a presumption.

     We see,    then,   that the widespread belief that the use of
export rebates in a value—added tax system is questionable and
perhaps an unfair protectionist device is very nearly the opposite

of the truth.    In fact, the export rebate is necessary if the VAT

is not to have a protectionist effect, reducing the volume of trade

and probably reducing the size of the tradeable sector.



4.   The Idealized VAT as a Substitute for an Income Tax


      The best case for arguing that a VAT enhances competitiveness

is not what it does, but what it doesn't do:        a VAT, unlike an

income tax, does not place a tax on saving.        Thus to the extent

that a VAT substitutes for an income tax, it will tend to reduce

the current propensity to consume.     As many economists have pointed

out (see in particular Frenkel and Razin 1988), to the extent that

a value—added tax that substitutes for an income tax reduces
current consumption, it will in turn will tend to lead to a trade

surplus in the short run. A trade surplus, other things equal,
tends to increase the size of the traded goods sector.
      In order to demonstrate this point, we introduce an income tax
                                           19

into our basic model.

       We already know that an idealized VAT does not distort the
economy, relative to a no-tax equilibrium.                           Thus,   in making the
comparison of a VAT and an income tax, it is sufficient to consider
the effects of an income tax.              So, we now examine the effects of
imposing on our economy an income tax at a proportional rate ir.
Proceeds of this tax, like those of the VAT considered earlier, are

assumed to be redistributed in a nondistorting fashion.

       It is important to specify how profit income is calculated for
tax purposes.     The most natural assumption here                            is that both
earnings on foreign investments and earnings on capital are treated

as part of second-period income, with profits calculated as the
difference between sales and factor costs plus depreciation                               on
capital ——   but since the economy only lasts two periods, the whole
capital stock is depreciated.              There is a potential issue over
whether   depreciation       should    be        calculated           at     historical   or

replacement cost, but our assumption of constant prices on world
markets allows us to ignore the issue here.

       Income in the first period, then, is the value of production
less taxes, plus whatever transfer the government makes:



(15)                     —   (1-,r)[P'Q'   +    P'Q'   +   P'Q1] +




where L, is the rebate from the government.
       Income in the second period is
                                                    20



(16)                                 —    (1-,r)[P2Q2        + P2Q2 +       P2Q2]


             +   (1.c)r*[P'Q'
                          XX
                                -    P1C'+ P'Q'
                                         XX        MM
                                                         -       P1C'+ P'Q'
                                                                  MM    MN
                                                                                -
                                                                                       MN
                                                                                            +



        Here the first term represents factor income,                                           i.e., gross

domestic product.         The second term represents capital consumption

allowances.       The third term represents the income from net foreign

investment.        Finally, the fourth term represents the rebate from

the government.
        How consider an individual's budget constraint.                                         In the first

period, the individual accumulates wealth equal to the difference

between income and consumption expenditure:



(17)                                W —   I'   -   P'C'
                                                    XX
                                                             +   P'C'
                                                                  MM
                                                                        +
                                                                             MN


        In   the second period, the value of consumption equals income

plus wealth:



 (18)                           Plc1 +     PC1      +   P'C1      —   W(l+r*)   + 12
                                 XX            MM         NM


        From inspection of (16)-(18), it is now immediately apparent
 that the presence of the tax distorts the incentives of a consumer.

 An individual who takes the government rebates as given, faces a
                                                                      r*    on deferred consumption.
 rate of return of r(l-71) rather than
 For a small income tax, which will have a second—order effect on
                                         21

welfare, the result must be a substitution effect that induces
consumers to consume more in the first period and less in the
second.

       To analyze the trade consequences of this disincentive to
save, we turn once again to the diagrammatic analysis of nontraded
goods prices.      In Figure 4, the curves N1N1 and N2N2 represent market

clearing for the nontraded goods market in the first and second
period, respectively.         Imposing an income tax shifts consumption
from the second period to the first.                 Thus, other things equal,
demand for first period N rises, shifting N1N1 up to N1N1; other
things equal, demand for second period N falls, shifting N2N2 down

to N2N2.       Thus, the result is to shift the equilibrium from E to
E', raising N       in   the first period and lowering it in the second.
The    initial    effect of     an   income tax       is,     therefore,   to draw
resources out of the traded goods sectors and into the nontraded
sector,    thereby reducing exports and the production of import
substitutes.

       In passing, it may be worth noting that in an economy such as

this, which although small in world goods and financial markets
does produce a nontraded good, it is not the case that changes in

the saving rate affect only the balance of payments, without
affecting the domestic real interest rates.                   It is true that the

real rate of interest in terms of traded goods remains fixed at r

by assumption.       A real interest rate defined in terms of a basket

of    either     domestic   production        or   domestic    consumption   will,

however, change whenever 1N/2W changes.                In particular, the rise
                                          22

in 'N/2W    that   results from an income tax will imply deflation of
domestic prices relative to world prices from period 1 to 2, and

will thus be measured as a rise in the real domestic interest rate.

In this sense the income tax produces domestic crowding out as well

as a shift toward trade deficit.
        We have now seen that an income tax, in contrast to a VAT,
does reduce the size of the traded goods sector.                           It   is now

straightforward to analyze the effect of introducing a VAT that
substitutes for an income tax.            The VAT has no competitive effect;

the reduction in the income tax expands trade. Thus the overall

effect to is to shift resources into tradeable.
        It is important however to note that this is true only in the

first period.        In the second period N          falls,    and the traded goods

sector is presumably smaller.             The point is that the short-term

increase in net exports leads to an accumulation of overseas assets

that eventually finances an excess of imports over exports.



5.   Effects of p      Selective   VAT

        We have so far considered only an idealized VAT which succeeds

in   taxing    all    consumption    at        the   same     rate.   In     practice,

value-added taxation does not fall equally on all activities.                       In

part,    this is because of practical difficulties:                        nonmarketed

production, ranging form do—it—yourself repairs to the services of

owner-occupied housing and consumer durables, cannot be taxed.
Also, social considerations, rightly or wrongly, frequently lead

to exemptions        for medical    care,        education,      and various other
                                     23

activities that are deemed inappropriate for taxation.        As a matter

of practice, many other services are frequently exempted from VATs.

Anong OECD countries with value-added taxes, the VAT typically
applies to only about two-thirds of total consumption and often has
lower rates for some products than for others.

        For the purposes of this paper, the important point is that
the de facto and de lure exemptions from a VAT are likely to fall
primarily on nontraded rather than traded goods and services.          This

is necessarily true of nonmarketed production, and for one reason

or another is also true of most of the marketed areas that are
likely to be exempted or subject to reduced taxation.
        The impact of a selective VAT is,     therefore,     to increase
nontradeable     consumption   and   production   at   the   expense    of

tradeable.     Imports and exports are both reduced by the imposition
of the typical VAT.

        To see this more formally, we return to our basic model.        It

will simplify matters at no cost if we take advantage of the
assumption of an unchanged relative price of exports and imports
to aggregate X and N into a composite traded good T.         We represent

the differential taxation of nontraded and traded goods in extreme

form,   by supposing that while domestic consumption of T is subject
to a value—added tax at a rate r, consumption of N is nontaxed.

        Firms in this economy will maximize the present value of
production after taxes,
                                      24




(19)                     V—   (1+rY'P1(Q'-Kt) +

                        + (1+r) ((1+Y'P2Q2     +   Q1


       Clearly the presence of the tax acts as a               disincentive to

produce traded goods.
       To think about the equilibrium that results,              it is helpful

once again to start by collapsing the model into a single period.

In Figure 5,     the curve QQ represents the economy's production
possibility frontier between N and T.          In a one—period model, trade

must be balanced, implying equality of supply and demand for T as
well as N: thus consumption must lie on this production possibility

frontier.   The optimum consumption is shown as E, where the PPF is

tangent to the highest possible              indifference curve.         With    a


selected VAT on traded goods, however,             consumption is distorted,

the equilibrium is at a point like E', where PP represents consumer

prices and Pp the marginal rate of transformation in production.
As shown, the relative price of tradeab].e faced by consumers is
 higher than that faced by firms, and the result is a smaller traded

 goods sector.

       In the two—period model,            the basic effect       is   the same.

 Figure 6   shows     initial    equilibrium       loci   at    N1N1   and   N2N2,


 respectively.      The effect of the VAT, other things equal, is to

 raise the demand for the nontraded good in each period.               Thus, both

 schedules shift out.         While it is possible that the net effect
                                          25

could be to lower N          in   one period, ordinarily both prices will
rise.      Meanwhile, the net price of T to producers will remain
unchanged,      since      producers     must    remain      indifferent     between
producing for the domestic and the world market.                   Thus, the rise
in the price of N will induce a shift of resources out of the
traded goods sector.

        A selective VAT that falls most heavily on traded goods, then,

will tend to hurt the traded goods sectors of an economy —— the
reverse of the common belief.              In addition, there is the effect
noted in the last section:             to the extent that a VAT substitutes
for an income tax, while it will in the short run encourage saving
and     therefore    net    exports,     in     the   long   run   the     resulting
accumulation of net foreign assets will have the opposite effect
on net exports.



6.    Conclusions

        There   is   a    widespread belief that value—added taxation,
because it is levied on imports and rebated on exports, acts as a

combination of protection and export subsidy, giving the traded-
goods    sectors     of    countries with VATs         an advantage        over   the

corresponding sectors of countries that rely on income taxation.
In this paper we have used a simple model to show that this view
is almost completely wrong.            A VAT is not a protectionist measure;

indeed, the allegedly pro—competitive device of export rebates is

necessary if the VAT is not to act as an export tax, which in turn

is actually a protectionist measure that would reduce both imports
                                  26

and   exports.    To   the   extent    that   a   VAT   does   improve

competitiveness, it does so in the short run by offering less bias

against saving than an income tax, which, other things equal, tends

to improve the trade balance --    but which is far from the common
belief about why VATs are helpful in international competition.
Moreover, in the longer term, the resulting accumulation of foreign

investment would lead to an increase ot imports         in excess of
exports.   In practice, moreover, a VAT would almost surely fall
more heavily on traded rather than nontraded goods, which would
constitute a bias aczainst both exports and imports.
References:



Dixit, A. (1985), "Tax policy in open economies" in A. Auerbach and

M. Feldstein, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Amsterdam, North-
Holland.



Dornbusch, R.        (1974),   "Tariffs and nontraded goods", Journal of
International Economics 4, 177—185.


Frenkel, J. and Razin, A.          (1988): Fiscal Policies and the World
Economy, Cambridge: MIT Press.



Grossman,     G.     (1980),   "Border tax adjustments:   do they distort
trade?", Journal of International Economics 10, 117—128.


Hamilton, B. and Whalley, J. (1986): "Border tax adjustments in US
trade", Journal of International Economics 20, 377—383.



McClure, C. (1987): The Value—added Tax: Key to Deficit Reduction?,

Washington: American Enterprise Institute.


Shibata, H.        (1967): "The theory of economic unions: a comparative

analysis of customs unions, free trade areas, and tax unions" in
C.S.Shoup, ed., Fiscal Harmonization in Common Markets, New York:
Columbia University Press.
P
     N1.
           N

    N9


                              N9


                          1




                                   N

               FIGURE 1
     N,
N1    1




                E


                               N
                                   2
                          N9

                           1
                     N1

                                       N

          FIGURE 2
                   1
    N




                       T




0
        FIGURE 3
           -
               -..   -




-t

                              .3



                                       N
                         NI                T

                                   T




     3-1)kI t
    T




Q            E


                   P




                       E'

                            fY


                            N
                        Q
        FIGUHE 5
        NI

N
    1




                        E


                                       N9
                 E'              N2

                                  1

                            N1


                                      LN

             FIGURE 6
