                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 LONG SWINGS IN THE EXCHANGE RATE: ARE THEY IN THE DATA AND DO MARKETS KNOW
                                                                            IT?




                                  Charles Engel

                                James D. Hamilton




                             Working Paper No. 3165




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 1989




This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. SES-8720731. We are grateful to Karen Lewis, Anthony
Rodrigues, and anonymous referees for helpful suggestions, and to the Federal
Reserve Bank of Richmond for assistance with obtaining the data for this
project. This paper is part of NEER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NEER working Paper #3165
                                          November 1989


                                                    DATA AND DO MARKETS KNOW IT?
  LONG SWINGS IN THE EXCHANGE RATE: ARE THEY IN THE


                                      ABSTRACT

    The value of the dollar appears to move in one direction for long periods
of time. We develop a new statistical model of exchange rate dynamics as a

sequence of stochastic, segmented time trends. The paper implements new

techniques for parameter estimation and hypothesis testing for this framework.

We reject the null hypothesis that exchange rates follow a random walk in

favor of our model of long swings. Our model also generates better forecasts

than a random walk. We conclude that persistent movement in the value of the

dollar is a fact that calls for greater attention in the theory of exchange

rate behavior.

     The model is a natural framework for assessing the importance of the

"peso problem" for the dollar. It allows for the expectation of future

exchange rates to be influenced by the probability of a change in regime. We

nonetheless reject uncovered interest parity. The forward premium appears

frequently to put too high a probability on a change in regime.




        Charles Engel                      James D. Hamilton
        Department of Economics            Department of Economics
        University of Virginia             University of Virginia
        Charlottesville, VA 22906          Charlottesville, VA 22906
                                           —l —




     Why did the dollar rise so dramatically in the early 1980's, only to fall

precipitously afterward? Explanations have focused on such factors as the

effects of U.S. monetary and fiscal policy on real interest rates (Frankej.

(19&8) and   Feldstein   (1986)), lower capital taxes (Blanchard and Summers

(1984)), or a "safe haven" effect (Dooley and Isard (1985)).

     Important features of the dollar's movements are difficult to reconcile

with these explanations under     the   dominant models of exchange rate

determination. Figure 1 plots the number of U.S. dollars required to obtain a

German mark, French franc, or British pound over the period 1973:III_1988:I.1

One is tempted to share Feldstein's (1988, p. 21) summary of these data: "the

dollar has experienced three big swings." The first of these is marked by a

sustained rise of foreign currencies against the dollar; between the beginning

of 1977 and the end of 1979, the mark gained 33% against the dollar, the franc

gained 21%, and the pound 26%. This was followed by a five-year surge in the

dollar, at the end of which these three European currencies fell 60—90%

(logarithmically) against the dollar. Early in 1985, foreign currencies once

more began to rise, gaining 50—70% against the dollar by the end of 1987.

     The apparent long swings in the exchange rate pose important challenges

for existing theory. In Dornbusch's (1976) model, a monetary or fiscal policy

change that drives up real interest rates results in a one—time upward jump in

the value of the dollar. The dollar is then supposed to depreciate steadily,

so as to equate expected returns across countries. Yet as Dornbusch himself

noted in 1983,



     The [overshooting] model for the real interest rate does well in
explaining that a rise in U.S. interest rates should lead to an appreciation
of the real exchange rate. But it fails when it predicts that the real
exchange rate should also be depreciating. That has not in fact been
happening, and a theory is needed that will explain why the dollar— real or
nominal— is both high          stuck.
                                          -2-


 Indeed, the picture seems to have been even worse than Dornbusch painted it—

 the dollar was high   and   risin& for three years prior and two   years   subsequent

 to Dornbusch's remarks. Accounting for the gradual, sustained fall in the

 dollar beginning in 1985 in a way that is consistent with the explanation

 given for its rise is equally problematic.2

     A further aspect of the apparent long swings that causes difficulty for

theories of the exchange rate is that during the period of the strengthening

dollar, forward exchange rates (in dollars per unit of foreign currency) were

consistently above the spot exchange rate. If the forward rate reflects

expectations of future spot rates, then the market appeared to believe over a

long period of time that a depreciation of the dollar was imminent. Yet the

dollar continued its climb upward until the end of 1984. It could be argued

that this forward rate behavior represents an example of Krasker's (1980)

"peso problem." If investors perceived a small probability of a large

depreciation, then we might see a forward rate in excess of the current spot

rate for a sustained period of time.

     For these reasons, it seems useful to formalize the concept of long

swings in the exchange rates. What does one mean by long swings, and what

magnitudes are plausibly associated with the population parameters? Are long

swings a systematic part of the process that generated the data in Figure 1,

or a pattern imposed by the eye on the directionless drift of a random walk?

If long swings are an accurate description of population dynamics, what sorts

of expectations on the part of foreign exchange speculators     are consistent

with this process? Addressing these questions can provide us with a

systematic basis for discussing the issues raised above.

    The model we investigate is a special case of that introduced in Hamilton

(l989a).3 The basic idea is to decompose a nonstationary time series into a
                                       —3—



 sequence of stochastic, segmented time trends. Specifically, we model     any
 given quarter's change in the exchange rate as deriving from one of two

 regimes, which could correspond to episodes of a rising or falling exchange

 rate, respectively. The regime at any given date is presumed to be the

outcome of a Markov chain whose realizations are unobserved by the

econometrician. The task facing the econometrician is characterize the two

regimes and the law that governs the transition between them. These parameter

estimates can then be used to infer which regime the process was in at any

historical date and provide forecasts for future values of the series.

     Our maximum likelihood estimates correspond closely to the visual

impressions of Figure 1. In regime 1 the mark is rising 4% per quarter

against the dollar, the franc 3.3%, and the pound 2.6%. Regime 2 is

associated with quarterly declines in the foreign currencies of —1.2%, —2.7%,

and —3.8%, respectively. A given regime is likely to persist for several

years, and the econometrically imputed historical change points are close to

those the eye is tempted to draw directly from Figure 1.

     We perform both Wald tests and likelihood ratio tests that compare the

null hypothesis that exchange rates follow a martingale with the segmented

trends alternative. In every test but one (the likelihood ratio tests for

German data), we reject the martingale hypothesis. The segmented trends model

reduces the within sample mean forecast error by 9—14% at horizons from two

quarters to a year for all three currencies, relative to a random walk

specification. Comparable improvements characterize the post—sample forecasts

at horizons from one to two quarters. We conclude that long swings in the

exchange rate may well be a real feature of the data-generating process.

     In exploring the second question posed by our paper— whether markets

perceive these swings— we investigate the hypothesis of uncovered interest
                                          -4-


 parity. This hypothesis holds that the nominal interest differential between

 two   countries   forecasts future exchange rate changes. This is essentially

 equivalent to the claim that the three-month forward exchange rate is a

rational forecast of the future spot exchange rate. We find no evidence to

support this hypothesis in the data. We conclude that either (a) investors

did not know the population parameters of the long swings model that generated

the historical data, as our rational-expectations calculations assume, or (b)

uncovered interest parity does not hold. ig differences in the volatility of

exchange rates between the two regimes make it possible that (b) is due to

risk aversion on the part of foreign exchange speculators.

       The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 1 sets out the basic model

we use to formalize the long swings hypothesis. Section 2 characterizes our

estimation procedure. Empirical results are presented in Section 3     ,   while
Section 4 analyzes the hypothesis of uncovered interest parity. Conclusions

are offered in Section 5.



1. k model of stochastic sepented trends.

       Our model postulates the existence of an unobserved variable (denoted

which takes on the value one or two. This variable characterizes the "state"

or "regime" that the process was in at date t.     When s—l, the observed change
in the exchange rate " is presumed to have been drawn from a N(ji1,u)

distribution,   whereas when           is distributed N(p2,or); thus when s-i,

the trend in the exchange rate is /h1, whereas when s—2, the trend is

       We further postulate a Markov chain for the evolution of the unobserved

state variable:

       P(St.lIs_i_l) — p11
                        —   1                                              (1.1)
                                         —5—



     p(sljsi2) —         1
                             —p22
     p(5_2ki_2) —        p22
The process for s is presumed to depend on past realizations of y and s only

through 5t—l
     Note the variety of behavior that the model allows; in particular, we do

not impose that exchange rates are described by long swings. For example,

there can be asymmetry in the persistence of the two regimes— upward moves

could be short but sharp (jz1 large and positive, p11 small) whereas downward

moves could be gradual and drawn out (p2 negative and small in absolute value,

22 large). Alternatively, the exchange rate change this period could be

completely independent of the state that prevailed last period, as in a random

walk, if p11 — 1 —p22. A third possibility is the long swings hypothesis,

which we represent as the claim that /L. and p2 are opposite in sign and that

values for both p11 and p22 are large.

     Our model resembles a standard probability distribution which is called a

"mixture of normal distributions." This distribution is a superposition of

two (or more) simple normal distributions. A histogram of data drawn from

such a distribution would represent the sum of two overlapping bell-ehaped

curves. The parameters of the distribution would be the mean and variance of

each of the simple normal distributions, and a weight given to the first

distribution to represent the fraction of realizations that were likely to

have been drawn from it. One could use these parameters to calculate the

probability that any given observation came from the first distribution. The

difference between our model and this mixture of normals is that the draws of

   in our model are not independent. When we infer the odds that a particular

  comes from the first distribution, that probability depends on the

realizations of y at other times.
                                                           -6-

2. Maximum likelihood                    estiuatign   of Daraeters.
       The probability               law for the data

       pyi, ''T'0                '
                                                                                          (2.1)
is summarized by six population parameters,

       .2—      1,p2,ui,a2,p11,p22)'
Hamilton (1988b) showed that first-order conditions for maximization of (2.1)

with respect to .2          characterize         the MLE . as satisfying
                 T                                     A
       A
              — t—l yt.p(st_iIyi, ''T'0                                j — 1,2            (2.2)
                 T                                A
                        p(s_jIyi,..
                 t—1
                   T                 A                           A

                                           .p(s...jIy1,.   ,y,;O)
                  t—l                                                  j —   1,2          (2.3)
                       T                               A

                   t—1
                                 T
       A
       p11 —                    t—2
                                          p(5t_,st_i_hIyi,.
                                                                                          (2.4)


                           p(s_l_1jy1,..,yT; + p
                 t—2

       A.
                                t—2
                                          p(s_2,s1_2Iy1,.
       p22                                                                               (2.5)


                 t2 p(stl_2Iy1,..,yT; — +
       In    (2.2)—(2.5), the expression p(s_jIyl,..,yT;O) denotes the

econometrician's inference about the regime the process was in at date t.

This inference takes the form of a probability, conditioned on the full sample

of observed data                              and the maximum likelihood estimates of parameters

(0).   The term p          in   equations (2.4) and (2.5) is the unconditional probability

that the first observation came from regime 1:
                                                      —7—.




      A
                 A           A                                                             (2.6)
              (l—p11)+(l—p22)
      We found solutions to equations (2.2)-(2.5) using the EM algorithm

developed in Hamilton (1988b).

      A well—known problem (e.g., Everitt and Hand (1981)) with estimating

parameters for i.i.d. mixtures of normal distributions is that a singularity

in the likelihood function arises when, for example, the mean of regime 1 is

imputed to equal the value of the realization of the first observation in the

sample (p1 —    y1) and the variance of regime 1 is permitted to vanish (a. —.
0).   At such a singularity, the likelihood function (2.1) blows up to

infinity. This paper follows Hamilton (l988c) in incorporating a Bayesian

prior for the parameters of the two regimes, replacing (2.2) and (2.3) with
                  T
                        y.p(s_jIyl,..,yT;O)
                 t—1
                                                                                           (2.7)
                       T                          A
              v +
                       t—1
                           p(s_jIy1..y;O)
      A                                 1
          —      —______________________________ x                                         (2.8)
                                       T                     A
                        + (1/2).            i(s   jIy1,.. 'T'0
                                       t—l
                                 T           A                      A                  A
                  + (1/2).             (Y-14j)2P(s—iIYi.. ''T'° +             (l/2).v.(P)2
                                 t—l

      This Bayesian approach reproduces the MLE              as   a special case of the

diffuse prior 1.A_U_$-.0. In general, (2.7) shrinks                     towards zero for j—1,2,

as if one had, in addition to the observed data (y1,. 'T'                        additional

observations from each regime that took on the value zero. Equation (2.8)

adjusts       towards (fl/a),        as though one had 2 observations relevant towards

this adjustment. Equations (2.4) and (2.5) are left as is. The prior thus

shifts the MLE estimates in the direction of concluding that there is no
                                            -8-


difference between the two regimes.

     A numerically equivalent way to think about.this prior is that one is

seeking to maximize not the likelihood function (2.1) but rather the

generalized objective function

     z(j) — log               ''T' — [(P./L)/(2o))             —

                  —a              — a log             —                           (2.9)
                        log                               f3/u — fi/o    .




Unlike the likelihood function (2.1), the singularities described above are

not a feature of the objective function (2.9) for a, f3 and ii > 0. Monte

Carlo simulations reported in Hamilton (1988c) suggest that very modest priors

can consistently improve mean squared errors.



3. Eatirical results.

     3.1. Maximum likelihood estimates.

     The raw data for this project are an arithmetic average of the bid and

asked prices for the exchange rate (in dollars per unit of foreign currency)

for the last day of the quarter, beginning with the third quarter of 1973 and

ending with the first quarter of 1988. The data are expressed in units of
                                WG FR             UK
percentage change, denoted y ,     y    ,   and
                                                  y
     We estimated the parameter vector 0          for   each currency in isolation from

the others. Table 1 reports maximum likelihood estimates; the Appendix

provides further details.

     The maximum likelihood estimates associate state 1 with a 4% quarterly

rise in the German mark, 3.3% rise in the franc, and 2.6% rise in the pound.

In state 2 the currencies fall by —1.2%, —2.7%, and —3.8%, respectively, with

considerably more variability in the exchange rate apparent in state 2 than in

state 1.

     The bottom panel of Figure 2 plots the exchange rate for the German mark
                                       --
(in   $/mark). Th. top panel plots the smoothed probability that the process

was in regime 2 at each date in the sample; that is, p(s_2,y,..y;fG) j

plotted as a function of t. This inference uses the full sample of

observations for Germany                and the maximum likelihood estimates of

parameters fG to draw an inference about the state of the process at each

date t. The dates at which the econometrician would conclude that the process

had switched between regimes (based on p(s—2Iy°,..,y;I)              .5) are shown

as vertical bars. Similar diagrams for France and the U.K. appear as Figures

3 and 4.

      The estimates in Table 1 show that movements in the exchange rate are

characterized by long swings. The point estimates of p11 range from .822 to

.927, while the estimates of p22 go from .908 to .928. These probabilities

indicate that if the system is in either state 1 or state 2, it is likely to

stay in that state. Inspection of Figures 2-4 shows that by our estimates the

switches between states are infrequent. All of the currencies were in a state

of appreciation of the dollar (that is, they were in state 2) from 1980—1984,

and were in a state of depreciation of the dollar (state 1) from the end of

1984 to the end of 1987. Thus, our model of long swings tends to match

closely what one might be led to believe from casual inspection of Figure 1.5

       States 1 and 2 are differentiated not only by their means, but also by

the variances of the conditional distributions. The exchange rate seems to be

much more variable when the dollar is appreciating. For the mark and franc,

our estimates show that the dollar entered the appreciation stage in the

middle of 1987. This assessment is based on the unusual volatility in the

exchange rate during that year.

       It is straightforward conceptually to generalize this approach to vector

processes      (see Hamilton (l988b)). Here we posit that        —                   ).
                                                                         t
                                                                     N(j&5 ,fl
                                                                                 t
                                                       —10—



Equations (2.4), (2.5), and (2.7) continue to hold with                and      interpreted

as the corresponding vectors. Equation (2.8) is replaced by



        A
                                       1
        fi       —    ____________________________ x                                 (3.1)
            j                          T                      A
                            + (1/2)            —
                                             p(s
                                       t—l
                               T       A           A               A                AA
                A + (1/2)•          (ye—p- )(y-j )'.p(s—jIyl...,yT;O) +      (l/2)i'.pp
                              t—l

where (a,,)          is   a multivariate generalization of (,fl)   based on the Wishart

distribution. Unfortunately, we had little success in using these equations

to fit all three currencies to a process driven by a single scalar state

variable s. The estimates did not correspond well with the individual

inferences of any of the three currencies. The behavior of individual

exchange rates is determined, of course, not only by events in the U.S. b.it

also by events in each of the corresponding countries. It appears thai

treating these three exchange rates as a group is inappropriate because

country—specific developments played an important role in the evolution of

exchange rates in the 1970's. For this reason, we proceed in our analysis of

each of the three countries in isolation from the others.

        3.2. Testing the null hvDothesis that exchange rates follow a randoii

walk.

        An alternative to the segmented trends model is the simple random walk.

Mussa (1979), Meese and Singleton (1982), Meese and Rogoff (l983a, l983b) and

Diebold and Nason (1989) have all produced evidence that the log of the

exchange rate follows a random walk. Hsieh (1988a), however, found evidence

consistent with both the earlier random walk conclusions and with the

predictions of our model, asserting that while there was little or no linear
                                               —11—


serial dependence in the log of the change in daily exchange rates, there

seems to be general nonlinear serial dependence.

        There are some knotty methodological problems in testing the null

hypothesis that exchange rates follow a random walk against the segmented

trends alternative. If one views the null hypothesis as the claim that

and 12' then under the null hypothesis, the parameters p11 and p22 are
                                                           A        A      T
unidentified. Moreover, at the constrained MLE (/s1—p2——
                                                                          t—l
A   A     T

         t—l
               (Y_1' the derivative of the likelihood function with respect
to p1 or         is identically zero. These difficulties combine features of the

problems discussed by Watson and Engle (1985) and Lee                   and Chesher (1986). The
information matrix is singular under the null, and the standard regularity

conditions for establishing asymptotically valid tests of H0 do not hold in

this case.

        In this paper we sidestep these issues by focusing on the following

slightly more general null hypothesis:

        H':       p11 —     1 —
                                  p22
                       "
                            p2

                            U2
Note that under H', the distribution of s is independent of s1; [from

(1.1), the probability that sl is p11 regardless of whether s_1l or 2].

Changes in the exchange rate under H' thus comprise an i.i.d. sequence with

individual densities given by the following mixture of two normals:


                           p11          -<y-)2          (1—pu)
                   —
                       ______ exp _______             + ______ exp _______
                             U1          2tT                   O2               2o
We can then hope to test H, against the alternative that p11                    1 —         using
                                                                                      p22
standard distribution theory, since under H' the parameters
                                                                                       c1 U2,
                                       —12—



       and p22 are all identified.

       We report two tests of H, the first being a Wal.d test. Let var(;jj)

denote the asymptotic variance of Pjj (as estimated from the inverse of the

negative of the matrix of second derivatives of 2.9) and cov(;111p22) the

asymptotic covariance. Then under H',

                ;ll —   (1-p22)]2
       __________________________________        x2l)    .                  (3.2)

       [var(;ii) + var(p22) + 2cov(;ll,p22)]
       Column 1 of Table 2 reports this Wald test statistic for the three

currencies. The 5% critical value for a X2(l) variate is 3.84, implying

overwhelming rejection of H for all three currencies.

       We also tested H using a likelihood ratio test.6 This statistic compares

the value of the objective function achieved by the estimates in Table 1 with

the largest value achievable when estimated subject to the constraint p11 —

   —         The latter estimation is a straightforward application of

estimating parameters for an i.i.d. mixture of two normals; we used the EM

algorithm described in Everitt and Hand (1981, pp. 36—37) for this purpose,

with ayesian correction as in (2.7) and (2.8). Twice the difference in the

objective function (2.9) between the constrained and unconstrained estimates

is reported in column 2 of Table 2, and is presumed asymptotically to have a

        distribution. The magnitude of the difference between the Wald test

statistics and the likelihood ratio test statistics is disconcerting.7 Still,

at least in the case of France and the U.K., the rejection of H' continues to
                                                                 0
be fairly decisive.

       It is also interesting to test the hypothesis H0": l —        Under this

hypothesis, the exchange rate follows a stochastic process as described in

Section 1, with the mean rate of depreciation the same in both states. If
                                               —1.3—




                     2, the
   —       but                    states have the same mean rate of depreciation, but

different variances. A Wald statistic for testing H0M is given by

            1
       __________________
                                                       2
                                                       X(1)
       var(p1) + var(/i2) —      2cov(p1,p2)
The statistics are reported in column 3 of Table 2. Column             4   reports an

analogous likelihood ratio test. The means of the two states are different.

       We thus conclude that movements in the dollar are described by long

swings. The dollar enters stages in which it appreciates or depreciates and

it remains in such stages for years. The expected length of state i is

l/(l—p1). State I is expected to persist for 7 quarters for Germany, 6 for

France, and 14 for the U.K. On average state 2 lasts 14 quarters for the

mark, 11 for the franc, and 12 for the pound.

3.3 Forecasting.

        As further evidence on the random walk hypothesis, we calculate the

in-sample and post—sample forecast errors for the segmented trends model in

comparison to those of the random walk specification.

        Consider first in-sample forecasts. If one takes the MLE j (about which

the full sample y1.. 'T was used to draw inference) as known at date t, then

the forecast one would make based on observation of y through date t and based

on knowledge of .    is   given by5


        E[Yt+jIYtYti.
                                      —
                                          2                                         (3.3)

             + (P + _l+;11+;22i.[Ps-lIY1,..; —p])•(p1-p2)
with    p given in (2.6). Letting ;+i denote the expression in (3.3), we
calculated k-period ahead forecasts of the level of the log of the exchange

rate,
                            I.            A                     A


        et+klt
                 —
                     e   + t+lIt + 't+2It +                   + t+kk
and calculated the average squared value of the forecast error,
                                         —14—


     T-kA                 2
                   _et+k) /(T-k)

for forecast horizons (k) of one through four quarters.

     The top panel of Table 3 compares these forecast errors with those of a

random walk specification, whose forecasts are given by et+klt —       e+
where     —              Note that the variance of the latter forecast error
               y/T   .




should, if the random walk specification is correct, rise linearly with the

forecast horizon k. The actual MSE's for the random walk specification in

Table 3 perform more poorly than this, owing to positive autocorrelation in y

at lags one through three° and to the fact that )7, the mean of observations 1.

through T, is not quite the same as the mean of observations k through T. The

improvement in forecasting at horizons of 2-4 quarters offered by the

segmented trends specification is 9—14% for all three currencies.

        It is worth noting that our model is doing more than just mimicking an

AR(l) specification for exchange rate changes. An AR(l) model has an

in—sample one-quarter ahead R2 of 8% for the U.K., 4% for France, and less

than 1% for the Mark, and offers virtually no improvement in forecasting at

longer horizons.

        To evaluate the post—sample forecasting performance of the model, we

reestimated the parameters with data only up to the end of 1983. We chose the

end of 1983 because the major turning point in the dollar that occurred in

1985 had not yet happened. Hence, the entire period of the dollar

depreciation of 1985—1987 is not available for estimating parameters.

Furthermore, with our out-of-sample forecasts our model must meet the

challenge of picking out the turning point.

        The parameter estimates for the truncated sample are similar to those of

the full sample; using only data through 1983, there is evidence in favor of
                                     —15—



the long swings hypothesis.

     The bottom panel of Table 3 compares the post—sample mean squared error

of the forecasts of our model with that of a random walk (with the drift term

estimated from data through the end of 1983). The forecasts for the segmented

trends model are calculated as in equation (3.3), but using the parameter

estimates from the restricted sample. We find that our model generally

outperforms the random walk, particularly at short forecasting horizons.

     Table 3 follows Mussa (1979) and Meese and Singleton (1982) in including

a drift term in the random walk; by contrast, Meese and Rogoff (1983a and

l983b) and Diebold and Nason (1989) set the drift term a priori to zero. The

zero-drift random walk specification has a forecasting performance over 1984:1

to 1988:1 that significantly beats both our specification and the random walk

with drift. Some would interpret this as evidence in favor of the random walk

hypothesis. We would instead argue that the superiority during 198448 of the

random walk without drift over the random walk with drift offers conclusive

evidence that exchange rates do     follow a random walk, with or without

drift! A random walk without drift is simply a special case of the random

walk with drift; if the data really follow a driftless random walk, then

differences in post-sample forecasts between the two random-walk

specifications should be entirely due to error in estimating the drift term.

One can place a bound on this error, and the observed differences are too

great to be due to this source. Conventional statistical tests lead to clear

rejection of the null hypothesis that the exchange rate data come from a

random walk with the same drift term before and after 1984; [see also Table 4

below]. The driftless random walk is just a special case of this rejected

hypothesis. Imposing a particular numerical value for the drift (in this

case, zero) is of course going to improve the fit over selected subsamples,
                                                 —16—


but cannot salvage the model as a specification that describes the complete

sample. An apparent break in parameter values over particular subsamples may

be an important feature accounting for the results of Meese and Rogoff and

Diebold and Nason, and is precisely the feature of the data that our long

swings representation is attempting to model.

        We conclude that the accumulated evidence from the Wald tests, likelihood

ratio tests, and forecasting performance favors the segmented—Crends

specification over the random walk.

3.4. Specification testinf.

        This section presents specification tests, falling into four broad

groups. The first group explores the forecastability of the one—quarter-ahead

in—sample forecast errors. Second, we consider tests based on the work of

Newey (1985), Tauchen (1985), and White (1987) which examine the null

hypothesis that the score statistics are serially uncorrelated. Third, we

perform Lagrange multiplier tests for various sorts of dynamic

misspecification. Finally, we split the sample at the end of 1979 and again

at the end of 1983 and perform likelihood ratio tests for changes in the

stochastic process governing exchange rates.

        Forecastinz tests. Our forecasting tests divide the one-quarter ahead

forecasts of our model (expression 3.3) by their conditional standard

deviation:


        ;t+1It -    {{           + lt+lIt         +     + ].(1t÷iIt)           }

                                                                 2   1/2
                             -
                                  {     ';t+lk   ÷ 2 t÷lIt }         }
where

               —                 +                                             The resulting
                   (l—p22)            (_l+;11+;22).p(s_lly1,..             .




standardized one—period—ahead forecasts errors (u÷i) should be unforecastable
                                        —17 —




with   any time t variables. We calculated many regressions of these errors on

their own lagged values, on lagged values of the log changes in exchange rates

and on various combinations of the squares and cross—products of these

variables. In no case did a joint test of a zero intercept and zero slope

coefficients reject the null hypothesis. For example, a regression of u Ofl a

constant, u1 and u1, for t—74:II to 88:1 yields F(3,53) statistics whose

p-'values are (.90), (.84), and (.70) for the three currencies. The smallest

p—calue in the two dozen regressions we looked at was (.42) for the regression

of u on u_ and Ut_i for j —       1,2,3,4   for the U.K.

       Hsieh (1988a) used the test of Brock, Dechert and Scheinkman (1987) to

search for general non—linear dependence in a time series. He found evidence

of significant dependence in daily data for several currencies. We repeated

these tests on our standardized residuals. We varied N (the dimension of

"N—histories") between 2 and 6 (in steps of 1) and I       (the distance measure, in
standard deviations of the data) between 0.5 and 1.5, in steps of 0.25. The

largest of these 75 different BDS statistics was 1.804 (for U.K. residuals

with N—6 and £   — 0.5).   Since these statistics are asymptotically N(0,l) we

thus find no evidence of serial dependence in the standardized residuals.

However, in contrast to Hsieh's analysis of daily data, there is little

evidence from this test of nonlinear dependence in the raw quarterly exchange
                                                                                 —
rate changes; the largest statistic was 2.498 (for the franc with N—6 and £

0.75).
       Score tests. White (1987) has suggested several useful tests based on

the fact that if the model is correctly specified, the score statistics (the

derivative of the conditional log likelihood of the t—ch observation) should

be serially uncorrelated. Hamilton (1989b) showed how these tests may be

constructed for some interesting possible alternatives to the Markov switching
                                       —18—



model. Table 4 applies these tests to the random walk specification, and

Table 5 to our long swings model.

     By considering the score with respect to the mean, a White test for

autocorrelation can be constructed (which essentially tests for the

correlation of the score at time t with respect to                and the score at time

t—l with respect to Pj for i,j —    1,2.)        Table 4 provides evidence of

autocorrelation in the raw data for the U.K., while Table 5 finds no evidence

of autocorrelation left over after fitting the long swings model.

     An ARCH test can be implemented by examining the serial correlation

properties of the scores with respect to a, i —            1,2.    Table 5 shows that the

test for ARCH for the U.K. is significant at the 5% level. However, Hamilton

(1989b) concluded from Monte Carlo simulations that "For a sample as small as

50 observations, one might be better off using the 1% critical value from the

asymptotic distributions (rather than the 5% value) as a rough guide for a 5%

small—sample test based on the Newey—Tauchen--White specification tests or

Lagrange multiplier tests for misspecification of the variance." By this

standard, the null hypothesis of no ARCH         should   not be rejected.

     The Markov assumption that p(s —       i)    depends only on the state at time

t—l can be tested against the alternatives that it depends on the state at

earlier times or that it depends on the realizations of the data                    This

test checks whether the score with respect to the transition probabilities can

be predicted by the corresponding lagged score or the score with respect to

the mean. Table 5 shows that the Markov specification cannot be rejected for

any currency.

     Lagrange multiDlier tests. Tables 4 and 5 also present Lagrange

multiplier tests of the random walk and long swings specifications. We tested

against the alternatives that there is omitted autocorrelation only in state
                                             —19—



1, autocorrelation only in state 2, and autocorrelation across regimes. These

produce the same conclusions as the White tests for autocorrelation.

         Tables 4 and 5 also report the results of LM tests for ARCH. For the

alternative to the long swings model, the variance at time t, h, is modeled

as


                                        t—
         ht — 7       1+                            i—l,2

                                 St—i
(see     Hamilton (l989b)). Under the null hypothesis of no ARCH,    —   0,   and

                 Again, we find some evidence of ARCH for the U.K., but we would
     t
           St
probably not consider it significant at the 5% level given our number of

observations.

         We can also use the Lagrange multiplier principle to test whether the

mean of the process shifted over any subsample. When we applied this test to

the random walk specification, we find evidence for all three currencies of a

change in the drift associated with the change in U.S. Federal Reserve

operating procedures during October 1979— October 1982 (see Table 4). By

contrast, allowing for a separate mean for this sub-period does not make a

statistically significant contribution to the long swings model (Table 5).

Thus one feature of the data that is inconsistent with a random walk which the

long swings model captures is the persistent tendency for the dollar to

appreciate during the three-year period in which the Fed targeted unborrowed

reserves.

         We also tested for a permanent break in the mean of the series for all

possible change points in the sample. It is interesting that for all three

currencies and for both the random walk and long swings specifications, the

largest value of this statistic comes within one quarter of 1985:11. Table 4
                                            —20—



reveals evidence of a break in the process after 1985 that is not captured by

the random walk. Table 5 suggests that the long swings model is able to

capture this break in the case of the U.K. but not in the case of Germany and

France.

        Likelihood ratio tests. We also tested for shifts in the stochastic

process by performing likelihood ratio tests for joint changes in all the

parameters at the end of 1979 and at the end of 1983. Table 6 shows that we

cannot reject the null of no shift at the 5% level for any currency at either

date.




4. Testing the hyiothesis of uncovered interest parity.

        We now turn to the second question posed by our paper— is this apparent

forecastability of exchange rates reflected in intercountry interest

differentials? Uncovered interest parity posits that a three-month Eurodollar

account should yield the same return expected by converting the dollars to

marks, holding these marks in a Euromark account for three months, and




                 i
converting back into dollars at the then-prevailing exchange rate:
                            WC        WG
        iUS —    WG
                      +
                          E(e÷ — e      )   +u                            (4.1)

Here i is the return on a Eurocurrency account for the specified currency, et

is the log of the exchange rate (in dollars per unit of foreign currency), and

u is a disturbance term reflecting measurement and specification error.

        Let the log of the forward exchange rate be f dollars per mark. A pure

arbitrage opportunity exists unless

             —        +f     —
                                 e?                                       (4.2)

Thus the hypothesis of uncovered interest parity (4.1) is essentially

equivalent to the hypothesis that the forward rate is an unbiased predictor of

the future spot rate,
                                              —21—



          —      WG     +
               Ee+i
We report our results in terms of testing uncovered interest parity rather

than testing the risk neutrality of the forward currency market, though the

two tests are conceptually the same.

     Suppose that investors know the population parameter 0 of the segmented

trends model and further observe the value of              which governed the wean of

the exchange rate change between t—l and t. When s—l, then the change in the

exchange rate between t and t+l will be drawn from a N(Jz1,O) distribution

with probability p11 and from a N(ji2,o) distribution with probability

(l—p11). Thus when stl investors would forecast a change in the exchange

rate between t and t+l of
              WG
     E(e+i — et ) — p11p1 + (l—p11)p2                                           (4.3a)

whereas when           their forecast would be
         Wc      WG
                         —                                                      (4.3b)
     E(e+i     _et )           p22p2    + (l—p22)/21   .




Substituting (4.3) into (4.1) gives

         — WG    —               +                                              (4.4a)
                                       (l-p11)/i2 + u when s—l
                 —               + (l-p22)/1 + u when s-2             .         (4.4b)
                       p22P2
     Rows (la) and (2a) of Table 7 present the predicted value for the

interest differentials based on the univariate maximum likelihood estimates

for each country's exchange rate.

     The predictions for state 2 (row (2a)) are particularly interesting.

State 2 is the state in which the dollar appreciates. During the period of

the dollar appreciation of 1980—1984, the forward rate generally exceeded the

current spot rate,10 implying under uncovered interest parity that markets

expected a depreciation of the dollar. One way to reconcile this finding with

rationality of expectations is to argue that the econometrician faces a Npeso

problem" (see Cumby and Obstfeld (1984), Hodrick and Srivastava (1984), Fama
                                      —22—


(1984), and Hodrick (1987)). When there is a small probability of a large

depreciation, the forward rate may consistently predict a depreciation while

none occurs.

    This possibility is in principle allowed by equation (4.3b). Even when

the process is in state 2. in which the dollar is more likely than not to

appreciate     < 0, p22 > .5),   the expected change in the exchange rate could

be positive if the product of (l—p22) and p1 is sufficiently large. However,

the probability of a depreciation could not have been large, because the

appreciation stage lasted so long. The probability of a depreciation given

that we are in state 2 is l—p22; our estimate is .072 for the mark. The value

of p1 for Germany, 3.987, is large, but not large enough to justify a positive

interest differential. Our calculations suggest that a substantial negative

differential of .928(—l.l83) ÷ .072(3.987) — —.811 was warranted despite the

potential "peso" effect. From mid—1980 to mid—1984 the German mark was in

state 2 and yet the U.S.-Qerman interest differential was invariably positive.

There is thus prima facie evidence against the joint hypothesis of uncovered

interest parity and rational expectations. We have allowed for a "peso

problem", but the evidence indicates that the probability of leaving state 2

once you are in it is so small that a positive interest differential is

unwarranted.'1 Notwithstanding, a 95% confidence interval for the predicted

interest differential does include positive values— the interval ranges from

—3.427 to 1.805.

     Essentially the same conclusion holds for the U.K. The predicted

interest differential in state 2 is —3.21— indeed, the upper end of the 95%

confidence interval for the predicted interest differential (—5.781 to —.619)

is negative—while the U.S.-U.K. interest differential was almost always

positive from the end of 1980 to 1984. This is again a period when our
                                       —23—




estimates   imply that the exchange rate was surely in state 2.

     With France, we cannot make such a bold statement. It is still true that

when we are in state 2 our univariate estimates of the exchange rate indicate

the interest differential should be negative. However, the U.S.—French

three-month interest differential was frequently negative during 1980—84. So,

there is not a simple, clear-cut case against interest parity in the case of

the dollar/franc relationship.

     Of course, one could still try to salvage the peso story by postulating a

possible depreciation of the dollar that   is   more dramatic than that associated

with regime 1. According to this view, there is perhaps a third possible

regime of violent depreciation which was never observed in the sample. The

problem with this view is that, under rational expectations, this massive

depreciation has to be regarded as an extremely unlikely event— it didn't

happen once in 58 observations. Suppose we therefore take the probability of

moving into this regime, p23, as less than .02. For such a remote event to be

able to change the calculations in row (2a) of Table 7 from negative to

positive, the quarterly depreciation of the dollar in state 3 would have to be

40% (logarithmically) against the mark, 108% against the franc, and 160%

against the pound!

     We now explore the hypothesis of uncovered interest parity by examining

the joint behavior of exchange rates and interest rates. Expression (4.4)

predicts that the interest differential at date t     should   have one of two

means, selected by the same state variable       that governed the realization of

the exchange rate change observed at t.    Consider   then the 2-dimensional

vector
                WC   WG .US .WC
             [(er    t—i)'t  t fl'
The model holds that this vector comes from one of two distributions:
                                                        —24—



                          N
    ;l(s.1)
                                    ii!'i   + (l—p11)p2        ]
                                                                           —    I
                                            p2
                    —N                                             '
    ;I(st2)                                 +                              —
                                                 (l—p)p1
where we put no restrictions on the variance-covariance matrices                                 and


whose properties are governed by the behavior of the specification error u in

(4.1)

        The unrestricted version of this model is thus a simple vector

generalization of the process in Section 1:

                —   N(M                                                                            (4.5)
                              'us
                          t         t

Our objective now is to maximize'2

                                                                       —
        log P(x1..YT;. — (1//2)•[Mi11M1]                                       (i//2)(Mfl2L&2)
           — log lull — log        —   ee       1fl21
                                                                           — .1

            —       ee    —     .1                                                                  (4.6)

where ee for example, denotes the (1,1) element of

        We then fit the unrestricted bivariate model (4.5) to the exchange rate

data along with interest rates. The series used for the latter were the

average of bid and asked prices on three-month Eurocurrency rates (quarterly

rates, in basis points) as of the close of the London market on the last day

of the quarter.'

        The parameter estimates associated with the highest value for (4.6) are

reported in Table 8 along with asymptotic standard errors. Figures 5 through

7 plot the data and imputed change points, with the two means for the interest

differential shown as horizontal dashed lines.

        It is difficult to find much support for the hypothesis of uncovered

interest parity in these results. Germany is the only country for which the

segments identified by the bivariate system (the top panel of Figures 5—7) at
                                     —25—



all resemble those identified by the univariate process for exchange rates

(Figures 2—4), and here the interest differential moves in the opposite

direction from that predicted by the theory— the period when the mark was

falling was a period when U.S. interest rates were unusually high relative to

Germany. The interest differential is 62.9 basis points higher in state 2

than in state 1 according to the estimates in Table 8 (1.171 — .542   — .629),

rather than 400 basis points lower as predicted from the univariate estimates

in row (3a) of Table 7.

     There are some interesting statistics that help to reveal the

inconsistencies between the univariate model of exchange rates and a bivariate

model that imposes uncovered interest parity. From the standard errors in row

(la) of Table 7 we can construct 95% confidence intervals from the univariate




                              i
estimates for the predicted level of the interest differential in state 1.

That is, we can construct confidence intervals for p11/1 +                which is
                                                             (1—p11)p2,
the predicted value for i —       if we are in state 1. These confidence

intervals never overlap with the 95% confidence interval for the interest

differential from the bivariate estimation for state 1 (row (ib) in Table 7).

This is a conservative test in that the marginal significance level is

strictly less than .05. This is because if the true parameter vector were in

the gap between the two confidence intervals, two events (either of which

alone has probability less than .05 of having occurred) would have to have

Qj occurred.    Even if the events were perfectly correlated, the probability

of both occurring together could be no greater than .05. and in general it

must be less than .05.

    Row (3a) of Table 7 gives the change in the interest differential in

moving from state 2 to state 1 predicted by the univariate estimates. Row

(3b) compares these with the estimates of the actual change in the interest
                                                 —26—


differential, js(2) —p2(2), as inferred from the bivariate system, where the

subscript refers to the state and the "(2)" indicates the second element of

the vector j. In no case do the confidence intervals overlap. This offers

evidence against not only the hypothesis of interest parity, but also of a

constant risk premium.

     The above calculations assumed that, unlike the econometrician, agents

knew the state of the process s governing the most recent observation on

exchange rates (e_e_i) with certainty at date t. Engel (1985) and Lewis

(1989), for example, discussed models of the exchange rate in which

individuals do not know the current monetary policy regime and learn about it

gradually through Bayesian inference. Our results change little if we

postulate that agents are learning about the state s in the same way as the

econometrician. The real—time forecast of the exchange rate change in this

case would not be (4.3) but rather (3.3),

                             -
                                 ,y1    —
                                            P2
              + (p +                                             —pp1-p2
which collapses to (4.3) in the special case when the econometrician has no

uncertainty about the state (p(s.lIy1,. -                  — 0 or 1). Equation (4.6)

then becomes

          —            —                                                         (4.7)
              iTG
              +       (p +                                                   + Ut
Hamilton (1988a) shoved how the system (4.7) could be estimated jointly with

the process for exchange rates. Here we settle for a more modest descriptive

statistic, obtained from the regression of the interest differential on the

output of the filter from the univariate estimator


      t       WG
                  t
                                       WG WG
                      + f3i[p(st_llyi ,y2
                                                   WGA
                                                        ;] + u
                                        —27—



This OLS   regression has   an   of .01 for all three currencies, which we take

as convincing evidence that uncovered interest parity can not explain much of

the movements in interest differentials.

     Thus neither the assumption that markets know the regime with certainty

nor the assumption that they are learning about it through the rule

                    offers a very appealing account of time variation in
p(5t_lIyl,
cross—country interest differentials.



5. Conclusion.

     Movements in the dollar appear to be characterized by long swings. We

have presented a formal statistical model of what it means for the dollar to

follow a pattern of long swings, and we find that the model fits the data

well. We conclude that the phenomenon of long swings deserves more attention

from exchange rate theoreticians.

     Can we offer an explanation of these exchange rate and interest rate

movements? Dornbusch (1986, 1987) and Daniel (1989) have suggested models

that allow persistence in movements in the exchange rate. Flood and Carber

(1983) discussed models in which anticipated future events affect the current

exchange rate, generating nonlinear behavior of the exchange rate akin to that

described here. Hsieh (l988b) described a model in which monetary policy

stochastically shifts between two regimes. Kaminsky (1988) generated a simple

model that also leads to nominal exchange rate movements of the type we

describe in Section 1, though empirically identifying the particular

fundamentals that have shifted in the way postulated by her model poses a

challenge for future research. Frankel and Froot (1988) described a model in

which the behavior of irrational "chartists" interacts with rational agents to

produce potentially long movements in one direction in the dollar and a
                                     —28—



failure of uncovered interest parity. These models seem able to account for

some, but not all, of the empirical regularities uncovered here.

     A model that allowed only rational investors would need to explain the

pattern of the dollar and be able to generate risk premia that varied enough
                                               differentials. This is an
over time to explain the pattern of interest

imposing task; (although see Cumby (1988)).

     Earlier researchers had found little evidence of linear serial dependence

in exchange rate changes, supporting the conclusion that the exchange rate

follows a random walk. We reproduce this result, but nevertheless find

compelling evidence of nonlinear serial dependence   in the data characteristic

of long swings. Our evidence indicates that movements in the dollar in one

direction persist over long periods of time. Furthermore, interest

differentials do not seem to take into account how long these movements are.

Our estimation method provides a natural way of parameterizing the "peso

problem," yet we still reject the uncovered interest parity hypothesis.    In

the absence of a plausible story about foreign exchange risk premia, we

conclude that there are long swings in the dollar, and that markets do not

know it.
                                       -.29 —




                                    APPENDIX

     Treating   each currency separately, we began from an initial starting

value for (o) —    (Ij(O)p(0)P(o)P(o)c(O)(O)).                We then iterated on

equations (2.l)—(2.6) until the largest element of                        was less than

1 x lO in absolute value. For the Bayesian parameter V appearing in (2.7),

we specified V — 0.1, which roughly corresponds to proceeding as if we had

observed one—tenth of an observation drawn from each regime which took on the

value zero. We further specified Cli —   .1     and /3   — .5, as if we had two—tenths

of an observation from each regime whose sum of squared deviations from the

population mean of that regime was fi/c — 5.

     For each currency we employed several hundred different starting values

       These starting values all led to a single unique solution to the normal

equations in the case of France. However, two local maxima were found for

Britain and four for Germany. The maximum likelihood estimates reported in

Table 1 are those which achieved the highest value of the objective function

(2.9). When a diffuse Bayesian prior is used (U—cli—/3—0) and iteration is

begun from the starting values in Table 1, the parameter estimates are changed

very little. It further appears that, apart from the singularities, these

correspond to the largest bounded local maxima of the raw likelihood function

(2.1). Thus, use of the prior has essentially no consequences for any of the

tests of conclusions reported in this paper. By contrast, other local maxima

of (2.1) or (2.9) exhibit large changes in parameter estimates for slight

changes in the priors. Hamilton (l988c) argued that such a finding should be

construed as an additional factor supporting selection of the global maxima

reported in Table 1 for the U.K. and Germany.

     Our bivariate analysis found four local maxima for France and Germany and

six for the U.K.
                                        —30—

                                  FOOTNOTES

?j   data are plotted as relatives to their value at the start of   the sample.


2Changes in nominal price differentials between countries were small over this

period compared to changes in nominal exchange rates.     Thus the real and

nominal exchange rate exhibit essentially the same patterns (see Mussa (1986)

on this point). This fact poses additional challenges for theory. In our

empirical analysis we focus on the dynamics of nominal exchange rates rather

than real exchange rates. When we extend the process to a bivariate system

including the nominal interest differential, this permits us to obtain a clean

parameterization for testing uncovered interest parity without having to

commit ourselves to a model of price level expectation.

3Kaminsky (1988) has also fit Hamilton's model to exchange rate data. She

uses monthly data on the pound, whereas we investigate quarterly data on the

pound, mark and franc. She does not explore the hypothesis of uncovered

interest parity, and does not devote as much detail to analysis of the random

walk hypothesis. She extends Hamilton's model to a case where information

besides realized exchange rates is available on the state of the process.


4All series were taken from the data banks compiled by Data Resources, Inc. as

of June 1988. The raw data have the DRI series names are WCCOOA, WGCOOB,

FRCOOA, FRCOOB, UKCOOA, and UKCOOB. Natural logarithms were taken. The data

were then first-differenced and multiplied by 100 to express in units of

percentage change. The resulting quarterly series (yT,y, and y) run from

1973:IV to 1988:1.

5Kaminsky (1988) fit Hamilton's model to monthly data on the pound. She

assumed constant variances, and arrived at parameter estimates for the means

and transition probabilities, as well as inference about historical switch
                                       —31—



points,   that are comparable to those we find for quarterly data.


dGallant (1987, p. 219) argues that the likelihood ratio test is apt to be

more robust than Wald tests in a nonlinear model such as this one.

7This seems due in part to asymmetry in the likelihood surface for increases

and decreases in Pjj. For values of Pjj above p, the Wald approximation

slightly understates the true curvature of the likelihood function, whereas

for Pjj <
            p,   the likelihood function quickly becomes much flatter than the

Hessian evaluated at
                       Pjj predicts.

8See eq. (3.2) in Hamilton (1989a).


9Recall Cochrane's (1988, p. 906) result that


     Var(e+k) — k[Var(e+1)               +    2   ((k_)/k).Cov(Y.Yj))

'°See for example Evans (1986), Frankel and Froot (1987, 1988), Borensztein

(1987), and Cumby (1988).

"This is reminiscent of the argument made by Frankel (1985) that a rational

stochastic bubble could not explain the behavior of the dollar.


'2The prior A   —[       ] was   used in (3.1) to weight the variance of the

exchange rate innovations to five and the variance of interest rate

innovations to one. A different scale variable is appropriate since exchange

rates are considerably more variable than interest rate differentials.


'3These are from the data banks of DRI (called WCDO3A, WGDO3B, FRDO3A, FRDO3B,

UKDO3A, and UKDOTh). Data were converted from annual to quarterly rates as

100.(l—[1+(i/l0O)F25), with i the average of the bid and asked returns.
                                    —32—



                                   REFERENCES

Blanchard, Olivier and Lawrence H. Summers, (1984), "Perspectives on High

   World Real Interest Rates," Brookings Paoers on Economic Activity,

    1984:2, pp. 273—334.

Borensztein, Edtxardo, (1987), "Alternative Hypotheses
                                                         About the Excess Return

    on Dollar Accounts, 1980—1984," IMP Staff PaDers, March, pp. 29—59.

Brock, W., W.D. Dechert and J. Scheinkman, (1987),   "A Test for Independence

    Based on the Correlation Dimension," Mimeographed, University of

    Wisconsin, Madison.

Cochrane, John, (1988), "How Big is the Random Walk in GNP?", Journal of

    Political Economy, 96, pp. 893—920.

Cumby, Robert, (1988), "Is It Real? Explaining Deviation from Uncovered

    Interest Parity," Journal of Monetary Economics, September, 22, pp.

    279—299.

Cumby, Robert, and Maurice Obstfeld, (1984), "International    Interest Rate and

    Price Level Linkages Under Flexible Exchange Rates: A Review of Recent

    Evidence," in John F. 0. Bilson and Richard C. Marston, eds., Exchange

    Rate Theory and Practice, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Daniel, Betty, (1989), "One—Sided Uncertainty About Future Fiscal Policy,"

    Journal of Money. Credit and Banking, 21, pp. 176—189.

 Diebold, Francis X., and James M. Nason, (forthcoming), "Nonparametric

     Exchange Rate Prediction?", Journal of International Economics.

 Dooley, Miachel P., and Peter Isard, (1985), "The Appreciation of the Dollar:

     An Analysis of the Safe-Haven Hypothesis," IMP working paper.

 Dornbusch, Rudiger, (1976), "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics,"

     Journal of Political Economy, December, 84, pp. 1161—1176.
                                          —33—




Dornbusch,   Rudiger, (1983), "Comment on Shafer and Loopesko," Brookings

    Paoers on Economic Activity, 1983:1, pp. 79—85.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, (1986), "Flexible Exchange Rates and Excess Capital

    Mobility," Brookings PaDers on Economic Activity, 1986:1, pp. 209—226.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, (1987), "Exchange Rate Economics: 1986", Economic

    Journal, March, 97, pp. 1—18.

Engel, Charles, (1985), "Reliability of Policy Announcements and the Effects

    of Monetary Policy," Eurotean Economic Review, November, pp. 137—155.

Evans, George W., (1986), "A Test for Speculative Bubbles in the

    Sterling—Dollar Exchange Rate: 1981—84," American Economic Review, 76,

    pp. 621—636.

Everitt, B.S., and D.J. Hand, (1981), Finite Mixture Distributions, London:

    Chapman and Hall.

Feldstein, Martin, (1986), "The Budget Deficit and the Dollar," in Stanley

    Fischer, ed., NER Macroeconomics Annual 1986, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Feldstein, Martin, (1988), "Let     the   Market Decide," The Economist, December

    3—9,   vol.   309, pp. 21—24.

Flood,   Robert, and Peter Garber, (1983). "A Model of Stochastic Process

    Switching," Econometrica, May, 51, pp. 537—551.

Frankel, Jeffrey, (1985), "The Dazzling Dollar," Brookings FaDers on Economic

    Activity, 1985:1, pp. 199—218.

Frankel, Jeffrey, (1988), "International Capital Flows and Domestic Economic

    Policies," in Martin Feldstein, ed., The United States and the World

    Economy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Kenneth Froot, (1987), "Using Survey Data to Test

    Standard Propositions Regarding Exchange Rate Expectations," American

    Economic Review, March, 77, pp. 133—153.
                                    —34—



Frankel, Jeffrey, and Kenneth Froot, (1988), "Chartists, Fundamentalists, and

    the Demand for Dollars," in Tony Courakis and Mark Taylor, eds., Policy

    Issues for InterdeDendent Economies, London: Macmillan.

Gallant, A. Ronald, (1987), Nonlinear Statistical Models, New York: John

    Wiley and Sons, Inc.

Hamilton, James D., (1988a), "Rational—Expectations Econometric Analysis of

    Changes in Regime: An Investigation of the Term Structure of Interest

    Rates," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 12, pp. 385-423.

Hamilton, James D., (1988b), "Analysis of Time Series Subject to Changes in

    Regime," Mimeographed, University of Virginia.

Hamilton, James D., (l988c), "A Pseudo—Bayesian Approach to Estimating

    Parameters for Mixtures of Normal Distributions," Mimeographed,

    University of Virginia.

Hamilton, James D., (1989a), "A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of

    Nonstationary Time Series and the Business Cycle," Econometrica, 57, pp.

    357—384.

Hamilton, James D., (1989b), "Specification Testing in Markov-Switching Time

    Series Models," Mimeographed, University of Virginia.

Hodrick, Robert J., (1987), The Emnirical Evidence on the Efficiency of

    Forward and Futures Foreign Exchange Markets, New York: Harwood Academic

    Publishers.

Hodrick, Robert J., and Sanjay Srivastava, (1984), "An Investigation of Risk

    and Return in Forward Foreign Exchange," Journal of International Money

    and Finance, April, 3, pp. 249-65.

Hsieh, David, (1988a), "Testing for Nonlinear Dependence in Daily Foreign

    Exchange Rates," Mimeographed, University of Chicago.
                                    —35—


Hsieh, David, (1988b), "A Nonlinear Stochastic Rational Expectations Model of

    Exchange Rates," Mimeographed, University of Chicago.

Kaminsky, Craciela, (1988), "The Peso Problem and the Behavior of the

    Exchange Rate: The Dollar/Pound Exchange Rate, 1976—1987," Mimeographed,

    U.C. San Diego.

Krasker, William S., (1980), "The 'Peso Problem' in Testing the Efficiency of

    Forward Exchange Markets," Journal of Monetary Economics, 6, pp. 269—276.

Lee, Lung—Fei, and Andrew Chesher, (1986) "Specification Testing When Score

    Statistics Are Identically Zero," Journal of Econometrics, vol. 31, pp.

    121—149.

Lewis, Karen K., (1989), "Can Learning Affect Exchange Rate Behavior? The

    Case of the Dollar in the Early 1980's," Journal of Monetary Economics,

    23, pp. 79—100.

Meese, Richard, and Kenneth Rogoff, (1983a), "Empirical Exchange Rate Models

    of the Seventies: Do They Fit Out of Sample?", Journal of International

    Economics, 14, February, pp. 3—24.

Meese, Richard, and Kenneth Rogoff, (1983b), "The Out-of-Sample Failure of

    Empirical Exchange Rate Models: Sampling Error or Misspecification?", in

    Jacob Frenkel, ed., Exchange Rates and International Macroeconomics,

    Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Meese, Richard, and Kenneth Singleton, (1982), "On Unit Roots and the

    Empirical Modeling of Exchange Rates," Journal of Finance, September, 37,

    pp. 1029—1035.

Mussa, Michael, (1979), "Empirical Regularities in the Behavior of Exchange

    Rates and Theories of the Foreign Exchange Market," In Carnegie-Rochester

    Conference Series on Public Policy, 11, pp. 9—57.
                                      —36—


                                             Rate Regimes and the Behavior of
Mussa, Michael, (1986), "Nominal Exchange

    Real Exchange Rates: Evidence and Implications," Carnegie-Rochester

    Qference Series on Public Policy, 25, pp. 117—214.

Nevey, Whitney K., (1985), "Maximum   Likelihood   Specification Testing and

    Conditional Moment Tests," EconometriCa, 53, pp. 1047—1070.

                                                and Evaluation of Maximum
Tauchen, George, (1985), "Diagnostic Testing

    Likelihood Models," Journal of Econometrica, 30, 415-443.

Watson, Mark W., and Robert F. Engle, (1985), "Testing for Regression

    Coefficient Stability with a Stationary AR(l) Alternative," Review of

    Economics and Statistics. 67, 341—346.

White, Halbert, (1987), "Specification Testing in Dynamic
                                                              Models,"   in

    Advances in Econometrics. Fifth World Conress. Volume II, edited by

    Truman F. Bewley, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
</ref_section>
                                        —37—


                                      Table 1

Estimates fit to individual country data,
                                               y e _ei,
                                                 —          t   —

      100 times the log of the exchange rate (in dollars per unit
                                                                    73:IV
                                                                       of
                                                                            to 88:1,
e —                                                                         foreign
currency).



Parameter              Germany     France       U.K.


                         3.987       3.256       2.627
                         (1.230)     (.967)      (.872)


                         —1.183     —2.712      —3.752

                         (1.480)    (1.367)     (1.139)


                           .848       .822           .927
  p11
                          (.122)     (.105)      (.057)


                           .928       .908           .913
  p22
                          (.066)     (.063)      (.073)



                        17.652       9.991      16.918

                         (9.351)    (5.001)     (4.660)



                        42.166     36.921       20.247
                        (11.242)   (10.252)     (5.841)




  p                        .678       .342           .542


                           .004       .000           .373
p(s1_lIy1P..Py;O)




Notes to Table 1:

        Standard errors are in parentheses.
                                        —38—


                                       Table 2

Tests of the null hypothesis that exchange rates follow a martingale against
the alternative of segmented trends.



                                                          H":    —
               H': 11 — 1 —p22                                       p2
                          Likelihood                            Likelihood
Country      Wald test    ratio test             Wald test      ratio test


Germany        24.70         2.49                  8.64              3.00
                (.00)        (.11)                 (.00)             (.08)

France         61.26         5.70                 12.65              6.10
                (.00)        (.02)                 (.00)             (.01)

U.K.           29.45         6.15                 25.80              8.85
                (.00)        (.01)                 (.00)             (.00)




Notes to Table 2:


       All statistics are asymptotically X2(l). Asymptotic p-values are in
parentheses.
                                         —39—




                                        Table 3
In-sample and post—sample mean squared forecast error at horizons from one to
four quarters of segmented trends model and random walk with drift




A. IN-SAMPLE MEAN SOUARED FORECAST R0RS

Country                      Forecast horizon (quarters)
   (model)             1            2                3              4


Germany
   (random walk)     38.01        83.79           130.84         199.18
   (segmented trend) 36.48        76.39           113.55         174.93
   (% improvement)    4%           9%              13%            12%

France
   (random walk)     34.37        82.96           143.99         220.88
   (segmented trend) 31.27        72.13           124.31         194.76
   (% improvement)    9%          13%              14%            12%

United Kingdom
   (random walk)     29.10        76.06           124.45         187.26
   (segmented trend) 25.11        65.95           107.82         170.36
   (% improvement)   14%          13%              13%             9%


B. POST-SAMPLE MEAN SQUARED FORECAST RORS

Country                      Forecast horizon       (quarters)
   (model)             1           2                3               4


Germany
   (random walk)     54.58      141.33          251.62           406.49
   (segmented trend) 50.44      133.37          245.77           409.85
   (% improvement)    8%          6%              2%              —1%

France
   (random walk)     52.47      145.59          266.34       426.76
   (segmented trend) 46.80      134.32          255.33       427.01
   (% improvement)   11%          8%              4%              -0%

United Kingdom
   (random walk)     42.35      117.54          186.68       270.43
   (segmented trend) 35.11       98.40          161.28       252.61
   (% improvement)   17%         16%             14%           7%
                                     -40—


Notes to Table 3:
   A. In-.samDle forecast errora. In each case1 the population parameters were
                           t — 1973:IV to 1988:1 and mean squared errors are
estimated using data from
those associated with forecasts for dates t — 1973:IV
                                                       + k to 1988:1 where k is
the forecast horizon.

   B. Post—saiiole forecast errors. In each case, the population parameters
were estimated using data from t — 1973:IV to 1983:IV and mean squared errors
are those associated with forecasts for dates t — 1984:1
                                                         to 1988:1.
                                        —41—



                                   Table    4

Tests of null hypothesis that percent changes in exchange rates are i.i.d.
Gaussian.



   Test                         Germany         France        U.K.


White test for                    .28           2.15          (6.02]
  autocorrelation (X2(1))        (.60)           (.14)         (.01)

White test for                    .32             .02           .39
  ARCH    (X2(1))                (.57)           (.89)         (.53)

114 test for                      .28           2.14          [6.02]
  autocorrelation (X2(l))        (.60)           (.14)         (.01)

114 test for                      .68             .00           .32

  ARCH (X2(1))                   (.41)          (1.00)         (.57)

114 test for shift in mean      [4.14]          [6.70]        [3.921
  79:IV—82:IV (x2(l))            (.04)          (.01)          (.05)

114 test for shift in mean      [4.53]          [7.69]       [10.191
  85:11-88:1 (X2(l))             (.03)          (.01)          (.00)




Notes to Table 4:


     All statistics are asymptotically X2(l) [5% critical value — 3.84;
1% critical value — 6.63]. Brackets [] denote significant at 5% level.
Asymptotic p-values are in parentheses.
                                        -42—


                                   Table       5


Tests of null hypothesis that exchange rates follow the long swings model.



                                Germany            France     U.K.
   Test


                                 2.56              4.23        4.61
White test for
                                 (.63)              (.38)      (.33)
  autocorrelation (x2())

White test for                   3.52               7.26     (10.551

                                 (.47)              (.12)      (.03)
  ARCH (x2())
                                 2.73               4.47       1.59
White test of Markov
                                 (.60)              (.35)      (.81)
  specification (x2())
                                  .00               3.26       3.02
111 test for autocorrelation
  in regime I (X2(1))           (1.00)              (.07)      (.08)

                                 1.44                .24         .30
121 test for autocorrelation
  in regime 2 (X2(1))            (.23)              (.62)      (.58)

                                  .59               1.06         .65
1.14 test for autocorrelation
                                  (.44)             (.30)       (.42)
  across regimes (X2(l))

114 test for                     1.27                 .10      [4.47]

                                  (.26)             (.75)       (.03)
  ARCH (X2(1))

 114 test for shift in mean      1.66               1.92        1.50

   79:IV—82:IV (X2(1))            (.20)             (.17)       (.22)

 111 test for shift in mean     [11.00]            [12.24]      2.28

   85:11—88:1 (x2(1))             (.00)              (.00)      (.13)




 Notes to Table 5:


      The first three statistics are asymptotically x2() [5% critical value —
 9.49; 1% critical value — 13.28]. All other statistics are asymptotically
 x21 [5% critical value — 3.84; 1% critical value — 6.63). Brackets [1
 denote significant at 5% level. Asymptotic p-va1ues are in parentheses.
                                        -.43 —



                                   Table 6

Likelihood ratio tests for whether all parameters of the long swings model
change at specified dates.



Date of sample break           Germany           France    U.K.


1979:IV                         8.343            12.313     4.846
                                (.21)             (.55)     (.56)

l983:IV                        4.303              8.050      3.775
                                (.64)             (.23)      (.71)



Notes to Table 6:


     All variables are asymptotically X2(6). Asymptotic p—va1ues are in
parentheses.
                                           -44-

                                          Table   7


Interest differentials as predicted by (a) the univariate MLE's
                                                                for each
country's exchange rate (Table 1 parameters), and (b) the bivariate MLE's                for
each country's exchange rate together with that country's            interest
differential (Table 8 parameters).



                                                                France          U.K.
                                                  Germany


1.   Predicted value for              —


     when   se—i based on:

     (a) univariate estimate of                       3.203*     2.196*         2.159*
                    + (l—p11)/i2                  (1.150)        (.934)         (.904)


                                                       .542*     _.249*         _.282*
     (b)    bivariate estimate of
                                                                                (.090)
                                                      (.061)     (.118)


2. Predicted value for i —
   when s2 based on:

     (a)    univariate estimate of                    —.811     -.2.160     —3.208

                    +                             (1.335)       (1.214)     (1.001)
            22'2        (l-.p22)/41

            bivariate estimate of                     1.171     —1.228      —1.425
     (b)
                                                      (.086)     (.238)         (.174)


 3. Predicted value for change in i —
     when    state changes from 2 to 1 based on:
                                                      4.014*     4.356*         5.367*
      (a)   univariate estimate of
                                                      (1.597)    (1.447)    (1.182)
            (—l+p11+p22)(j41—i2)

      (b) bivariate estimate of                       _.629*       979*         1.143*

                                                       (.102)     (.249)        (.193)
            p1(2)    —p2(2)
                                        —45—



Notes to Table 7:

   Standard errors are in parentheses. The standard error for a nonlinear
function h() of the (p x 1) parameter vector was calculated as
                        where h0() denotes the (p x 1) vector of derivatives of

the function h(.) with respect to the elements of j,   evaluated at the MLE
and Var(.P) denotes the (p x p) estimated variance-covariance matrix of 9.

   (*)   indicates that the 95% confidence intervals for (a) and (b) fail to
overlap.

           denotes the j-.th element of the vector   in Table 8; thus i1(2) is
the mean interest differential when the process is in state 1 and ji2(2) is the
mean interest differential when the process is in state 2.
                                                —46—




                                              Table    8




Estimates fit            —
                             1(e
                                   —
                                       ei)i    (jUS —
                                                           i')j',   t — 73:IV — 88:1, et — 100

times the log of the exchange rate (in dollars per unit of foreign currency),
   — interest rate (in basis points at quarterly rate).




Parameter       Germany

                 2.407                    1.319                       .216
                (1.132)                  (1.164)                     (.845)
                  .542                                               —.282
                 (.061)                   (.118)                     (.090)

                —1.164                   —3.042                     -2.407
                (1.178)                  (1.163)                    (1.057)
                 1.171                   —1.228                     —1.425
                 (.086)                   (.238)                     (.174)
                  .972                        .916                    .983
p11                                       (.050)                     (.019)
                 (.030)
                  .951                        .889                    .969
p22
                 (.039)                   (.071)                     (.044)
                36.553        .269       34.423       -.2.157       31.306 —1.950
a1                           (.358)      (8.819)       (.733)       (6.702) (.577)
                (9.639)                                                         .342
                  .269        .095       —2.157            .365     —1.950
                ( .358)      (.026)       (.733) (.096)              (.577)    (.073)
                36.222       —.920       25.068        —2.036       15.282     —.335
                (9.816)      (.528)      (7.586)        (.974)       (5.733)   (.680)
                 —.920        .195       -.2.036           .603      —.335      .406




 Notes to Table 8:

      Standard errors are in parentheses.
                                      FIGURE         1

1   .6



1   .'-l
                                                                                       ', I
1.2—                                                                              //
                                                                              /
                                                                              /
1.0—


    .8   —




    .6   —




    .9

             79   75   76   77   78   79   80   81       82   83   89    85   86        87
                                                                        FR               —
                                                                        UK               ——
                                                                        WG               —.
                                  N                           N
                                  Co                          C
                                  Co                          (0
                                  Co                          C

                                  Co                          C
                                  r
                                  Co
                                                              rC
                                  n
                                  Co                          C
                                  N                           N
                                  Co                          C
(N
                                  -4                          -I
LU                                Co
                                                              0
                                  0Co                         0C
CD
                                  0)                          O•)
                                                              N
LL                                N
                                  Co                          Co
                                  N
                                  N                           N
                                  N                           N

                                  CO
                                                              Co
                                  N                           N

                                  LI)
                                                              L/)
                                  N
                                  rN                           r

     tThJ 00(0   r NO N                 U) 0 V 0 UI 0 LI) 0
                                        wWLflU,rrflmn
     —   —                0   I




                 H   CU                    oi1jrcz   rc
                                  N                                N
                                  C                                C
                                  (0                               (0
                                  C                                C
                                  to                               to
                                  C                                C
                                  rC                               rC
                                  en
                                  C                                C
                                  nC                               r'j
                                                                   C

UJ                                                                 C
                                  0C                               C
                                                                   C
C
                                  0)
U-                                N                                N
                                  C                                C
                                  C—                               N
                                                                   N
                                  N-                               N
                                  Co                               (0
                                                                   N
                                  Lii                              to
                                  N                                N
                                  r                                rN

     fl 0 (0 ct r (N 0 flJ                   rni r.j Csj
                                                     00— 'n
                                                          — r—n—01
                                                                  P4
                                        to
     —   —               0    I         n                        —o
                                                                  >c

         QCOO U)    II   CN                  UUJCJt Laro
                N                                       N
                                                        CD
                CD

                                                        CD
                CD
                                                        CD
                CD

                                                        C!)
                U,                                      CD
                CD


                                                        CD
                CD



                                                        CD
                CD


                (N                                      (N
                                                        CD
                CD

                -4                                      CD
LU              CD



                                                        CD
                CD


                0,                                       N
LU              N
                                                         CD
                CD
                N                                        N

                N                                        N
                N                                        N
                                                         CD
                 CD
                 N                                       N
                 U,                                      U,
                 N                                       N

                 N                                        N




                      (N (N (N -4   -4   -4   _4   _.
     ——

          ,Nr
                                        FIGURE         5
p    1.2—
R    1.0—
0
B                                  /
         .6—
S

-        .2—
2
     0.0—                     I
     -   2—
               79   75   76   77   76   79   60   81   62   83   89   85   86   87
     .65
E    .60
     .55
     .50
N

P1   .90
     .35
K    .30
               79   75   76   77   78   79   80   81   82   83   89   65   86   67
     2.9
     2.0
     1,6
     1.2
         B
         .9
     0.0
     -9
               79   75   76   77   78   79   80   81   82   83   89   85   86   87
                                             FIGURE             5

p      1.2—
A      1.0—
0
B                                                      I
        .6    —
S

•        .2—           L
                         n
2
       0.0—
       -.2—
                  79     75   76   77   78   79   80       81   82       83   69   85 86     67

F      26
R      29
E      22
'4
C
       20
H      18
       16
F      19.
A
A
       12
II     10
C
     xl 0—2       79     75   76   77   78   75   80       81       82   83 89     65   86   87

         2.
 I
N
T        0.
 0
        —2
 F
        —3
        —9

                  7'-l   75   76   77   78   7    80       81       82   83   89   85   86   87
                                        FIGURE         7
p    1.2—
R    1.0—
0
B
          6—
S

         .2—
2
     0.0—
     —.2—
               79   75   76   77   78   79   60   81   62   63   89   85   86   87
U    2.5
K    2.3
P    2.1
0    1.9
U
     1   .7
II
D    1.5
     1.3
     1.1
               79   75   76   77   78   79   80   81   82   83   89   85   86   87
         2

N        1.
T
         0.
0
I
     —2

     —3

               79   75 76     77   78   79   80   81   82   83   89   85   86   87
