                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIffi




               HUMAN   CAPITAL AND GROWTH: THEORY AND EVIDENCE




                                 Paul 11. Romer




                             Working Paper No. 3173




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 MassachusettS Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 1989




                                                  Conference. The comments of the
Prepared for the April 1989 Carnegie-Rochester
participants at the conference, the NBER conference on Growth, and the Applied
Workshop at the University of Chicago, including comments made by Robert Barro,
                                                       Kevin Murphy, and Jim
Gary Becker, Robert King, Paul Krugman, Alan Meltzer,
Poterba, are gratefully acknowledged. This work was supported by NSF Grant
SES-8821943, a Sloan Foundation Fellowship, and the Center for Advanced Study
in the Behavioral Sciences. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
Growth. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #3173
                                       November 1989


                HUMAN CAPITAL AND GROWTH: THEORY AND EVIDENCE


                                   ABSTRACT

     This paper outlines a theoretical framework for thinking about the role of
human capital in a model of endogenous growth. The framework pays particular
attention to two questions: What are the theoretical differences between
intangibles like education and experience on the one hand, and knowledge or
science on the other? and How do knowledge and science actually affect
production? One implication derived from this framework is that the initial
level of a variable like literacy may be important for understanding subsequent
growth. This emphasis on the level of an input contrasts with the usual
emphasis from growth accounting on rates of change of inputs.  The principal
empirical finding is that literacy has no additional explanatory power in a
cross-country regression of growth rates on investment and other variables, but
consistent with the model, the initial level of literacy does help predict the
subsequent rate of investment, and indirectly, the rate of growth.




                                        Paul M. Romer
                                        Center for Advanced Studies in
                                        the Behavioral Sciences
                                        202 Junipero Serra Boulevard
                                        Stanford, CA 94305
1. Introduction



     As suggested by its title, this paper offers both theory and evidence on

the connection between human capital and growth, but only if both "theory and

"evidence" are interpreted broadly. The theory is really no more than a

conceptual framework for thinking about growth, one that is intended to be

useful in the analysis of data. It generates neither a set of equations to be

solved for an equilibrium nor sharp quantitative predictions.

Correspondingly, the empirical analysis presented here is no more than a

preliminary attempt at exploratory data analysis guided by the framework.

     Section 2 below presents the outline of the theoretical framework. Its

conclusions for data analysis can be simply stated. If one allows for an

explicit research and development activity designed to foster the creation of

new goods, simple growth accounting relationships do not
                                                           hold. In addition to

the usual relationships between the      j growth of inputs and the rate of

                                                                be a role for the
growth of outputs suggested by growth accounting, there may

level of human capital variables to explain the rate of growth of output.      In


a regression equation that tries to estimate separate roles for both physical

 investment and human capital variables in explaining the rate of output

growth, collinearity may cause the human capital variables not to enter

 significantly. They should still have explanatory power for investment.

     The empirical part of the paper illustrates how this observation can be

 exploited by focusing on literacy as a measure of human capital.     The results

 are consistent with what one would expect from the model (and also, one might

 add, from common sense), but they go beyond what one would expect from a

 narrow growth accounting framework.
2




        The empirical analysis is also drawn into a discussion of the effects of

measurement error. Formal tests for the presence of measurement error are

relegated to a separate paper (Romer, 198gb), but the results here show that

it is possible to correct for measurement error, at least in some cases and

that doing so can significantly affect the inferences that one draws from the

data.

        Section 2, the bulk of the paper, outlines the theoretical framework in

some detail. Because it is important for matching theory to data, the

framework is explicit about exactly what one means in practice, i.e., in the

available data, by education, experience, knowledge, and technology. Section

3 reports the results of cross country regressions. Section 4 summarizes the

empirical findings and the contribution of the model.




2. Theory



                                   2.1 Motivation



        The usual approach in the study of growth is to outline a very specific

dynamic model that can be explicitly solved for an equilibrium. In developing

our sense of what happens in a new setting, explicit solutions are extremely

important, but they are achieved at a substantial cost. Analytical

tractability is decisive in the construction of such models, and artificial

assumptions are inevitably made for purely technical reasons. As a result,

when it comes time to compare the model with actual data, there is at best a

distant and elastic connection between the variables manipulated in the model

and those that we can actually measure. For example, I used a mongrel notion
                                                                                3




of aggregate capital that combines elements of both knowledge and physical

capital (Romer, 1986.) It offers no clear guidance about whether physical

capital, or physical capital plus cumulative research and development

expenditures, or these two variables combined with expenditures on education

and on the job training should be used in an empirical application of the

model. Similarly, Lucas (1988) uses on a notion of human capital that grows

without bound that apparently is quite different from the human capital

measures like years of schooling and on the job training used by labor

economists.

     This section outlines an attempt at a model that lends itself more

readily to a discussion of data. It builds on the model I have previously

outlined (R.omer, 1988), and extends that model's applicability by giving up

                                            solution. Based on the results that
any hope of deriving an explicit analytic

can be derived from the simpler model and other special cases of the general

model, one can make informed conjectures about how the extended model will

behave, but none of these conjectures is verified rigorously here. What this

 loose kind of framework can do is detail a list of possible variables to

 consider and a set of possible interactions to look for in an exploratory

 analysis of data.

      Since the focus of this paper is education in particular and human

 capital more generally, the extension will focus on these variables and will

 be guided by the available data that bear on them. The empirical exercise in

 Section 3 will consider only the cross country data on literacy,   but it will

 be clear that the analysis could be repeated with measures of primary,

 secondary, or higher education, or with measures of scientists,    engineers, and

 technicians. To keep the discussion of the theory manageable, the model

 neglects the very important interactions between measures   of human capital per
4




capita and demographic variables like birth and death rates. It will also

offer only a very simple specification of how the government interacts with

the rest of the economy. For theoretical elaborations and empirical evidence

on both of these points, see Barro (1989a).




                            2.2 Production of Goods



     Let M denote the number of agents in a closed economy, and let i

denote a typical individual. Each has a fixed allotment of time that can be

divided between two different kinds of educational activities and four

different productive activities. Every agent has an endowment of three types

of skills:



         physical skills like eye—hand coordination and strength;

         educational skills acquired in primary and secondary school; and

         scientific talent acquired in post—secondary education.



    will be taken as given, but it could be more explicitly modeled as the

outcome of investments in nutrition, health care, and so forth.

     The schooling measure E1 for each agent could be measured as it is in

the data, in total years of schooling. Thus, for agent i, E grows

according to




                             1
                                 =   fu   if E   12,               (1)
                                     L0   otherwise.
                                                                                 5




where       E [O,fl denotes the fraction of time that is spent in primary and

secondary school. (All rates of change will be denoted with an overdot, but

nothing in what follows depends on the use of continuous time.) The total

number of years of education in the population is then




                                  E =                             (2)
                                             E1,



the rate of growth of E will be



                                  =         —'                    (3)



where 5 is the constant probability of death in any period. To keep the

demographics simple, assume that one new person is born each time someone

dies. Like many of the simplifying assumptions made here, the demographic

assumptions could easily be made more realistic.

        By convention, scientific skills Si could be distinguished from skills

acquired from primary and secondary schooling, and measured in years    of post—

secondary schooling. In some applications, one might choose a finer means of

discriminating educational outcomes, distinguishing perhaps between college

graduates generally and scientists, engineers and technicians.    What matters

here is only to illustrate how more than one type of skill might enter the

production technology, and how different empirical measures of the more

advanced skills could be used.

        Corresponding to equations 1, 2, and 3 are equations describing how

 scientific skills evolve:
6




                            1
                                =       u       if     = 12,
                                                                 (4)
                                        o       otherwise,

                                                 M
                                    S= Si,      i=1
                                                                 (5)




                                             M.
                                S=, 1=1S.—.
                                        1
                                                                 (6)




As always in what follows, the variable u denotes the fraction of time

devoted to an activity, so uS denotes the faction of time devoted to

scientific training.

     Analogously, one can define a measure of cumulative job experience.

Thus, let Z denote total man—hours of time spent on the job and specify that

Z grows either through time spent working in the sector that produces

consumption goods      or through time spent working to produce any of the


intermediate inputs in production u13:



                                Z. =
                                    1
                                            u + E.u.3
                                            1    31'           (7)



                                                M.
                                             i= 1
                                                    Z—Z.       (8)



This simple formulation is based on the assumption that experience is not too

job specific or that job mobility is not too important. It could easily be

extended.

     It should be clear that allowing L and E and Z to enter as separate

inputs into production is less restrictive than conventional specifications
                                                                                    7




that   assume that all three can be measured in common units of efficiency—man-

hours. The specification here permits this as a special case, but does not

require it. The inputs are kept separate in an attempt to be as explicit as

possible about the different kinds of intangible inputs that are relevant for

production. As the arguments that follow will show, an intangible input like

education has theoretical properties that are very different from those of an

intangible like an invention.

       The specification here follows the convention from growth theory and

aggregate general equilibrium theory of using as inputs in a production

function only goods that have quantity units. This means that it does not

follow the convention from labor economics of allowing some inputs to be

measured in units that are the ratio of quantity units, e.g., years of

education per worker. At a formal level, this choice is arbitrary, but for

expositional purposes, the specification used here has distinct advantages.

For example, in stating the neoclassical model with a Cobb—Douglas technology,

one could specify output either as Y =      F(K,L) =   KaLl   or instead define

k =    K/L and write Y    G(k,L) =   kaL.   These formulations are mathematically

equivalent, but the second does not lend itself readily to general equilibrium

analysis. The homogeneity of degree one of the true production function and

its crucial role in the theory of distribution is hidden by the second

formulation. The partial derivative           has units goods/worker, but it is

not equal to the wage rate. The partial derivative            has units of

goods/(unit of capital/worker) and has no interpretation as a wage or rental

rate. The second formulation obscures much of the structure of the

neoclassical model. An attempt to write the aggregate production function

used here in terms of the number of workers and the average level of education

and experience per worker would have exactly the same effect.
8




       This framework highlights the fact that the variables E, S, and Z are

bounded on a per capita basis. They cannot exceed the average length of life

of people in this economy. For unbounded per capita income growth to take

place, some input will have to grow per capita without bound. Average years

of education or experience are not candidates for this variable.

       It is clear that something like knowledge, understanding, or science has

grown per capita and shows every prospect of continuing to do so. The very

fact that unbounded growth is possible is an indication that this input is a

very different kind of intangible from cognitive skill or memory related to

the performance of a task. The feature that makes cognitive skill and memory

easy to include in economic models is the one that makes them bounded: They

are inextricably tied to a particular individual. An intangible like

scientific or engineering knowledge is not tied to an individual. This means

that they can grow without bound, but it also raises conceptual difficulties

about the excludability and rivalry of knowledge as an economic good. These

difficulties are discussed in more detail below.

       Output of consumption goods in this economy will be denoted as C and

expressed as a function of labor inputs       =            educational inputs

EC =           experience, Z =           and a list of intermediate producer

durables XC =                      (Superscripts   are used here to denote the
                 (X,   X, ...).
productive activity that a particular input is used in.) Since u denotes

the fraction of time agent i devotes to production of C, this person must

supply all four of                       and uZ to this sector. By
                            uE1,
assumption, scientific skills make no contribution to increased output of C,

so they are not reflected in the notation. The joint supply attributes of an

individual's time, together with fixed time costs for acquiring educational

and scientific skills and different relative productivities for the three
                                                                                9




factors in different sectors of this economy will lead to specialization in

the acquisition of scientific skills. This issue is discussed by Becker and

Murphy (1988), and is not pursued here.

     In an abuse of notation, let C(.) denote the function that describes

output of consumption goods as a function of its inputs:   C = C(LC,EC,ZC,XC).

This formulation seems to leave out both knowledge or technology and capital.

The omission of capital is only apparent. In the specification used here,

different types of capital enter through the list of intermediate inputs     XC.


A typical component of this list      could refer to the number of lathes,

computers, or trucks.

     The omission of knowledge or the technology is real. It reflects the

belief that once the machinery X and the attributes of labor L, E, and Z

have been specified, output is determined. Technology and knowledge enter

production of consumption goods indirectly through their effects on the list

of inputs X that is used at any point in time. In this sense, the model

here is akin to models of technological change that is embodied in capital

goods.
     This formulation denies any role for science in producing E. A contrary

claim that is sometimes made is that E years in school now produces a worker

of higher productivity than E years in school did 100 years ago because of

the growth of knowledge and science. Given that the main role of primary and

 secondary school education is to produce basic cognitive skills like the

 ability to read or to solve an equation for an unknown, this seems unlikely.

 School instruction today actually bears a remarkable resemblance to

 instruction 100 years ago. If there is any positive effect of science and

 technology on our ability to teach basic cognitive skills, it is small enough

 to neglect here. It is not through the schoolhouse that science has its
10




effect on output. Rather, it is through the introduction of new goods.

     To capture the process of new good introduction, the list X of actual

and potential inputs is assumed to be of infinite length. At any time, only a

finite number of Xi's, the ones that have been invented so far, can be used.

For example, if X1 denotes a computer that operates with pulses of light

rather than with pulses of electricity, X is now equal to 0 because no

such computer is available yet. One can nevertheless conjecture how its

availability would affect output, for example in fiber—optic networks, if it

were. The simplifying assumption that the function C and the complete

infinite list of arguments X is known from the beginning is not to be taken

literally. The basic points of the analysis that follows will carry over to a

model that introduces uncertainty about the function C(.) and the list X.

     For a particular intermediate input of type j for which a design is

already available, the stock of X3 will increase when production is

undertaken. (Where designs come from is discussed below.) The stock will

decrease with depreciation at a rate p. As for C, output of units of X

can be written as a function of the amount of physical labor L             =

                      X.     X.                   x.          x.
education skills E 3 =                experience Z -   = E1u3Z,    and other producer


durables X -   that   are employed:



                                       X. X. X.
                              =         3,E 3,X 3) —                 (9)
                                  X(L                  pX3.


Neither the stock of scientific knowledge nor that of scientific skills is a

direct input of the manufacturing process for C or for the Xj's.

     The conventional assumption in growth theory is that production functions

like C(.) and X(.) are homogeneous of degree one. This assumption seems
                                                                               11




entirely reasonable in the present context. Most of the alleged scale

economies in plant size or manufacturing processes should be exhausted at

scales of operation that are small compared to the size of a national economy.

Where a truly fundamental departure from the usual assumptions about returns

to scale does arise is in the creation of a good, not in its subsequent

production.

     The essential fact about new good creation is that it requires

expenditures that are quasi—fixed. These expenditures must be incurred to

produce any goods at all, but they do not vary with the level of production.

Such costs, typically subsumed under the label of research and development,

include invention, construction of a prototype, testing, and refinement.

Generically, these costs will be referred to as the cost of producing a

design. The manufacturing function X(.) describes what happens when the

design is sent to the factory floor for production.

     Degree of excludability and rivalry are fundamental attributes of any

economic good used in production or consumption. The observation that an

intangible good like a design knowledge is often only partially excludable     is


very familiar. The fact that it nonrival has received less attention, but it

is equally important. A design is a nonrival input in production in the sense

that the same design can be used simultaneously in as many production

processes as desired.

     The extent of rivalry is determined entirely by the technology. In

contrast, the notion of excludability is determined by both the technology and

the legal institutions in a particular economy. If a good is purely rival,

using it yourself is equivalent to excluding others from using it.      If it is

nonrival, excludability requires either a technological means for preventing

access to the good (e.g. encryption) or a legal system that effectively deters
12




others from using the input even though it is technologically possible to do

so (e.g patents).

     There have been repeated acknowledgments that the production of knowledge

or technological change seems to conflict with the assumption of price—taking.

Schumpeter (1942) gives one of the classic statements of the conflict between

innovation and perfect competition. Arrow (1962a), Shell (1967), and Wilson

(1975) do so as well. Despite the central role played by knowledge or

technology in models of growth, growth theory has tended not to dwell on this

issue. The neoclassical model of exogenous technological change (as presented

by Solow, 1956) implicitly acknowledges the nonrival aspects of knowledge—

improvements in the technology can be exploited simultaneously by all firms—

but it does not consider the possibility that knowledge is privately provided.

Arrow (1962b) allows for nonrival knowledge that is privately produced, but

only as an unintended side effect of other activities. The formulation in my

earlier paper (Romer, 1986) and in Lucas's paper (1988) introduces forms of

knowledge that are partly excludable and rival, and partly nonexciudable and

nonrival. As in the Arrow model, the nonrival knowledge is produced only as a

side effect of some other activity. All three of these models allow for

spillovers, that is, problems relating to excludability of knowledge, but they

do not address the conflict between nonrivairy and private creation of a good

in competitive markets.

     Attempts to avoid the issue of the intentional, private production of

nonrival inputs like designs or inventions presumably arise from technical

considerations relating to the construction of economic models rather than a

belief that privately produced nonrival goods are of negligible importance.

Direct estimates of the magnitudes involved are not easy to come by, but we

know that something on the order of 27. to 37. of GNP in industrialized
                                                                               13




countries is spent on research and development. Almost all of the output from

this activity has the nonrival character of blueprints, designs, or

inventions, and much of this activity takes place in the private sector.

     A casual examination of the business press suggests that the problems for

firms created by the private provision of a nonrival input are very real. For

example, recent stories have described thefts of secret process technologies

used by Du Pont in the production of Lycra, and of thefts of documents from

Intel concerning its 80386 microprocessors. The problems in the micro chip

and chemical industries have high visibility and are easy to understand, but

large resources are at stake in more mundane areas like the design of blades

for steam and gas turbines that are used to generate electricity. General

Electric mounted extensive criminal and civil proceedings to keep its $200

million investment in mechanical drawings and metallurgical formulas for

turbine blades from being used by competitors who had received copies of

internal documents (Wall Street Journal, August 16, 1988, p.1.)

     The point here is not just that it is costly to make knowledge

excludable. Even if patent and copyright protection were perfect and

completely subsidized by the government so that excludability was perfect,     it


is still the case that these firms, and many like them, sell goods that depend

in an important way on nonrival inputs. Neither Intel, nor flu Pont, nor

General Electric can sensibly be modeled as a price taker in the market for

its goods. Once designs are in place, chips, Lycra, and turbine blades can

all be manufactured under conditions of constant returns to scale. If these

firms sold their goods at marginal cost, which is equal to unit cost, none of

them would ever be able to recoup the initial research expenditures.

     The nonrivalrous aspect of new good design is captured here by assuming

that there is an additional variable A (A for "applied science") that
14




represents the outcome of applied research and development. A separate

knowledge input B (B for "basic science") will be introduced below, that is

both nonrival and nonexciudable. The distinction between A and B arises

from the fact that A is assumed also to be at least partly excludable, at

least insofar as it is used in the production of a good. Thus one unit of A

confers the right to produce a good that is protected by the legal system or

secrecy from copying for at least some period of time. This means that it is

possible to have the private provision of A.

     Loosely speaking, A measures the total number of designs. One unit of

A must be produced before it is possible to start production of each new good

X, so A is also a measure of the total number of types of goods that are

available. Thus X = 0 for any j>A. For jA, the level of production of
                                                           x. x. x. x.
X depends only on the inputs used in production, XJ(L ,E ,Z ,X J).




                          2.3 A Simple Special Case



     In its general form, this mOdel is like an infinite extension of a model

with multiple capital goods. A special case that permits a significant

simplification and still captures the essential issues about the role of

science and knowledge is one where the production functions for manufacturing

capital goods and consumption goods have the same functional form:




X(LEZX) = C(L,E,Z,X)     =   6(L,E,Z,X), for all j = 1,   2, .   . .(10)


This assumption suppresses any factor intensity differences in the different
production activities. The inputs L, E, Z, and X will be used in identical

ratios in all of the productive activities, and a change in the output of one

activity requires only a scale change in the other activities. Using the kind

of functional form suggested by Dixit and Stiglitz (1977) and Ethier (1982)

for modeling the dependence of utility or production respectively, on many

goods, a simple example of a functional form for G(.) is




                        C(L,E,Z,X) =
                                       L'EZ j=1 X.J              (ii)




Homogeneity of degree one is imposed by the assumption that c÷f3i-7+p=1.

     A further simplification illustrated by this kind of function is the

assumption that all of the different types of producer durables X3 have

symmetric effects in production. With both of these assumptions, it is

possible to define aggregate capital as K =           Because of the symmetry

assumption, the concavity of the function G implies that all of the inputs

X that are available will be used at the same level,         =          for all   j
                                                                 Xk
and k less than or equal to A.

     With these assumptions, it is possible to define aggregate output Y as

a function of total labor used in production of goods, L\'=LC+EL -; total

educational inputs used in production of goods,    E =           3; total years of
                                                         EC÷E
experience in the labor force, Z' =           1; total capital used in the
                                      ZC+jZ
production of goods, K' =         +        and the number of designs or goods

in existence, A. Even though A is not a true input in the production of

goods and does not appear in any of the manufacturing functions C() or

X(.) its presence is crucial to distinguish between a case in which an
 16




 increase in K is caused by an increase in the quantities of existing

 intermediate producer durables and a case in which the increase in K is

 caused by an increase in the number of types of intermediate producer

 durables.

          Let X(K',A) denote the list of producer durables with the property that
      =
          K'/A for 1jA and       X =   0   for j>A. Then define



                         F(L,E,Z,K,A) =      G(L,E,Z,X(K,A)).       (12)




For the functional form for G(.) given in equation (11), F(.) takes the
form




                               F(L,E,K,A) = LEfiZ7KPA1_/t.          (13)



At any time, Y =       F(L,E,Z,K',A)       represents the total feasible output that

can be split between consumption and accumulation of additional inputs X, or

equivalently of additional K:




                               Y =   F(L,E,Z,K,A)    =C+K.          (14)



          The simplifying assumptions and functional form described here are not

essential for the arguments that follow, but the resulting expressions (12),

(13), and (14) do help make concrete some of the abstract arguments and show

the close parallel with earlier models. For fixed A, the model here reduces

to a description of the technology to one that is very close to the one

assumed in the standard neoclassical model. Physical labor, education, and
                                                                                17




experience are entered separately to avoid some of the ambiguity associated

with the use of the term human capital, but otherwise the specification is

entirely conventional. In particular, it follows that F is homogeneous of

degree one in its first four arguments, holding A constant, just as it is in

the neoclassical model.

     The theoretical tasks that remain are to specify the technology for

producing new designs, and more important, to specify an equilibrium that

supports production of A by private firms. For these tasks, the entire

specification leading up to equation (14) is needed, not just the reduced form

equation itself.




                          2.4 Production of Designs



     The production technology for creating new designs measured by A is

assumed to depend on the amount of scientific and educated labor          and

used in this process. It depends on the amounts of intermediate inputs

for example computers, used for this purpose. It is also assumed to depend on

the stock of basic science B that is known. Finally, the production of new

designs is assumed to depend directly on the stock of existing designs because

existing designs offer hints about how to undertake future designs. Thus, for

example, the productivity of an engineer with 8 years of post—graduate

training who is engaged in the design of a new good will depend on both of the

measures A and B of cumulative knowledge available for use.



                            A   A(EA,SA,AA,BA,XA),                 (15)
 18




      It is tempting to assume that A suffers depreciation as well. After

all, things like designs or blueprints do sometimes get lost. However, this

 is not what one typically has in mind here. Instead, depreciation is used as

a synonym for obsolescence, but the distinction here is important. A

particular piece of engineering may lose its economic value without being

truly lost. The canonical example is the design for a buggy whip. This kind

of obsolescence is not explicitly captured in the model as it stands. To do

so, one would have to modify the simply functional form used in equation (11),

in which all intermediate inputs enter production in an additively separable

way, and allow instead for complicated patterns of complementarity (say

between buggies and whips) and substitution (between horse power and internal

combustion.) This extension is of real interest, but adding an exponential

depreciation term to equation (15) seems like a poor, and possibly misleading,

substitute for it. In any case, the basic lesson here is likely to survive

any extension: growth accounting based on perfect competition leads to too

narrow a focus on rates of change of inputs.

      The production of basic science depends on the amount of scientific

talent       devoted to this activity, its own level B, and any of the

intermediate inputs X that are available for use:




                                B = B(SB,BB,XB).                 (9)




      Once one constructs this kind of explicit framework, it is clear how it

could be extended. For example, to model learning by doing, arguments of the

production function for C or for the Xs could also appear as arguments

in the production of A. For example, if people on the job in the production
                                                                             19




of Y have insights about new products or processes purely by virtue of doing

their jobs, time spent on the job L' (or L and the educational level E)

would appear as arguments of A.

    The constraints on the rival inputs in this model are entirely

conventional. The constraint on the allocation of time is




                          u +u +u +u +u +u       1.             (17)




This constraint determines the allocation of the inputs L, E, and S to the

various production activities. Similarly, the stock of X must be allocated

among production of Y, A, and B. The constraints on the nonrivalrous goods

are different precisely because they are nonrival:



                               AAA,                             (18)
                               BA   B, BB   B.




It is possible that these last constraints are not met with equality. If part

of A or B developed by one organization is kept secret, it may not be used

in subsequent production of A or B by other organizations.

     There are important questions about aggregation that are not being

addressed here, but it should also be clear how they could be addressed.

Output of both A and B could be indexed by the producing organization,

with individually indexed levels of inputs. Total output would be the sum of

across firms corrected for double counting (i.e. for the production of the

same piece of A or B by different firms or labs).
 20




                        2.5 Prices and Marginal Products



      At the level of generality used here, there is not much that one can

 prove rigorously about this system of equations. One immediate implication of

 the presence of nonrival inputs in production, however, is that the

 competitive assumptions needed for a complete accounting for growth do not

hold. At the firm level, the failure of the usual assumptions for competition

follows from the decreasing average total cost of producing   X implied by
the initial investment in design costs. If the firm priced output at marginal

cost (equal to constant unit cost) as competition would force it to do, it

would never recoup this initial investment.

      At the aggregate level, this departure from the usual assumptions shows

up in the form of aggregate increasing returns to scale. Consider an economy

that starts from initial stocks L0,
                                      E0, S0, Z0, K0, A0, B0 and evolves
through time. If the economy were instead to start with twice as much of the

initial tangible stocks L0, E0, Z0, S0, K0, it would be possible to produce

more than twice as much consumption good output at every point in time. It

could produce exactly twice as much by building a second economy that

replicates the production of the rivalrous goods C and all of the
                                                                        Xi's and
that replicates the accumulation of E, Z, and S that takes place in the

first economy. Since the underlying production functions for C    and         are

homogeneous of degree one, as are the schooling technologies, this is

feasible. At every point in time, this replica economy could make use of the

stock of the nonrivairous goods A and B that was already available in the

original economy. Even if the portion of the talent E and S and of the

inputs X that are used to increase A and B in the first economy is left

idle in the replica economy, it can replicate all of the output of the first
                                                                               21




economy. If the idle E, Z, S, and X were instead used to produce

additional units of A or B or merely used in production of C or of the

Xi's, output would more than double. Thus aggregate output increases more

than proportionally with increases in the rivalrous inputs L, E, Z, S, and K

alone. Once one recognizes that A and B are inputs too, measured, say, in

units of production cost, it is clear that a proportional increase in L, E,

S, K, A, and B would increase output by even more.

     The fact that it is not possible to replicate any number of existing

inputs is not relevant here. All that matters in this thought experiment is

what it can reveal about the underlying mathematical properties of production.

Because of the departure from homogeneity of degree one that it reveals, it

follows that market prices cannot reflect marginal values.

     In a simple static model, a production function that increases more than

proportionally with increases in all of the inputs has the property that the

marginal product of each input times the quantity of that input, summed over

all inputs, yields a quantity that is greater than output. A marginal

productivity theory of distribution fails because paying each input its

marginal product would more than exhaust total output. In a dynamic model,

this result is repeated at every point in time.




                               2.6 Equilibrium



    The discussion so far has established the basic elements of the

technology and indicated why a classical competitive equilibrium will not be

feasible. This section proposes an alternative equilibrium concept.

    The simplest alternative would be to assume that no compensation is paid
22




to any resources that are devoted to the production of A or B. In this

case, all output Y =     F(L,E,Z,K,A)      at given time can be distributed as

payments to L, E, and K according to marginal productivity theory because

F is homogeneous of degree one in its first four arguments. This is the

alternative followed by the neoclassical model with exogenous technological

change. The problem of course is that since the output sector pays nothing

for the use of the designs A, there is no way to compensate the inputs used

to produce more designs A and more basic science B, so these inputs are

ignored or suppressed. The spillover models follow this same route      if one

makes the qualification that the relevant marginal products for distribution

theory are private ones, not social ones. Inputs used intentionally to

produce A or B are still suppressed.

     Models that rely on government funding to pay for increases in A and B

reintroduce these inputs. In effect, the power of the government to tax is

used to break the budget constraint on overall resources. All of GNP can be

paid to the factors other than A in competitive markets according to

marginal productivity theory. Then some of this income can be taken away by

means   of   lump sum taxation and used to compensate inputs used to produce

increments to A and B.

        The essential characteristic of basic research is that it is very close

to a purely nonexcludable, purely nonrival good; that is, it is a classical

public good. It is very hard to establish any kind of property right over

basic scientific discoveries. Consequently, private firms engage in very

little true basic research unless they are paid to do so by the government.

In developed countries, government funding probably gives a reasonable

description of the process that leads to growth in basic science. In less

developed countries, which can take advantage of the results produced in the
                                                                               23




developed countries, growth in basic science is essentially an exogenously

given feature of the world that they inhabit.

     If basic research were the only kind of nonrival good, this is as far as

the theory would need to go. The neoclassical model of exogenous

technological change, supplemented in developed countries by a model of

government subsidies for basic research, would be sufficient to understand

growth. Empirically, growth accounting would need only to be supplemented by

an analysis of government support for basic science, possibly worldwide.

     Appealing as this description is at a theoretical level, it is not very

useful empirically. Part of the point of the detailed outline of production

give above is that basic research is a not a direct input in the production

goods. Before it can be exploited, someone has to design and develop a good

that takes advantage of it. A very large part of this kind of activity takes

place in the private sector, and most of it is undertaken as an intentional

investment activity. The spillover models are surely correct in the sense

that firms rarely capture all of the benefits created when they undertake

research, but these models fail to explain the underlying motivation for doing

the research in the first place. They do not explain why the knowledge

produced from intentional private—sector research and development generates a

return.

     The most natural model explanation of how this can happen, and the one

emphasized by Schumpeter, is through the presence of market power. Research

and development leads to a new good that is not a perfect substitute for any

existing good in the market. The producer of the good can exploit the unique

qualities of the good and sell it at a price that is greater than its unit

cost of production. This observation must be combined with the observation

that introducing new goods is subject to free entry. In equilibrium, all
24




firms must earn zero profits in the relevant sense: the initial cost of

designing and developing a good must be just equal to the present discounted

value of the difference between the unit cost of producing the good and the

price that the firm charges for it. Each good X can be thought of as being

introduced by a different firm. The resulting equilibrium is one with

monopolistic competition between a large number of firms engaged in the

introduction and production of new goods X3.

     It would clearly be possible to introduce fixed costs and departures from

price—taking behavior in sectors other than the intermediate good sector. As

it stands, the model assumes that there is a single final good that is

produced according to a production function that is homogeneous of degree one,

which leads to price taking in the final goods sector. One could easily allow

for the possibility that there are also many distinct consumption goods

supplied under conditions of monopolistic competition. For the purposes of

this paper, this would add little. Thus, for thinking about equilibrium, all

goods other than the intermediate inputs are assumed to be sold in competitive

markets.




                          2.7 Empirical Implications



     For a representative country, the implications of this framework can be

elicited from Figure 1. As noted above, the rate of growth of basic science

B for most purposes can be taken to be exogenously given by developments in

other countries and by government policy decisions. This does not reduce the

model to the neoclassical model, because B has no direct effect on measured

output Y. What matters for growth in output is growth in A.     If A is
                                                                               25




constant because no resources are devoted to converting the stock of B into

usable products, the fact that education and experience are bounded per capita

implies that the economy will reach a conventional stationary state in per

capita income because of diminishing returns to the accumulation of K; that

is, because of the diminishing marginal productivity of more units of the same

set of types of producer durables.

       Figure 1 illustrates what happens to conventional growth accounting

relationships in an equilibrium in which A grows, i.e., one in which new

goods are constantly being introduced. It plots an illustrative graph of

total output Y as a function of the amount of a specific intermediate input

      when other inputs are held constant. Let P denote the rental rate

charged for this input by the single firm that produces it. For simplicity,

assume that once the good is introduced, the rental rate is constant for all

time. Since firms that buy this input are price takers, the durable good will

be used at a level X, such that its marginal productivity is equal to P.

Under the conditions of zero profit that must obtain under monopolistic

competition, revenue to the seller PX is equal to the total cost to

society of supplying good J at the level X. For the present value of

entry to be zero, the revenues at any given time PX must be just equal to

the interest cost on the initial investment to design the good, plus the sum

of the interest rate and the depreciation rate times the cost of producing the


xi.

       Because of the concavity of the production function, the introduction of

a new intermediate input generates an additional flow of consumption goods at

every point in time that is greater than the cost, measured in consumption

goods, of the resources that are used to produce the intermediate input. In

the figure, this follows from the fact that the intercept of the tangent to
26




the curve is greater than zero. This intercept represents the increment in

the value of output that cannot be accounted for by an increase in the value

of the raw inputs L, E, Z, and K used in production.

     (A similar point could be made about the introduction of new consumer

goods instead of new intermediate inputs. Increases in GNP will understate

increases in welfare when new goods are introduced because expenditure on new

goods does not tale account of the additional consumer surplus added by the

good. Since welfare is not measured, however, this effect has no obvious

implications for the analysis of cross country data on growth.)

     The most direct implication of this kind of model is that data on

something like patents or new good introductions, or even private applied

research and development spending, would have important explanatory power for

growth. As a practical matter, internationally comparable data of this kind

are not available for many countries. Even among the developed countries that

try to maintain aggregate statistics on research and development, there are

likely to be important differences in the conventions for defining an activity

like new good development and measuring expenditure on it.

     An indirect strategy for explaining cross—country variation in the growth

of A is to focus on the inputs that determine its rate of growth. One

obvious input is the rate of growth of basic science B, but it is unlikely

that this can be exploited in a cross—section regression. By assumption,

basic science is a nonexciudable good and can be exploited anywhere in the

world once it is produced.

     Another variable that influences the rate of growth of A should be the

level of A in a country relative to that in the rest of the world. A

country that exploits a very small range of inputs relative to the range of

inputs available in the rest of the world might be expected to be capable of
                                                                               27




rapid growth in A, either through the initiation of international trade or

through copying and reverse engineering. As noted above, direct measures of

A or its rate of change are not available, but it is likely that a low level

of A is associated with low income per capita. Thus, if everything else is

held constant, one might expect that poor countries would tend to have faster

growth in A, and therefore faster growth in output. This is a version of the

catching—up hypothesis also generated by the neoclassical model, but here the

process in not automatic. The inputs that one would expect to affect the rate

of growth of A are openness to trade and measures of total educational

achievement and of scientific talent in a country. It is not logically

necessary that a country with more educational talent actually devotes it to

new good production, but the presumption is that it would, and in at least one

worked—out model (Romer 1988) this is the case. This paper also contains a

theoretical demonstration that free trade should increase growth. Empirical

consideration of trade variables is put off for future work. Here, only

measures related to the educational variables are considered in the

illustrative empirical analysis in the next section.

     A special case of the model outlined here that has been solved (Romer,

1988) combines the variables E, Z, and S into a single human capital

variable H and combines basic research B and applied product development

A into a single variable A. The symmetry assumptions from Section 2.2 are

used, together with a functional like that given in equation (11) for the

functions that depend on the infinite list X. With these specifications, the

model permits an explicit solution for a balanced growth equilibrium.

Increases in the total stock of education and scientific talent lead to

increases in the amount that is allocated to the production of A.

Generalizing to the model here, one should expect that the rate of growth of
28




A is an increasing function of the level of E and        S   in the economy. The

rate of growth of A should in turn help explain the rate of growth of K

and   the   rate of growth of income.

       In the balanced growth solution calculated for the special case, the rate

of growth of A is identical to the rate of growth of K. New investment

takes place one for one with growth in the new opportunities represented by

growth in A. Thus, in a regression of the rate of growth of output on

investment and the level of education and scientific talent, collinearity

between investment and A would mean that there is nothing left for the level

of education and scientific measures to explain. They are proxies for growth

of A, but investment is an even better proxy. Investment will have a

significant partial correlation with the rate of growth, in contrast to the

neoclassical prediction that in the steady state, the rate of investment

should not be associated with with the rate of growth. This association

arises because investment picks up the indirect effects of increases in A.

In this case, one would expect that a regression of investment on the

educational variables should reveal an important partial correlation.

       In summary, the empirical implications of this analysis are that the

level of a human capital variable like education or scientific talent will be

correlated with both the          of growth of income per capita and the share of

total output devoted to investment in physical capital. It is possible that

the educational variables will not be significant in a regression for output

growth that also includes the rate of investment. If so, the rate of

investment should be significantly related to growth, even in the long run,

and the rate of investment should be related to the level of education.

Finally, a tendency for less developed countries to catch up because of more
                                                                                29




rapid growth of A should lead to a negative partial correlation between the

initial level of income and the subsequent rate of growth.

     A prediction that this model shares with more conventional models is that

the rate of growth of human capital variables should also be related to the

rate of growth of output. This is the conventional presumption from growth

accounting. Like the rate of growth of A, variation across different

countries in the steady state the rate of growth of education may tend to be

matched by variation in the rate of growth of investment. Thus in a

regression context, growth in human capital may not be significant in a

regression of growth rates on a list of variables that includes investment.

Once again, investment should explain the rate of growth of output, and the

change in human capital should explain investment.

     This model does not offer any direct test of the proposition that there

are increasing returns at the aggregate level. As the logic of the model

shows, presence follows from the assertion that nonrival goods like

inventions, designs, or science are important for explaining long run growth.

That this is true is suggested by industry studies of the productivity of

research and development, but comparable evidence at the aggregate level will

have to await the construction of measures of research and development that

are comparable across countries.




Section 3. E.pirical Results



                 3.1 Description of the Data and Related Work



    The basic source of national income accounts data used here is the World
30




Data table compiled by Robert Summers and Alan Ileston (1988). The measures of

human capital collected come from the United Nations, primarily from the

annual statistical yearbooks published by UNESCO. These include obvious

measures like literacy and less obvious measures like consumption   of newsprint

per capita and the number of radios per capita.   To keep the project

manageable and because of data limitations, consideration of measures of

higher level human capital like the number of college graduates of the    number

of scientists and engineers is put off for subsequent work, and the results

presented here merely illustrate the kind of data analysis that could be done.

The results reported here are concerned only with the connection between basic

literacy and the rate of growth of income per capita and the rate of

investment. Literacy was chosen partly because it is a variable that is

available for a broad sample of countries, and partly because cross—country

measures of literacy should be more comparable than cross—country measures of

educational attainment. Finally, literacy has the advantage that its level at

any time is easily measured. This is useful for the analysis undertaken below

that differentiates between the level of a human capital variable and its rate

of change. Most of the data on education are flow measures like enrollment

rates rather than stock measures of average educational attainment.

     I used data from an earlier version of the world data table constructed

by Summers and Heston were used in a preliminary investigation of cross

country variation in per capita growth rates and investment (Romer, 1987,

1989a.) These data have also been used in conjunction with detailed data on

government expenditure and demographic variables by Barro (1989a) in an

analysis that focuses on fertility choice and on a possible productive role

for government investment expenditure, and with emphasis on human capital

 (Barro, 1989b). His results are not strictly comparable with results here.
                                                                               31




Barro's estimates make use of variables that are not used here. In addition,

because of the limited availability of data for some variables, the sample of

countries considered differs. This problem recurs throughout all of the

subsequent analysis. Anytime a variable other than one from the Summers and

Heston data set is added to a regression, the number of countries with

complete data gets smaller. Other than Barro's, the work most closely related

to the results reported here are the regressions reported by Azariadis and

Drazen (1988), who also regress cross—country measures of growth rates on

literacy. The results reported here are qualitatively similar to theirs, but

the interpretation here raises the possibility that measurement error plays a

role in their findings.

     There is of course a very large literature on human capital generally,

and human capital as it relates to growth accounting (so large in fact that it

is a challenge for a nonspecialist to read even the surveys in the area.)

Without making any attempt to give a balanced overview of this literature, I

can offer some subjective impressions. There is lots of evidence that across

individuals, the level of education is correlated with all kinds of indicators

of ability and achievement. Because economics is not an experimental science,

it is not easy to draw firm conclusions about the causal role of increases in

education on earnings at the individual level or on output at the aggregate

level. Probably the strongest evidence is the general finding that

agricultural productivity is positively correlated with the level of education

of the farmer (see for example Jainison and Lau, 1982.) This evidence has the

advantage that farmers are generally self—employed, so that signaling is not

an important issue, and inputs and outputs can be measured relatively

directly.

     This evidence leaves open the possibility that unmeasured attributes
32




cause both the variation in educational achievement across individuals and the

variation in productivity, but there is separate evidence such as that

presented by Chamberlain and Griliches (1974, 1979) using sibling data on

education, labor market outcomes, and test scores to suggest that unobserved

attributes are not so large as to overturn the basic finding that improvements

in education cause improvement in economic outcomes.

     Taken together, the accumulated evidence suggests that education almost

surely has a causal role that is positive, but beyond that our knowledge is

still uncomfortably imprecise. Moreover, there seems to be a general sense

that the "human capital revolution" in development has been a disappointment,

and that growth accounting measures of the effects of education do not help us

understand much of the variation in growth rates observed in the world. In

this context, one of the questions that this particular exercise faces is

whether different theory and the use of different ways of looking at the

evidence will increase our estimate of the empirical relevance of education

for understanding growth. From this point of view, the results here are

mildly encouraging. Previous analyses may have missed an important channel

whereby education has fostered growth.




                            3.2 Regression Results



     The list of variables considered is presented in Table 1, together with

basic descriptive statistics. The sample of countries used in initial

investigations included all of the market economies from the Summers and

Heston data set for which data are available for the entire period from 1960

to 1985. The initial plan was to retain all of the high—income oil—exporting
                                                                                 33




countries (as defined by the World Bank), but to allow a dummy variable for

countries in this class. Much of the subsequent analysis turns on the

properties of the initial level of real income per capita in 1960, however,

and at roughly $50,000 (in 1980 dollars) Kuwait is an outlier by an order of

magnitude. The next highest value is for the U.S. at around $7000. Moreover,

of the high—income exporters, only Kuwait and Saudi Arabia had enough data to

be included in the sample. So that Kuwait would dominate all of the

regressions, it was excluded. Since Saudi Arabia was the single remaining

high—income oil—exporter, it too was dropped. The remaining sample consists

of 112 countries.

     The starting point for the analysis is the regression described in Table

2.   It gives 1east squares estimates of the effects that the initial level of

income, the average share of total investment (including government

investment) in GDP over the sample period, and the level of literacy in 1960

have on growth of income per capita from 1960 to 1985. For comparability with

other other results, the regression also includes the level of government non—

investment spending and dummy variables for the continents of Africa and Latin

America (including Central America and Mexico).

     Because of the relatively long time period (25 years) over which rates of

growth and the average share of investment in GDP are measured, the fixed

weight price series from Heston and Summers are avoided. The real income

series used to calculate the rate of growth and the level is a chain index.

The share variables are measured in current prices. The qualitative results

are not too sensitive to this choice. Changes in parameter estimates due to

the use of different measures of income and share variables are not large

compared to the estimated standard errors.

     Table 2 reports the results of a least squares regression of the rate of
34




growth on the level of income, Y60, current price measures of the share of

investment, INV, the share of government consumption spending,    CDV, dummy

variables for the continents of Africa and Latin America, AFDUM and LADUM, and

literacy in 1960, LT6O. Attempts to uncover heteroscedasticity, some of which

were reported in an earlier version of this paper, found some evidence that

the poorest countries tended to have somewhat larger residuals; even so

Generalized Least Squares estimates did not lead to important changes     in any

of the coefficient estimates or inferences, and they are not reported here.

     The basic results in Table 2 seem to be consistent with the hypotheses

suggested above. In particular, the initial level of income has a significant

negative partial correlation with the rate of growth and the initial level of

literacy has a positive partial correlation. Table 3 reports a test of the

robustness of these findings that was motivated by a concern that there could

be important measurement error in the initial level of income and in the

 reported literacy rate. The possibility of measurement error     in the level of

 income is particularly important because it is used to calculate the growth

 rate on the left—hand side. Any measurement error in this variable will

 induce a spurious negative correlation between growth and the initial level of

 income. Since the level of income is also closely correlated with the level

 of literacy, bias in the coefficient for the level of income is likely to

 cause a bias of the opposite sign in the estimate of literacy.     (For a proof

 that this is the case and further discussion of the problem of measurement

 error, see Romer 1989b.)

      Table 3 suggests that this is exactly what happens. Once instrumental

 variables are used to correct for measurement error in both the initial level

 of income and the literacy rate, neither is significantly related to the rate

 of output growth. In addition to the other variables used in the equation,
                                                                               35




the instruments used here include the log of newsprint consumption per capita

in 1960, NP6O, and the number of radios per 1000 inhabitants in 1960, RD6O.

Newsprint consumption was expected to be a useful indicator of true initial

literacy. Because the distribution of values for consumption of newsprint per

capita turns out to be very significantly skewed, the logarithm of the level

per capita was used as the instrument in the equations. Compared to the raw

level, it improves the fit in the first stage regression of literacy on the

instruments. The number of radios per capita was expected to act primarily as

an indicator of income per capita.

     Recall that for a variable to be a valid instrument, it need not itself

be free of error or be perfectly correlated with the variables of interest.

All that is required for a variable to be a valid instrument is that it be

correlated with the variables used in the equation and that it be uncorrelated

with the error term in the equation. Since these variables are both

predetermined, they are good candidates for satisfying this last requirement.

     To verify that the instruments are indeed correlated with literacy and

the level of income, one need only consider the first stage regressions. The

regression of literacy on the other variables has an It2 of .78, with virtually

all of the explanatory power coming from the newsprint consumption variable (t

statistic of 6). The regression of the initial level of income has an R2 of

.84, with most of the explanatory power coming from the radios variable (t

statistic of 8), and some from the newsprint variable (t statistic of 4).

     From these results, one can conclude that the negative results reported

in Table 3 are not simply the result of a bad choice of instruments. Rather,

the results suggest that the apparently positive findings in Table 2 are

attributable to measurement error. Because literacy and the level of income

are correlated, and become more so once one corrects for measurement error,
36




the problem here is partly one of multicollinearity. If one is willing to

assume that one variable has no effect, it is possible to test for an effect

for the other. Excluding the level of income, there is no evidence that the

level of literacy has a separate effect in a regression that includes

investment, whether or not one corrects for measurement error; but excluding

literacy, there is some evidence (e.g., a t statistic of 1.8) that the level

of income is negatively related to the rate of growth, even after correcting

for possible measurement error.

     Elsewhere, (Romer, 1998b) I report results showing that it is possible to

reject the hypothesis that there is no measurement error in the   level of

income at conventional significance levels. Overall, the evidence for

measurement error in the literacy rate is mixed. One cannot reject the

hypothesis of no measurement error at conventional significance levels,      but

the estimate of the coefficient tends to change by a nontrivial amount in the

direction that one would predict if measurement error were present. The use

of the instrumental variables estimator entails at most a loss in efficiency,

a loss that in this case appears to be acceptable. Hence, for the rest of the

regressions, instrumental variables are used not only for the level of income

but also for the literacy rate in 1960.

     Contrary to what one would expect from the basic prediction of steady

state dynamics in the neoclassical model with the same rate of technological

change in all countries, the rate of investment is significantly correlated

with the rate of growth in both Tables 2 and 3. Across papers, data sets, and

 specifications, this finding is the most robust partial correlation in cross—

 country data. This could either be an indication of a direct causal role for

 investment in causing growth in   A (as was argued in Romer 1986, 1987), or

 of causality that runs from more rapid growth in A to higher rates of
                                                                              37




investment (as suggested here), or of more complicated forms of joint

causality.

     Like the coefficient on investment, the coefficients on the other

variables in Tables 2 and 3 are not particularly sensitive to the use of

instrumental variables. Since they are not considered by the theory, results

concerning them will only be noted briefly. Consistent with the findings of

others (e.g. Barro 1989a), the dummy variables for Africa and Latin America

are significant and negative. This suggests that there are important omitted

variables here. The government spending variable is negative, a result that

is suggestive of inefficient intervention or tax effects that act through some

mechanism other than through reductions in the rate of investment. For

further evidence on the effects of the government, see Barro (1989a).

     Both standard growth accounting and the theory suggested here predict

that the change in the level of literacy between 1960 and 1980 should

influence the rate of growth. This variable does not have significant effects

if it is added to either of the specifications in Tables 2 or 3. Barro

(1989b) reports similar results using primary and secondary school enrollment

rates in 1960 as a proxy for growth in human capital. In both cases, this

finding may reflect a problem of collinearity with the rate of investment like

that as described for growth in A.   In a model of steady state or balanced

growth, both growth in the technology A and growth in the quality of the

labor force would be expected to cause growth in K.

     Table 4 presents evidence bearing on the conjecture that that literacy

does not have a significant coefficient in Table 3 because investment is

included in the regression. Consistent with this view, the table shows that

level of literacy has a significantly positive partial correlation with the

rate of output growth in an equation that excludes the rate of investment.
38




The change in literacy does not, however, have any independent effect on the

rate of growth. In contrast, using enrollment data in 1960 as a proxy for the

rate of growth of human capital, Barro (1989b) finds that they do have a

significant positive partial correlation with the investment share.

     Table 5 presents a more direct test of the assertion that the initial

level of literacy and its rate of change are positively correlated with the

rate of investment. It reports instrumental variables estimates of the

coefficients in a regression of the share of investment on the initial level

of income and literacy, on the change in literacy (LT_DIFF) and on the

government share variable and the continent dummies. The literacy variable

has effects that are both statistically and economically significant. An

increase in the literacy rate from the mean of 507. to 607. is associated with

an increase of the share of investment in GD? from the mean of 147. to 167..

     In this equation, it is reassuring for both this theory and conventional

growth accounting that the change in literacy also exhibits a significant

partial correlation with the rate of investment. This finding is consistent

with the view that exogenous increases in literacy, hence in human capital,

could cause increases in output that are collinear with increases in

investment. Nevertheless, one must be especially careful in interpreting this

partial correlation. It is quite possible that investment, growth in income,

and growth in literacy are simultaneously determined. It is also possible

that there is measurement error in the change in the literacy rate, but if the

standard used to measure literacy is constant within a country over time,

measurement error in the change may be less severe that measurement error in

the level that is caused by cross—country variation in the standard. In

contrast to the variables that are predetermined, for which there are good

 instruments, there are no good candidate instruments for the change in
                                                                                39




literacy, and   the   question of bias in its estimated coefficient cannot be

resolved.




4. Conclusion



     As suggested in the beginning, the empirical work undertaken here is more

in the spirit of exploratory data analysis than of hypothesis testing. The

role of the theory is not so much to generate sharp testable predictions, but

rather to guide the process of data analysis. At best, the results

demonstrate a weak consistency between the data and the theoretical framework

outlined in Section 2. They should not be taken as a strong confirmation of

the model considered here because there is little reason to believe that these

data discriminate strongly between different models. The initial level of

literacy helps explain investment, but it is correlated with other variables

like life expectancy at birth, and an equation like that reported in Table 5

cannot discriminate between the hypothesis that it is actually life expectancy

that causes higher investment rather than higher literacy, or that some other

variable causes all three to move together.

     Consistent with other similar empirical exercises, the regressions here

report a strong and robust finding that the rate of investment helps explain

the rate of growth in cross—country regressions. After one corrects for

measurement error, the results here find only weak evidence that the initial

level of income is negatively related to the rate of growth. The only measure

of the growth          of a human capital variable considered here, the change in

the level of literacy, does not have an independent effect in the growth

equation, but it does help explain the rate of investment, as one would expect
40




from a steady—state version of the model here or of a conventional

neoclassical model.

     The interesting, and from the point of view of conventional theory

unexpected finding is that the initial level of literacy also helps explain

the subsequent rate of investment, and thereby the subsequent rate of income

growth. It suggests a direction for further work that would not have been

evident from rigid adherence to a conventional neoclassical model or its

empirical counterpart, growth accounting.
     The substantive contribution of this paper is not to offer a firm set of

conclusions about the causal relations underlying the data, but rather to

demonstrate how a more general model can be used to guide the analysis of

data. The model suggests the inclusion of a variable that might otherwise

have been neglected, and it turns out to be important.

     Other models might have suggested this variable, and as suggested in the

introduction, even common sense might have done so. Nonetheless, one should

not underestimate the practical importance of having available a theoretical

framework that can be used to interpret an empirical finding and to integrate

it with findings from other parts of economics. Development economists have

for many years felt the need to go beyond the neoclassical model to understand

the experience of developing countries. They have typically done so using

models that are not consistent with the theory and evidence developed in other

parts of economics. For example, they have assumed a Harrod—Domar technology

with fixed coefficients and an excess supply of labor, or by used

disequilibrium models in which wages and prices are not equated across

sectors. The difficulty with this approach is that there is not enough data

 in development proper for it to operate as a closed system that does not take

advantage of the findings from the rest of economics. The model proposed here
                                                                              41




at least hints at the possibility of integrating the analysis of growth and

development across all countries and across the disciplines of industrial

organization, firm level studies on research and development, and possibly

even with the recent work in macroeconomics on aggregate production and

departures from price taking (e.g. Hall, 1989).
                                    References

Arrow, K. J.    1962a. "The economic implications of learning by doing."
     Review    ofEconomic Studies, 29 (June), 155—73.

             1962b. "Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for
     invention." In The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity. Princeton:
     NBER and Princeton University Press.

Azariadis, Costas and Allan Drazen. 1988. "Threshold externalities in
     economic development." University of Pennsylvania Working paper, October
     1988.

Barro, ft. J. 1989a. "A cross country study of growth, savings,   and
     government." NBER working paper 2855.

             1989b. "Economic growth in a cross section of countries."
     Harvard University working paper.

Becker, 0. and K. Murphr. 1988. "Economic growth, human capital, and
     population growth.' University of Chicago, June 1988.

Chamberlain, 0. and Z. Griliches. 1974. "Unobservable with a variance—
     components structure: Ability, schooling, and the economic success of
     brothers." International Economic Review, 41(2), 422—9.

                       "More on brothers." In P. Taubman ed. Kino.etrics: The
     Determinantsof Socio—Econo.ic Success Vithin and Between Families.
     Amsterdam: North Holland, 97—124.
Dixit, Avinash K. and Joseph Stiglitz. "Monopolistic Competition and    Optimum
     Product    Diversity." American Economic Review 67 (June), 297—308.

Ethier, V. J. 1982. "National and International Returns to Scale in the
     Modern Theory of Trade." American Econo.ic Review 72 (June), 389—504.

Jamison, U. and L. Lan. 1982. Farmer Education and Far. Efficiency.
     Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Hall, Robert E. 1989. "Invariance Properties of Solow's Productivity
     Residual." NBER working paper No. 3034.

Lucas, R. 1988. "On the mechanics of economic growth." Journal of Monetary
      Economics 22, 3—42.

Romer. P. 1986. "Increasing returns and long run growth." Journal of
     Political Economy 94 (October), p.1102—1037.

             1987. "Crazy explanations for the productivity slowdown."     S.
      Fischer ed. NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Cambridge MA: MIT PRess.

               1988. "Endogenous technological change." University of Chicago
      working paper.
           • 1989a. "Capital accumulation in the theory of long run growth."
     In R. Barro ed. lodern Iacroecono.ics. Ca.mbridge: Harvard University
     Press.

          • 1989b. "Measurement error in cross—country data."    Working
     paper.

Schumpeter, Joseph A.  1942. Capitalis., Socialisi and De.ocracy. New York:
     Harper and Brothers.

Shell, Karl. 1967. "A model of inventive activity and capital accumulation."
     In K. Shell, ed. Essays in the Theory of Opti.al Econo.ic Growth.
     Cambridge MA: MIT Press.

Solow, Robert M. 1956. "A contribution to the theory of economic growth."
     Quarterly Journal of Econosics 70 (February), p. 65—94.

Summers, Robert and Alan Heston. 1988. "A new set of international
     comparisons of real product and price levels: Estimates for 130
     countries, 1950 to 1985." Review of Inco.e and Wealth (March), 1—25.

Wilson, R. 1975. "Informational economies of scale." Bell Journal of
    Econo.ics 6 (Spring), 184—195.
                    Table 1: Variable Definitions


C         A constant term used in all of the regressions.

Y60       Real per capita income in 1960, measured in 1980 dollars.
          Constructed using current price weights. From Summers and
          Heston, RGDP2. Range, $250 to $7400.

GROWTH    The average annual rate of growth of Y60, measured in
          percentage points times 100, over the years 1960 to 1985.
          Range, —4 to 7.

GDV       Share of GDP devoted to government spending on items other than
          investment goods, in percentage points times 100, averaged over
          the years 1960 to 1985. Measured as the ratio of current price
          government spending to current price GDP. Range, 5 to 35.

INV       Share of GOP devoted to investment, averaged over 1960 to 1985.
          Measured as the ratio of current price investment to current
          price GDP. Range, 4 to 37.

LT6O      Percentage of the population times 100 that is literate in a
          survey year close to 1960. Range, I to 98. From UNESCO.

LT_DIFF   Change in the literacy rate between 1960 and 1980, in
          percentage points times 100. Range, —19 to 56. From UNESCO

NP6O      The logarithm of consumption of newsprint per capita in 1960.
          Range, —4 to 4. From UNESCO.

RD60      The number of radios per 1000 inhabitants in 1960. From
          UNESCO.
                               Table 2


Least Squares: Dependent Variable is GROWTH

Number of observations: 94

     VARIABLE    COEFFICIENT    STD. ERROR       T—STAT.   2—TAIL SIC.

        C        1.8860644      0. 6677856     2.8243562      0.006
       Y60      —0.0006255      0.0001744     —3.5853773      0.001
       INV       0.1883967      0.0274488      6.8635803      0.000
       COV      -.0.1165580     0.0299402     —3.8930302      0.000
      AFDUM     —0.8970903      0.4440245     —2.0203621      0.047
      LADUM     —1.2957244      0. 402 1405   —3.2220689      0.002
      LT6O       0.0154671      0.0081786      1.8911618      0.063

R—squared               0.583406      Mean of dependent var   1.811394
Adjusted R—squared      0.554675      S.D. of dependent var   2.063386
S.E. of regression      1.376952      Sum of squared resid    164.9518
Durbin—Watson stat      2.520105      F—statistic             20.30605
                                Table 3


Instrumental Variables: Dependent Variable is GROWTH

Number of observations: 69
Instrument list: C INV GOV AFDUM LADTJM RD6O NP6O

       VARIABLE   COEFFICIENT    STD. ERROR     T—STAT.    2—TAIL SIG.
   —
         C         2.0456095     0.9568901     2.1377686    0.037
        Y60       —0.0002062     0.0002799    —0.7367500    0.464
         INV       0.1475381     0.0352431     4.1863005    0.000
         GOV      —0.0926471     0.0355311    —2.6074894     0.011
        AFDUM     —1.2276418     0.6052440    —2.0283420     0.047
        LADUM     —1.3738536     0.4143630    —3.3155794     0.002
        LT6O       0.0061744     0.0172710     0.3575018     0.722
                              Table 4


Instrumental Variables: Dependent Variable is GROWTH

Number of observations: 69
Instrument list: C GOV AFDUM LADUM RD6O NP6O

    VARIABLE    COEFFICIENT    SID. ERROR      T—STAT.   2—TAIL SIG.

       C        2.2644223      1.1360664     1.9932130    0.051
      Y60      —0.0004166      0.0003321    —1.2545811    0.214
      GOV      -0.0508671      0.0405552    —1.2542699    0.215
     AFOUM     —1.0275136      0.7179690    —1.4311393    0.157
     LADUM     —1.8331959      0.4769421    —3.8436447    0.000
     LT6O       0.0386495      0.0187536     2.0609111    0.044
                              Table 5


Instrumental Variables: Dependent Variable is INV

Number of observations: 51
Instrument list: C CDV AFDUM LADUM LT_DIFF NP6O RD60

     VARIABLE   COEFFICIENT    STD. ERROR     1—STAT.    2—TAIL SIC.
—-
        C        1.3745661     4.3981236     0.3125347    0.756
       Y60      —0.0001662     0.0008864    —0.1874816    0.852
       COY       0.1684469     0.1368366     1.2310076    0.225
      AFDUM      1.0307406     2.8535393     0.3612148    0.720
      LADUM     —1.6100160     1.4534961    —1.1076851    0.274
      LT6O       0.1574893     0.0610410     2.5800592    0.013
                 0.2044889     0.0879624     2.3247317    0.025
     LT_DIFF
  xi



Figure 1
