                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      SIGNALING AND ACCOUNTING INFORMATION




                                Stewart C. Myers




                             Working Paper No. 3193




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 December 1989




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics.  Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3193
                                        December 1989


                     SIGNALING AND ACCOUNTING INFORMATION


                                   ABSTRACT


     This paper develops a signaling model in which accounting information
improves real investment decisions.  Pure cash flow reporting is shown to lead
to underinvestment when managers have superior information but are acting in
shareholders' interests. Accounting by prespecified, "objective" rules
alleviates the underinvestment problem.




                                       Stewart C. Myers
                                       Sloan School of Management
                                       Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                       50 Memorial Drive
                                       Cambridge, MA 02139
                                       (617)253-6696
1.       Introduction

         This paper develops  signaling model in which accounting
                                  a

information improves real investment decisions.   Pure cash flow
reporting is shown to lead to underinvestment when managers have
superior information         but are     acting   in    shareholders' interests.
Accounting         by   prespecified,    "objective"     rules     alleviates    the
underinvestment problem.


     The motivating ideas are as follows. Outside investors are
assumed to observe the firm's revenues and net cash flow without
error.    But they do not know how to interpret cash Qjj.flows.                   If
outflows     are    higher than       expected,   it   could     mean   that    cash
expenditures for current activities are unexpectedly high (bad news),
or   that positive-NPV        investment opportunities are unexpectedly
expanded (good news).          Absent other information, investors' reaction
to   higher-than-expected outflows will            "average      out"   these   two
possibilities, and in most reasonable cases the bad news will

                                          1
dominate.        Managers, who know the truth, will tend to underinvest
in order       to reduce cash outflow, report higher net cash flow, and
support current stock price.


      Accounting conventions help by partly distinguishing current
from investment outflows. Thus expenditures for plant, equipment
and other tangible assets are labeled as investment outflows, and put
on the balance sheet; current income is supposed to equal revenue
less current outflows only.


         These conventions are only rules of thumb.         If accounting were
perfect, it would classify outflows as "good news" or "bad news," not
by class of expenditure.        Thus many good news, positive-NPV outlays
never qualify for the balance sheet, for example when expanded
opportunities lead to outlays for R&D, training and testing, start-up
losses    of     new     ventures or technologies,   etc.      Unfortunately,
unexpectedly high outlays for R&D, training or start-up -- and even
for capital equipment -- may reflect problems with current
operations        (bad     news)
                               rather than expanded investment
opportunities. Outside investors do not know. Outside accountants do
not know either.1


     This paper does not attempt        present a general theory or
                                           to
survey of the "meaning of accounting." It presents a simple formal
model in which (1) managers and investors are rationally concerned
with reported book earnings, (2) firms underinvest in order to report
lower costs and higher earnings, and (3) book earnings convey

                                       2
information not contained in reported cash flow.     However, the paper
does not rule out other explanations for these three points.            For
example, managers' and investors' attention to reported earnings
may be triggered by links between managers' personal compensation
and earnings, or by attempts by managers to protect their firms from
adverse regulatory or political developments. Watts and Zimmerman
(1986) review research on these and related lines of argument.2


     This paper ignores agency, regulatory and political issues.          It
assumes that managers' and stockholders' objectives are aligned.
Managers, acting in (a particular definition of) shareholders' interest,
bond themselves to accept "objective" accounting procedures to
relieve the underinvestment caused by signaling.         So far     I   have
found no prior research that anticipates this approach or result.3


     This paper now turns to assumptions and notation, followed by
a more careful discussion of the boundary between good-news and
bad-news outflows.    Then Section 4 shows the conditions under
which firms will be tempted to underinvest in order to pretend to
have more good news than they actually do.         Section 5   presents the

signaling equilibrium, and Section 6 shows how noisy but objective
accountants can reduce underinvestment. Section 7 contains brief
concluding comments.


2.   Assumptions and Notation




                                   3
      The three main ingredients of the signaling models I have in
 mind are: (1) the inability of investors (or outside accountants or
 objective accounting rules)         to
                                 distinguish good-news from bad-news
 outflows, (2) an objective function which responds to current stock
 price as well as intrinsic value, and (3) the resulting signaling-by-
 underinvestment problem and the potential use of accounting                    to
 alleviate it.


       In the current period the firm reports:
                      Cashflow=R-X = R-C-I                                     (1)

                 where   R=        cash   revenue
                         C=        cash    outflows for current operations
                         I   =     cash   outflows for investment
                         X       C + I = total cash outflows


           Although revenue and total cash outflows are separately
observable by outside investors, current and investment outflows
are not. Managers, on the other hand, know C as well as R.
                                                                             They
accept R and C, but control I.


Managers' investment decision I reflects the investment opportunity
schedule G(I), with dG/dI    G1> 0 at I = 0 and d2G/d12 G11 < 0.
Absent asymmetric information, the firm would invest to the point
where G1 = 0. Since financing decisions will play no role, we can
implicitly assume that investment is financed by cutting back cash
dividends or, if necessary, by issuing shares.

                                          4
The assumed objective function responds to current stock price P          as
well as intrinsic value V:


                       maxW = aP+(1-a)V,                              (2)


where    a is a fixed weight between 0 and 1.


     This objective could be justified in several ways. For example,
shareholders might vote for it ex ante if each saw a probability a of
selling in the upcoming period, and also believed that intrinsic value
is an unbiased predictor of the following period's price (E(Pl) = V0).
Whatever the justification, it's essential for signaling story that the
objective function put partial weight on the current price P.4

        Equilibrium requires that managers maximize this objective
with respect to I, given current stock price P:


                          max W = W(I R,C,P(I))
                                         I                           (3a)


Also, P must be an unbiased estimate of V given the limited
information available to investors.


                                P = E(VfR,X)                         (3b)


     Intrinsic firm value V depends on net current cash flow, R - C,
and on G(I). Investors and managers agree on the form of the

                                    5
function       V(R-C,G(I)). Also, V is defined before any payout of
current cash flow and before new shares, if any, are issued to finance
investment.


3.      Distinguishing Current and Investment Outflows


        This paper's concept of current and investment outflows                          is not
the     same   as        the   generally accepted accounting                 definitions of
operating cost and capital investment.                     I   start with a more primitive
idea,    the   distinction           between        cash       spent   to   support     current
production and other planned, business-as-usual activities and cash
spent in pursuit of newly discovered opportunities.


        First story.            --     The     dividing line between current and
investment outflows depends on the nature of the firm's activities.
Think of a firm entering a period with a fixed capital stock and a
commitment          to     produce     a   well-defined basket of products                   or
services.  The out-of-pocket cash expenditures required for this
production are not known ex ante, but managers observe them
immediately after production starts. At the same time they learn
about next      period's demand and decide how much                            to     spend to
expand the capital stock.  Investors then observe revenue and total
cash flow and infer what they can about outlays for production and
for investment.


        This is one of several stories that could be attached to the
algebra presented below.               This story defines current and investment

                                                6
outflows in a more or less standard way.          Moreover, we can safely
assume that larger-than-expected outflows for present production
are bad news      and that larger-than-expected investment in next
period's capital stock is good news (because it reveals larger future
demand).


     Second     story. -- Here is a more complex story which
captures more of this paper's motivation. Suppose the firm enters
the current period with (1) a commitment to produce a basket of
products or services and (2) a planned program of investment
outlays    for   product   development,       training,   replacement    and
modification of capital stock, etc.       This program would include cash
outlays prompted by investment opportunities identified         in previous

periods.


      Shortly after the start of the period, the actual cash outlays
required for categories (1) and (2) are revealed to managers, who
also learn about any new investment opportunities. The managers
then decide how much cash to invest in the new opportunities.           They
also can increase or reduce outlays in category (2).


      We can now define current outflows to include the hands-off
realizations in category (2) -- i.e., the actual cost of the business-as-
usual investments planned at the start of the period:


   Operating outflows =    C = (1)   production outflows plus (2A) actual
                                cash outflow of planned investment

                                      7
     Investment outflows =   I = (2B)       cash flows from modifications
                                   of planned investment plus (3)
                                   investment for new opportunities

       Obviously (2B) can be positive or negative.         We will assume (3)
is   positive although there obviously could be new information
prompting disinvestment.


       Either of these stories will support the models developed
below.      The first is simpler and easier to connect to accounting
practice.    The second makes it easier to appreciate the real-life
difficulties of interpreting unexpected cash outflows.


      Larger-than-expected cash outflows are normally bad news in
categories (1) and (2A) and good news in categories (2B) and (3). For
example, suppose the firm is halfway through construction of a new
manufacturing plant. If difficulties are encountered, and cash is
flowing out unexpectedly fast, the bad news is reflected in (2A). On
the other hand, it's usually good news if construction is on target but
the firm decides to invest more to bring the plant on line faster.          This
cash outflow would fall in (2B).


      The outside investor who observes the additional cash outflow
usually does not know what it means. Whether it's good or bad news
depends on the manager's motive for spending the money.             Of course
managers who worry about current stock price are always tempted

                                        8
to provide the upbeat interpretation of their actions, so a good-news
press release does not resolve the matter.5


     I   believe that separation of good-news and bad-news cash
outflows is, at least for mature firms, the single most difficult task
for outside investors and security analysts.    Most unexpected cash
outflows have two competing interpretations. Does an increase in R
& D outlays reflect new positive-NPV opportunities or cost overruns
on existing projects? Do unexpected hiring and training costs mean
increases in projected future demand or simply that existing workers
aren't as productive as management had thought? Is purchase of a
new machine motivated by the opportunity to make a new product
or by the discovery that old machines can't        cope with current
demand for existing products? It's hard for an outsider to know.


4.   The Incentive to Underinvest


     The assumptions given so far are still too broad to support a
specific signaling model.   We can nevertheless explore the conditions
necessary for the incentive to underinvest that will drive the model's
behavior.


      Suppose investors believe that the firm is investing optimally.
Would its managers be willing to confirm those expectations, given
an objective that weights current price P in addition to intrinsic
value V?


                                   9
      It depends on the relative importance (and uncertainty) of
current outflows versus investment opportunities.                       If investment
opportunities are unimportant, and investors are concerned mostly
with news       about current operations, firms will be tempted to
underinvest in order to pretend to have low current outflows and
high profits.     If uncertainty about investment opportunities                  is large
enough, however, firms may be tempted to overinvest in order                           to
pretend that growth opportunities are expanded.

      The temptation to underinvest should dominate for established
firms. The following analysis illustrates why. Assume the firm can
only report revenue R and cash outflow X       I + C. It provisionally
decides to invest the optimal amount 1*, consistent with investors'
expectations. Now it considers changing I and X. Since V1 = 0 at

1*, the change in the objective function is

                             WI =              =    ctP                              (4)


Managers will reduce I from 1* if                  < 0.



      Investors, who in this instance don't know they are about to be
fooled, try to price at intrinsic value. Before X is announced,

         P = E(V) = V(R) +   5   5    [H(I*)   -   M(C)   ]
                                                              f(J*) f(C) dI*dC        (5)
                             C   1*




                                        10
Here H(I*) is outsiders' best estimate of NPV once they know that
optimal investment is 1* (although ex ante they do not know what 1*
will be).   V(R) and M(C) are the capitalized values of revenue R and
current cash outflow C.


        For any given C,              1* is no longer a random variable; investors
infer 1* = X - C. Therefore6

                                           X                               f(C)
             P(X) = V(R)              +    5
                                               [H(X-C)-M(C)]               F(X)
                                                                                dC           (6)
                                          0



Managers then consider P, which resolves to:7


     2Px =   -         [ M(X)     -    E[M(C)}(1



                 +         [ H(X)     -   E[H(I*)J(1
                                                       -   f(O)   )I1 -   [ E[Mc] - E[H1] ](7)




The notation E[        }   is   shorthand for investors' expectation over the
range C =        0   to X.       Note that f(X)fF(X) and f(0)IF(X)                     are   the
probabilities that C = X or 0 once X is observed.


      Take the right-hand side terms in (7) one by one: an increase
in X is (1) bad news8 because it raises the upper bound on the
capitalized value of possible costs, relative to the "average" M; (2)
good news9 because it raises the upper limit on investment and NPV,


                                                11
relative to the "average" H, and (3) bad news if, on average, an extra
dollar of operating cost reduces value by more than an extra dollar of
investment opportunities increases it.


     Thus there are cases in which the firm is tempted to increase X,
i.e. to overinvest.   Suppose that there is little uncertainty about
operating costs (M(X) - E(M) small), great uncertainty about
investment opportunities (H(X) - E(H) large), and that this period's
unanticipated operating costs are mostly viewed as transitory noise
(E[Mc] small). Then       could be positive.


      But if the ranges of possible C's and I*'s are roughly the same,'0
underinvestment should win out, because the "M-terms" are likely      to

be much larger than the "H-terms".


       All this falls out in a very simple way if the current outflow C
is uniformly distributed over the range zero to X. In that case f(O) =
f(X) and f(X)IF(X) = f(O)IF(X) 1/X. Suppose further that M(C) = MC,
that is MC = M, a constant. Equation (7) becomes

                                    ÷ H(X)
                      2Px =   -2M            ÷ E(H1)


If the "2M-term" is larger than the two corresponding "H-terms,"     'x
will be negative.




                                     12
        Suppose    unanticipated       current       outflows   and    investment
opportunities are transitory -- they do not affect expectations for
later periods. Then M(C)      C and MC = 1, indicating a dollar-for-
dollar reduction in V when C increases.              Then       is negative unless
H(X)/X + E(H1) exceeds 2.


      These H-terms' units are basically NPV per dollar invested. If
                                                           IRR(X)-r
investment generates level, perpetual cash flow, H(X)/X is     r

where IRR(X) is the average IRR when 1* = X, and r is the cost of
capital.   For the other H-term,


                                                +   I*dIRRrfdI*1


                             IRR-r
A positive 'x     requires
                               r
                                     on the order of 1.0. For example, if IRR
                               r
= 2r    at all I*'s, then 'r       = 1.0   exactly, and P< =     0.   But finding a

project that offers double the cost of capital in perpetuity is rare
luck.


     If changes in current outflows are expected to be permanent,
then Mc =     far in excess of reasonable NPV for an unanticipated

dollar of investment.

        The only ways to push P positive in these examples are                   to

assume (1)        unrealistically high profitability for              unanticipated
investment, or (2) that expanded investment today also signals

                                           13
expanded future opportunities, so that prospective NPVs are rolled
into G(I) and H(I*). However, unrealistically high profitability may
have to be assumed even in case 2. In order for present and future
investments to be worth   per dollar of current investment, the firm
would have to earn twice the cost of capital in perpetuity on this
year's project, and also gain the opportunity to invest in a perpetual
stream of equally attractive projects. Only in such cases would P
0    be plausible.


      None of these comparisons prove that the underinvestment
incentive will dominate.   Highly profitable growth firms may be
tempted to overinvest, in order to pretend to have better than their
actual       investment opportunities.        However,   the   temptation   to
underinvest should dominate for mature firms. The next section
takes a closer look at how this incentive plays out in a signaling
equilibrium.


5.       A One Period Signaling Model When Investment
         Opportunities Are Known' 1

         This    model   guarantees   an      underinvestment incentive     by
assuming the investment opportunity function G(I) is known to
investors. The model yields a fully-revealing signaling equilibrium
formally similar to Miller and Rock's (1985), though with a different
economic interpretation. In the end investors are not fooled by




                                         14
changes in reported cash outflow, but managers cannot escape
underinvesting.


        Assume there   is       some maximum possible current outflow C.
The investment function G(I) has a maximum G(I*) at 1* > 0. Also
G(0) = 0. We take MC = M, a positive constant. Only cash flow is
reported to investors.


        In the fully-revealing equilibrium, outside investors infer the
true value of C and I by observing X. From their point of view, C is a
function C(X), 1(X) = X     -   C(X), and P(X) equals the true value V:


                                 P(X) = V(C(X),X) = V(C,X)                       (8)



The top bracket shows investors' inference of V given X; the bottom
bracket states that their inference is correct.

        The firm maximizes W = aP        + (1 - cz)V,   with V= V(R) + G(X   -   C)   -

M(C).    It considers W:


                   W = a(Gj(1-Cx)         -   MCX) +    (1 -   a)G1              (9)



Note that the firm recognizes that a change in X will change P(X) by
changing investors' beliefs about costs, C(X).




                                         15
Set W =        0   and solve:



                                 Cy                                                       (10)



Figure     1   shows the equilibrium behavior of C(X) implied by this
differential equation.          Note that the firm does ij               underinvest when

current cash outflow is at the upper bound C.                       The firm makes the
best of the worst possible case by investing 1*.                        At     that   boundary

(C=C), G1 =        0   and C = 0.


         But when C < C, the firm underinvests to report lower X and to
try   to pretend that it        is   better than it really is.      The result is shown

in Figure 2. Note that dI/dX becomes very large as X approaches X.
The cost of underinvestment is low in this region because G1 is close

to zero.       Thus a firm with C =            .98C    has to underinvest "a lot'            to

distinguish itself credibly from the still-worse firm with C = .99C.

But when C              is substantially less         than C   ,   G1    and the cost of

underinvestment are high, so less underinvestment occurs at the
margin where C increases.


         Figures       1   and 2 have been drawn so                that lower X always
signals lower costs and lower or equal investment.                           That requires C
                    cLMC
1 and G1                        Clearly this is so for I close to 1*, because G1 = 0
                   1-a      .




                                               16
at optimal investment.    Reducing C and X drives I down and G1 up.
                                                 aM
As   G1 approaches the lower bound                             flattens out.1 2
                                             1    -    a


       Thedegree of underinvestment depends directly on a and on
M. The incentive to signal is strongest when a heavy weight a is put
on share price, rather than on intrinsic value, and when revealed
current cash outflow has a large negative impact on market value.
Note from (10) that higher a or M always reduce Cx for X < X. Since

0X) always equals C = X    -   1*,   a lower Cx requires a higher C(X) curve.
Increasing a or M also increases the upper bound on G1 and reduces
the minimum investment undertaken by low-cost firms.


Example.        Suppose G(I)          is     a        known,    quadratic function    of
investment:


                               G(I) =      101 -       12/2,


which implies G1 =   10 - I,   1* =     10   and G(1*) =        50.   The current

outflow C is uniformly distributed over the range 0 to C = 10, and
M(C) = MC (Mc = M, a constant). The present value of revenues is

V(R) = 200.


       If the firm does pj     underinvest,            its ex ante value with M =    10




                                             17
is


                            V = V(R) + 0(1*)                -    MC/2
                                       = 200 + 50       -       10(10/2) = 200



        Unfortunately, it    will signal, and underinvest except when C is
at the maximum C = 10. Given C, the firm invests less when a and
M are large. Figure 3 plots investment as a function of C for a = .3
and M = 10.    This behavior yields ex ante firm value of 194.7, a
shortfall of 5.3 from the value of 200 assuming optimal investment.
This shortfall is 10.5 percent of G(1*), the NPV of optimal investment.
The mini-table below shows this shortfall for four combinations of a
and M.

                        a=        .2        a=     .3              a = .3        a=   .5
                       M=5                 M=5                     M=10          M=10
     Value lost             0.6              1.6                     5.3         13.3

     Value lost
     as percent             1.3              3.2                    10.5         26.6
     of G(I*)




                                             18
6.   Gains From Nondiscretionary Accounting

      The only possible role for accountants in the signaling model
just presented would be to verify that cash revenues and outflows
were honestly reported. They would not be required to interpret
cash flows.


      Real accountants do interpret, by putting some cash outflows
on the balance sheet, leaving the residual as a "cost" of current
operations. I regard this as a crude separation of good-news from
bad-news outflows.


      An accountant (or accounting rule) that could distinguish the
true current outflow C embedded in X would eliminate signaling-by-
underinvestment. (Once investors know C, Cx = 0, and setting W =
G1 = 0    implies optimal investment.)


         But an accountant cannot truly distinguish C from I because he
or she must be an an outsider and thus can never be sure of insiders
motives for spending money. Indeed an accountant who attempted a
subjective assessment of C and I would be naturally suspected of
shading    towards   managers'    and    selling   stockholders'   interests.
Instead, accountants (or accounting rules) classify expenditures not
by their motivation, but by use, e.g. for wages, equipment, R&D, etc.
This will convey valuable information, however, if expenditures that
go on the balance sheet are more likely to be motivated by good
news than expenditures that are left as current costs.

                                    19
                                                                                   A
          The         imperfect accountant reports      a   "cost" estimate C =            C + e,

where e          is    noise with expectation zero and range ± è.              Assume that
                                                                      A

è    is   small enough that the upper end of this range, C + e, is less than

C for       at        least some estimates C.         The manager knows C when the
                                                  A
investment decision                is made, and C is independent of that decision.
In other words, managers bond themselves ahead of time                                 to accept
                         A
the accountant's report C.



            This report       is   "objective" and not discretionary.          The manager,
who knows the true current outflow, and might instinctively like to
       A
report C as low as possible, cannot twist the accountant's arm or bend
the accounting rules. As we will see, this commitment is in all
shareholders' ex ante interests.

                                                                               A
            Consider       a class of firms with a given reported C and actual
                                              A         A
    current outflows ranging from C - e to C + e. If they invest optimally,
    their true C's are revealed as C = X - 1*. But since they face the same
    a's, G1's and M's with or without the accountant on hand, they will
                                                                                   A
    again    be drawn into signaling.             The accounting report            C defines        a
                                                                      A                A
    cohort with true current outflows              ranging from       C-   e   to C + e. The
                                                                  A
    worst firm in the cohort faces current outflows C + e. This worst firm
    has nothing to lose, invests 1*, and reports X = C + I. The rest
    underinvest.



                                                  20
                                                                 A                                     A
             Figures 4 shows the result.               Given    C,    the function C( X I C)               =
                                                                      A
X   -       J*    when C is at its highest possible value C +               e.           As C declines,
             A
C(X C)  I
                   slopes down to the left in the same general way as before.' 3

                                                  A                                                A
                 Clearly there is one C(X    I
                                                  C)    function for each possible C,'4 all
within             the    envelope     of   C(X)            derived       for    a       world    without
accountants.15


                 In other words, accountants reduce underinvestment.  Figure 4
                                                                             A
shows             nvestment as a function of C given one possible value for C.
                                                                                     A
Again            there is a family of such curves, one for each C. All but one lie
above the investments that would be made in a world without
accountants. The one exception is the far-right curve, which begins

with 1* at C; this one lies                      the envelope.16



                 The value of non-discretionary accounting                       is obvious.           Firms
underinvest less.                All firms are worth more ex ante.                       Almost all firms
are worth more ex post, and none are worth less.                                 Table      1   shows how
ex ante value lost from underinvestment depends on a, M and the
accountant's maximum error .                           Naturally the loss decreases as the
accountant's accuracy increases.


                 This    table    clearly   illustrates          why        managers            acting     in

shareholders' ex ante interests should bond themselves to accept the
constraints of external,               "objective" accounting rules.



                                                       21
        A     conjecture         conservatism. -- What kind of
                              about
                                                            A
accounting signal does the manager hope for?   For a signal C which is
as low as possible; the firm is better off being a high-cost firm in a
cohort      with low reported         costs.    Thus in a one-period model,
managers will always           be   tempted to cajole              the accountant       to
understate costs and overstate reported income.

      But if we pose the question differently the manager could vote
for "conservatism" in accounting.    Accountants define conservatism
as a predisposition to record future losses and expenses, even when
uncertain, but to defer recognition of revenues or other gains until
proved.       The idea   is   to provide the "most conservative measure of
net income" and to "avoid unwarranted optimism."17


      This could be rationalized as follows. Take the accounting
       A
signal C as given.   What kinds of errors are most serious -- cost
overestimates or underestimates?

                 A
         Given C, it's    the underestimates that really hurt.             The upper
                                                                                    A
bound       on true costs is critical. Look again at Figure 4.             Given C, a
reduction in the maximum possible underestimate shifts the starting
                                                A
point    of the upper curve, where I(C          C) =   1*,   to the left, and leads to
                                                               A
higher      investment for all firms with the same C.                Ex ante, the firm
 therefore prefers a "conservative" accountant;              all   firms in the cohort
                     A
 with the same C are better off if the maximum cost underestimate is
 as small as possible.


                                           22
      This kind of conservatism does not mean a low standard error.
It means chopping off the right tail of the distribution of possible
costs as close as possible to its mean -- not the same thing as fudging
                       A
in an upward bias to C.      (Mere downward bias in cost estimates is
pointless because investors will just take the fudge out again.                  Think
     A
of C     as investors' expectation of costs given the accounting signal.)           In

this paper's analysis conservatism          would mean changing the shape
of the distribution.          Accountants should shift their time and
resources to the task of eliminating high-cost outliers.


7.        Conclusions

     The main points of the two models presented in this paper can
be summarized as follows. The heart of the problem is asymmetric
information,        specifically investors' inability to distinguish cash
outlays       for   current operations      from     outlays     for    investment.
Managers are concerned with current stock price as well as intrinsic
value, and thus are tempted to reduce investment in order to
pretend to have lower operating costs.             They end up in a signaling
equilibrium in which investors learn the true operating costs of
every firm.         All but one firm must underinvest            to maintain their
place in the signaling equilibrium.The firm with the highest possible
costs invests optimally, because there are not still higher-cost firms
that could imitate it.


          Signaling    by   underinvestment     is    a   costly       channel     for
information.          Accounting    reports    are     usually     cheaper.         If

                                       23
nondiscretionary accounting rules could identify true costs exactly,
there would be no temptation to signal and no underinvestment.
Noisy accounting cost estimates          narrow the       range    of possible
operating costs and reduce the scope for signaling.               Investment is
increased and the   costs of signaling reduced.


      The accounting cost estimates are not necessary to reveal true
costs to investors.   Signaling does that without any accounting
reports. The noisy accounting estimates are a partial substitute for
signaling; they convey information that would otherwise have to be
signaled by underinvestment. Managers acting in shareholders' ex
ante interests will bond themselves to report by "objective" rules
implemented, or at least monitored by outside accountants.


      This paper's analysis    formally similar to Miller and Rock's
                              is

signaling treatment of dividend payouts. Their model also has the
firm cutting back on cash outlays in order to initiate lower-cost and
higher-income firms.       However, they leave        "income" undefined
except by reference to economic theory.               I     have specifically
identified the components of income which         I   believe to be at the
heart of the problem, that    unanticipated cash outlays for current
                              is
operations and investments.18 Accounting information is valuable to
investors primarily because it helps distinguish these two
components, not because accountants attempt estimate true economic
 income.19




                                    24
      If    I    am right, some attempts        to improve the accuracy         or
relevance of accounting income are just wasted motion.               For example,
investors       evident lack of interest   in   price-level adjusted accounts20
is   easily explained if investors are not looking to accounting
information         to   estimate real   economic income,      but     mainly   to
distinguish unanticipated current and investment outflows. Most of
the information accountants provide on this distinction was already
in historical cost books.   For example, inflation adjusted income
statements would restate depreciation            in current dollars.      Ideally,
current replacement cost depreciation would be used.             Obviously this
would be        a   helpful step towards reporting real economic income.
However,         using    a   better depreciation   number   for past      capital
investment gives no assistance to investors trying to separate the
good and bad news in unanticipated current cash outlays.




                                          25
*   MIT Sloan School of Management and NBER. This paper's main
ideas were developed during a visiting appointment at the London
Business School. I thank Julian Franks, Paul Healy and Anthony
Neuberger for helpful discussions. Research support from the MIT
Sloan School of Management, MIT's Center for Energy Policy
Research, and the London Business School is gratefully
acknowledged.

1)       Inside accountants, e.g. the controller, are treated as management.


2)    Several recent papers present models which could explain
accounting as a rational response to agency problems, in which a
compensation rule or contract must be worked out in a situation
where the manager's effort or performance cannot be observed
directly.   Examples are the papers by Lambert (1984) and by
    Demski, Patell and Wolfson (1984).


    3)   Titman and Trueman (1986) is a partial exception. They assume
    that firms want to signal low earnings volatility. Some firms can do
    this by damping fluctuations in reported income, but others cannot.
    Investors cannot distinguish the two groups. The result is a pooling
    equilibrium in which some high-volatility firms use income
    smoothing to imitate lower-volatility firms.


    4)   Miller and Rock (1985) discuss the pros and cons of this objective
    function. One obvious con is that putting no weight on current stock
    price (a = 0) leaves all shareholders better off ex ante. However, it's
    difficult to insulate managers from pressure from shareholders who
    have decided to sell right away.
             Of course managers could pay attention to current stock price for
    other seasons, e.g. because of takeover threats.



                                        26
5)    See the discussion of "information costs" in Myers and Majiuf
(1984), 195-196.


6) If there is some known minimum value of C, we can net it against
R and still integrate from zero to X in (6).


7)    A derivation is available from the author.


8)    Bad news unless the probability f(0) is much larger than f(X).


9)    Good news unless f(X) is much larger than f(0).


10)   In other words, I assume here for convenience that the cx post X
is less than the highest possible ex ante 1*.


11) Thanks to Anthony Neuberger for helpful comments on this
model.

12)    Could minimum investment be negative?          Yes.   If      is less than

1-a     when X -   C = I = 0,   firms with still lower costs will be forced to
sell off assets (at a net loss) to signal effectively.       Of course in such
cases the zero point for investment could be redefined in terms f
maximum disinvestment.    For example I = $1 could reflect a decision
to keep $1 of existing assets that could have been sold.


13)    C( X I   ) is   not an exact transposition of C(X) unless MC i S
constant.



14)    These functions "bunch up" when X is close to X. Think of

and 2       with upper bounds        +        >   +   > C.    In   each case the

                                         27
worst possible firm has costs C. Therefore the curves for C( X
and C( X C2)      are identical.


15)    We can show that the curves C( X I      )    never cross the     C(X)

curve. For any cost C < C, Cx(X I         < C because the accounting
signal leads to higher X and I and therefore lower G1. Cx(X I ) and
      are equal in the limit of very low C. If the slopes are equal at
this only possible crossing point, the curves cannot cross.


16)    Note, however, that not all of this curve is likely to be populated.
The best possible firm on this curve has costs      C -   2.   Unless      is
very large, there will be still better firms        with lower C, which
without accountants would have been on             the envelope at lower
investment.
17)    See Davidson, et al. (1988), pp. 628-629, 725.


 18)  Remember that in my model cost and investment do not
correspond to the accounting definitions of these terms. For example,
I would define investment as cash outlays caused by unanticipated
expansion of the investment opportunity set; anticipated capital
outlays would be treated as a current "cost."

 19)   Book income does seem to convey information to investors that
is not found just in reported cash flow. See, for example, Bowen, et
al. (1987).
 20)   See, for example, Beaver (1983).




                                      28
                                   REFFRENES




Beaver, William H., 'The Incremental Information Content of Replacement
     Cost Earnings," Journal of Accounting and Economics 5 (1983), 179-
         94.


Black,   Fischer, "The Magic in Earnings: Economic Earnings vs. Accounting
         Earnings," Financial Analysts Journal    (November-December 1980),
         19-24.


Bowen, Robert M., David Burgstahler and Lane A. Daley, "The Incremental
         Information Content of Accrual Versus Cash Flows," Accounting
         Review 62 (October 1987), 723.


Davidson, Sidney, Clyde P. Stickney and Roman L. Weil, Financial
         Accounting:  An Introduction to Concepts. Methods and Uses, 5th ed.,
         Dryden Press, Chicago, 1988.


Demski, Joel S., James M. Patell and Mark A. Wolfson, "Decentralized Choice
         of Monitoring Systems," Accounting Review 59 (January 1984), 16-
         34.


Edwards, Edward 0., and Philip W. Bell, The Theory and Measurement of
         Business Income, Berkley, CA: University of California Press, 1965.


Holthausen, Robert W. and Richard W. Leftwich, "The Economic
      Consequences of Accounting Choice -- Implications of Costly
      Contracting and Monitoring," Journal of Accounting and Economics 5
      (1983), 77-117.

Lambert, Richard A., "Income Smoothing as Rational Equilibrium
     Behaviour," Accounting Review 59 (October 1984), 604-617.

Miller, Merton and Kevin Rock, "Dividend Policy Under Asymmetric
         Information," Journal of Finance 40 (September 1985), 1031-1051.


                                       29
Myers, Stewart C. and Nicholas Majiuf, "Corporate Financing and
      Investment Decisions When Managers Have Information Investors Do
      Not Have," Journal of Financial Economics 13 (June 1984), 187-221.


Riley, John G., "Informational Equilibrium," Econometrica 47 (March 1979),
       331-359.

Ronen, J. and S. Sadan, Smoothing Accounting Income Numbers: Objectives.
     Means and Implications, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1981.


Strong, John S. and John R.      Meyer, "Asset Writedowns: Managerial
      Incentives and Security Returns," working paper, College of William
      and Mary, 1987.


Titman, Sheridan and Brett Trueman, "An Explanation for Accounting
      Income Smoothing," working paper, Graduate School of Management,
      UCLA, July 1986.


Verrecchia, Robert E., "Managerial Discretion in the Choice among Financial
      Reporting Alternatives," Journal of Accounting and Economics 8
       (1986),   175-195.


 Verrecchia, Robert E., "Discretionary Disclosure," Journal of Accounting and
       Economics 4 (1982), 15-39.


 Watts, Ross L. and Jerold L. Zimmerman, Positive Accounting Theory,
       Prentice Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1986.


 Yamey, B.S., "Some Topics in the History of Financial Accounting in England
       1500-1900," in W.T. Baxter and Sidney Davidson, eds. Studies in
       Accounting, Institute of Chartered Accountants, London, 1977.




                                       30
</ref_section>
                                                x



>c
C-)
U,

0
4-
0
C
4-
0
•1
4,
a.
0



                       1*
                       Total cash outflow, X

     Figure I. Operating costs (C) as a function of total
               cash outflows (X) in a signaling equilibrim.
              C(X) is the heavy line.
     I,

 a
C
1)




                                        x ZC+L*
                     Total cash outflow, X

     Figure 2. Investment as a function of total cash
               outflows X. The firm invests the optimal
               amount I' only in the worst state where
               C:Cond X:XC+t*
                                  FIGURE 3

                    SIGNALING EQUILIBRIUM
                      INVESTMENT OPPORrUNITES   KNN.
       10

       9

       8

       7

I-'
       6
I-
z'Ii
       5

       4


       3

       2

       I

       0
            0   2             4                 6      8   10

                        CASH OPERATING COST (C)
C
I)



I

                            a   —

                      C     C+.              C

                     Operating cost, c

     Figure 4. Investment as a function of operating
               cost c. The curve i(Cle) assumes
               occountants report a noisy cost estimate
                C. The film with the highest costs
              consistent with this estimate invests
               the optimal amount.
                                   TA5LE 1

                   Value Losses from Underinvestment with
                          Noisy Accounting Signals
                  (Percentage of NPV at Optimal Investment)




Accountant's        a — .2         a — .3          a — .3     a —
Maximum Error,      M — 5          M — 5           M — 10     M —    10
Percent of True
Current Outflow


      1              .15              .2              .5             .9

      5              .5             1.0              2.2            4.2

     10              .8             1.6              3.8            7.8

     20             1.1             2.4              6.3        14.1

     30             1.2             2.8              8.1        19.5

     50             1.3             3.3             10.5        26.6


Value
loss with
no accounting       1.3             3.3            10.5         26.6
signal
