NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

QUALITY LADDERS AND PRODUCT CYCLES

Gene M. Grossman
Elhanan Helpman

Working Paper No. 3201

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1989

Part of the work for this paper was completed while both authors were visiting
the Institute for Advanced Studies at Hebrew University, and while Grossman was
at the World Bank and Helpman at the International Monetary Fund. We thank
there organizations plus the National Science Foundation and the Bank of Sweden
Tercentennary Foundation for financial support. This paper is part of NBER's
research programs in Growth and International Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3201
December 1989

QUALITY LADDERS AND PRODUCT CYCLES

ABSTRACT

Ve develop a two-country model of endogenous innovation and imitation in
Firms in the
order to study the interactions between these two processes.
North race to bring out the next generation of a set of technology-intensive
Each product potentially can be improved a countably infinite
products.
number of times, but quality improvements require the investment of resources
and entail uncertain prospects of success. In the South, entrepreneurs invest
resources in order to learn the production processes that have been developed
All R&D investment decisions are made by forward looking,
in the North.
The
is
steady-state
equilibrium
entrepreneurs.
profit
maximizing
Ve
characterized by constant aggregate rates of innovation and imitation.
study how these rates respond to changes in the sizes of the two regions and
to policies in each region to promote learning.

Gene M. Grossman
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544

Elhanan Helpman
Department of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv 69978
ISRAEL

I. Introduction
The life history of a technology-intensive commodity can be quite

complex. Consider the recent life of the personal computer (PC). Ever since
IBI introduced the 8088-based IBI PC in the early 1980's, we have witnessed a
more or less continuous race between IBI, Compaq, and others to provide

products of ever higher quality. This quality competition has led to the
almost complete replacement of the 8088-based computers by machines housing an
80286 processor, and more recently these latter PC's are losing their place in

the market to computers based on the 80386 processor. At the same time, other
firms, many of them located in low wage countries such as Taiwan and Korea,
have strived to copy the state-of-the-art machines and to come to market with

competitively priced "clones'. As a result, market shares have fluctuated for
innovators and imitators, and for last generation and next generation
products.

The complex dynamics of this example and others like it (e.g.,
semiconductors, consumer electronics, etc.) stem from the interaction between

two concurrent and interrelated stochastic processes. The first is the common
process of quality upgrading. Scherer (1980) cites evidence that improvements
in product quality account for more than one half of all industrial

innovation. The second process is that of imitation. Latecomers seek to
exploit the public good nature of technology by mimicking the designs and

prototypes developed by others. Both of these processes are characterized by
fundamental uncertainties. Even when firms know ahead of time the attributes
of the good that they hope to invent or mimic, they often cannot be sure ex

exactly how long it will take to develop a marketable product. Thus, the
dynamic evolution of the market shares and trade pattern for any given product
is bound to be complex.

-2-

Elsewhere, we have studied these two components of the innovation process

in isolation. In Grossman and Eelpman (1989a), we developed a model of
endogenous product cycles. Building on work by Krugman (1979) on the dynamics
of trade with exogenous innovation and exogenous diffusion, and by Itomer

(1988) and ourselves (1989c) on endogenous technical change, we described a
process whereby new, differentiated products are first developed in the
industrialized North, and then, after a (random) period of production there,

are subject to imitation by entrepreneurs in the less developed South. While
useful for studying the implications of imitation in the South for incentives
to innovate in the North, our model does have the somewhat unrealistic
property that, once the locus of production for some good shifts to the South,
that good is produced there forever after.

In Grossman and Belpman (1989d) we considered the process of quality
upgrading. Drawing building blocks from the works of Aghion and llowitt (1989)
and Segerstrom, Anant and Dinopoulos (1988), we constructed a model of Quality
ladders wherein firms race to improve each of a continuum of industrial

products. We took the increments to quality to be exogenously given, and
studied the determinants of the average rate of innovation. In that paper, we
did not allow for the possibility of profitable imitation.

Our goal here is to analyze the nature of the interactions between these

two processes. In doing so, we hope to gain insights into an important aspect
of North-South trade. We construct a model in which Northern firms race to
improve a given set of technology-intensive products while Southern
entrepreneurs strive to learn the production technologies developed in the

North. The learning decisions by each set of agents are affected by the
choices of the others. All rates of innovation and imitation are jointly

-3-

determined in the dynamic general equilibrium. Ve study how the sizes of the
two regions and the levels of support that the two governments provide for
research and development affect the long-run rates of innovation and imitation
and the length of the average product cycle.

Before proceeding, we relate our work to some other recent papers on

North-South trade and the product cycle. Krugman (1079) was the first to
attempt to formalize some of the ideas contained in Vernon's (1966) seminal

article. However, his model and the extension by Dollar (1986) did not
incorporate endogenous determination of the rates of innovation and imitation

by profit-maximizing agents. Jensen and Thursby (1988a, 1988b) introduced a
decision-theoretic framework into the Krugman model, but they allowed
innovation by only one firm and imitation only by a utility-maximizing central

planner in the South. The papers most similar in spirit to ours are those by
Segerstrom, Anant and Dinopoulos (1988) and Dinopoulos, Oehmke and Segerstrom
(1989). These authors also study quality upgrading for a range of industrial

products and our utility function is borrowed from them. Two salient features
distinguish our work from theirs. First, they assume that patent races take
place in one industry at a time, and so products are improved in sequence. By
contrast, we allow for simultaneous research activities in all sectors of the

economy. Second, we incorporate imitation as an economic activity that
requires resources and responds to profitability considerations, whereas they
assume that diffusion is automatic and costless once a patent of fixed

duration has expired. Tangentially related to our work are the papers by Flam
and Helpman (1987) and Stokey (1989). These authors also study quality
upgrading in the context of North-South trade. But they do not introduce
explicit dynamics, nor do they incorporate R&D as a distinct economic

-4activity. Lather, they assume that' all goods can be produced from the
beginning of time, but that only a subset of goods is produced at any moment

depending upon demand and factor endowment conditions. Product improvements
are studied via exogenous variations in income levels, income distributions,
factor productivities, and factor supplies.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section
we specify preferences and technologies and describe optimal behavior by

individual agents. Conditions for a steady-state equilibrium are developed in
Section III. Ye find that two different equilibrium regimes are possible,
depending upon the gap in R&D efficiency between the agents who have been
successful in developing the latest generation of a product and all others.
Ve study the determinants of innovation and imitation in these alternative

regimes in Sections IV and V. Section VI contains a summary of findings.

II. The lodel
Ye study innovation, imitation, and trade in a world economy comprising

two regions. The regions -- which we refer to as "North" and "South" --

are

distinguished by their abilities to conduct state-of-the-art research and

development (R&D). Resources in the North are assumed to be considerably more
productive in undertaking innovation than are resources in the South. Ye
focus on steady-state equilibria in which all innovative activity takes place
in the North.

Innovation in this economy takes the form of improvements in the

qualities of a fixed set of goods. Ye take the set of goods to be continuous
and index its elements by &E[O,1]. Each good potentially can be improved an
infinite number of times. These improvements require resources and entail

-5-

uncertain prospects, as we shall de&cribe below. The increments to quality
are common to all products and exogenously given by a parameter A>l. We
denote by qo(&i)=l the initial (lowest) quality of each good. After j
improvements of product ,,

its

highest available quality is given by qj

Consumers worldwide share identical preferences. They seek to maximize
an additively separable intertemporal utility function of the form

(1)

U =

f

exp(-pt) log u(t)dt,

where p is the common subjective discount rate and log u(t) represents

instantaneous utility at time t. We specify

(2)

log u(t) =

J'

log [jqj(i)djt()]di,

where d(&) denotes consumption of quality j of good

at time t.

The representative consumer maximizes utility by choosing an optimal time

path for nominal spending and by allocating spending optimally at each point

in time. Given prices pjt(') and the level of spending E(t)=
f'[jpjt()djt(i)]d, the composition of spending that maximizes (2) is
attained when the consumer allocates an equal expenditure share to every
product type i and when he chooses for every i

the single variety that offers

the lowest quality adjusted price pjt(J)/qj(&). We shall see that in
equilibrium it is always the highest available quality that provides the

lowest quality adjusted price Let q(&) denote the quality of the
state-of-the-art variety of good '

at time t. Substituting the optimal

allocation into (2), and the result into (1), we obtain the indirect utility

-6-

function

(3)

U =

f

exp(-pt){log E(t) - 11 log[p(j)/qt(i)]d&}dt,

where pL() represents the price of the state-of-the-art product.
Ve assume that the consumer can borrow or lend freely on a capital market

with instantaneous (and riskiess) rate of return r. Consumers take this
interest rate as given, though its value must be determined in the general

equilibrium. The optimal time profile for nominal spending is that which
maximizes (3) subject to an intertemporal budget constraint. The constraint
limits the present value of the infinite stream of expenditures to the present
value of income plus the value of initial asset holdings. As is well known
(see, for example, Grossman and Helpman (1989c)), the solution to this problem
yields the following differential equation for spending:

(4)

/E=r- p.
The consumer-investor also must solve a portfolio allocation problem. He

may choose among shares in a variety of profit-earning firms and among
interest-bearing bonds. Claims on particular firms are risky assets, as we
shall see. However, the risk attached to any one equity is idiosyncratic, so
the investor can earn a sure rate of return by holding a diversified portfolio
of shares. It follows that, in asset-market equilibrium, the consumer will be
indifferent between holding bonds and stocks, and between holding different

diversified portfolios of stocks. Although the individual's portfolio
allocation problem has no unique solution, the associated no-arbitrage

-7-

conditions allow us to value the various profit-making entities.

Consider then a firm that earns a profit stream r(r) for rt. Below we
show that profits accrue only to firms that are the lowest cost producers of
state-of-the-art products. The stream of profits of such a producer continues
until the time that another firm succeeds in copying the product or improving

upon it. Then the value of its shares falls to zero. Recognizing this risk
of total capital loss, we can calculate the expected return to any equity as

follows. If v(t) is the value of a firm at time t, (r/v)dt is the dividend
rate in a time interval of length dt, and (/v)dt is the rate of capital gain.
But with probability fdt the shareholders will suffer a capital loss of v at

the end of interval dt. Summing these components of the expected return and
equating the result to the sure rate of return on bonds, we have

(5)

r/v÷'r/v_f=r.

This equation implicitly determines the value of any firm as a function of its
profit rate, the interest rate, the rate of capital gain and the relevant

value for f. In what follows, we shall link f to the activities that
competitors undertake in equilibrium in order to supplant the profit earner.

Ye shall need to distinguish three types of profit-making firms that may

exist in equilibrium. These firms earn different rates of profit and face
different risks of loss of their market power. Consequently, their stock-

market values differ. They are (i) Northern firms that have exclusive
ability to produce some state-of-the-art product and that compete with another
Northern firm that can produce the second-to-top quality; (ii) Northern firms
that have exclusive ability to produce a state-of-the-art product and that

-8-

compete with a Southern firm that can produce the second-to-top quality; and
(iii) Southern firms that are able, via imitation, to produce the

state-of-the-art quality. Ye shall refer to the measure of firms in each of

these categories as n, nNS, and n, respectively. As we shall see, these
firm types are exhaustive and each product is manufactured in equilibrium by
exactly one firm. Therefore, we have nNN-4-nMS-4-nS=l.

Let us derive now the profit rates for each of these types of firms. Ye
will show at the same time that no other type of firm can earn positive

profits. Consider first a firm in the South that is the only one there to
have successfully imitated the top-of-the-line quality for some product i. Ye
assume that this firm can manufacture (a flow of) one unitof output using one
unit of Southern labor, regardless of a' or q(w). Ye assume as well that
Northern firms with knowledge to produce this or other qualities of product a'
require one unit of Northern labor in order to manufacture one unit of output.

Finally, we assume that all firms with the know-how to produce some quality of
good a' compete as price-setting (Bertrand) oligopolists. Marginal costs of

production then are w in the South and

in the North, where w is the wage

rate in region i, i=N,S. In all of the equilibria that we study below, the

wage in the South is less than that in the North. The Southern manufacturer
maximizes profit by charging a price equal to the Northern wage rate (or e
below it).1 It thereby captures the entire market, makes sales of E/wN, where
E now represents aggregate spending (recall that consumers spend equal shares
on all products), and earns instantaneous profits

1 Each product a' has a unitary price elasticity of demand. Therefore, the
Southern firm would never wish to set a price discretely below that of its
Northern rival.

-9-

=

(6)

( - w)E/w.

It is clear that when the Southern firm charges this price, all suppliers of
qualities below qt(nI), as well as any Northern suppliers of qt(&), make zero
sales and earn zero profits.

If two Southern firms are able to produce the same top-of-the-line
product qt (&)

for

some w, then both price at marginal cost and neither earns

positive profits in the resulting Bertrand competition. Such a situation
never arises in equilibrium, because once some Southern firm has succeeded in
copying qt(w) no other entrepreneur is willing to invest costly resources in
order to learn the technology for that same product.2

Consider next the case of a Northern firm that has successfully improved
a product most recently manufactured in the South. Suppose that the quality
of the Southern product is exactly one increment below that of the Northern
leader's product, as is always the case in equilibrium (see below). The
Northern leader maximizes profits in this instance by setting a quality
adjusted price equal to (or c below) the Southern firm's marginal cost of

production. This price of Aw5 yields the Northern firm a 100 percent market
share for product group w and sales of E/w5. Tts instantaneous profits are
given by3

2 The probability that two Southern firms will succeed in their efforts to
imitate the same Northern product at precisely the same moment is of order
(dt)2, and so can be ignored.

3 Naturally, the expression for profits given in (7) applies only when
< A; i.e., when the wage differential between North and South is not

too large. Otherwise, r=O and the Northern firm will have no incentive to
improve the quality of a product manufactured in the South.

- 10

(7)

TNS = (Aws

-

-

w1jE/Aw5

Consider finally a Northern firm with the exclusive ability to produce a
top-of-the-line product whose nearest competitor on the quality ladder is

another Northern firm one step behind. This firm maximizes profit by charging
a price of (or e below) Awn. This price once again ensures the leader of a
100 percent market share and thus a flow of sales equal to E/Aw. The flow of
profits in this case is given by

(8)

In

TNN = (AwN

-

wN)EIAwN

the event that two Northern firms are able to produce the same

top-of-the-line product, both earn zero profits. This never occurs in
equilibrium, since imitation requires resources and so is not a viable
activity in the North.
Our last tasks in describing the economy are to specify the technologies

for innovation and imitation and to ascertain what is optimal behavior by

entrepreneurs in regard to these activities. We suppose that innovation and
imitation entail uncertainty for the individual entrepreneurs. When an
investor devotes resources to one of these activities for an interval of time,
she purchases a probability of success during that interval that is

proportional to the intensity of effort. The probability of success during
any time interval does not depend upon the resources that have been spent in

previous (unsuccessful) periods. Thus, individual research success is a
continuous Poisson process, as in Lee and Vilde (1980). Free entry

- ii
characterizes

-

both the innovation and imitation activities. Accordingly, we

model a continuum of product-specific "patent races".

As we noted at the outset, entrepreneurs in the South are quite

inefficient at innovation. We do not specify a technology for this activity,
but simply suppose that no innovation takes place there. We distinguish two
technologies for innovation in the North. An entrepreneur who has achieved
the most recent research success for some product i

is

likely to have acquired

suhstantial product specific information by dint of her successful effort.
This information may he valuable in developing the next generation product and
not all such information will be readily apparent to outsiders who observe

only the final product and not the process that led to its discovery. Thus,

firms

we specify one technology for product improvement by "leaders" -successfully developed quality qt(w) --

that

and another for all "followers",

including firms that may have developed previous generations of product ,

firms

that may have tried to develop qt(&) but failed, and all new potential

entrants into industry a'.

A Northern firm that undertakes innovative activities at intensity i. for

an interval of time dt succeeds in developing the next generation of the

targeted product with probability tdt. This effort requires aDLt units of
labor per unit of time for a leader, and a0,t for a follower, with

Tmitation similarly requires resources and entails uncertain success. In the
South, imitation at intensity p for a time interval of length dt requires

aMPdt units of Southern labor and yields results with probability pdt. We
need not specify a technology for imitation in the North, because we have seen
that this activity is never profitable there.

Having specified the various research technologies, we turn now to

- 12

individual

-

behavior. Consider first those research efforts in the North

targeted at improving a good momentarily produced in the South. Suppose that
a profit opportunity exists for a successful Northern innovator; i.e.,

in

(7) is positive. Either the leader or one or more followers might contemplate
undertaking this activity. All face the same cost of funds in the capital
market and all stand to gain the same expected profit stream if successful.
However, the leader alone enjoys a cost advantage in innovation by dint of her

superior product-specific knowledge. Vith a linear R&D technology, only the
Northern leaders (if anyone) ever engage in efforts to improve products that
are being manufactured in the South.

The profit opportunity for any Northern leader that successfully
recaptures its market share from an imitator in the South is the same,
regardless of the product &

or

its current quality level. Ye suppose,

therefore, that all such Northern firms undertake innovative activities with

denote this intensity level. Successful ones among

equal intensity. Let

those who undertake such R&D will attain a stock market value of vNS. So each
such firm can achieve an expected gain of vNSLSdt at cost wNaDLtSdt by
targeting for further improvement the product that it previously developed and

undertaking R&D at intensity t

for

an interval dt. Value maximization by

leaders requires that the expected gain not exceed the cost, with equality

holding if any innovation activity takes place at these firms. Thus we have

(9)

vNS

a0[w(

,

with

equality for

>

0.

Now consider research efforts aimed at improving a good momentarily

manufactured by a firm in the North. Again, these efforts might conceivably

- 13 -

be undertaken by any of a large number of followers, or by the industry leader
itself. The followers can achieve an expected gain of v55tdt by bearing
research cost wNaDFt for an interval dt. Value maximization again requires
that the expected gain not exceed the cost, with equality if any R&D is

conducted by followers. We suppose that all Northern products are targeted by
followers for improvement to the same (aggregate) extent. Let
total

denote the

of such research activity by followers for each i produced by a Northern

firm. Then we have

vNN a0w5

In

,

with equality for

Appendix A, we show that aDF/aDL< 2

0.

- 1/A is sufficient to rule out

any efforts by extant Northern producers to improve their own products.

Intuitively, these firms stand to gain less from product improvement than

followers. The benefit to a leader from a research success is the difference
between the profit stream that accrues to a producer two steps ahead of its
nearest rival, and that which is earned by a producer one step ahead of its

nearest rival. A follower stands to gain a profit stream of

in place of

zero. The latter increment is always larger than the former, so the followers
have

greater incentive

to conduct R&D unless their cost disadvantage is

severe. We shall henceforth assume that aDF/aDL< 2 -

1/A and thereby exclude

the possibility that leaders engage in R&D unless and until their products
have been imitated by a firm in the South.

Southern entrepreneurs that target for imitation a product manufactured

in the North stand to reap an expected gain in firm value of vpdt for a cost

of pawdt. We assume that all Northern products are targeted by imitators in

- 14

the

-

South to the same (aggregate) ettent .

By familiar reasoning, value

maximization by Southern entrepreneurs implies

(11)

vs

with

aMwS ,

equality for >O.

Ve return finally to the no-arbitrage conditions. A Northern producer --

be it one that faces competition from another Northern firm as its closest
rival or one that competes with a Southern firm as its closest rival -- may

forfeit its earnings potential in one of two ways. Its product might be
improved upon by another Northern entrepreneur, or it might be successfully

copied by a firm in the South. The probabilities that these events occur in a
time interval of length dt are tNdt and

respectively. Using (5), then,

with f=tN+, we obtain

(12)

=

r

+

r/vNs +

VNS/VNS

NN/vfl +

V/vu = r +

+ tM

and

(13)

+ tN.

Each Southern firm, on the other hand, faces a probability t5dt of losing its

earning potential during a time interval of length dt. This event occurs if a
Northern leader succeeds in improving once again the product that the Southern

firm had earlier copied. Applying (5) once more, this time with f=t, we have

(14)

+

=

r+

- 15

-

Equations (12), (13), and (14) link the value of existing firms to the
intensities of innovation and imitation that take place in equilibrium. With
these equations, we have completed the description of behavior by individual

agents in our economy. We turn in the next section to the characterization of
steady- state equilibria.

III. Steady-State Equilibrium
We study steady-state equilibria in which the rates of imitation and
innovation, the measure of firms of each type, and all relative prices are

constant. In these equilibria, growth takes the form of an ongoing process of

product improvements. Each product follows a stochastic life cycle. An
individual product might not be improved or copied for a period, or it might
be improved several times in succession by various Northern firms, or else it
might be copied in the South and produced there for a while before being

upgraded again in the North. Despite the many possible life histories for
individual products, the rate of increase of an aggregate utility indicator is
constant in the steady state.

Our first equilibrium conditions ensure that labor markets clear in each

region. Labor supplies L ,

j=N,S, are fixed and constant. Labor demand

arises from innovators and manufacturing enterprises in the North, and from
imitators and manufacturing in the South. The South targets each of
Northern products for imitation at aggregate intensity p and so employs aMpnN

units of labor in imitation. lanufacturing employment there is n5E/w5. Thus,
labor market clearing in the South requires

- 16

(15)

In

aMIhnK +

rsE/s

-

=

the North, followers employ aDFtNnN units of labor in efforts to improve

products, while leaders employ aDLLSnS units of labor in this activity.

lanufacturing requires nNNE/wN +

nNsE/s

units of labor. Consequently,

labor market equilibrium in the North entails

(16)

aDFtNnN + aDLtSnS + nNNE/AwN +

nE/Aw5

=

LN.

These labor market clearing conditions apply of course not only in steady
states, but out of steady state as well.

In a steady state, all nominal values grow at a common rate. In

particular vj/v= E/E for firms with positive value, jE{NN,NS,S}. Imposing
these conditions, using (4), and combining the respective asset-pricing
equations with the corresponding value-maximization conditions (for example,
(9) and (12)) we derive the following steady-state relationships:

(17)

IS/aMwS

(18)

1NS/aDL

(19)

f.LN/aDFwN

p +

with

equality for p >

,

with

equality for

>

0;

,

with

equality for

>

0.

,

p + p +

p + p + LN

0;

The remaining steady-state conditions ensure that the measures of
products manufactured in the North and in the South, as well as the

composition of Northern products, remain constant through time. At each

- 17

moment, the South successfully copies p(nNN+nNS) products and takes over

production of these goods. At the same time, t5n5 products revert to Northern
leaders who succeed in their upgrading efforts. The measure of products
manufactured in the South remains constant if and only if

(20)

pn1

=

where n5n55#n55. Vithin the group of Northern produced goods, the sub-group
with a Northern firm as closest competitor grows in some cases in which a

follower succeeds in her research efforts; i.e., at rate t5n55. This
sub-group shrinks when one of its members is copied by a Southern firm, which

happens at rate pn55. The composition of products (and therefore the
allocation of labor) in the North remains constant if and only if the inflows
match the outflows, or

=

This

completes the description of the steady-state equilibrium.

Our model admits several types of steady-state equilibria. These
equilibria differ in terms of which innovation and imitation activities are

actively undertaken in the long run. Parameter values determine which one
applies. Two types of equilibria may arise when innovation or imitation are
quite costly, one in which no innovation or imitation takes place in the
steady state, and another in which innovation does occur but imitation does

not. Our main interest lies in the interaction between imitation and
innovation, when product cycles co-exist with quality ladders. For this

- 18

-

reason, we concentrate on steady states with both imitation and innovation.
Even so, two different types of equilibria may arise. In one type,
leaders enjoy a large cost advantage over followers in product improvement, in

which case only the leaders engage in liD in the steady state. Then
equilibrium involves alternating phases of Northern and Southern production of
each good, with active R&D by Northerners after their product has been copied,
and active imitation by Southerners after the North has reclaimed a product by

improving it. In a second type of equilibrium, both leaders and followers
undertake R&D. This case arises when followers are relatively efficient at
innovation, though still less so than leaders. In this type of equilibrium,
the path followed by any particular good can be complex, since at any time it
may pass from one Northern firm to another, or from North to South.
Consider the latter type of equilibrium first, wherein equations (17)

through (19) all hold with equality. Ye can derive a useful, five equation,
reduced-form system as follows. Define tst5n5+t5n5, the aggregate (or
average) rate of product improvement, and tstn5, the aggregate rate at which

goods flow from North to South. These variables summarize the extent of
innovation and imitation in the world economy, and so will be the focus of the

analysis that follows. Define also önl/A, wswN/wS, and esE/wN. Then
substituting (6)-(8) and (20)-(21) into the labor-market clearing conditions
(15) and (16) and the no-arbitrage conditions (17)-(19), we derive

(1

(22)

aMl? +

(23)

aDF(t -

-

nN)e

=

) + a11)7

L5

+

-

5enN(1

t/t)

+

Sen5wl7/t

=

- 19 - 1)e(1

(24)

(w

(25)

(1 - Sw)en5

(26)

(1 - S)enN

-

n5)

=

=

=

+

aM[p(r+

aDL(pnN

aDF(pnN

17]

+

Using (25) and (26), we can solve immediately for the relative wage rate
that prevails in a regime with "efficient followers". Ve find

(27)

(1 -

öw)/(1

-

5)

=

aDL/aDF

In this case, the steady-state relative wage does not vary with the sizes of

the two regions. The same can be said of the terms of trade, which depend
only on w and A. The relative wage of the North (and the South's terms of
trade) are higher the more efficient are leaders at R&D relative to followers.

In a regime with "inefficient followers", tN= 0. Then (20) and (21)
imply nNN= 0 and 17=t. In a steady state with no active followers, the measure
of products improved per unit time just matches the measure of products that
flow from North to South. Now (19) holds as an inequality, and (15)- (18) can
be written (after substituting (6)-(8)) as:

-

(28)

aM + (1

(29)

aDLt + Swen5

(30)

(w -1)e(l -

=

n5)e

L5

=

n5)

=

-

aM[p(1

nN)

+

t]

- 20

(31)

(1 -

5w)en

=

aDL(pnN

-

+

As is evident, the relative wage does depend upon the sizes of the two regions
in this case. Ye discuss in the following two sections the determinants of
the steady-state rates of imitation and innovation, and of the average length
of a product cycle, in each of the two regimes.

IV. Efficient Followers
Ye investigate the determinants of the aggregate rate of innovation (t),

the

aggregate rate of imitation (,), and the average length of a product cycle

(l/p). This last variable tells us how long, on average, a product will be
produced in the North before being successfully copied by a firm in the South.
Ye perform comparative statics with respect to changes in the sizes of the two
regions, and with respect to two policy parameters reflecting government

support for research activities. To perform the calculations, we substitute
(27) into (22)-(25), then apply familiar techniques. These calculations are
of little interest and so are relegated to Appendix B.

Several of our conclusions may hinge on an intermediate result that in

principle can go either of two ways. Consider labor demand in the North (the
left-hand side of (23)). Suppose that, for some reason, the intensity of R&D
per product undertaken by followers (t5) were to increase, with t5, t,

n

(hence q), e and w constant. The direct effect of this would be to increase
demand for Northern labor in proportion to aDF. But an indirect effect
operates in the opposite direction. Vith n5 constant and t having increased,
the steady-state composition of Northern products shifts in favor of goods for

- 21

-

which the nearest competitor is another Northern firm; i.e., n rises, while
nNS falls. The former goods bear a higher price and thus involve fewer sales
than the latter, so the change in composition entails a fall in demand for

Northern labor by manufacturing establishments. To keep our discussion from
becoming taxonomic, we shall assume in reporting our results that the direct

effect dominates.4 In all cases in which we rely upon it, this assumption is
sufficient but not necessary for the result that we report.

Consider first the long-run effects of an expansion in the size of the
North. As in other contexts with endogenous growth (for example, Rcimer
(1988), Grossman and Belpman (1989a,b) and Aghion and Howitt (1989))5, a
larger resource base means that more resources may be deployed in R&D, and so

the rate of innovation is higher. Expansion in the North induces an increase
in the aggregate extent of imitation by the South (' increases), but the
average span of the product cycle for any given product may rise or fall. The
latter ambiguity stems from the fact that the measure of products manufactured
in the North rises with L5, so the expanded Southern imitation effort must be
spread over a larger set of goods.
An expansion of the labor supply in the South effects greater aggregate

learning by the South (,

rises),

and a greater intensity of imitation targeted

at each Northern product (p rises). The latter implies a fall in the average
length of time that a Northern firm can expect to earn profits (ceteris

4 lore precisely, we assume aDEt > Sen5v(w-1)/t. It should be noted that
none of our results concerning the determination of the aggregate rate of
innovation, t, rely on this assumption.

But see Grossman and Belpman (1989d) for a discussion of the lack of a
general positive relationship between resources and growth in models with
endogenous innovation.

- 22

paribus).

-

This effect serves to dampen the incentive to innovate. However,

the profit rate in the North may rise, and so aggregate innovation in the

North may rise or fall. This result stands in contrast with what we found in
our paper "Endogenous Product Cycles" (and also with the results for the
inefficient-follower case reported in Section V below). There, a larger South

always leads to faster world growth. In those other circumstances, we find
that when Northern firms earn higher profits for a shorter (expected) period
due to an increase in p, the net effect is a greater incentive to conduct R&D.
But the necessary dominance of the profit effect over the risk effect does not
extend to the current environment.

Next we consider subsidies to innovation and imitatioii. These exercises
are intended to capture the effects of a broad range of measures that

governments might take in support of learning and research activities within

their borders. Government support for innovation in the North can be
represented by a parameter s that reflects the fraction of R&D costs borne by

the government. Then we must multiply the right-hand sides of (25) and (26)

by 1s. Similarly, we can multiply the right-hand side of (24) by i-s to
represent a policy whereby the government of the South bears a fraction

of

research costs there.

Ye consider first a small increase in s above zero. This augments
incentives for R&D and so increases t.

Again, this finding is reminiscent of

others in the literature. At the same time, the subsidy reduces the measure
of products copied by the South in a given interval of time. So aggregate
learning in the South is adversely affected by policies that promote research

in the North. The average length of a product cycle may rise or fall, as
Southern entrepreneurs devote fewer total resources to copying what, in the

- 23

-

steady state, ends up being a smaller set of Northern goods.
A small subsidy to imitation in the South expands the aggregate amount of
resources devoted to learning there (t
slows the rate of world growth (t

rises).

falls).

But this policy unambiguously

Again we find an inverse

relationship between policies that support learning in one region and the

equilibrium rate of learning in the other. And again this result stands in
contrast with the findings from our earlier (1989a) paper.
Ve find that a subsidy to imitation, while it augments aggregate
imitation, may reduce the intensity of innovation targeted at any given

Northern product and so increase the average length of the product cycle. The
ambiguity stems from the fact that, holding constant the intensity of
imitation p and real spending e, an increase in n5 may either expand or reduce

the demand for Southern labor. Labor demand tends to rise with n5, because
manufacturing employment in the South rises, but tends to fall with n5,

because employment in imitation, ap(l-n5), declines. If the former effect
dominates, then a subsidy to imitation must increase p; otherwise, p may fall.
Ve summarize our findings for the case of efficient followers in Table 1.
The results that we wish to emphasize are those that concern the feedback

links between the regions. Ve have found that, holding the resource bases
constant, the greater are incentives to undertake research activities in one
region, the slower will be the steady-state rate of learning in the opposite

region. Ve have identified, therefore, a fundamental tension in the learning
processes of the North and the South that may exist due to the knowledge
spillover and trade links between these different economic regions.

- 24

V.

-

Inefficient Followers

Vith inefficient followers, t= 0. Then =
to 17 =

jn5

which in turn is equal

by (21). So the steady-state rates of aggregate innovation and

aggregate imitation are equal in this case. Ve may treat the case
diagrammatically by further reducing our system to two equations that
represent the no-arbitrage conditions for Northern (leader) and Southern

firms. To this end, we substitute the labor-market conditions (28) and (29)
into (30) and (31), to obtain

LN -a DL
e,
(32')
St

L
(33')

S

—

L -at
M
S

-at
L -a DLt
M — N

t

'

M

/h-t

=

p

+

DL

L

The left-hand sides of (32') and (33') represent the profit rates for Southern
and Northern (leader) firms, respectively, while the right-hand sides
represent the risk adjusted interest rates faced by each of these types of

firms. The Northern firms, of course, face a constant risk of imitation,
while the Southern firms face the risk that the Northern leaders will succeed

at taking another step up the quality ladder. As is evident, the respective
terms reflecting the risk factors appear on both sides of (32') and (33').
Canceling these terms, we may rewrite the two equations as

(32)

LN -at
DL
St

L
.

a

- 25

L
(33)

S

-

-a L
M

/- i.

N

t

DL

Ve depict the combinations of

and j

that

satisfy (32) by the curve SS

in the two panels of Figure 1. The curve MN in the figure shows the
combinations of

and

that satisfy (33). The SS curve is upward sloping,

since the left-hand side of (32) increases in both the rate of innovation and

the rate of imitation. The NM curve may slope in either direction. Panel a
shows the downward-sloping case. If the curve slopes upward, it must be
steeper then the SS curve, as in panel b (see Appendix C).6 The intersection
point A in each panel represents the initial steady-state equilibrium.
Now suppose that

increases. This shifts both curves to the left. In

Appendix C we show that, at constant t, the SS curve must shift by more. As
can be seen from the figure, the net result is an increase in the aggregate

rate of innovation. The per-product intensity of imitation may rise or fall,
though it necessarily falls in the downward-sloping case. Of course, the
average length of the product cycle moves inversely with .
An expansion of the resource base of the South shifts both curves to the

right (not shown in the figure). But the MN curve shifts further with changes

in L5 (see Appendix C). This implies an increase in both the rate of
innovation and the intensity of imitation. The average length of the product
cycle falls. These results are similar to our findings in Grossman and
Helpman (1989a), but differ, as we noted above, from those for the case of

6 Ve argue in the appendix that the upward-sloping case has greater empirical
relevance.

- 26

efficient

-

followers.7

Ye introduce subsidies to learning, as before, in the form of two
parameters that represent the share of R&D costs borne by the respective

governments. Vith small subsidies to imitation and innovation of

and

respectively, we multiply the right side of (32') by 1M and the right side

of (33') by l-s. An increase in

from zero shifts the NN curve to the

right without affecting the SS curve. The result is an increase in the rate
of innovation and per-product intensity of imitation, and a fall in the

average length of the product cycle. A small subsidy to learning in the South
shifts the SS curve to the left. This increases the intensity of imitation in
the upward-sloping case, while reducing it in the downward-sloping case. The

former result is more likely to apply (see footnote 6). In any event, the
rate of innovation always accelerates. Again, we note the contrast with our
findings for the case of efficient followers.8

Ye record our results for comparison purposes in Table 1. In this case
of inefficient followers, we find no conflict between the incentives for

learning in the North and in the South. Evidently, structural conditions of
the world economy help to determine whether the two learning processes are
mutually reinforcing or not.

7Ve show in Appendix C, however, that resource expansions affect relative
wages differently than in Grossman and llelpman (1989a).
8 As a further point, we note that a subsidy to R&D in the North increases
the steady-state relative wage of Northern workers, and deteriorates the
long-run terms of trade of the North. A subsidy to imitation has the
opposite effect on these variables. Ye establish these claims in Appendix C.

- 27

VI.

-

Conclusions
Ve have developed a model of quality competition with simultaneous,

stochastic innovation and imitation. In our model, each product exists on a
quality ladder. Entrepreneurs in the developed "North" devote resources to
R&D in an attempt to upgrade the quality of a product. If an entrepreneur is
successful in her research efforts, then she acquires market power in

production of that good for a period of time. In the less developed South.
entrepreneurs strive to learn the production processes developed in the North.

These efforts, too, are costly

successful,

and involve uncertain prospects. When

a Southern entrepreneur can take advantage of the favorable

manufacturing cost conditions in the South to earn monopoly profits until the
next product improvement takes place.

The steady-state equilibrium is characterized by continuous product
upgrading and product cycles (migration in the locus of production of

particular

goods from North to South and back again) of varying durations.

Each individual product may exhibit a complex life history, with alternating
periods of technological stagnation, rapid innovation, and with many or few
shifts in its direction of trade. In the aggregate, the average rates of
imitation and innovation are constant in the steady state, as are the fraction

of products manufactured in the South, the North-South terms of trade, and the
average length of a product cycle.

We have analyzed two distinct equilibrium regimes that may arise under

different parameter configurations. In one such regime, the most recent
Northern innovators for each product enjoy a substantial productivity
advantage over potential entrants in generating the next product improvement.
In this case of "inefficient followers", a fixed set of Northern firms

- 28

-

conducts all innovative activity. These firms engage in R&D following every
instance of loss of market share to Southern imitators. When the productivity
gap between leaders and potential displacers is less extreme, entry by new

firms is possible. In the regime with "efficient followers", the Northern
leaders conduct R&D in order to re-capture products copied by the South, while
inactive producers in the North attempt quality improvements in the hope of
stealing business away from the extant industry leaders.

We studied the implications of region size and of government technology

policy for the steady-state rates of innovation and imitation. We found a
rich set of possible interactions. When followers are efficient, the
feedbacks between the learning processes in the North and in the South

generally are negative. Northern policy to promote innovation causes the
steady-state rate at which goods flow from North to South to decline.
Similarly, government subsidies to imitation in the South effect a decline in

the average rate at which goods climb up the quality ladder. Expansion in the
size of the North causes innovation to accelerate, whereas expansion in the
size of the South may (but need not) have the opposite effect.

The results for the regime with inefficient followers are quite

different. In this case, the two learning processes generally are mutually
reinforcing. Northern subsidies to innovation increase the rate at which the
South learns to produce new goods and shorten the average length of a product

cycle. Southern promotion of imitation leads to faster steady-state
innovation in the North, and may increase or decrease the average length of

the product cycle. Also, an expansion in the size of either region causes the
rates of innovation and imitation to increase.

- 29

-

Ve have so far been unsuccessful. in our attempts to attach normative
significance to these suggestive findings. In our earlier work on quality
ladders in a single country (Grossman and Uelpman, 1989d; see also Aghion and

Howitt, 1989) we have shown that innovation in an environment such as this one

may be too fast or too slow. Velfare analysis in the present circumstances is
complicated by the terms of trade adjustments attendant to any policy change,

and by the complex transition path that may link steady states. It may prove
necessary to resort to simulation techniques in order to resolve whether
governments in the North and South face conflicting or coincident incentives

where technology policy is concerned. Ve leave this important issue for
future research.

References

Aghion, Philippe and Howitt, Peter (1989), "A lodel of Growth Through
Creative Destruction," Iassachusetts Institute of Technology, mimeo.

Dinopoulos, Elias, Oehmke, James F. and Segerstrom, Paul S. (1989), "ughTechnology-Industry Trade and Commercial Policy," lichigan State
University, mimeo.
Dollar, David (1986), "Technological Innovation, Capital obility, and the
Product Cycle in North-South Trade," American Economic Review, 76,
pp.177- 190.

Flam, Harry and Helpman, Elhanan (1987), "Vertical Product Differentiation
and North-South Trade," American Economic Review, 77, pp.810-822.
Grossman, Gene M. and Helpman, Elhanan (1989a), "Endogenous Product Cycles,"
Vorking Paper No. 2913, National Bureau of Economic Research.

_____ (198gb), "Growth and Velfare in a Small, Open Economy," Discussion
Paper in Economics No.145, Voodrow Vilson School of Public and
International Affairs, Princeton University.
(1989c), "Product Development and International Trade," Journal of
Political Economy, 97, forthcoming.

_____ (l989d), "quality Ladders in the Theory of Growth," Discussion Paper
in Economics No. 148, Voodrow Vilson School of Public and International
Affairs, Princeton University.

Jensen, Richard and Thursby, arie (1986), "A Strategic Approach to the
Product Life Cycle," Journal of International Economics, 21, pp.269-284.

——

(1987), "A Decision-Theoretic !odel of Innovation, Technology
Transfer and Trade," Review of Economic Studies, 55, pp.631-648.

Krugman, Paul R. (1979), "A yodel of Innovation, Technology Transfer, and
the Vorid Distribution of Income," Journal of Political Economy, 87,
pp.253-266.
Romer, Paul I. (1988), "Endogenous Technical Change," Paper presented at the
SUNY-Buffalo Conference on the 'Problem of Development.'
Segerstrom, Paul S., Anant, T.C.A. and Dinopoulos, Elias (1988), "A
Schumpeterian ode1 of the Product Life Cycle," Michigan State
University, inimeo.

Scherer, Frederick I. (1980), Industrial Market Structure and Economic
Performance, 2nd edition (Boston IA: Roughton Mifflin).

Stokey, Nancy L. (1989), "The Volume and Composition of Trade Between Rich
and Poor Countries," Northwestern University, mimeo.
Vernon, Raymond (1966), "International Investment and International Trade in
the Product Cycle,' Quarterly Journal of Economics, 80, pp.190-207.

APPENDIX A

In this appendix we prove that, in a steady state, if a0,/a0< 2 -

1/A,

no Northern leader with positive sales will undertake efforts to improve its

own product. We do this in two steps. First we show that no Northern firm
whose nearest competitor is another Northern firm (an NN firm) will improve
its own product. Then we show that the same is true for a Northern firm whose
nearest competitor is a Southern firm (an NS firm).

Let v be the value of a Northern firm that is two steps ahead of its
nearest (Northern) rival (an N2 firm). An N2 firm charges a price A2w5. It
is easy to calculate that it earns profits TN =

(Ail)rNN/A.

The no-arbitrage

condition for shares in N2 firms and that for shares in NN firms in equation

(13) imply, in a steady state, that v1 = zNvNN/vNN.

(Al)

Then

v5 - v55 = vNN/A.

An NN firm that improves its own product will achieve a capital gain of

v NKN The cost per unit intensity of effort is wNaDL. Equations (10) and
:(Al') imply v- vxs

wXaDF/A. If aDF/aDL < A, the expected gain from

research effort by an NN firm cannot justify the cost. But aDF/aDL < 2 -

1/A

a/af c A. So R&D is not profitable for NN leaders.
Next consider an NS firm. If this firm undertakes research and succeeds,
it becomes an N25 firm, two steps ahead of its nearest (Southern) rival. An

N25 firm would charge a price A2w and earn a flow of profits r5=
1 -

w5/A2w5.

We calculate

- WN/WS.

=

(A2)

An NS firm that conducts research stands to gain VNS VNS• Using the
no-arbitrage conditions and the steady-state requirement that all nominal
values increase at the same rate, we find

(A3)

"2s "s =

(TM 5-

From (11) and > 0,

(A4)

vMs/TNs= wNaDL/(lwN/AwS).

Now (10), (11), (13) and (14) imply, in a steady state with i>0 that

(A5)

1 -

1/A < (aDF/aDL)(1-wN/AwS)

< 1 - 1/A.
Then aDF/aDL < 2 - 1/A and (A5) imply WN/AWS wN/Aws

Finally,

this inequality, together with (A2), (A3) and (A4) implies vNS VNS < a0w
Thus, research efforts by NS firms are not profitable.

APPENDIX B

In this appendix we provide calculations of comparative statics results
for the efficient followers case. For this purpose we use equations (22)-(25)

to calculate changes in e, n!, 17

and t, taking w from (27). In order to

avoid a taxonomical treatment we assume that the condition from footnote 4
applies at the initial equilibrium point, i.e.,

a

(Bi)

aDF 5enN(w-1)17/t2 > 0.

Our calculations proceed as follows. We multiply the right-hand side of (24)

by (1_SM) and the right-hand side of (25) by (1_sD), with initial values
SM =

=
SD

0.

This way we account for innovation and imitation subsidies. Now

total differentiation of (22)-(25), using L5, LN, SM and SD as shift
parameters, yields:

de
(B2)

A

dn5

dL5
=

dL5

d

-bds

d2

-bDdsfl

where bM= aM(pnS + 17),

bD = aDL(pnN +

t), and

e
—
A —

where u = 1

+

5ev

5nv

(aDF_aDL)pnM/t

(w-1)n5

aMll/nS

(1-Sw)nN

aDLL/nN

(w-1)/t

0

aM

a
0

aM

0

aDL

> 0, and use has been made of (24) in the

simplification of a, of (25) in the simplification of a, of (27) and
(26) in the simplification of a, and (Bi) in the simplification of a.
Developing the determinant of A by means of the last column, and making use of
(24), it is straightforward to establish:

A

detA > 0.

Next we calculate from (B2):

-

(B3) =

(B4)

(B5) _.

(B6)

7)

{5aMaDLvpnN

=

-!{waDLtnS/nN

(aDFaDL)pnN[(w-1)aDLnS/nN

+

= - {p5vaMaDLnN

=

(1-Sw)nN(e

+

{aM5v[(w1)enS

+

+

aDL)p[aDLnS

an5/n5

{aM5v[aMnN/nS÷(w-1)enS]

+

+

e]

+

(1-Sw)aMl7nN/LnS]}

0,

> 0,

aM/nS)}

-

(aDF

+

+

(1-5w)en/t]}

-

(aDF

< 0,

aDL)pnNnSaMp/L} > 0,

a[(w-1)aDLtnS/nN+(1_Sw)aMnN/nS]}

>

0,

=

(B8)

aa,4pn > O

=

(B9)

+ a[aDLtnS/nN

A =-

(BlO)

+

(1-Sw)enN]}

> 0,

bflaapn < 0,

where we have used (25) to derive (B3), and (B5) and (24) to derive (B6), (B8)
and (BlO).

In order to calculate the response of ,

recall

that

=

Similar

calculations show that:

In addition:

=

An increase in

>o.

-

,

raises

,'

K =

L,

LN, SM, SD.

and reduces n. Therefore

Vhen Northern labor supply increases or the North subsidizes innovation

'i

and nN respond in the same directions. Consequently p may increase or
decline. Vhen the South subsidizes imitation the ambiguity in the response of
leads to an ambiguity in the response of p.

APPENDIX C

In

-

this appendix we derive several properties of the SS and MN curves

that are used in Section V. From (32) we calculate the slope of the SS curve,

dL

(Cl)

Since

(L - aDLL)ISt

=
P

(LN -

L/S2 +

+

LsI(Pt)2

> 0 (because it is equal to manufacturing employment in

aDLt)

the North),

(C2)

0 <

dt

<

Ve calculate the slope of MN from (33);

dt

(C3)

=

t

(L
(L

-

-

at)/(-)
aM)I(t)

2

+

2

+

Here the numerator is always positive, because (L - aMt)
manufacturing employment in the South. If (L5 -

aM/h)

equals

> 0 we also have a

positive denominator, and since t = pnN < p, the slope of the curve is
positive and larger than t//h.

In

fact, whenever the denominator is positive

the slope of the MN curve exceeds t/j.

Vhen the denominator is negative,

however, the NM curve slopes downwards. Hence,

(C4)

< 0 or

> t/p.

These possibilities are depicted in Figure 1.

Although there exist two theoretical possibilities concerning the slope
of the MN curve, casual empirical evidence suggests that the upward sloping

case is more plausible. This argument is based on the observation that a

large share of products actually is manufactured in the North (i.e., n is
relatively large) while the South devotes only a small share of its resources

to imitation (i.e., aMt/LS

is relatively small). If, as is plausible, the

share of resources devoted to imitation in the South falls short of the share

of products manufactured in the North (i.e., n > aML/LS)

then NM slopes

upwards. The proof is straightforward. The condition n > aMt/LS
>

a114j

= pn),

(because t

implies

which implies in turn a positive denominator on

the right-hand side of (C3).
we calculate from (32)

Now consider an increase in LN. For given

the response of ,

=

(C5)
N

-

ss

(LK -

2 +

aDLt)/6t

2<

•

L5/(p-1)

This shows that the SS curve shifts leftward. We similarly calculate the
horizontal shift of the NN curve from (33):

=

(C6)
N

U

-

(L

-

aMt)/(,al)

+

2<

O•

Hence, the MN curve also shifts leftward. However, the difference in the
denominator on the right-hand-side of (C6) and the denominator on the

right-hand-side of (C5) equals:

(1- S)LS-aMt

2

+

aDL/t.

(p-i)

On the other hand, (28) and (30) imply:

(1-5)L5-a4t = [SaMp +

(1-5w)e](1-n)

> 0,

because (1-5w) > 0 (see (31)). Therefore, the denominator is larger in (C6)
and the SS curve shifts leftwards by more than the NN curve.

Next we calculate horizontal shifts of the curves in response to an
increase in

s ss

(CS)

p/t(p-t)

=

(C?)

(LN -

p/t(p-t)

=

5 NN

2 > 0,

a0t)ISt +

(L5 -

> 0.
+

aMt)/'(pt)

Hence, both curves shift to the right. The difference between the
denominators on the right-hand-side of (C7) and (CS) equals

(1_S)LN -

aflJL

+

St2

2

aMt/(p t)

From (29) we obtain:

(i-5)L - aDLL = S[w(1_S)enN

-

aDLL]

> S[(1-Sw)enM -

aDLt]

=

SPnNaDL

> 0.

The first inequality follows from the fact that w > 1, while the last
equality results from (31). This shows that the denominator is larger on the
right-hand side of (C7). Therefore the NN curves shifts further to the right
than the SS curve.
Direct comparative statics calculations on system (28)- (31) , augmented to

include R&D subsidies (i.e., multiplying the right-hand side of (30) by lSM,

where s is the imitation subsidy, and the right-hand-side of (31) by
where s is the innovation subsidy) enables us to calculate also the
response of relative wages and product shares, which have not been discussed
in the main text. Ve obtain the following system of equations for comparative
statics calculations (assuming 'small' subsidies):

-e
öew
(CD)

-L5/n

n

LN/nN

where bM = aM(pnS+t)

0

aM

öen5

aDL

de

dL5

dnN

en

0

dw

0

0

di.

and bD = aDL(pnN-4-e).

dL
=

-bMdsM
_bDdso

The determinant of the matrix,

denoted by A2, is

A2 = - aDLenS(nSLS/nNenN)

-

aMSen(wSLS/nS

+

wen5)

< 0.

Using this system it can be shown that an increase in LN increases the share
of products manufactured in the North and an increase in

increasees the

share of products manufactured in the South. The effects of labor supply on

relative wages are, however, ambiguous. This contrasts with our finding in

Grossman and llelpman (1989a) where an increase in a country's labor supply
always raises its labor's relative reward.
The results for small R&D subsidies are, however, unambiguous:

du
=

5aen/b()

>

0,

=[5aawpn + aDL(nSLInN

dii

0,

+

enN)]/bM

+

wenS)1/bD()

<

2

5MSD0 =

=

< 0,

aDLenSIbD

[aMaDLönS

+

öaMw(nNLS/nS

>

0,

where (30) and (31) have been used in the derivation of the second and fourth
results, respectively. Thus, a subsidy to imitation expands the share of
products manufactured in the North (because the South employs more resources
in imitation and thereby contracts manufacturing employment) and reduces the

North's relative wage. A subsidy to imitation has the opposite effects.

Table 1

Exogenous Variables
LN

t

/h

L5

SD

SM

+

1-

+

-

+

+

-

+

+/-

+

+1-

+1-

Case of
Followers

Efficient

Endogenous
Variables

t7

+

+

+/

+

+

+

1÷

Case of
Followers

Inefficient

-s

/

5

F11- ía

L

S
IV

lb

