NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAXATION, CORPORATE CAPITAL STRUCTURE, AND FINANCIAL DISTRESS

Mark Gertler
R. Glenn Hubbard

Working Paper No. 3202

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1989

We are grateful to Rosanne Altshuler, Ben Bernanke, Larry Summers, and
participants at the 1989 NBER conference on Tax Policy and the Economy for
helpful comments and suggestions. This paper is part of NBER's research
programs in Economic Fluctuations and Taxation. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3202
December 1989

TAXATION, CORPORATE CAPITAL STRUCTURE, AND FINANCIAL DISTRESS

ABSTRACT

Is corporate leverage excessive? Is the tax code distorting corporate capital
structure decisions in a way that increases the possibility of an economic
crisis owing to "financial instability"?
Answering these kinds of questions first requires some precision in
terminology. In this paper, we describe the cases for and against the trend
toward high leverage, and evaluate the role played by taxation. While
provision of proper incentives to managers may in part underlie the trend to
the debt, high leverage may in practice be a blunt way to address the problem,
and one which opens up the possibility for undue exposure to the risks of
financial distress.
Our story takes as given the kinds of managerial incentive problems deemed
important by advocates of leverage. We maintain, however, that when a firm is
subject to business-cycle risk as well as individual risk, a profit maximizing
arrangement is not simple debt, but rather a contract with mixed debt and
equity features. That is, the contract should index the principal obligation
to aggregate and/or industry-level economic conditions.
We argue that the tax system encourages corporations to absorb more businesscycle risk than they would otherwise. It does so in two respects: First, it
provides a relative subsidy to debt finance; second, it restricts debt for tax
purposes from indexing the principal to common disturbances. At a deeper
level, the issue hinges on the institutional aspects of debt renegotiation. If
renegotiation were costless, then debt implicitly would have the equity
features relevant for responding to business-cycle risk. However, because of
the diffuse ownership pattern of much of the newly issued debt and also because
of certain legal restrictions, renegotiation is likely to be a costly activity.

Mark Gertler
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
(608)262-7789

R. Glenn Hubbard
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
609 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
(212)854-3493

I.

INTRODUCTION

Is

corporate leverage excessive? Is the tax code distorting corporate

capital structure decisions in a way that Increases the possibility of an
economic crisis owing to 'financial instability'?
Answering these kinds of questions first requires some precision in

terminology. We refer to a firm as having 'excessive leverage' or a "debt
overhang problem" when the magnitude of the principal obligation on the debt
it is carrying constrains either the amounts it can Invest, produce, or
employ.

In this regard, the business press regularly records fears of the
1

consequences of high leverage.

The sharp rise in corporate debt (and

debt-service burdens) over the last six years has sparked this concern. The
alarm has also spread among circles in the academic community.

On the other hand, the discussions have rarely been precise about how

high debt levels could have bad effects on economic activity. Nor has it been
made clear why, If hlgh leverage is so dangerous, the private market economy

has generated this kind of situation. Finally, there has been an emerging
school of thought, led by Jensen (1986, 1988, 1989), which rejects the idea
that current leverage is excessive.

Instead, It views the current corporate

financial situation as simply an efficient market outcome. The efficiency
argument rests on the idea that high leverage may provide lenders with a means
to restrict Indirectly non-value—maximizing behavior by corporate managers.

In this paper, we describe the cases for and against the trend toward

high leverage, and evaluate the role played by taxation. While provision of
proper incentives to managers may In part underlie the trend to debt, high
leverage may in practice be a very blunt way to address the problem, and one
which opens up the possibility for undue exposure to the risks of financial

distress. We argue that the tax system deserves at least some of the blame
for a capital structure that does not optimally shield corporations from the

which opens up the possibility for undue exposure to the risks of financial

distress. We argue that the tax system deserves at least some of the blame
for a capital structure that does not optimally shield corporations from the
consequences of an economic downturn.

Our story takes as given the existence of the kinds of managerial

incentive problems deemed important by the advocates of high leverage. We
maintain, however, that when a firm is subject to business-cycle risk as well
as individual risk, the efficient financial arrangement is not simple debt,
but rather a contract with mixed debt and equity features.

In particular, the

arrangement insulates lenders as much as possible from firm—specific

risks but have them share in systemic risks. That Is, the contract
indexes the principal obligation to aggregate and/or industry-level economic

conditions. The rough Idea is to minimize the impact of a recession on firm
net financial positions, as we discuss later In detail.

We proceed to argue that, on the surface, the tax system encourages
corporations to absorb more business-cycle risk than they would otherwise.
It does so in two respects: First, it provides a relative subsidy to debt
finance; second, It restricts debt for tax purposes from indexing the

principal to common disturbances. At a deeper level, the issue hinges on the
institutional aspects of debt renegotiation. If renegotiation were costless,
then debt implicitly would have the equity features relevant for responding to

business—cycle risk. However, because of the diffuse ownership
pattern of much of the newly issued debt and also because of certain legal
restrictions, renegotiation is likely to be a far from costless activity.

The remainder of the paper Is organized as follows. Section II
summarizes the facts regarding the recent rise in corporate leverage. Section
III reviews the main arguments over whether high leverage should be cause for

alarm. It describes the benefits of leverage as a corporate control mechanism

2

Section IV presents some rough evidence regarding the magnitude of the

relative tax susbsidy to debt. Whether the 'new debt' is easy to renegotiate
-—

that

is. whether It is effectlve./ equlty ——

Is

taken up in section V.

Section VI outlines the Issues for tax reform using the guiding premise that

taxation should not distort corporate capital structure. Finally. section VII
provides some concluding remarks.

I. DEBT AND RECENT

I

CORPORATE F I NANC I NC PATTD(NS

The trend to high leverage is relatively new. Over the entire post-war
period, equity finance was dominant. For nonfinancial corporations, retained
earnings accounted for roughly 73 percent of funds raised and net new share

issues added another 2 percent. Debt provided the balance, divided about
equally between private issues (e.g., bank loans and private placements) and
public issues (e.g., bonds). Table 1 summarizes this evidence.

Financing patterns altered course during the 1980s. While corporations
continue to rely heavily on retained earnings, they have sharply adjusted the

composition of external finance. Most notably, there have been substantial
equity repurchases, financed mainly with debt (see, e.g., Shaven, 1987).

That

is, leverage ratios have risen mainly as the product of corporate capital

restructurings. Net new equity issues totaled -5131 billion in 1988, as
compared to to +525 billion five years earlier.

An important effect of the shift to debt has been a substantial rise in
debt-service burdens, and an associated rise in bankruptcies and defaults.
Interest payments per dollar of earnings (before interest and taxes) have

risen from 16 cents over the postwar period prior to 1970 to 33 cents over the

1970s to an average of 56 cents aver the 1980s. Alternatively, interest
payments per dollar of cash flow have increased from about 10 cents in the pre
- 1970 period to about 35 cents aver the 1980s. This increase in debt-service

3

burdens (documented in Figure 1) has been accompanied by an increase In
corporate bankruptcies and liabilities of business failures over the 1980s.
,Jhile there has been a cyclical pattern of bankruptcies over the postwar

period, bankruptcies have been high (relative to postwar standards) throughout

the boom following the 1981-82 recession (see Figure 2).2 There is, as well,
an impression that larger firms are defaulting on debt obligations (and
failing) relative to earlier periods.3

As suggested, an important factor underlying the trend to debt has been

a dramatic rise In corporate restructurings. Prompting the restructurings
have been waves of mergers, acquisitions, leveraged buyouts (LBOs), and

defense against LBOs. These restructurings have been particularly
significant in raising debt-equity ratios. According to First Boston
Corporation (1989, p.27), the average capital structure of an LBO In 1988
Included 87 percent debt (divided among bank debt, 53 percent; coupon debt, 20
percent; and deferred-interest obligations) and only 13 percent equity

(divided between common, 10 percent; and preferred, 3 percent). The Office of
the Comptroller of the Currency reported that, by theend of 1988. outstanding

LBO debt was roughly S150-180 billion. This amounted to about 20 percent of
the (book) value of outstanding corporate bonds or over 9 percent of the
(book) value of total nonfinancial corporate debt (based on data from the Flow
of Funds Accounts).

In comparison, from 1978 to 1983, debt emerging from LBO

deals was only about $11 billion.

The trend to debt, however, encompasses more than than just LBOs.
Goldman Sachs has estimated that the equity base of U.S. corporations shrunk
by about $420 billion between 1982 and 1988, and that debt supplanted about
three—fourths of this reduction.

(Financial Market Perspectives, 1988, p.S).

Another important change in corporate financial policy involved the kind

of debt issued. Private debt issues have declined in relative importance.

4

The trend is toward public issues, particularly low grade investment bonds,

known popularly as "Junk bonds." While Junk bonds existed well before the
1980g. widespread use of them has been a relatively sudden event. Seventy
percent of outstanding Issues (as of the end of 1988) are from the last three
years, with 20 percent from 1988 alone (First Boston CorporatIon, 1989, p.30)
There is no clear consensus on why the Junk bond market grew so

dramatically. Many observers, though, tend to agree that the development of
the secondary market for Junk debt (as part of the general trend toward

"securitization") was an important factor. This innovation. it is argued.
provided junk bonds with the kind of liquidity needed to induce lenders to

absorb them on a large scale.4 An added implication was that it made diffuse
ownership of a firm's junk debt possible, and even likely.

Thus, along with

the general rise in leverage, the 1980s also witnessed a change in the kind of
debt issued by corporations -— toward debt that involved a more "arms length"
relation with bondholders and away from debt, such as bank loans, that
permitted a more intimate connection (see Bernanke and Campbell, 1988).

How have junk bonds been faring? After a strong initial performance,
total returns on major high—yield funds have fallen significantly in recent
years (see Table 2).

And for the first half of 1989, the portfolio of

high—yield Issues reported by Moody's Bond Survey (July 17, 1989. p. 5110)
had a total return of 5.8 percent versus 11.4 percent for investment-grade
bonds —-

despite

the large default premia built into coupon rates.

III. IMPLICATIONS OF INCREASED CORPORATE LEVERAGE, AND THE ROLE OF TAXATION
The case in favor of current trends rests on the idea that the private
market is well suited to generate the most efficient kind of corporate

organization. The case against argues instead that high leverage exposes the
economy inordinately to the risks of a severe business downturn; tax

5

considerations rather than pure efficiency considerations. it Is held,
primarily drive the movement to debt.

In this section we first present both

sides of the Issue and then conciud by discussing the role of taxes.

lilA. Benefits of Leverage: Debt as an Incentive Mechanism.
Those who are sanguine about the rise in leverage typically maintain that
debt Is desirable because it empowers lenders with an Indirect means to

monitor the activities of managers. The need for some kind of supervision
owes to the separation between ownership and management that Is characteristic

of the traditional corporate structure. As Berle and Means (1932) originally
described, a conflict between ownership and management can emerge if It is
difficult for the former to observe and evaluate the activities of the latter.
In this kind of environment, management's self interest may not always
coincide with efficiently operating the firm (I.e., with maximizing firm
value).

Jensen and Heckling (1976) formalized this potential for divergence of
interests as an agency problem. '

Their work and subsequent by others

characterized the efficiency losses ('agency costs") that can arise in this

environment. An important Insight was that financial contracts could be
structured to mitigate the problem. Another was that the managerial stake in
the enterprise (the managerial equity) was key: The higher the managerial
stake, the closer the gap between managerial interests and value maxirniaztion,

and hence the lower agency costs. Advocates of Increased leverage interpret
the recent wave of LBOs In this light. The restructurings improved mangerial
incentives both by converting the claims of lenders from equity to debt and by

concentrating ownership in the hands of management (I.e., by raising the
managerial stake).

But why is high leverage the right course? And perhaps more imporantly,

6

why was the movement to high leverage so recent? In general, the efficient
financial structure depends on the exact nature of the conflict between

ownership and management. For a wiIe class of situations, It is optimal to
make the managers bear as much of the firm—specific risk as possible, the goal
being to have managers internalize the gains from maximizing firm value.5
Debt contracts represent an approximate (sometimes exact) way to implement

this kind of solution. By promising lenders a fixed stream of payments, the
contract effectively ties managerial rewards closely to the performance of the
firm.

6,7

The idea that debt is a way to properly align managerial Incentives is at
the core of Jensen's (1986) "free cash flow" theory, perhaps the most

prominent explanation for the trend to leverage. The story begins with the
idea that managers, If given the leeway, will take advantage of outside
lenders' inability to ascertain perfectly whether the firm is investing

efficiently. Specifically, managers are inclined to squander cash flow by
investing for their own aggrandizement In projects with a negative present

value. An arrangement where outside lenders hold debt and managers are the
residual claimants is a way to minimize this kind of misuse of cash flow.8
The Jensen story also offers some additional insight into why the rise in
debt occurred so recently, beyond beyond the conventional story that

emphasizes innovation in the secondary market for junk debt. It is observed
that (1) high cash flow arises primarily in mature industries, and that (ii)
:he maturing of American industry in the post-war era began only over the last

decade. As a result, the argument goes, the widespread need for corporate
restructurings is relatively new (see for example Blair and Litan, 1989).
This set of arguments contains some loopholes, however.

'Jhi1e leveraging

the firm may be a way to mitigate the kind of agency problem Jensen describes,
it is not immediately obvious that it is the best option,

7

If the objective is

to make managers bear the residual risk, then it would seem that other

practical means are available. One possibility is to is to adopt a fixed
dividend policy with penalties for 'ranagement if it falls to meet the payment.

If these kind of alternatives are available,9 then it appears difficult to
explain the debt build—up simply as a response to an emerging agency problem.
Tax considerations have likely played a role.

If, however, the tax distortion

Is key, then it is not at all clear that high leverage Is the most efficient
form of financial organization.

As a matter of theory, high leverage is a very blunt way to align
managerial Incentives.

It works best when most of the variation in cash flow

Is idiosyncratic to the firm ——
firm—specific.'

i.e..

when most of the risk is

It works poorly when most of the variation is common across

firms, to the extent that debt is costly to renegotiate. The optimal response
to the kind of agency problem posed by Jensen Insulates lenders as much as
possible from the firm-specific risk, but has them share In the common risk.
The idea Is that managers should be made residual claimants only on the
component of profits they can Influence -—

the firm-specific component. For

example, managers should not be punished if the firm does poorly during a
recession but no worse on average than its competitors.
managerial equity ——

Indeed, to preserve

which is valuable for mitigating agency costs —- outside

lenders should share in the losses to the firm due to an industry—wide or
economy-wide recession.

The overall message is that the optimal financial arrangement should link
payments to creditors to industry and economy-wide performance (e.g., as would

a contract with mixed debt and equity features). Further, because it is
desirable to have the outside lenders share in the gains and the losses due to
systemic factors, the arrangement is not equivalent to allowing merely for
postponement of payment without any adjustment in the present value of the

8

principal obligation. Standard debt contracts do not provide the flexibility
needed for sharing of common risks. The advocates of high leverage, however,
argue that most debt is easy to renegotiate In practice and, therefore, is

implicitly Indexed to systemic risks. Whether in fact they are right about
renegotiation is perhaps the pivotal question. We will return to this issue
frequently.

1112. Costs of Leverage: Debt and Financial Stability.
A wide spectrum of economists (e.g., Friedman. 1986; and Kaufman, 1986)
have voiced concern that corporate restructurings have exposed the economy
unduly to a fir,aricial crisis. Ratios of interest obligations to cash flow are
at ron-recession record highs (see Bernarike and Campbell, 1988).

The general

fear expressed is that an otherwise normal business downturn could trigger a
large wave of bankruptcies, turning the recession into a severe business

downturn. This fear is based on the presumption that highly leveraged
transactions have occurred in cyclical as well as acyclical industries.

Indeed, a good fraction of the high-yield debt has been issued in

manufacturing, a cyclically sensitive industry. Table 3 reports the
breakdown of high-yield debt as of the end of 1988) by industry of issue,
using data provided by Drexel Burnham Lambert and First Boston Corporation.

Based on the First Boston data, depending on how one allocates the components
of the "energy" group between manufacturing and extractive activities, about
one-half of the stock of high-yield debt is attributable to manufacturing

firms. Similarly, the first five catagories in the Drexel enumeration (heavy
industry, retailing, leisure, transportation, and consumer goods) which are
arguably (relatively) cyclical, account for 57 percent of high-yield debt
outstanding.

To put the matter in sharper perspective, Berrianke and Campbell

9

considered the counterfactual experiment of imposing the 1974—75 business
recession on a sample of firms with financial conditions corresponding to 1986

data. The sample was drawn from th Compustat file, and therefore consisted
primarily of large firms. The simulations implied that a downturn like
1974-75 would force more than ten percent of the sampled firms into
bankruptcy.

Any argument that high debt levels are dangerous, however, requires

qualification. The institutional structure of the economy is critical.
Leverage ratios for nonfinancial corporations are much higher In West Germany

and Japan than in the U.S., for example. The critical difference is that, in
these countries, the financial institutions that supply debt typically
participate in or monitor closely the activities of the firm.

(This is

particularly true for Japan —— see Hoshi, Kashyap and Scharfstein, 1989 —- and
for Germany -- see Bergiof, 1988: and Mayer, 1989. ) The close connection

between the firm and its major creditor facillates renegotiation.

It thus

provides (at least some) of the flexibility needed for adjusting to
macroeconomic disturbances.

It also serves to directly mitigate the agency

problem since the lendtng institution actively monitors the firm. On the
other hand, as Jensen (1988) observes, legal restrictions introduced in the

wake of the Depression preclude U.S. financial institutions from directly

participating in the activities of nonfinancial corporations. The U.S. system
of corporate finance is thus closer to one of diffuse ownership with an

arms—length relationship between the firm and its creditors. Further, as
implied earlier, the substitution of junk bonds for bank loans in recent years
Is making this characterization increasingly accurate.

10

It is also true that the quantity of debt a firm Issues must be measured
against the quality of its underlying collateral, Including the managerial

equity. Perfectly collateralized debt poses no threat, for example.

10

In a

less extreme situation, the collateral position Is key to evaluating the

dangers the firm may face In the event It cannot meet Its crrent Interest
obligation (but IS otherwise solvent for the long term).

A firm with a strong

posItion will find it relatively easy to obtain credit to offset the shortfall

in Its cash flow. One with a weak position is likely to experience the costs
of financial distress —— suspension of credit flows entailing the need for
substantial retrenchment In employment and investment.

(For a detailed

account of this type of experience, see the description of the Texaco-Pennzoil
case In Cutler and Summers, 1988.

Overall, for the U.S economy, high debt levels are dangerous to the
extent that collateral positions are weak for a significant fraction of
corporations and that provisions (either explicit or implicit) do not exist
for adjusting the obligations to common rIsks.

12

The absence of comprehensive

indexing permits destabilizing movements in managerial equity. Forcing the
corporation to meet fixed interest obligations in a prolonged recession can
deplete managerial equity (to the extent managers are the ultimate residual
claimants) which in turn can send the company Into financial distress.

Similarly, noncontingent debt exposes the economy to the risk of unanticipated

wealth redistributlons that can have adverse effects. For example, the
deflation during the Great Depression wiped out a good fraction of the

col1aera1 base of nonfinancial corporations, which hac issued liabilities
fixed In nominal terms.

There are some corollary factors also suggesting that high debt levels

make the economy particularly vulnerable to a recession. One consideration
involves the nature of bankruptcy laws in the U.S. These regulations place
severe restrictions on the activities of firms in default, thus adding to the

real costs of financial distress (again, see Cutler and Summers, 1988). The
cumulative effect of a wave of bankruptcies could greatly exacerbate a

11

downturn. And

concern

for the potential of widespread defaults does not seem

misplaced. Asquith. Muilins, and Wolff (1989) have noted that the default
rate on junk debt has b€en rising, despite the economy's having been in a

prolonged expansion; specifically there has been a rise In cumulative default
probabilities for the first several years after issue.

In addition, the rated

quality of the debt has declined.

Two other factors Involve external effects. First, a kind of 'contagion
effect" Is possible; the default of a large firm or group of large firms can

induce panic among lenders, precipitatIng a liquidity crisis. An example is
the near collapse of commercial paper market in the wake of the Penn Central

crisis. News of the Impending Penn Central default generated fears of
defaults by other firms, prompting a flight of funds out of the commercial
paper market (see Brimxner, 1988). Similar effects occurred in the municipal
bond market after the 1HPPS default; and Hirtle (1988) describes how the LIV
default (In July 1986) and the outbreak of the Boesky scandal (in November
13

1986) had adverse consequences on prices and liquidity of junk bonds.
Second, to the extent demand externalities (due, for example to imperfect
competition), the effects of financial distress can spread throughout the
economy.

In this kind of setting, a downturn In a financially troubled sector

can spill over to other sectors (see Cooper and John, 1988, for a discussion
of the macroeconomic effects of demand externalities).

IJIC. The Role of

Taxes

As we have noted, (in our view) the cause for concern over high leverage
rests on the premise that It limits the ability of corporations to optimally

share Industry and economy-wide risks with outside lenders. To the extent
there is a tax incentive encouraging the use of debt relative to equity, it is
relevant to consider how the tax system fits into the overall picture.

12

Ideally, corporations would like to tssue securities they could label as
"debt' which permitted the legally required princlp.il obligation to vary,

perhaps by introducing contingencies on a set of ob;ervable indicators.

In

this way, they could collect the tax benefits from cebt finance without

sacrificing any flexibility in adjusting to common disturbances. More
generally, if allowed the option, firms would like to relabel for tax purposes

equity as debt. The spirit of the tax code, at least, precludes this kind of
activity. The IRS has generally required that any instrument called debt for
tax reasons have a payoff which is sum certain, "

(e. g.

,

see the review

of cases In Bulow, Summers, and Summers, 1989)14 Writing a debt contract
hich either explicitly or implicitly indexes the principal payment to common
iisturbances violates (at least) the intent of the tax code.

It is true that IRS accepts as debt securities which permit interest to

be deferred. The recently introduced "payment in kind" bonds are an example.
However, these securities meet the 'sum certain" requirement because they do
not explicitly allow

for

adjustment of the principal obligation. Thus, at

least on the surface, they are not useful instruments for sharing common
risks.

There is,

accordingly,

reason to suspect that the current tax system

encourages corporations to adopt a financial structure more exposed to common
cyclical risks than would be the case in the absence of any subsidy to debt.
In Gertler and Hubbard (1989), we sharpen this

point.

We study a model of

firm investment behavior where the kind of incentive problem deemed important

by Jensen is present. Because of certain informational asymmetries, firm
insiders (say corporate managers and directors) may try to misallocate

investment funds on their own behalf. The financial structure is designed to
address the incentive problem. However, the tax system introduces a tradeoff
between optimally Insulating the firm agains.t business cycle risk and

13

minimizing the expected tax burden.

Under a benchmark tax system that treats all kinds of liabilities

symmetrically the optimal financialarrangement Insulates the lenders from as
much of the idiosyncratic (firm—specific) risk as possible, but has them share

in the aggregate risk. This is in keeping with the arguments presented in

Section lilA. The optimal financial arrangement is Interpretable as a mixture
of "debt' and "equity." Effectively, equity serves as a buffer to business
cycle risks; firms may suspend dividend payments in recessions.15 This
arrangement mitigates the impact of a recession on managerial equity.

Under a tax system that treats debt favorably, firms are Induced to issue
a smaller fraction of indexed securities (I.e., equity) and thus to absorb
more business-cycle risk than they would choose in the absence of the
distortion.

Indeed, if the probability of a recession 13 sufficiently low, it

may be In a firm's Interest ex ante to obtain the tax advantage of a high
debt—equity ratio at the risk of having a quantity of debt that makes it
infeasible to
In

this

operate

in the (ex post) event of a general business downturn.

situation, because of the large quantity of debt being carried, a

recession lowers the net asset position of the firm's insiders to the point

where the agency costs are so severe that lenders will no longer supply

credit. The tax system thus encourages the firm to risk the possibility of
having a debt—overhang problem In a recession.

16

We also consider the implications of permitting the principal obligation

on debt to be renegotiable. Having (costlessly) renegotiable debt makes
debt effectively like equity and thus completely unravels the effect of the

tax distortion. The outcome is exactly equivalent to the case of symmetric
tax treatment of debt and equity.

Two basic questions emerge directly relevant to public policy. First,

how large Is the tax subsidy to corporate debt? Second, Is debt, particularly

14

the "new" kind of debt, easily renegotiable and thus effectively equity in
drag."

If the latter is true then the only

public

policy question is

whether the effective reduction in the corporate cost of capital Is desirable.
If it Is not true, and If the debt subsidy is significant, then it is
conceivable that the tax system Is encouraging an overly fragile corporate
financial structure.

We address these questions in the next two sections. SectIon IV
discusses the magnitude of the tax subsidy, while Section V takes up the issue
of renegotiation.

IV.

THE TAX SUBSIDY TO DEBT
In this section we examine the relative tax treatment of debt versus

equity. A major point we emphasize is that it is Important to distinguish
between the Incentives provided for using leverage to finance new investments

versus using it to repurchase equity. We also try to evaluate recent changes
in the tax code in this light.

The relative subsidy to dett is a lcng—standing feature of the U.S tax
code.

It Is in part an outcome of the classical system of income taxation

under which the incomes to corporations and to the individuals who supply them

with funds are taxed separately. Under this kind of system, the effective tax
rate on a security depends on its treatment both at the corporate level and

the personal level. There are three important wedges.' First, corporations
may deduct interest paid to bondholders, but cannot deduct dividends paid to

shareholders.

Second, individuals must pay taxes on interest as it accrues,

as opposed to when it is actually received, but they need pay taxes on income

from stocks (dividends and capital gains) only when it is realized. Third,
capital gains have been historically taxed at rates below those on ordinary
income.

15

With respect to choosing between debt and equity to finance new
Investments, It Is relevant to cotr.pare the total (corporate and individual)

tax burden on each kind of security. .The interest deduction at the corporate
level, of course, provides a major tax break for using debt.

Conversely, the

low capital gains rate at the personal level works in favor of equity. In
this regard, recent tax changes have had a mixed effect. The 1981 tax act
reduced capital gains along with individual tax rates (maintaining the level

of the corporate tax rate), while the 1986 act raised them. Specifically, it
called for treating realized capital gains as ordinary income (though
preserving the advantage of deferral).

For financing new investment, the subsidy to debt finance is

t + (1
C

—

t C)tep

—

p

where t, te, and t represent, respectively, effective tax rates on corporate
Income, and equity and debt income at the individual level. The first two
terms represent the taxes paid on returns from an equity-financed Investment;

e last reflects the tax paid on a return from a debt—financed project
(untaxed at the corporate level). The effective tax rate on equity depends on
assumptions about the mix of returns between dividends and capital gains as
well as the deferral advantage of capital gains.

The effective corporate tax rate will in general be less than the

statutory rate because of the tax-loss carryforwards. Altshuler and Auerbach
(1989) calculate that during the early 1980s, the effective tax rate was about

32 percent, as opposed to the statutory rate of 46 percent. Gordon and
MacKie-Mason (1989) estImate the effective tax rate to be about 29 percent in

1988, as opposed to the statutory rate of 34 percent. Using Poterba's (1989)
estimate of t, they estimate the tax subsidy to debt (Implied by the

16

expression above) to be 19.9 percent just prior to the Tax Reform Act of 1986,

and 22.4 percent In 1988. Alterratlvely, using the effective tax rates on
interest and equity-return recipients calculated in Table 4, the spread

between equity and debt tax rates is larger (30.2 percent).17 (Both
calculations assume that the effective capital gains rate is one-fourth of the
statutory rate because of the effects of deferral and stepped-up basis at
death; see Feldstein, Dicks—Mireaux, and Poterba, 1983.
The tax considerations involved for deciding to restructure are slightly

different than for financing new investments. Because in this instance
leverage Is being used to repurchase shares, the net tax cost of issuing debt
depends positively on the effective tax on distributions to the existing

equity holders, who receive capital gains in process. That Is, while a low
capital gains rate reduces the subsidy to using debt to finance new capital
investment, at the same time It encourages replacing existing equity with
debt.

Both corporate and individual tax rates declined after the Tax Reform Act
of 1986.

In addition, because the statutory capital gains tax rate has been

(relatively) high since 1986, it might appear that tax considerations provided
little incentive for the mass of corporate restructurings that have occurred

since then. On the contrary, even abstracting from deferral advantages, the
average effective capital gains tax rate is much lower than the individual

income tax rate. This is because capital gains accrue in part to
institutional and foreign investors paying lower tax rates. For example, the
18

effective tax rate is zero for pension funds and foreign investors.
Moreover, the fraction of equity held by zero-tax investors (foreign investors
and private and state and local government pension funds) has grown from 12. 1
percent in 1970 to 22. 1 percent in 1979 to 27. 1 percent in 1988.

In summary,

since interest payments are deductible at the corporate rate, there are still

17

tax incentives underlying the recent switch from debt to equity.

While the tax system encourages the use of leverage, It is seems unlikely
that tax considerations alone are responsible for the current surge in debt.

It Is hard to pinpoint any recent changes in the tax code that could have

promoted a major shift to leverage. A more plausible scenario is that
innovations in the junk bond market described earlier (primarily the
development of the secondary market) opened up the possibility for
corporations to exploit the tax advantage on a much wider scale than was ever
19

possible before.

V.

IS DEBT REALLY DEBT?
As we have emphasized throughout, a critical question is whether junk

bonds are easily renegotiated in the midst of industry-wide or economy-wide

recessions. The claim that junk bonds have the pertinent equity—like features
centers on five propositions:

Ci) Junk bonds are more closely held than traditional debt, which
facilitates renegotation.
(ii) The new instruments have fewer restrictions and covenants than
traditional private placements, which facilitates trade on a
secondary market.
(iii) Original-issue—discount and payment—in—kind obligations permit the
issuer to skip cash payments in some periods.
(iv)

Exchange offers of securities can forestall default and bankruptcy
in periods of financial distress. Further, incentives are strong
to complete these transactions because highly leveraged firms
are likely to be valuable ongoing concerns, at least relative to
tradtional firms in financial distress.

Cv) For reputational considerations, firms like Drexel Burnham Lambert
or KKR have a strong incentive to guarantee liquidity in the
market.

We address each of these points in turn.

With respect to the first point, the opposite is probably true; holdings

18

cf junk bonds are more dispersed than holdings of traditional debt, raising
not lowering —-

all

other things equal —- the costs of renegotiation. Over

the past decade, nonfinarcial corporations have steadily relied less on bank
credit and more on funds obtained from bond markets (e.g., insurance

companies, pension funds, and foreigners). Bank loans provided 44 percent of
debt funds raised by nonfinancial corporations In 1979 and only 21 percent in

1988. Corporate bonds provided just over 25 percent In 1979, and 50 percent
in 1988. Bonds used in highly leveraged transactions have in part replaced
equity, bank loans, and private placements. While traditional debt was indeed
closely held, the same is unlikely to be true for the new debt. The process
of securitizing -—

critical

to the growth of the market —— makes possible

widely diffuse holdings: see Bernanke and Campbell (1988) for related
arguments.

Independent studies by Drexel Burnham Lambert and Hirtle (1988) at

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York confirm these points. Breakdowns of
high-yield debt holdings by investor class are reported in Table 5.

For

example, Hirtie estimates that in 1987, 66 percent of junk bond holdings were

in the hands of mutual funds (25 percent), pension funds (10 percent), and
insurance companies (31 percent). The balance was distributed among
individuals (10 percent), savings and loan institutions (6 percent), and other
investors (including foreign investors and domestic corporations -- 18

percent). Further, in addition to complications introduced by dispersion of

ownership, "prudent man' rules (under ISA) governing pension funds and
institutions managing pension accounts (see Warshawsky, 1988) mayrestrict the
ability of many Institutions to renegotiate.

With respect to the second point, it is no longer true that high-yield

debt avoids the restrictions common in traditional private placements. For
example, First Boston Corporation (1989, p.35) reports:

19

• . the market appears to be coming full circle, back toward the
stringent indenture packages of the private placement market. While
earlier Issues of public high yield securities found that they could
trade the liquidity of the public high yield market for the tighter
indentures demanded in the prvate market, many of the more recent.
Issues include covenant packages rivaling those provided In the
private market.

Specifically, the First Boston study notes that as late as 1986, most major
deals contained no restrictions on additional debt; by 1987, the major issues
reviewed all contained varying degrees of protection against incremental

borrowing, thus impeding the ability to renegotiate. This pattern is
expected to continue. Other relevant restrictions related to changes in
corporate control ('poison puts'), requirements of net worth maintenance, and
limitations on certain payments, mergers and consolidations, and asset sales.

The recent issue of senior subordinated notes by Playtex (due December

15, 1998) well illustrates the new restrictions. Though the firm Is credited
with having a stable market position and consistent operating earnings,
Moody's assigned the issue a B2 rating out of concern over interest coverage.

The Moody's review indicated a number of covenants relating to changes in
control, limitations ott debt and dividend payments, and net worth maintenance

(Moody's Bond Survey, December 19, 1988, pp.4212-4214). The review also
expressed concern about the possible effects of leverage on future Investment
decisions:

A significant risk for Playtex is that it may not have the financial
strength to support the marketing and manufacturing programs necessary
to build higher sales volume. (p.42l3)

The third point pertains to the newly Introduced debt instruments which
permit corporations some flexibility itt meeting their interest obligations.

There are several kinds. "Original issue discount" bonds defer either all
("zerofix') or part ("split coupon") of the interest payments until maturity.

20

These bonds are growing in popularity: Fully 25 percent of new high yield
issues In 1988 were original issue dIscount bonds, and they acco.inted for 14.4

percent of the stock of high yield debt and 6 percent of total outstanding
corporate debt obligations (First Boston Corporation, 1989, p.23).

Payment In kInd" (P1K) obligations allow the issuer to pay interest in cash

or in additional securities (which would be valued at par). These kinds of
contracts permit the firm to defer cash payments in periods of distress.

Like equity, these new instruments permit corporations to overcome

temporary liquidity problems. However, unlike equity, they do not allow firms
to share the risks of systemic disturbances with outside lenders. Both types
of instruments, as well as traditional debt, meet the 'sum certain'
requirement imposed by the IRS.

That is, while they permit deferral of

interest, they do not allow for costless adjustment of the principal

obligation. Thus, they do not permit the kind of Indexing of necessary to
insulate corporations from systemic risks (as described in Section lilA).

One recent illustration of this point relates to the securities issued in

the 1987 purchase of SCI TV by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts. The accumulating
debt -— as cash Interest payments are omitted by the financially strapped deal
--

will

grow from $200 million in PIKs in October 1987 to $310 million in

October 1990. The result according to one investment manager:

'You have a

S-pound bag and 10 pounds of garbage" (see "How KKR Stubbed Its Toe,"

Bus.ness Week, August 7, 1989, pS6). Other examples have emerged recently.
as well.

20

It is worth emphasizing that the IRS appears determined to prevent firms
from simply relabeling equity as debt; in particular, has taken the sum

certain requirement seriously. For example, in 1982, Goldman Sachs attempted
to introduce Adjustable Rate Convertible Notes, which allowed for variable

payments to bondholders (based on explicit contingencies). However, the IRS

21

disallowed the contracts In 1983 for failing to meet the sum certain
principle.

Regarding point four, 'exchang offers' of securities -- the typical
mechanism for out-of—bankruptcy renegotiation -—

are problematic with multiple

creditor interests. Such offers are voluntary, raising a "free rider"
problem: Debtholders not participating in the exchange of securities may see
the market value of their securities subsequently rise, lowering the desire of
a given debtholder to participate.

Moreover, historically, completed exchange offers have not provided
sufficient breathing room for distressed companies to rebound (First Boston
Corporation, 1988, pp.35-36; 1989, p.46), and investors have experienced
similar losses in distressed exchange offers as In defaults (Asquith. Mullins,

and wolff, 1989). These losses have over the past decade averaged 50.05
percent of principal (First Boston Corporation, 1989, p.45). Table 6, which
uses tabulations from Asquith, Mullins, and Wolff (1989), shows that while
exchange offers are not infrequently used, their ability to avoid default
is rare.

Another consideration Is that the availability of renegotiation under
Chapter 11 may provide firms with an attractive alternative to

out-cf-bankruptcy renegotiation. Under Chapter 11, equityholders and
managers have a more significant claim on the enterprise than they would, say,

in liquidation. Further, the uniform voting (by creditors) required under
Chapter 11 avoIds many of the free-rider problems associated with voluntary

renegotiation. Out-of—bankruptcy arrangements are not a perfect substitute
here, because only Chapter 11 procedures avoid the tendency for bilateral

renegotiations. Nor are formal covenants in (publicly Issued) bonds. The
Trust Indenture Act act forbids the inclusion of voting procedures for

bondholders to adjust principal and/or interest payments (see Jackson. 1986;

22

or Roe, 1987, for a discussion). Hence, in periods of distress both debtors
and creditors may prefer filing for Chapter 11 to voluntary renegotiation;
this sentiment is echoea In First Boston Corporation (1989, p.43).
It is probably true that incentives to complete exchange offers are
stronger for highly leveraged firms than for traditional firms, since the
value of the underlying assets in the wake of default or bankrupcty is likely

to be greater, holding everything else constant. Nonetheless, the weight of
(informal) evidence suggests that the frictions owing to the free-rider and
institutional considerations mentioned above remain present in the exchange
offer process.

It is probably also still the case that equity or closely held

debt provides better Insulation against common risks.

Finally, is it the case that the investment banks and dealmakers that
have a major stake In the ongoing use junk bonds will actively intervene to

ensure the smooth functioning the market? Indeed, to date, investment banks
such as Drexel Burnham Lambert have played an important role in providing the
needed liquidity by actively participating in the secondary market.

In our

view, these private institutions can perform "lender of last resort" functions

when defaults (or near defaults) are relatively isolated incidents. However,
it is unlikely

that

they have they resources to intervene in the midst of a

wave of defaults owing to some kind of systemic disturbance.

Indeed, popular

perception is that the liquidity of the junk bond market has been drying up as
the frequency of defaults has been rising.

VI. THE
We

21

AGENDA FOR TAX REFORM

now consider possible reforms which would mitigate the impact of the

tax system on corporate capital structure (see also Auerbach, 1989).
One possibility is complete integration of corporate and individual
income taxes; this would, of course, eliminate the need to define debt and

23

equity for tax purposes.

It would, however, also entail windfalls to existing

equityholders, and eliminate any revenue from Investments by foreign

shareholders and domestic tax-exempt shareholders. Another possibilty is to
remove the tax deductibility of Interest, which would place debt and equity on

a more equal footing. This action, however, would raise the cost of capital
to corporations; and it would also confer an advantage on foreign investors in

the market for corporate control in the U.S. The latter is true because
foreign Investors avoid capital gains taxes in the U.S. and may not pay taxes
on their U.S. income in their home country (if they are subject to a
territorial tax system).

To the extent that corporate—level taxes on capital income are to be
maintained, a corporate cash—flow tax provides an alternative way to minimize

the differential treatment of debt and equity.22 Abstracting from the tax
treatment of financial institutions, the tax base would be the difference
between gross income (receipts less costs of goods sold) and investment

expenses. That is, depreciation deductions are replaced by expensing
investment, and interest deductions are removed. There is thus no marginal

effect of corporate taxation on investment decisions. Nor is there any
distinction between returns to existing and new equity, since the tax Is
effectively on distributions less new equity issues.

The corporate cash-flow tax does not, however, remove all distinctions
between debt arid equity for tax purposes (see the discussion in Auerbach,
1989).

In principle, since the cash—flow tax Imposes a zero marginal tax on

both debt and equity, the marginal effects of the tax are akin to those of a
true Income tax in which there are deductions for real returns to both debt
and equity. Taking corporate and Individual levels of taxation Into account.
equity returns would have a lower effective tax rate than debt under a
cash-flow tax, since interest payments would continue to be taxable for

24

individuals. The transition problems associated with converting to a
cash-flow ta< are also significant (see the discussion in King, 1986).

25

VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS

Assessing whether corporate leverage is "too high' requires some kind of
metric. We propose one, using an approach that stresses the role of fInancial
contracts in aligning managerIal Incentives. We argue that, when common as
well as Idiosyncratic disturbances are Important to firm profitability, the

optimal financial arrangement involves a mixture of debt and equity. The
arrangement is also equivalent to one with debt that has provisions allowing
for adjustment of the principal in response to Industry—wide or economy-wide

dIsturbances. The idea is to have outside lenders share the systemic risks in
order to Insure the firm's financial position, and therefore Its

creditworthiness, against fluctuations in general business conditions. Our
measure of excessive leverage Is therefore (roughly speaking) a measure of the
degree to which financial contracts are not optimally indexed to cyclical
disturbances.

In this regard, distortions contributed by the tax system may be an

rnportant factor in creating a situation of excessive leverage. The point is
somewhat more subtle than the usual argument that the relative tax subsidy

increases the level of debt, thereby increasing the risk of default. The
traditional literature, we think, misses the significance of the distinction

between Idiosyncratic and common risks. As stressed earlier, when only firmspecific risks are important, it is conceivable that pure debt financing is
desirable, despite the possibility of costly default and independent of tax

considerations. Once common risks are present. however, the tax system
lntrodu.es a tension. In particular. the authorities who define debt
for tax purposes make difficult the kind of indexing provisions desirable for

Insuring against common risks. This introduces an Important tradeoff in the
capital structure decision --

the

benefits from additional debt of the

expected tax subsidy versus the costs of having reduced flexibility in

26

adjusting obligations to creditors in the event of an industry-wide or

economy—wide recession. We argue further that because junk bonds are costly
to renegotiate In practice, It Is unlikely that optimal indexing is implicitly
present.

We are left with some clear but difficult policy choices. Animportant
problem with the current system is that it seeks to classify particular forms
of financial contracts for tax purposes, and thereby interferes with the
efficient choice of capital structure.

Integrating corporate and individual

tax systems or instituting a corporate cash flow tax would avoid the need for
this kind of classification, and therefore mitigate the distortion. However,
instituting such reforms also requires addressing possible revenue

considerations and problems of transition. Nonethess, discussions of these
issues should figure prominently In the debate over corporate leverage.

27

NOTES
1See for example Anise C. Wallace, Time for jitters in the junk bond market,
New York Times, August 6, 1989.
increase in

bankruptcies

would be incurred --

that

raises the question of why bankruptcy costs

is, why renegotiation of financial contracts has

not been more effective. We will return to this point repeatedly.
3See for example Alison Leigh Cowan, Rescuing businesses Is now a big
business, New York TImes. October 5, 1989.

4me corporate debt 'puzzle" is always couched In terms of explaining why
current leverage is high. Placed in historical context, an alternative puzzle
is why

corporate

leverage was so low in the 1950s and 1960s (see for example

Taggart. 1985). The idea that financial innovation was important in the
recent development of the junk bond market provides (at least part) of a
consistent explanation of both phenomena.

5Grossman and Hart (1962), for example, show how high debt levels can limit
manager's consumption of perquisites when firm investment is not easily
monitored.

6Hall (1988) characterizes these kinds of contracts as "back to the wall," due
to

the position in which they place management.

One countervailing

factor is that the combination of debt finance and limited

liability can induce 'enders to invest in overly risky projects, if lenders
cannot directly monitor investments.
contracts

may be optimal.

In this kind of situation, equity

8The value of Insiders' stakes for aligning incentives has long been stressed
by such practitioners as K.KR.

Recent accounts have pointed out the role of

low insiders' stakes in the failure of the Seaman leveraged buyout. See for
example Stuart Flack, See you In bankruptcy court, Forbes, October 16, 1989,
pp. 77—80.

9Another theoretical possibility is to tie managerial compensation to firm
performance, i.e., to use managerial salary rather than capital structure to

align incentives. This possibility may be limited in practice, however, by
the "business judgment "

rule

which protects management from liability

mistakes of judgment in shareholder challenges in court —- as long as

management stakes are low (see Gilson, 1986). Yet another alternative in
principle is to have the board of directors actively monitor the managers.

However, many commentators have lamented the generally weak oversight role
provided by outside directors, a role not enhanced by the generally small
stake of directors in the firm (see for example Shietfer and Vishny,

1988). Similarly, institutional restrictions on banks in the U.S. preclude
them from undertaking the kind of the extent ongoing monitoring of corporate
borrowers that, for example, Japanese banks are free to perform (see Hoshi,
Kashyap, and Scharfsteln, 1989).

10Jhile it is true that banks hold (at least initially) the majority of the
sen1or debt ifl a hIghly leveraged restructuring, it is also true that the

Comptroller of the Currency has urged them to restrict their holdings to a
minimum (see Brancato, 1989).

1tBernanke and Gertler (forthcoming) emphasize that borrower net worth is
likely to be important in the renegotiation process.

12The idea that borrower net worth, rather than debt per Se, Is fundamentally
key to financial stability is present in a number of recent studies.

See, for

example, Bernanke and Gertler (forthcoming); Calomiris and Hubbard
(1990); and the review of studies in Gertler and Hubbard (1988).

13Another example. occurring very recently (September 1989). is the response
of the high-yield debt market to Campeau's troubles.

141n principle, the Secretary of the Treasury can define "debt' for tax
purposes, as a result of Congress's addition in 1969 of Section 385 to the
Internal Revenue Code. The regulations are administratively complex, however.
Is Interesting to observe that, while insignificant over the postwar
period, equity issues were an important form of corporate finance prior to the
Depression, accounting for more than 15 percent of funds
1901-29

period

(Taggart, 1985).

raised

during the

It is possible that greater cyclical

movements (common risks) contributed to the increased reliance on equity
finance over that period.

16We do not mean to suggest that tax distortions are the only reason financial

contracts may not be properly indexed to aggregates. It is. for example, a
longstanding puzzle as to why debt contracts are not indexed to the price

level. Factors such as the Inability to find good indices are probably
alsc important to explaining incomplete indexing.

171n addItion, the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984, whIch eliminated withholding
taxes on newly issued corporate bonds, provided incentives for foreigners to
Increase their holdings of U.S. corporate bonds.

8The tax rate Is "effectively zero for pension funds, since taxes are paid
ultimately by beneficiaries, who are able to defer the obligation, and the

advantage of deferral i; still quite substantial. Foreign Investors also
effectively face a zero rate.

U.S. capItal gains taxes are not levied on

foreigners, and withholding taxes on dividends are low for most investors from
countries with tax treaties with the United States.
19Highly leveraged transactions involving unsecured debt have long been common

In the financing of small and medium—sized corporations. Traditionally, such
transactions consisted of secured debt (60 percent), equity (10 percent), with
the balance handled largely through private placements with Insurance firms.
This market was not large enough to finance large-scale unsecured debt issues
necessary to wage war for the control of large corporations (see Perry and
Taggart, 1988).

20Concern has been expressed that P1K bonds do not adjust the principal

obligations. For example:
The wide interest in troubled businesses comes as many
companies that loaded up on tax—favored debt capital In recent
years are ruing their boundless optimism. Even when a
company's income did not justify the debt load. Wall Street's
financial engineers often found ways of deferring the out—ofpocket costs.
Known as pay-In—kind securities, increasing-rate notes, or
zero-coupon bonds, these exotic inventions cleverly conserve cash
in a deal's early years. But the borrower faces a balloon payment
(In Alison Leigh Cowan, Rescuing
on a future day of reckoning.
busInesses is now a bIg business, New York Times, October 5,
1989.

2See for example Anise C. Wallace, Time for jitters In the junk bond market,
New York Times, August 6, l9S9.

22See for example Institute for Fiscal Studies (1978), King (1986), Feldstein
(1989), and Hubbard (1989).

REFERENCES

Altshuler,

Rosanne and Alan J. Auerbach.

1989.

The significance

of tax law asymmetries: An empirical Investigation. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, vol. 104 (November): forthcomIng.

Asquith, Paul, David W. Mullins, Jr., and Eric D. Wolff. 1989. Original
Issue high yield bonds: aging analyses of defaults, exchanges, and
calls.

Auerbach,

Journal of Finance. vol. 44

Alan J. 1989.

(September):

923—52.

Debt, equity, and the taxation of corporate

cash flows. Mimeograph, University of Pennsylvania.

Bergiof, ErIk. 1988.

Capital structure as a mechanism of control: A

comparison of financial systems. Discussion paper No. 48. Program
in Law and Economics, Harvard Law School, December.

Berle, Adolph and Gardiner Means. 1932.

The Modern Corporation and

Private Property. Macmillan: New York.

Bernanke, Ben and John Y. Campbell. 1988.

Is there a corporate debt

crisis? brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:

83—125.

Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler. Forthcoming. Financial fragility and
economic performance. Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Blair, Margaret M. and Robert E. Litari. 1989. Explaining corporate
leverage in the eighties. Mimeograph, Brookings Institution.

Brancato, Carolyn K.
update.

,A

1989. Leveraged buyouts and the pot of gold: 1989

Report Prepared for.the Use of the Subcommittee on

Oversight and Investigations of the Committee on Energy arid Commerce,

US. House of Representatives, July.

Brimmer, Andrew. 1989. Central banking and systemic risks in capital
markets. Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 3 (Spring):

Bulow, Jeremy I. ,

3-16.

Lawrence H. Summers, and Victoria P. Summers. 1989.

Distinguishing debt and equity In the jund bond era. Mimeograph,
Harvard University.

Calomiris, Charles V. and R. Glenn Hubbard.

1990.

Internal finance,

firm heterogeneity, and credit rationing. Economic Journal, vol. 100
(March).

Cooper, Russell and Andrew John. 1988. Coordinating coordination failures
in Keynesian models. Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 103 (August).
441-64.

Cutler, David H. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1988. The costs of conflict
resolution and financial distress: evidence from the TexacoPennzoil litigation. Rand Journal of Economics, vol. 19 (Summer):
157-72.

Feldstein, Martin. 1989. Excess debt and unbalanced investment: The case for
a cashflow business tax. Testimony before the Committee on Ways and

Means, United States House of Representatives, January 31.
Feldsteln, Martin, Louis L.D. Dicks-Mireaux, and James M. Poterba.
The effective tax rate and the pretax rate of return.

1983.

Journal

of Public Economics, vol 21: 129—53.

First Boston Corporation. High Yield Handbook. Various Issues.

Friedman, Benjamin M. 1986.

Increasing indebtedness and financial

instability in the United States.

In Debt, Financial Stability

and Public Policy. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Friedman, Benjamin M. 1989. Views on the likelihood of financial crisis.
In Reducing the Risk of Economic Crisis •

ed. Martin Feldstein.

Unviversity of Chicago Press: Chicago, forthcoming.

ertler, Mark and R. Glenn Hubbard.
fluctuations.

1988.

FinancIal factors in business

In Financial Market Volatility, Federal Reserve Bank

of Kansas City.

Gertler, Mark and R. Glenn Hubbard. 1989. Corporate taxation, capital
structure, and aggregate fluctuations. Mimeograph, Columbia
University.

Gertner, Robert and David Scharfstein. 1989. Corporate bankruptcy and
the costs of financial distress. Mimeograph, MIT, May..

Gilson, Ronald J. 1986.

The Law and Finance of Corporate Acgusitions.

The Foundation Press: Mineaola, New York.

Gordon, Roger H. and Jeffrey K. MacKie-Mason. 1989. Effects of the tax reform
act of 1986 on corporate financial policy and organization form.
Mimeograph. University of Michigan, September.

Grossman. Sanford and Oliver Hart. 1982. Corporate financial structure

and managerial incentives. In The Economics of Information and
Uncertainty, ed. John McCall. University of Chicago Press: Chicago.

Hall, Robert E. 1988. Financial factors in business fluctuations: commentary
In Financial Market Volatility, Federal Reserve Bank

of

Kansas City,

73-78.

Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap, and David Scharfstein. 1989.

Bank monitoring and

investment: Evidence from the changing structure of Japanese
corporate banking relationships.

In Asymmetric Information.

Corporate Finance, and Investment, ed. RG. Hubbard. University of
Chicago Press: Chicago, forthcoming.

Hubbard, R. Glenn 1989. Tax corporate cash flow, not Income. The Wall
Street Journal, February 16.

Institute for Fiscal Studies. 1978. The Structure and Reform of Direct

Taxation. Allen and Unwin: London.

Jackson. Thomas H. 1986. The Logic and Limits of Bankruptcy Law. Harvard
University Press: Cambridge.

Jensen, Michael C. 1986. Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate
finance, arid takeovers. American Economic Review, vol. 76 (May):
323-9.

Jensen, Michael C. 1988. Takeovers:

their causes and consequences.

Journal of Economic Perspectives 2 (Winter): 21—48.

Jensen, Michael C. 989. Active Investors, LBOs, and the privatization
of bankruptcy. Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, vol. 2
(Spring): 35—44.

Jensen, Michael C. and William Heckling. 1976. Theory of the firm:

managerial behavior, agency costs, and owTership structure. Journal
of Financial Economics, vol. 1 (October): 305—60.

Kaufman, Henry. 1986.
stability.

Debt:

the threat to economic and financial

In Debt, Financial Stability, and Public Policy. Federal

Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

MacKie-Mason, Jeffrey K. 1989.

Do firms care who provides their

financing? In Asymmetric Information, Corporate Finance, and
Investment, ed. R.G. Hubbard. University of Chicago Press:
Chicago, forthcoming.

Mayer, Cohn. 1989. Financial systems, corporate finance and economic
development. In Asymmetric Information. Corporate Finance, and
Investment, ed. R.G. Hubbard. University of Chicago Press:
Chicago, forthcoming.

Myers, Stewart C. 1977. Determinants of corporate borrowing.

Journal

of Financial Economics, vol. 5 (November): 146-75.

Perry, Kevin and Robert Taggart. 1988.

The growing role of Junk bonds

In corporate finance. Continental Bank Journal of Applied
Corporate Finance, vol. 1 (Spring):

37"45.

Poterba, James M. 1989. Tax reform and the market for tax-exempt debt.
Working Paper No. 2900, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Roe, Mark. 1987.

The voting prohibition in bond workouts.

The Yale

Law Journal, vol. 97: 232—79.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny. 1988. Value maximization and the
acquisition process. Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 2
(Winter):

7—20.

Shoven, John B. 1987. The tax consequences of share repurchases and
other non-dividend cash payments to equity owners.

In Tax Policy

and the Economy, vol. 1, ed. Lawrence H. Summers. MIT Press,
Cambridge.

Summers, Lawrence H. 1989. Taxation and corporate debt. Testimony before the
Committee on Finance, United States Senate, January 25.

Taggart, Robert A., 1985. Secular patterns in the financing of U.S.

corporations. jn Corporate Capital Structures in the United States, ed.
Benjamin M. Friedman, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Tax Analysts. QuantifyinR the Impact of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 On
Effective Corporate Tax Rates.

4arshawsky Mark. 1988. Pension plans:

funding, assets, and regulatory

environment. Federal Reserve Bulletin (November).

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

FA'i,MENTS
—

Corporate au.iness

CORPORATE EARNIN:S

1988)

T)

tonfinanc ti1

(1946

RELATIVE

1

Source:

Bureau of Econtnic Analysis.

46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88

percen
70

INTEREST

FIGURE

0

10

30
20

70
60
50
40

90
80

100

110

120

md Ilraclstrt'et

54 56 58 60 62 64

(left scale)

.iiid

66

tImw

68

(1989).

year

70 72

AN) IANKFi]i'TCY RAILS

(I9) —18)

Failures per 10.000 concerns

ILFAUL1

v1(;uRE 2

74

in

82

scale)

failures

76 78 80

(right

Liabilitkes

I'

84

as %

CNP

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

86 88

of

\

0.4

0.5

0.6

TABLE I
CORPORATE FINANCING FRO1 INTERNAL AN!) EXTERNAL SOURCES, 1946-1988
(PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL SOURCES)

Business Cycle or
Year

1945:4 1949:4 —

1954:2 1958:2 1961:1 —
1970:4
1975:1
1980:3
1982:4
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988

-

1949:4
1954:2
1958:2
1961:1
1970:4
1975:1
1980:3

198:4

1987:4

Retained
Earnings

68.4%

Private
Debt

Corporate
Bonds

16.2%

12.4%
11.1

5.3%
6.3

New Equity Issues

68.7

6.6

78.4
79.9
73.7

8.2
8.0

10.9

5.4

9.9

4.2

12.3

11.1

2.0

62.0
74.8
72.7
77.6

16.8
6.5

11.2
10.8
6.2
16.0

6.5
2.4
-0.6
-12.8

67.3
65.9
68.0

7.8
4.4
12.0
33.7
17.8
-7.4
3.8
13.0
16.0
12.4
7.2
23.7

21.2
16.6
9.6
5.2
13.4
17.9
11.7
10.3
8.2
6.8
10.0
6.5
6.0
4.2
10.4
17.1
24.8
23.5
36.4

6.1
10.1
8.6
4.5

53.3
60.9
82.1
72.5
74.1
70.7
77.2
72.3
68.2
77.3

74.6

19.1
12.3

14.4

75.6
81.5

10.0
24.5
15.3

73.1

10.7

83.0
85.2

1.2
8.7

2.8
6.5

5.4
1.2

—0.0
—3.1
4.7

-3.3
2.0
6.1

-16.8
-18.8
-16.5
—18.0
-30.3

Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Flow of Funds
Accounts, various issues; and MacKie—Mason (1989).

TABLE 2
TOTAL RETURNS, SANPLE OF HIGH-YIELD FUNDS
(Year Ending June 30)

1989

Fund

1988

1987

1986

1985

11%

23%

23%

4%

2%

Fidelity High Income

9

5

9

24

29

Frnk1in AGE

8

7

6

18

25.5

Prudental-Bache

8

6

9

19

25

10

8

9

19.5

23

Dean- 'itter

High-Yield

High

Yield

iutr:am High Yield

Note: Returns

include price appreciation and reinvestment of capital
gains and income dividends.

Source:

Lipper

Analytical Services.

TABLE 3
ISSUES OF HIGH-YIELD DEBT
(Percentage of High-Yield Debt Outstanding, December 30, 1988)

First Boston Study
Containers
Consumer Manufacturing
Chemicals
Transportation
Media
laformation and Technology
General Industrial
Food
Energy
Consumer Distribution
Airlines
Acquisition
Utilities

1eta1s and inera1s
Housing
Health Care
Gaming and hotel
Finance
Entertainment

Drexel Buraham Lambert Study

4.8%
8.0
2.3

7.3
8.0
2.8
7.3

6.6
7.8
11.6
2.1

Heavy Industry
Retailing
Leisure
Transportation
Consumer Goods
Media
Banks and Insurance
High-Tech
Utilities
Miscellaneous

4.1
5.0
2.2
7.3

2.0
5.9
3.7
1.3

Sources: The categories and calculations are taken from First Boston
Corporation (1989, P. 20) and from unpublished Drexel Burnbam
Lambert data reported in David Zigas and Larry Light, "Don't
Put A.av the Smelling Salts Yet,' Business Week, October 2,
1989.

pp. 92—93.

20°!.

14
io
8
5

11
7
5

4
16

TABLE 4
EFFECTIVE TAX RATES FOR RECIPIENTS OF DEBT AND EQUITY PAYMENTS

Percentage of Total

Taxpayer Category
Households (untaxed)
Households (taxed)
Foreigners
Commercial Banks
Savings and Loans
Mutual Savings Banks
Insurance Companies
Private Pensions
State and Local Government
Retirement Funds
Mutual Funds
Securities Brokers and Dealers

1988

Interest
Receipts

Tax Rate

(1988)

0%
28
0
15
18

6

20
0
0
28
34

2.8%
4.8
12.7

5.7
3.0
1.1
35.7
12.7
10.9

eighted-Average
Sources: Tax rates are taken from Tax Analysts (1986).

4.4
1.5

7.3%

Equity
Holdings
(1988)
0

1

5.4
0
0

0.2
5.1
15.5
6.2
5.2
0.9

19.9%

Interest receipts

data are from Summers (1989). Relative omership of corporate
equity in 1988, weighted by the market value of holdings, are
obtained from Flow of Funds data published by the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

TABLE 5
HOLDINGS OF HIGH-YIELD DEBT BY INVESTOR CLASS

Holdings
Institution or Group

as a Percentage of High-Yield Debt Outstanding

Drexel (1986) New York Fed (1987) Drexel (1988)

lutual. funds

32%

25%

30%

Insurance companies

30

31

30

Pension funds

10

10

15

Individuals

10

10

5

7

6

7

Savings and Loan
Institutions

Foreigners

3

Domestic corporations

3

9
3

18

Securities dealers

1

1

Others

4

0

Sources: Drexel Burnham Lambert data for 1986 are taken from Report on
High Yield Bonds, General Accounting Office, February 29, 1988.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York data for 1987 are taken
from }{irtle (1988). Drexel Burnham Lambert data (as of
December 31, 1988) were reported in David Zigas and Larry Light,
'Dont Put Acay the Smelling Salts Yet,' Business Week, October
2, 1989, pp. 92—93.

TABLE 6
EXCHANGE OFFERS AND SUBSEQUENT DEFAULTS

(Sample of High-Yield Bonds, by Year of Issue)

Issue
Year

1977
1978
1979

iqso

Cumulative Default
Percentage (of

Percentage of Total
Issues Exchanged
($ Amount)

Percentage of Total Issues
Exchanged with Subsequent
Default (S Amount)

33. 92%
34. 36

30.95%

49. 11%

20. 11

55.17

26. 70
27 .56

43
17.33
29.44

75 .00

7

.23
13.66

88.89
46.51
0.00

Dollar Amount of Issues)

4 .

64.62

1981
1c82

20.97

198.

9.38

4.80

1985

3.53

3 .25

0 .00

8.14

1.55

31.25

S. 19%

32. 81%

1986
TOTALS

25 .94
19.21

10.66%

17.81

Source TabLiations are based on the study of original-issue high-yield bonds in
Asquith, Nullins, and o1ff (1989, Tables 2, 6, and 7). Cumulative percentages are through December 31, 1988. Defaults refer to bankruptcy
filing, formal declaration by the trustee of a bood, or a missed coupon
pTrnent. Exchange offers do not include security transactions after
default or bankruptcy.

