                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                JAPANS SAVING RATE: NEW DATA AND REFLECTIONS




                                 Fumio Hayashi




                            Working Paper No. 3205




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 December 1989




This paper was prepared for presentation at the Giorgio Rota Conference on
household saving and wealth held in Torino, Italy, on 18 November, 1989.
The author is grateful to Professor Kanemi Ban of Osaka University for
consultations. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Productivity.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3205
                                        December 1989


                JAPAN'S SAVING RATE: NEW DATA AND REFLECTIONS


                                    ABSTRAGI

This   paper examines available evidence on Japan's wealth accumulation.

Time-series evidence over the last one hundred years indicates that the

phenomenon of extraordinarily high Japanese saving rate ia limited to the

high-growth era of 1965-1975. Micro evidence about consumption and aaving

by age can be more easily explained by the dynasty model than by the life-

cycle hypothesis.      The infinite horizon neoclassical growth model, while

capable of generating the hump in the saving rate and explaining why it was

preceded by the rapid GNP growth in the post-war period, leaves unanswered

the question of why wealth accumulation in pre-war Japan was so slow.

Perhaps growth in pre-war Japan was hampered by harmful effects of misguided

government policies.




                                         Fumio Hayashi
                                         Department of Economics -
                                         University of Pennsylvania
                                         Philadelphia, PA 19104
1. Introduction and Summary

   There is a strong perception that the Japanese outsave Europeans and

North Americans by a wide margin. I wish to make two points in this paper.

First, in the last one hundred years of Japanese economic history, the

phenomenon of high saving is limited to the high growth era of the 1960s and

early 70s. Second, the standard neoclassical growth model explains Japan's

rapid post-war wealth accumulation reasonably well.

    This first point, while possibly controversial, is what emerges from my

examination of available data on Japan's aggregate saving in section 2.

For the post-war period, Japan's saving rate appears very high, especially

compared to the U.S. However, much of the gap is a statistical illusion due

to differences in the way national income statistics are compiled. If one

calculates Japan's national saving rate as percent of NNP using the U.S.

definition that excludes government capital and values depreciation at

replacement cost, the adjusted national saving rate for Japan gets much

lower.   It shows a quite rapid decline after the 1970 peak of about 26%.

Newly available national accounts data for the period since 1955 indicate

(after the depreciation adjustment) that Japan's national saving rate

between 1955 and 1965 was nowhere near the 1970 peak. The national saving

rate for the pre-war period was even lower than that. The long term econo-

mic statistics that cover the period between 1885 and 1940 indicate the pre-

war national saving rate was between 5% and 10%.

    My claim that except for its large hump in the 1960s and early 1970s

Japan's saving rate is not extraordinarily high by international standards

is fully reflected in Japan's national wealth over the last 100 years.

Japan's national wealth before World War II had a time trend with a growth




                                                                      page 1
rate of only about 3% per annum. Of course much of the wealth was destroyed

during the war. The extent of wartime destruction is hard to estimate, but

there is no question that the rapid wealth accumulation associated with the

extraordinarily high national saving between 1965 and 1975 has put Japan's

national wealth well above the pre-war trend line.

     The analysis of the data in section 2 naturally leads one to ask the

following two "big" questions about Japan's economic development over the

last one hundred years. First, why was Japan's post-war wealth accumulation

so rapid, especially between 1965 and 1975?      Second, why didn't the rapid

growth take place before the war?

     Economics offers two competing explanations. The life-cycle hypothesis

views the national economy as consisting of overlapping generations.         The

alternative theory, the dynasty model, posits that each generation is

linked to the next by altruism so that all generations act as if they form

a single immortal dynasty.     Section 3 examines cohort data to see which

theory is closer to the truth. For the U.S. ,   recent   empirical work seems to

support the life-cycle hypothesis. The elderly in the U.S. hold typically

very low assets with their consumption financed mainly by pension benefits.

The kind of inter-dependence between parents and their adult children that

is predicted by the dynasty model cannot be found in available micro data

on income and saving.      For Japan, the dynasty model fares better.        The

elderly do not seem to run down assets after retirement.          Calendar time

rather than age seems to be the dominant determinant of household saving.

Despite the rapid productivity growth, consumption by the old today is as

high as consumption by the young whose lifetime income is several times

that of the old today.




filename:   Tsrino.aI.].                                                  page   2
    Section 4 then utilizes the standard neoclassical growth model -      -a
version of the dynasty model --   to   answer the two questions about Japan's

economic development. The first question is relatively easy to deal with.

To converge to the equilibrium growth path from the low capital stock, Japan

had to grow rapidly at some stage during the transition phase. It cannot be

immediately after the war because people were too poor to save. It takes a

number of years to set up the stage where the rapid growth can be sparked.

Recent work shows that it is in fact possible to construct a simple theore-

tical growth model that generates the hump-shaped saving rate. This answer

makes the second question even harder. Why didn't the rapid growth take

place before World War II?     I do not have too much to say about this.

Perhaps it is the bad government.      Japan's pre-war economic history is a

history of the government taking up ever-larger share of resources. Very

often, as too many less developed countries have witnessed, big governments

are impediments to growth.

    The last section, section 5, contains brief concluding remarks and

conjectures about the future of Japan's economic development.



2, Kacro Evidence


2.1. Post-War Evidence

     At first glance, Japan's postwar saving rate is extraordinary.        The

national accounts data indicate that in 1987 Japan's national saving rate is

more than 20% while the U.S. rate is below 5%.        However, as I argued in

Hayashi (1986, 1989), much of the apparent gap is a statistical illusion.

Two of the most important differences in the way Japan and the U.S. compile

 their national income statistics are (1) depreciation accounting, and (2)



 fiLen.m.   Torino.ati.                                                 page    3
treatment of government capital formation.

     It is perhaps useful to remember that saving as usually defined is net

saving, which equals gross saving minus depreciation. Depreciation should

be valued at replacement costs, that is, the correct measure of loss of

value due to depreciation is how much it costs to replace worn out assets at

current market prices. In the Japanese national accounts, depreciation is

at book or acquisition value, which in an inflationary environment is much

less than depreciation at replacement costs.              This leads to a significant

over-statement of net saving. According to my calculation, the discrepancy

between depreciation at replacement costs and depreciation at book value on

private depreciable assets is as much as several percent of GNP (it is about

5% of GNP for 1980).         My procedure for estimating the replacement cost

depreciation is merely to infer the Japanese government's estimate that is

implicit in the national accounts, which include a section on balance sheets

by sector at replacement costs. Briefly, I use the following procedure:


    change in wealth —        gross saving
                         -
                              depreciation       at replacement costs

                        +     capital    gains

                         -    residual   losses.


The change in wealth, gross saving and capital gains can be calculated from

the Japanese national accounts. I measure the replacement cost depreciation

as gross saving plus capital gains minus the change in wealth, so that my

measure includes residual losses, a component that should average out to

zero over time.

    The second important difference is that the U.S. national accounts fail




filename:   Termed                                                            page   4
to credit the government sector for its capital formation. All of govern-

ment expenditures are treated as consumption, so that government saving in

the U.S. national accounts simply equals a government budget surplus.

Japanese national accounts do include government capital formation as part

of government saving.1

    To make the saving rates from the two countries comparable, I calculated

Japan's national saving rate according to the U.S. definition. This means

that capital consumption adjustment and government capital formation are

taken out from saving for Japan. In Hayashi (1986) the calculation was for

the period l970-l98 only. Recently, the Japanese government has published

the long-awaited estimate of national income accounts from 1955 to 1969. In

Hayashi (1989) I expanded the calculation to cover the period 1955-1987.

Figure 1 reproduces the result of the calculation.2 It displays the adjust-

ed and unadjusted national saving rate along with the U.S. national saving

rate. As clearly seen from the Figure, the adjustment makes a big differ-

ence.      In 1979 the U.S. national saving rate was hiaher than Japan's.

Comparing Japan's adjusted rate with that of the U.S., we can make the

following observations.    First, the phenomenon of the extraordinarily high

saving rate is limited to the ten year period of 1965-1975. Second, after

rapidly declining from the 1970 peak of 26%, Japan's saving rate has turned


     1 The OECD national income statistics for the U.S. include government
capital formation. However, data on government capital formation for Japan
in the OECD statistics come from the Japanese national accounts, which
grossly over-estimate (net) government capital formation for two reasons.
First, only buildings are depreciated. Second, for buildings, depreciation
is at book value.   For 1987, the CNP share of government capital formation
reported in the Japanese national accounts is 5.7%.       If all government
assets are depreciated at replacement cost, it falls to 3.6%.

     2 Consumer durables as well as all government expenditures are treated
as consumption.



fitenam.   Torine.ai1.                                                page 5
up again in the mid 1980s. This coincides with the rapid improvement of the

government budget deficits.3      Third, Japan's national saving rate showed

erratic behavior between 1955 and 1960.     Depreciation for this period was

implausibly high. The residual losses component of my estimate of deprecia-

tion may have been quite substantial during that period. This is born out

in the capital stock series available in the balance sheet section of the

Japanese national accounts: it shows no increase during the same period of

1955-1960, which is a bit of mystery.      I will briefly come back to this

point later on in this section.

    Given the magnitude of the adjustment, some may be suspicious about my

estimate of depreciation. The question really is whether the depreciation

rate implicit in my estimate of depreciation at replacement costs is reason-

able. For 1987, the implicit depreciation rate --    the   ratio of depreciation

at replacement costs to the capital stock --    is   9.8% according to my cal-

culation.4 This is significantly smaller than the U.S. figure of 57%,5

mainly because the assumed depreciation rate for residential structures in

Japan (made of paper and wood) is much higher (about 9%). If the deprecia-

tion rate for the depreciable assets of the household sector in Japan is

constrained to be 4%, then the overall implicit depreciation falls to 7.5%.

Since the Japanese private capital-GNP ratio for 1987 is about 1.7, the GNP


       In 1987, the government sector started to run a surplus.

       By the very nature of my estimation of replacement cost depreciation,
which relies on the capital stock series in the Japanese national accounts,
this depreciation rate of 9.8% must be very close to the depreciation rate
implicit in the national income capital stock.

       It is the ratio of depreciation in the U.S. national accoLnts to the

              L
stock of private capital stock (excluding consumer durables) in the Balance

Reserve System. -
                  Economy compiled by the Board of Governors of the Federal




fi1anam. terio.tI.                                                        page 6
fraction of depreciation must then be about 17% (9.8% times 1.7). In other

words, one has to subtract about 17% of GNP from gross saving to arrive at

net saving for Japan.6


2.2. Pre-War Evidence

    My conclusion that the phenomenon of high Japanese saving rate is limit-

ed to the period of 1965-1975 is reinforced in a longer time span.       Figure

2 includes the gross and net national saving rates as percent of GNP since

1885.     The data for the pre-war period are from the                 Economic

Statistics (Ohkawa .      . (1966),   hereafter the 1I) painstakingly put

together by a group of economists at Hitotsubashi University. For the per-

war period, gross national saving is defined as GNP minus private consump-

tion minus government consumption including military expenditure, which by

the national income identity equals domestic capital formation (excluding

military expenditure) plus the current account. Thus national saving here

includes statistical discrepancies and government capital formation but

excludes military expenditures.     For the post-war period, national saving

includes government capital formation but excludes statistical discrepan-

cies. The CNP share of depreciation •-   the difference between the ratios of

gross and net savings as percent of CNP -   - is   as much as 20% for the post-

war period, because here, unlike in Figure 1, depreciation on government

capital is included. For the pre-war period, the CNP share of depreciation

is only slightly more than 10%.     As acknowledged in the          the pre-war

estimate of gross saving is subject to a great deal of uncertainty (statis-


        6 If government capital is included in saving, the replacement cost
depreciation is about 20% of GNP.

        7 An English summary   is Ohkawa L    (1979).



fiL.nam. Torine.all                                                      page 7
tical discrepancies are often quite substantial). It is possible that both

gross saving and depreciation are under-estimated. Figure 2 also includes

the current account as percent of CNP. That the most volatile component of

national saving for the pre-war period was the current account can be

clearly seen.          The large deficit in trade balance in 1905 indicates that

much of the Russo-Japanese war was financed by external debt, while the huge

surplus during World War I is due to the capital outflows to finance the war

effort by the Allies and China.

     To state the- conclusion again: except for its large hump in the late

l960s and early l970s, Japan's saving rate is not extraordinarily high by

international standards.         This fact is fully reflected in the history of

Japan's national wealth.         National wealth here is the sum of the capital

stock(tangible depreciable assets including housing and non-military

government capital but excluding inventories8) and net external -financial

assets. To be consistent with the definition of national saving in Figure

2, I exclude land from national wealth because saving in land for a nation

as a whole is always zero.9 Figure 3 displays in log scale the real value

of the capital stock and national wealth in 1934-36 yen.         (I currently do

not have data on external assets for the pre-war period, so only the capital

stock is plotted for the pre-war period.)           For the pre-war period, the

capital stock has a time trend with a growth rate of only 3.1% per annum,

which is the same as the growth rate of U.S. capital stock for 1889-1940 of


      8 Inventories are not available in the Ia.

       For 1987 the value of land is more than two times the value of the
capital stock, according to the Japanese national accounts. The value of
land fluctuates over time wildly, thus obscuring our analysis. The exclu-
sion of land in growth analysis can be justified with suitable separability
assumptions. See Hayashi (1989).                                 -




Ijisnuas: Torino.all                                                     page 8
3.1%.1.° Japan was probably a net debtor before the war, so the growth of

national wealth must have been a bit lower.

     There are no reliable records for constructing consjstent capital stock

series between 1940 and 1955 which includes World War II. See Data Sources

at the end of this paper for my procedure of splicing the pre-war and the

post-war capital stock series. The capital stock series since 1955 is from

the stock section of the Japanese national accounts. One curious feature of

the pre-war capital stock is the slight decline between 1955 and 1960, which

corresponds to the puzzlingly large depreciation that is apparent in Figure

1.    One possible explanation offered above was that the residual losses

component of my estimate of depreciation may have been substantial. Howev-

er, available estimates of the gross capital stock for the same period do

not show a decline, which is inconsistent with the residual losses explana-

tion. My conjecture is that the 1955 value of the capital stock, which is

heavily influenced by the 1955 National Wealth Survey (a sampling survey of

the replacement value of capital), is over-valued relative to the subsequent

periodical benchmark estimates, so that, given an independent estimate of

gross investments, depreciation had to be scaled up.

     Leaving aside the mysterious disappearance of the capital stock during

1955-1960, the capital stock series linking the pre- and post-war periods

is consistent with whatever scant evidence there is about the wartime

destruction of the capital stock by Americans. Okita (1949) reports that

about 25% of the capital stock was destroyed during World War II.     If one



     10 For the U.S., data on the capital stock are taken from Goldsmith
(1956). Since the population growth rate for the U.S. over this period is
higher by 0.4 percentage points than that of Japan, the percapita growth
rate of wealth is slightly higher for Japan than for the U.S.



fi1.ana.: Torino.all                                                  page 9
extrapolates the prewar trend to obtain a capital stock value for 1945 and

compares it with another value for 1945 that one obtains by "backcasting"

using the 1950-55 trend, the gap is about 50% of the 1945 value implied by

the prewar trend.      This leaves 25% to be sccounted for, but that may be

attributable to the slowdown in non-military capital accumulation that must

have taken place during the war.

    No matter what the extent of wsrtime destruction was, there is no ques-

tion that the rapid capital accumulation associated with the extraordinarily

high national saving between 1965 or 1965 and 1975 has put Japan's capital

stock well above the pre-war trend line.       Even more amazing, this rapid

accumulation was accomplished without much reliance on external debt.       As

clear from Figure 3, the discrepancy between national weslth and the capital

stock, which is net external assets, became substantial only very recently.


2.3. Two "Big" Questions

    Another noteworthy feature of the post-war wealth accumulation in Figure

3 is that it appears to be tapering off; it appears as though the time path

of wealth is converging to a new time trend, which I think is significant

because it is happening precisely when Japan's per-capita GNP has caught up

with that of the U.S. The U.S. ,    being the only developed country free from
wartime destruction, has had at least a hundred years of uninterrupted

wealth accumulation (with s relatively minor disruption during the Crest

Depression).      It is therefore reasonable to suppose that the U.S. economy

has been in a state of equilibrium.       The view that the U.S. has been in

equilibrium and Japan has been converging (on percapita basis) to that

equilibrium from below is born out in Figure 4 where real CNP per capita is

graphed for the two countries over the last 100 years. Here, I assume that



filename: Torino.all                                                  page 10
percapita GNP is the same for Japan and the U.S. in 1987. A remarkable fact

about the U.S. GNP is the pre-war and the post-war trends are the same,

which is consistent with the view that the U.S. has been on the equilibrium

path.      The Japanese pre-war trend is almost parallel to the U.S. trend;

Japan's real percapita GNP before World War II was never more than 40% of

that of U.S. for more than several years.

    This prompts me to pose the following two closely connected questions

about Japan's economic development over the last one hundred years.


        (1) Why   was the post-war wealth accumulation so rapid, particularly
            between 1965 and 1975?


        (2) If Japan was able to reach the equilibrium growth path represented

            by the U.S., why didn't it take place before World War II? Why did

            Japan wait until after the war to decide to be rich?


These are "big" questions.      I suppose that every economist seriously inter-

ested in Japan has his or her own answer.         Explaining Japanese economic

development in a coherent and simple fashion is a challenge to economics.

    Modern economics offers two competing theories of wealth accumulation.

The celebrated life-cycle hvoothesis of Modigliani and Zrumberg views the

national economy as consisting of overlapping generations.           Since each

generation is finitely-lived, its saving behavior depends critically on

age. The life-cycle hypothesis predicts, among other things, that national

saving will be higher and wealth accumulation faster if the elderly, who

are supposed to dissave after retirement, make up a smaller fraction of the

population. The alternative theory, called the dynasty              posits   that

each generation is linked to the next by altruism so that all generations



fi1.n.m.   Toino.a1L                                                    page 11
act as if they form a single immortal dynasty with infinite horizon. Which

theory of saving and wealth accumulation is closer to reality is one of the

most basic unresolved questions in economics.     As can be easily imagined,

the two theories have very different implications about how consumption and

saving behavior should differ between age cohorts.        In the next section,

therefore, I examine cohort data on consumption and saving.



3. Evidence from Cohort Data


3.1. Cross-section vs. Longitudinal Profile of Consumotion

    When analyzing micro data, it is very important to distinguish between

the cross-section age profile of consumption, which is a point-in-time

profile of consumption for cohorts of different ages, and the lonaitudinal

age profile, which tracks consumption over the life-cycle of a given cohort.

It is the cross-section age profile of consumption where the predictions of

the two theories of wealth accumulation differ sharply.

    The life-cycle hypothesis predicts the well-known cohort effect in the

cross-section profile of consumption: the slope of the profile must be less

than the longitudinal age profile of consumption by the productivity growth

rate of the economy. For example, if productivity grows at 5%, this year's,

30 year-olds are wealthier than last year's 30 year-olds (namely, this

year's 31 year-olds) by 5%. Thus the level of consumption that this year's

30 year-olds expect for the next year is 5% higher than the level of con-

sumption enjoyed by this year's 31 year-olds. Put differently, to obtain

the longitudinal age profile of consumption, one needs to "tilt' counter-

clockwise the cross-section age profile by the productivity growth rate.

    The prediction of the dynasty model is that there should be i cohort



fil.n.ms: Torino.L1                                                    page 12
effect in that the cross-section age profile of consumption should be

independent of the productivity growth rate. This is because in the dynasty

model all cohorts are altruistically linked, so that gains from productivity

growth are shared by all cohorts of different ages.

    To be sure, both theories predict the cross-section age profile of

consumption to shift upwards as productivity increases. The difference in

prediction arises when one compares the cross-section profiles for two

economies growing at different rates.    The life-cycle hypothesis predicts

that the age-consumption profile in a slow-growing country should be more

positively sloped than in a fast-growing country. That is, "in more rapidly

growing countries the old are much lifetime-poorer than the young so con-

sumption of the old will be much lower relative to consumption of the young

than in slowly growing contrives." (Carroll and Summers (1989)).         The

dynasty model predicts no such systematic relation.


3,2. Savins Rate

    Perhaps the most well-known prediction of the life-cycle hypothesis is

that the saving rate depends on age. More specifically, since households

want the longitudinal profile of consumption to be smoother than the earn-

ings profile, which is hump-shaped, the saving rate should be negative at

both ends of the life-cycle. For the elderly, however, this prediction of

negative saving rate should be modified if they have access to annuities, in

which case (except for transactions purposes) their asset holdings should be

zero with their consumption entirely financed by annuity benefits.

    The prediction by the dynasty model is less clear-cut. In the dynasty

model, generations are altruistically linked via inter-generational trans-

fers. If inter-generational transfers are entirely in the form of bequests,



ftlsnsms:   Tortho.aLL                                               page 13
then the saving rate for the young (before they receive bequests) will be

negative.         The situation gets complicated if inter-generational transfers

sre in the form of the flow of transfer payments (                yjys gifts) from
parents to adult children.          A variety of age profiles of saving rate is

possible.         If, as usually is the case, transfer payments are included in

the definition of household income and if transfers payments are made to

children when they are young, then the saving rate for the young may well be

positive.         If parents start transferring wealth to children after their

retirement, then it may well be that their saving rate is positive while

their wealth decumulates.         In fact, Hayashi      j._   (1988) found that this

is the age profile of saving and wealth for Japan.

    Transfers may arise under the life-cycle hypothesis, which makes its

prediction not as clear-cut as commonly thought.         For exsmple, suppose that

it is difficult to purchase annuity contracts.          A parent and a child may

find it to their self interests - -      even   if they are not altruistic to each

other -    - to   enter into a contract whereby the child would support the parent

when old.         The payment by the parent cannot be before the service is deli-

vered by the child, because the child has every reason to renege the con-

tract. The payment must be made after the service is delivered, namely when

the parent dies, in the form of bequests. The child may even have to post a

bond, in which case the parent would accumulate wealth toward death. The

point here is that one has to be careful about the treatment of transfer

income and payments. If transfers are excluded from income, the life-cycle

hypothesis does predict negative or zero saving by the retired.


3.3. Measurement Problems. ConceDtual and Practical

    Before turning to evidence, let me briefly discuss some measurement



filsnas:   Torino.ati.                                                      page   14
issues, because I think that defining income, consumption and saving in a

way consistent with national income accounts for each cohort (and for each

household for that matter) from household surveys is an issue that deserves

more attention. Imputed rent from owner occupied housing should be part of

income and consumption, while depreciation on housing should be subtracted

from income and saving. Employer contribution to social security and other

pension plans should be included in income and hence in saving. Government

transfers in kind should be included in income and consumption. This is

important for Japan where education is heavily subsidized and where there is

a large national medical insurance system. Household surveys typically lack

information on some or all of these items, especially employer contributions

and accrued government transfers, so that it is impossible to incorporate

them for each household in the survey, but calculating those items for a

typical household of a given age cohort should be feasible.

    There is a more conceptual problem. Should capital gains be included in

saving? They should be if households can "see through" the corporate veil

so that dividends and capital gains due to retentions are just alternative

forms of income.         If one extends this argument further and assume that

households can see through the government veil, changes in future tax

liabilities should be deducted from saving: a tax cut of $1 raises dis-

posable income and hence saving, but it also raises, other things equal, the

present value of future tax liabilities which should be deducted from

saving. It may be possible to calculate capital gains and losses on market-

able assets for each cohort if data on assets and liabilities are available,

but it is impossible (unless one makes very specific assumptions) to calcu-

late for each cohort accruals of future tax liabilities.




fil.nam.   ToEino.atl.                                                page   15
3.4 Evidence

    For the U.S. evidence from household survey data seems broadly consis-

tent with the life-cycle hypothesis. The elderly in the 17.5. carry very low

financial assets. According to Wise (1988), the median net financial assets

for couples aged 68 to 73 was only about $16,000 in 1979, and consumption is

almost exclusively financed by social security benefits. This is precisely

the prediction of the life-cycle hypothesis. However, as I argued above, it

is also consistent with the dynasty model. A more decisive evidence against

the dynasty model was provided by Altonji, Hayaahi and Kotlikoff (1989) who

find that there is strong correlation between consumption and income within

the family. If the dynasty model were true, the correlation should be zero.

    The dynasty model fares better in Japanese data. Figure 5 displays the

saving rate by age for several years over a 25 year period. The source is

the published tabulations on after-tax income and saving by age from the

National Survey        Family Income and Exoenditures (hereafter the National

Survey) which is undertaken every five years since 1959. It is not possible

from the published tabulations alone to incorporate any of the required

adjustments I just mentioned to make the saving rate by cohort comparable to

the national income saving rate. Thus there is no reason for the cross-

section average of the saving rates to agree with the national income

definition of houaehold saving rate for the same year which is also dis-

played in the Figure as the "macro" saving rate.1'

    One needs to exercise extra caution when one deals with Japanese cohort




     11 Another source of discrepancy is that the National Survey covers
only September, October and November.     Income and consumption are not
seasonally adjusted. Also, singles are not included in the tabulation.



filenase: Torino.all                                                  page 16
data, for several reasons.12 First, no government household survey reports

taxes paid by households other than the so-called "worker households"

(households whose head is on a payroll), which means that one can never

observe from published reports the saving rate for the retired. The saving

rate displayed in Figure 5 is for the worker households only; the saving

rate for the 65+ age bracket is really for those who are still working after

turning the age of 65, a pool of people hardly representative of the 65+ age

cohort.       Second, extended families, which make up about a quarter of all

households, are mixed with nuclear families in published tabulations by age.

This obviously results in cohort mixing: what is included in the, say, 25-

29 age bracket are extended families in which a 25-29 year old son is living

with his parents. This partially masks the true age dependence of consulnp-

tion and saving in simple tabulations by age.        Furthermore, this cohort

mixing is not random. Since the household head in an extended family is the

main income earner, the 25-29 year old household head living with his

father earns more than his father does.        This means that the young in

younger age brackets and the old in older age brackets are relatively

wealthier people within their own respective age cohorts.13

    Despite all these caveats, the saving rate in Figure 5 seems to be

inconsistent with the life-cycle hypothesis.     First, it shows no systematic


      12 For more details, see Hayashi .        (1988).
     13 In extreme situations the true age dependence is conwetely masked
due to this non-random cohort mixing.     Imagine that there are only two
generations, young and old, and that the cross-section age profile of
earnings is flat.   The young and the old living in the same household have
an equal chance to be the head, that is, the main income earner. Suppose
all households are extended families, so that household consumption is the
sum of consumption by the two generations. Then it is easy to see that the
cross-section profile of household consumption by the age of the head will
be flat irrespective of the productivity growth rate.



filenams:   Torino.sll.                                                page 17
dependence on age.         The cohort mixing would not completely maak che age

dependence in the age tabulation. Second, this cross-section age profile of

saving shifts up and down with the aggregate saving rate, meaning that

macroeconomic events are much more important than age in determining indivi-

dual saving. Put differently, the shifting age distribution -        - the   impor-

tant determinant of aggregate saving under the life-cycle hypothesis -       - has
not been a major factor in the determination of aggregate saving in Japan.

Third, the temporal variation is greater for older cohorts. It is true that

households in the 65+ age brackets in published tabulations are those whose

head is still working, so that their positive saving is not necessarily

inconsistent with the life-cycle hypothesis.         But, since their horizon is

shorter than that of younger households, their saving rate should exhibit

less volatility.

      One really needs to have access to micro data to overcome the problems

about Japanese data mentioned above.           Age tabulations free from those

problems were produced by Hayashi j,.        4j_   (1988) using the 1984 National

Survey data tape14.        Income tax and hence saving for all households (not

just for worker households) are imputed, so that the retired can be brought

into the age tabulations. Tabulation of the saving rate by age is done for

nuclear households, so that the cohort mixing is eliminated. For extended

families, the head is re-defined to be the younger generation (not neces-

sarily earning more than their parents living together), so that the young

in younger age brackets for extended families are representative of their

own   cohort.     The definition of saving is strictly comparable to the national



     14 All the calculation was done at Osaka University during the 1986/87
year when I was a faculty member there.



filenams:   Torino.atl.                                                   page   18
income definition15. Figure 6 reports the resulting saving rate for nuclear

and extended families. Now the saving rate is much more dependent on age

than is indicated in Figure 5, which is a testimony of the seriousness of

the    cohort mixing in published age tabulations. However, the evidence for
negative      saving for the old is very weak.        There are two    groups of old
people:    those maintaining an independent household, which are classified as

old nuclear, and those living with their children.            For both groups, only

thosewho are really old dissave. For the former group, that fact is clear
from the saving rate for old nuclear families. For :he latter, their saving
must be substantial because the saving rate for the extended families in the
younger age brackets (where parents, whose adult children living with them

are    still young, are not very old) is higher than that for nuclear families
in    the same age bracket.

      Thus,   evidence about the saving rate is not favorable to the life-cycle
hypothesis.       What   about   the age-consumption profile? Figure   7 displays the
cross-section      age profile of consumption taken from published tabulations

for the last six National Surveys.             Here, being derived from published

tabulations,     nuclear and extended families are mixed up, so the age profile
is made flatter than it really is)6 But still, young people are more
numerous than old people in younger age brackets and                     in older age
brackets.       For a fast-growing country like Japan, the age profile -- albeit

        15 Except that the government transfers in kind (education and medical
care) are not included in income and consumption. This (unavoidable)
omission, however, does not affect the level of saving. The saving rate is
only slightly affected because income is slightly under-estimated.             Also,
transfer payments and income to and from members outside the household is
not included in income.
        16 Also, government transfers in kind are not incorporated.



fiJ.sname: Iorino.sL1.                                                       page   19
contaminated by extended families in the published tabulations -   - should   be

tilted more in favor of the young, according to the life-cycle hypothesis.

However, as documented in Carroll and Summers (1989), the profile is

positively   sloped in Japan than in the U.S. To see this point more clearly,

one can create longitudinal profile of consumption by traversing across the

cross-section profiles.      For example, the longitudinal profile for the

cohort aged 25-29 in 1959 is the line connecting the 25-29 node for 1959,

the 30-34 node for 1964, and so forth.      The cohort mixing puts an upward

bias in the slope of the longitudinal profile thus obtained, but that alone

would not explain why the profile is so much steeper than the profiles

typically found for the U.S.

    It is possible, however, to reconcile this last piece of evidence with

the life-cycle hypothesis.     The large-scale inter-generational redistribu-

tion of resources from the young to the old, which was brought about by the

expansion of the social security system in the early l970s, may have allowed

the current old to consume more than they could have afforded had there

been no such expansion.        An equally plausible explanation is that the

current old, when young, did not anticipate the rapid economic growth that

took place in the l960s and early 70s.        Over their lifetime, they kept

receiving more income than they anticipated, resulting in the old age asset

holdings far larger than anticipated when young. It is this "excess" asset

holdings that is financing the high old age consumption.



4. Explanation of Japanese Economic Develooment

    To recapitulate: evidence from Japanese cohort data is consistent with

the dynasty model.       Is the dynasty model consistent with the aggregate




fitonem.   Torinoall                                                   page   20
evidence discussed in section 2? I now try to answer the two "big' ques-

tions about Japan's economic development I posed at the end of section 2.

The first question is relatively easy to deal with. If the U.S. economy is

in a steady state equilibrium and if the only important difference between

Japan and the U.S. immediately after the war is the huge disparity in the

capital-labor ratio, then the standard neoclassical growth model -    - which   is

a specialization of the dynasty model with the standard neoclassical aggre-

gate production function -   - predicts   that Japan will eventually converge to

the equilibrium path that the U.S. has been on. The idea is simple enough,

but to fit the neoclassical growth model to the post-war Japanese data some

modifications are needed.     When the capital stock is low, the return from

saving is unusually high because of diminishing returns to scale.           This

immediately sparks rapid capital accumulation which lasts until the capital-

labor ratio gets close to the equilibrium growth path. This feature of the

standard growth model is inconsistent with the post-war Japanese experience

where the phenomenon of high saving did not occur until the mid 1960s.

    Recent work by Christiano (1989) shows that it is indeed possible to

modify the standard growth model to be consistent with the hump-shaped

Japanese saving rate.       Suppose that there is some subsistence level of

consumption at which the marginal utility of consumption is very high and

suppose Japan after the war was in that subsistence level.          Then people

would choose to consume rather than save even though the return from saving

is extraordinarily high. People were too poor to save. But eventually, as

the standard of living gradually improves, the high return from saving wins

out, so that people start rapidly accumulating wealth. This is precisely

what happened in the l960s.      Christiano (1989) simulated the neoclassical




fit.n.m.   ?orino..11                                                    page   21
growth model that has this subsistence feature to generate the hump-shaped

saving rate. His model also predicts that the increase in the growth rate

precedes the increase in the saving rate, another important feature of post-

war Japanese economic growth noted by Romer (1986).

     This answer makes the second question even harder. Why didn't the rapid

growth take place before World War II?            I really have no satisfactory

answer. Perhaps it is the bad government. Japan's pre-war economic history

is a history of the government taking up ever-larger share of GNP. This can

be seen clearly in Figure 8.       Here, aggregate demand or total expenditure,

which is GNP minus net exports, is broken down between private consumption,

private investment and government expenditure (government consumption plus

government investment).       It clearly shows the adverse impact on private

expenditure of government war efforts, including the Sino-Japanese war of

1894, the Russo-Japanese war of 1904, and the invasion of Manchuria followed

by World War II.       As we all know, the resources taken up by the government

did not bring about any benefits to the private sector.          It is as if the

aggregate production function had been shifted down. It also must have made

the future too uncertain for the private sector to be tempted to save. It

is perhaps not surprising that Japan's wealth accumulation did not take off

until the bad government was removed.



5. Concludina Remarks

     In this paper I have made two basic points.           I hope by now I have

convinced the reader of my first point --    that   phenomenon of extraordinarily

high Japanese saving rate is limited to the period between 1965 and 1975.

As far as it goes, the second point --    that   the standard neoclassical growth




filename: Tonino.all                                                      page 22
model does a good job of explaining post-war Japanese economic development
--   should not be controversial, either. This model should be taken seriou-
sly because it is also consistent with micro evidence about consumption and

saving.

     If a theory is capable of explaining existing facts, there is a good

chance that its prediction about the future will be validated. Here I want

to be a bit tentative.     When I made the second point, I talked as if the

U.S. represents the equilibrium path for the neoclassical growth model

which, if true, leads to the prediction that the U.S. and Japan will grow at

the same rate for the rest of the future.     However, my justification for

that was rather tenuous, as an avid reader may have noticed. That the U.S.

economy has been on or close to the same time trend for at least a century

does not necessarily mean that the same path is the equilibrium path (on

percapita basis) for Japan.    In fact, as I argued in section 3, the U.S.

wealth accumulation may well be consistent with the life-cycle hypothesis.

In both the overlapping generations economy inhabited by life-cycle consu-

mers and the infinite-horizon neoclassical growth economy, the equilibrium

growth rate is the rate of technical progress. The        of the equilibrium

growth path, however, may be different. It may be that the equilibrium path

for the neoclassical model is parallel to the U.S. path but lies            it.

If so, the prediction is that Japan will break away from the U.S. and other

developed countries in terms of percapita GNP.    The evidence presented in

this paper is consistent with both predictions.      The next several years

should be a very interesting period to students of the wealth of nations.




filenain.: torino.att                                                page 23
Data Soura

Figure 1. Hayashi (1989).


Figure 2. For the pre-war period, the data are from Ohkawa     al. (1979).
           Gross saving is defined as: Y - CP - CG -    (I
                                                      - NMLI), where



             Y — "gross national expenditure at market prices" (Table Al),
             C? — "personal consumption expenditure" (Table Al),
             CG — "general government consumption expenditure" (Table Al),
             I — "gross domestic fixed-capital formation" (Table Al, A38),
             NI1LI — "gross domestic fixed capital formation excluding milita-
                         ry" (Table A38).

             Depreciation is "Provisions for the consumption of fixed capital"
              (Table A7).   The current account is calculated as "exports of
              goods and services and factor income received from abroad" (Table
             Al) less "imports of goods and services and factor income paid
              abroad" (Table Al).
                   For the post-war period, the data source is Table Al and A2
              of Hayashi (1986) and an update by the author.


Figure 3. The capital stock for the pre-war period is from Table 1, Vol. 3
           of the        For the post-war period, data splicing is needed.
           The 1950 value of the real capital stock is assumed to be 1.1
           times the 1938 value. This factor of 1.1 was taken from Chapter
           4 of         There, the       capital stock in the LI1 for 1938
           was converted in 1960 prices using price indexes for various
           assets for 1938 and 1960, and then it was compared to the 1950
              value in 1960 prices of a gross capital stock series (the H
              series reported in Table 4-1 of Chapter 4 of                It
              turned out that the latter was 1.1 times the former. I assume
              that the same factor of 1.1 applies to (net) capital stock. For
              1950-55, I use the growth rate of the net capital stock is the
              same as that of the gross capital stock series from the the H-
              series. The net capital stock series since 1955 and net external
              assets since 1955 are taken from the Japanese national accounts
               (Table 1-1, Part 2).


 Figure 4. Japanese pre-war real GNP is taken from Table A3 of Ohkawa
                    (1979). Table A4 of . reports two          additional   real GNP
               series: Yl — "gross national expenditure in millions of 1934-36
               prices for 1940-51 (excluding 1945), and Y2 — gross national
               expenditure in billions of 1965 yen for 1952-75.     The pre-war
               real GNP series and Yl can be used to cover the period 1885-1951
               (excluding 1945).   The Yl and Y2 series do not overlap, so I
               assume that the growth rate of real GNP from 1951 to 1952 is the
               same as the real GNP growth rate from 1952 to 1953 given by Y2.




  ftt.na.   Torine.sll                                                       page   24
               The Y2 series and the National Income series for 1955-87 are
               spliced at year 1955.
                   For the U.S. real GNP for 1885-1929 is taken from Balke and
               Gordon (1989).    Real GNP since 1929 is taken from the U.S.


                                       j
               National Income and Product Accounts.
                    The population for 1885-1940 and 1950-1970 is taken from
               Table A53 of Ohkawa j,.     (1979). The 1940-50 gap is filled by
               linear interpolation. Japan's population since 1970 and the U.S.
               population are from the census data.


Figure 5. The data for "worker households" on after-tax income and consump-
           tion are from the National Survey Reoorts (various years, hereaf.
           ter ). After-tax income is pretax income less income tax less
           social security contributions.    The following published tables
           are used. Table 12, Vol. 1 of 1956 , Table 7, Vol. 1 of 1964
              ,Table 17, Vol. 1 of 1969 , Table 6, Vol. 1 of 1974 NS,
           Table 6, No. 1, Vol. 1 of 1979 , Table 6, No. 1, Vol. 1 of 1984
              NS.



Figure 6. The data on saving and disposable income are from Table lilA of
           Hayashi     nj,. (1988). They incorporate: employer contribution
           to social security, imputed rent from owner-occupied housing,
              depreciation on owner-occupied housing, seasonal adjustment
              converting a monthly average over September through November to
              an annual rate.    Singles are included in the pool of nuclear
              families.


Figure 7. For 1964, 1974, 197 and 1984, the data are from published tables
           for all households excluding singles.   Table 6, Vol. 1 of 1964
              ,
              ,Table 6, Vol. 1 of 1974 , Table 6, No. 1, Vol. 1 of 1979
               Table 9, No. 1, Vol. 1 of 1984 . For 1959 and 1969, the
              tables for "worker households" listed above for Figure 5 are
                                                                              -
              used.


Figure 8. Let IP — gross private domestic capital formation, and IC —
              government capital formation.   This figure the three-way break-
              down of total expenditure (CP+IP+IC+GP) between private consump-
              tion (CP), private investment (IP), and government current and
              capital expeneiditure (IG+CC).     For the pre-war period, the
              source for CP is listed above for Figure 1.    IP equals I above
              minus IC ("government gross domestic fixed-capital formation
              including military") which is taken from Table A38 of Ohkawa
                   (1979). G equals CC above plus IC. The data for the post-
              war period are from the Japanese national accounts (Tables I-I
              and 111-1 of Part 1).




fi1.ne.:   Terine..LL                                                  page   25
References

Altonji, Joseph, Fuinio Hayashi, and Laurence Kotlikoff (1989), "Is the
    Extended Family Altruistically Linked? Direct Tests using Micro Data",
    National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 3046.

Carroll, Chris, and Lawrence Summers (1989), "Consumption Growth Parallels
    Income Growth: Some New Evidence", National Bureau of Economic Research
    Working Paper 3090.

Christiano, Lawrence (1989), "Understanding Japan's Saving Rate: The Recon-
    struction Hypothesis", Federal Reserve Bank of Minneanolis Quarterly
     Review, Spring, pp. 10-25.

Goldsmith, Raymond (1955), A Study of Saving in the United States, Princeton
    University Press.

Balke, Nathan, and Robert Gordon (1989), "The Estimation of Prewar Gross
    National Product: Methodology and New Evidence", Journal of Political
     Economy, Vol. 97, No. I.

Hayashi, Fumio (1986), "Why is Japan's Saving Rate so Apparently High",
    Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 1, pp. 147-210.

            (1989), "Is Japan's Saving Rate High?", Federal Reserve Bank of
     MinneaDolis quarterly Review, Spring, pp. 3-9.

Hayashi, Fumio, Albert Ando, and Richard Ferris (1988), "Life Cycle and
    Bequest Savings: A Study of Japanese and U.S. Households Based on Data
    from the 1984 NSFIE and the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finances", Journal
     of the Jananese and International Economies, Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 417-449.

 Ohkawa, Kazushi, at.      (1974), Estimates of Long-Term Economic Statistics
     of Janan Since 1868, Toyo Keizai Shinposha.

 Ohkawa, Kazushi, and Miyohei Shinohara,         (1979), Patterns of Jacanese
     Economic Develonment: A Ouantitative Anvraisal, Yale University.

 Okita, Saburo (1949), "Taihelyo Sensou niyoru Wagakunt n   lljgaj
              (Comprehensive Report on the Damage in Japan During the Pacific
     War), Domestic Document No. 8, Economic Stabilization Agency, April.

 Romer, Paul (1986), "Comment on Hayashi", NEER Macroeconomics Annual, Vol.
     1, pp. 220-232.

• Wise, David (1988), "Saving for Retirement: The U.S. Case", Journal of the
     Jaoanese and International Economies, Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 385-416.




 filename:   Torino.all                                                page 26
            Figure 1: National Saving Rate
                         Percent of Net National Product
35



30


25



20



15




10



 5



0
     1955                  1965                      1975                1985
              1960                     1970                     1980            1987
                                     year
            Japan. unadjusted       + Japan. adjueted       0     U.S.
          Figure 2:Saving and Current Account
                                     Percent   of GPIP
    50


    40


    30


    20
C
C
U
C
0    10



     0


    -10



    -20
                 1900    1910
                                          year
          ii   Groee Saving     --    Net Saving         o   Current Account
                 Figure 3: Real Capital Stock and Wealth
                                  Log   of Capital Stock set to 0 for 1885
        5


      4.5   -
        4
0
      3.5   -
C

U       3-
0
0
0
4-    2.5   -
0.
l5
C)
4-      2-
 0
 0)
 0
-a
0     1.5   -
4-
z0      1—

      0.5


       0                                                                             -—_____
                1885 I 1895 1905 I 1915       1925 I 1935 I 1945 I 1955 I 1965  1975   1987
                   1890   1900   1910     1920   1930 1940 1950         1960 1970 1980
                                                  year
                           - -—-                        National Wealth
                                 Capital Stock
                     Figure 4: Real Percapita GNP
                            Log   of JapaneseGNP set to 0 for 1885
      32
       3
      2.8
      2.6
0.    24
za
Is    2.2                                                          /7
0.
Is     2
a
S     18
0
IS
V     1.6

0     1.4
0)
0     1.2
-J
'U
I-

z'S   0.8
      0.6
      0.4
      0.2
       0           T -.                                        I
            1885 I 1895 I 1905 I 1915 I 1925   1935 I 1945 I 1955 1965 1975 1987
               1890   1900    1910   1920   1930  1940 1950 1960 1970 1980
                                               year
                                        U.S.      I-   Japan
                                                  0
                                                  S
                                                  0
                                                  E

                                                  —I)
                                                   (0



                      KXXXXXXX<4
    >'                                            — j7,
—        .              __________
 0)                    [XXXXXXX>: XXXXXXXXXXXXX           C)

.E

Cl)
         I   _________________________________
              ____________________
L                      _______________________ C




                            _________                 0


                                          x
                        rxXXXnx                                —


                        I             i




             U3Jd
C,
0)
C)
<0
>'.-
     U..
— V.c
     LU
C) -vC
      'V                        0V
                                E
(J)z                            L&.

                                'V
                                V
cc
0)
                                z
I-
C)
U-



           U,
           c'J
                 0          0



                     UOJd
                     Figure 7: Age Profile of Consumption
                                  All Households   except 1959 and 1969
     300
     280
     260
     240                                                                            N
     220
     200
     180
               tc


     E                 -
     100        4—                      --a-




              -25      25-29   30-34   35-39       40-44   45-49       50-54     55-59   60-64        65-
                                             Age Bracket
El   1959(Workers)         -   1964        1969 (Workers)          A      1974     x     1979    c7     1984
      Figure 8: AggregateDemand Components
100


90


80




                              F1925J 1935                                     1987
      1885j18951                          1930
                                              5T5 11965 1975
                                         1940 1950 1960 1970           1980
                    1900   1910
        1890
                       g09i51920
                                           year
               ii   Private Consumption      —-— Private Expenditure
