                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    USING PRODUCTION BASED ASSET PRICING TO EXPLAIN THE BEHAVIOR OF STOCK
                        RETURNS OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE




                               John H. Cochrane




                            Working Paper No. 3212




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 December 1989




I thank Andrew Abel. Philip Braun, Gene Fama, Lara Hanaen, Robert Hodrick, Ed
Prescott, an anonymous referee, and numerous seminar participants for valuable
comments. This research was partially supported by a National Science
Foundation grant number SES 88-09912. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Economic Fluctuations, Any opinions expressed are those of the
author not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NEER Working Paper #3212
                                        December 1989


          USING PRODUCTION BASED ASSET PRICING TO EXPLAIN THE BEHAVIOR
                    OF STOCK RETURNS OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE



                                    ABSTRACT


    The investment return is defined as the real return that results from
marginally increasing investment at date r, and then reaping the extra output
and decreasing investment at date t+1 to leave the production plan for other
dates unchanged.   This paper constructs inveatment returns from investment
data and a production function, and compares investment returns to stock
returns, in order to explain forecasts of stock returns by business cycle
related variables, and to explain forecasts of future economic activity by
stock returns.




                                      John H. Cochrane
                                      Department of Economics
                                      University of Chicago
                                      1126 E. 59th Street
                                      Chicago, IL 60637
                                      (312)702-3059
      Recent empirical work in finance contains a great deal of evidence that
asset returns are linked to business cycles. The term premium, the corporate
or junk bond premium, lagged returns, dividend price ratios, and investment
all forecast stock returns and real variables, and stock returns forecast
future investment and aMP growth.        Risk premia vary over time in other
markets as well: the holding period ten premium in the bond market and the
forward premium in the foreign exchange market vary over time and appear
correlated with business cyclesJ

      This paper applies a production based asset pricing model as described
in Cochrsne (1988) to explain these links between stock returns and business

cycle variables.       The central concept in this approach is the investment
return. The investment return is the marginal return to physical investment.
If investment is marginally Increased at time t, output will rise at t+l, and
investment tan be decreased at t÷l, leaving the capital stock unchanged at
t+2 and beyond. The investment return is the extra output and disinvestment
at   t+l   divided by the marginal investment at t. Firms will adjust investment
to remove arbitrage opportunities between investment returns and stock
returns, so changes in stock returns should be mirrored in investment
returns.


       In this paper, investment returns are constructed from investment data
and an assumed production function end compared to real returns on the GRSP
value weighted NYSE portfolio.         The comparison investigates I) whether
investment returns and value weighted returns are highly correlated, 2)
whether forecasts of value weighted returns are equal to forecasts of



            include the following: for forecasts of stock returns based on
lagged returns: Fama and French (l988s)Lo and MscKinlay (1988), Cochrsne and
Shordone (1988). Poterba and Summers (1988); based on other variables: Fams
(1988), Famm and French (1988b) (1989); for quantity variable forecasts based
on term premia: Stock and Watson (1989), Estrella and Hardouvelis (1989);
based on stock returns: Fama (1981), Barro (1989a) (1989b); for time
variation in holding period return premia: Fama and Bliss (1987) ; in foreign
exchange premia: Hansen and Hodrick (1983).


                                         1
investment returns, 3) whether forecasts of future GNP growth and investment
to capital ratios based on value weighted returns are the same as
corresponding forecasts based on investment returns, and 4) whether the
projection of value weighted returns and investment returns on investment to
capital ratios are the same.


     The investment return calculated with an adjustment cost technology in
this paper is approximately a monotone function of investment growth: when
investment at t is high, investment returns from t to t+l are low, because
marginal investment runa into a stiff adjustment cost; when investment at t+l
is high, investment returns from t to t+l are high, because disinvestment at
t+l benefits from the high adjustment cost.      Hence, relations between asset
returns and investment growth in the data drive the relations between asset
returns and investment returns that are the empirical results of this paper,
and these results are not sensitive to the particular form of the
adjustment cost technology,


     This approach can be understood as a direct measurement of the real
investment opportunity set. The investment returns on all active production
processes constitute the investment opportunity set, so equilibrium asset
returns should mirror changes in this opportunity set.


     This approach can also be viewed as a production hased analog to the
conaumption based asset pricing model, formed from a return version of the q
theory of investment (for example, Abel and Blanchard (1986)).       The first
order conditions of present value maximizing firms imply that firms should
adjust their investment plans until no arbitrage opportunities are left
between investment returns and asset returns.        Then, as one can reverse
consumers' first order conditions for optimal consumption decisions given
asset returns, to express equilibrium asset returns am m function of a given
process for consumption, so one can reverse producers' first order conditions
for optimal investment decisions given asset returns, to express equilibrium
asset returns as a function of a given process for investment.            This
interpretation creates the consumption based asset pricing model from
consumers' first order conditions, or a "production based asset pricing
model" from producers' first order conditions,




                                2
     The q theory of investment is not known for its good empirical fit.
However, the experience of the consumption based asset pricing literature
suggests that, as Euler equations describing returns are more empirically
successful than present value relations describing prices, so the return
version of the q theory may be more empirically successful than the
conventional present value version.     One reason is that most empirical
implementations of present value models (present value of dividends or
present value of marginal benefits of investment) exclude time varying risk
premia for tractahility, yet the data display convincing evidence of time
varying rick premia (see the first footnote, and Cochrane (1989a) for
discussion of this point). Also, returns emphasize high frequency aspects of
the data that the models may be better able to capture in the presence of
slow moving changes in technology or preferences.


     The goal of this production based approsch is to provide an slternate
partial equilibrium framework that is analogous to the consumption based
asset pricing model but sidesteps its problems, and ties asset returns
directly to cyclicslly important variables such as investment. Just as
consumer's first order conditions describe a relscion thst should hold
between asset returns and consumption no matter what producers do, so
producer first order conditions describe a relation that should hold between
asset returns and production variables like investment no matter what
consumers do.


     However, it is only a partial equilibrium model, and is thus distinct
from empirically oriented general equilibrium asset pricing models with
nontrivial production sectors.2 To the extent that the model in this paper
is successful, it can take statements like "expected asset returns are low
becsuse expected investment growth (more accurately, investment return) is
low," as a successful consumption based model (Ferson and Constsntinedes




2Examples are Bslsvers, Cosimsno and McDonald (1989), Breeden (1986), Brock
(1980) (1982), Bossearts snd Green (1989), Donaldson and Mehra (1984) snd
Sundsressn (1984).   Partial equilibrium consumption based models are often
called "general equilibrium" following Lucss (1978). In these models,
consumption is given as an endowment. Since actual economies have storsge
snd production, these models in fact only exploit the partial equilibrium
relation between consumption snd asset returns in empirical applicstions.



                                3
(1989) Is the closest analog) might make a statement like riexpected asset
returns are low because expected consumption growth (more sccurately,
marginal utility growth) ía low." Neither model tells you why expected
coneweption or investment growth are low, in terms of shocks thst are
exogenous to the economy.




I, Producer's first order conditions and Investment returns


        This section shows formally that producers' first order cond.itions imply
thst there should be no srbicrsge between asset returns and investment
returns.      It introduces a parametric form for production technology, and
shows that with that technology, the investment return is equal to the return
on the fIrm's own stock.           These statements of producer's first order
conditions are derived in a simple environment with discrete time, a finite
number of ststes, and complete markets.              None of these elements are
essential, but they simplify the msthematics. The crucial assumption is that
markets sre complete enough that any investment csn be financed externally,
so that managers need not bear any risk. The setup is quite similar to that
in Abel and Blsnchard (1986), Ross (1978) end roughly similar statements can
be found in a lsrge number of papers and textbooks, for example Fams and
Miller (1972). Braun (1989) makes the connection to q theory explicit.


A.    Asset Prices and Contingent Claim Prices

        Uncertainty   comes from a state variable s, which generates a state
tree. s can take one of S values, (A A2                A5). The cumulative history
of shocks at time t is denoted s —
                                                 2         ) p(t) is the time
o price to a claim to a unit of a single consumption good c(st) delivered at
time t in state              An asset is a claim to a contingent stream of
"dividends" (d(s'), d(s2) ..       1, where the list extends over eli dates and
states.      The asset's price at time t in state St         (i.e.   with c(st) as
numeraire) is thus

                         ((r)/()) d(sT)      .
                                                                            (1)
                  that follow t}
Let
           t+l
                 ) — P(s
                                t4-l            t
     p(s                               )/P(s )

denote the one period ahead contingent claims price, i.e. the price at time t
in atate     of a unit delivered in a state        that follows t (t+1 ia
                 t+l             t
formed by a                 Is ,                    Let
                                 A t+l
                                P(s  )+d(st+l )
      A t+l
     R(a             —                          At
                                            P (s )
denote a one period asset return from date t state s to a state 5t÷l that
follows St. Then, (1) implies that

               A t+l
     l p(s t÷l
            )R(s   ).                                                                                          (2)

     At time t in state s there are S contingent claims prices
corresponding to all the possible draws of 5t+l that form 5t÷l from a. Thus
given 5 (5t+l) and R(st) are S dimenional vectors.      (2) says that all
return vectors lie on a plane in , characterized by its orthogonality to
the vector of contingent claims prices.


     Equations (I) and (2) are conventionally written in terms of scaled
prices
           t
     Q(s ) — P(m )/p mr(s
                           t t t);                  q(s
                                                          t+l
                                                                )   — p(s
                                                                            t-i-I.        t
where mr(at) is the time-O or unconditional probability of state s, and
           t                                .
                 is                     .
                          the conditional probability that 5t+l (and hence a                         )    occur
given m It is also common to delete the reference to state in writing
random variables, so Q(5t) (or                                      is commonly written       etc. With this
notation, (2) is equivalent to


     1 — s(st+llst) q(5t+l) RA(st)                                                                       (3)
               t÷1
or

                 Et (t+1R+1]                                                                             (4


and (1) is similarly equivalent to



                                                    dt+                                                  (5)
                     (1
                          r—l          —lt

                                                      5
     These representations may be found in any textbook such as Ingersoll
(1988)       Hansen and Richard (1987) derive (4) with an infinite dimensional
state space and incomplete markets. The crucial aasumption is the absence of

arbitrage.


5- Producers' first order conditions


     The firm chooses a production plan for sales, investment] production,
capital stocks and other inputs (c(st), 1(5t) y(5t), k(st), 1(5t)) (the list
extends across all dates and states) to maximize its contingent claim value
(equivalent to expected present value as (1) is equivalent to (5))


    max                        p(T) c(sr)                           —          tQ                 (6)
                                                                [        r—0        ]
          {all states)
subject to the constraints

     Production:                             yt f(kltst)
     Resources:                              y —          c ÷ It                                  (8)


     Capital accumulation:                   k÷1 —          g(k.l)                                (9)


k0 given, and k, c 0 for all t.                                         Here and below, the conventional
notation for a random variable is used where possible to simplify notation:
k(st) is denoted                 etc. The capital accumulation functions g(.) allow for
adjustment costs to investment.                           Subtracting an adjustment cost from output
yields very similar results.


        The first order conditions to this problem imply

                                 t+l     I    t-s-1
               1 —E p(s                )R(s           )                                           (10)

where         is the investment return from state                              to state


         I
        a (s
              t.*-l
                                        + g(t+l)
                      )
                          — ( fjt1-l)     g(t+l)            ]   g1(t)                             (11)


(The notation (t) means "evaluated with respect to the appropriate arguments
at time t in state se," and the subscripts denote partial derivatives, e.g.,

g1(t) —      Og(k.         I)/dIt.) (10) is equivalent to




                                                  6
       I —        p                                                               (12)
                      E4 ÷1÷1 ]
       Comparing the producer's first order conditions (10) or (12) end the
orthogonality relation between aeset returns and contingent claims prices (2)
or (4), the producer's first order conditions direcc the firm to adjust
investment so that the investment returns lie in the space of asset returns
defined by (2). This means that the firm should operate the technology up to
the point where it can no longer make sure profits by arbitrage between asset
market returns and its investment return.                Three equivalent statements are
that the firm should adjust investment until 1) the benchmark that prices
asaet returns also correctly pricea investment returns; 2) investment returns
match asset returns of similar risk characteristics; and 3) the firm can no
longer short a portfolio of assets that has returns less than or equal to the
investment return in each state of nature, create the investment return, and
make a profit in at least some states. When there are several technologies,
producer's first order conditions specify (10) or (12) for each investment
return separately.


       To derive (10) or (12), consider a marginal change in investment at time
t and at time t+l, arranged an the production plan is unchanged for t+2 and
beyond. The marginal coat of increasing        by dI is a lost unit of sales
            The increased investment gives rise to increased capital dk+i —
dlt.
                  This increased capital gives rise to increased output
g1(t)dI.
       dy1 —          fk(t)t+l — f(t+l)g1(t)dI
Also, 1t+l must be simultaneously decreased to hold k+2 unchanged:

       d1c÷2 —        g(t+l)dk1 ÷ g1(t+1)dI÷1 — 0
       dl         — - g(t÷l) dk          — - g.(t+l) g (t)   dl t
            t÷l                    t÷l       g1(t+l) I
                       g1(t+l)
Both the increased output and decreased investment at t÷l csn be sold, These
benefits occur in every state 5t÷l that follows at, so marginal cost —
marginal benefit is
                                           g(t+l)
       Ptdlt                     fk(t+U+ g1(t+l) )   g1(t)   dlt.
Dividing by P and dit and using the definitions of p(5t) and q(st+t)yields
(10) and (12)              which thus just say that the marginal benefits of the
marginal. Investment equal the marginal coat.


C. A   Functional      Form For Technology and               Investment Returns

       The empirical section of this paper uses the following paraneLric form
of the technology.


Production:            y — mp       kt +       apl      It                                  (13)


Resources:                 — c    +


                             - (1                            -
       ation   :                      -
                                          6)   [icr +
                                                                  [   ]2J]        ¶         (14)

mp is the marginal product of capital. 6 is the depreciation rate, and o is
the adjuatment cost parameter.



       The ona period investment returns are, from their definition (11)


                                                    1 ÷
                                                                              3       I 2
R'(tt÷l)               1                        +                         -
                                                                                             (15)
                   [
                            6 j
                                  [                                               ° [) ]
                                                    1   - c2
The notation R(t-at÷l) is used to distinguish a quarterly return from an
annual return, denoted R(t4t+4).                          Note that the investment return is a
decreasing function of time t investment and an increasing function of time
t-4-l investment as explained in the introduction. The investment return has
roughly the same sensitivity to investment at t and at ts-l, though with
opposite sign, so the investment return is roughly proportional to investment
growth.    (More precisely, a Taylor expansion of the investment return with
respect to investment at time t and t+l has approximately the same
coefficients with opposite signs.)




                                                B
D. Firm value and Q    theory

     With this technology, the investment return is also the return to owning
a unit of capital.       The model so far only allows us to compare investment
returns and some portfolio of asset returns, picked to mimic the pattern of
the investment return across states of nature. With this result, we can
compare investment returns directly to the returns on the firm's own stock.


     The firm can transform a marginal unit of the consumption good at t into
g1(t) units of installed capital at t+l, via the investment equation k÷i
                 Thus the price at time t of a claim to a unit of time t-*l
         kr).
installed capital must be

                   1                        1
     P      — _________ —                                               (16)
                g1(lk)                      3             It 2
                                    -5)11 - a
     (16) can inverted to express investment as a function of the price of
capital:

                                                1/2

     IIc o 1-                                         .                 (17)
                                (1-5)

     (17) is the price version of the q-theory of investment: it expresaes
optimal investment It as an increasing function of the market price of the
firm's capital divided by replacement cost. (Replacement cost is l/(1+5).)


     Now, uhat is the (earket) return available from buying some capital and
holding it for a period? Buying one unit of capital costs pk÷1. In return,
you get the produce of that capital at period t+l, fk(t+l). An extra unit of
capital at t+l becomes g.5(t+1) units of capital at t+2, which may be sold a±
time t+l for Pknz. Thus the return from buying capital and holding it for a
period is


     Return —
                         + g(t+l)       t
                                S
                            p
                                t


Substituting     P1'. l/g1(t) and pt+Z_ l/g1(t+2) from (16), we obtain the



                                        9
investment return (11) again. Thus, the investment returns are also the
market returns to owning capital for a period If we model a firm as a claim
to the capital of a single technology or a claim to a constant linear
combination of technologies, the (marginal) investment return will be the
same as the return on a ownership share of the firm.




IL. Th     tyclical   behavior .f   .pç_k   returns   investment returns


     To examine the cyclical behavior of stock returns in the simplest
version of the above model, the CRSP value weighted portfolio is modeled as a
claim to the capital stock corresponding to gross fixed private domestic
investment.3 The real value weighted return and the investment return should
be the same:


            RW(t4t+1) R'(It/ki It÷l/kt+lk mp÷1).                           (18)

In particular         the empirical work focuses on three issues: 1) whether
forecasts of value weighted returns are the same as forecasts of investment
returns 2) whether value weighted returns have the same relation to
contemporaneous investment to cspitsl ratios (I/ki I/k+1) as investment
returns and 3) whether forecasts of future investment and GNP from value
weighted returns are the ssme as corresponding forecssts from investment
returns.


     However, we can expect an error term in implementing (18). First, we do
not have direct dats on the production function shock mp÷1 so a constant
value is used instead.4 Second, the value weighted return may be in fact a




3The bend portion of claims to firms in the value weighted NYSE are ignored.
Since bond returns vary a great deal less than expectef stock returns, snd
since the standard deviation of investment returns is an essentially free
parsmeter, it is hoped that not much error is introduced.
4lt is possible in principle to mesaure these shocks, unlike utility shocks.
For exsmple, in the given model,

     mp'-(y-mpl l)/k
snd mpl x 1 may be measured ss the wage bill.     This ides is not pursued
below, However, note from equstion (16) that the terms in the investment to
capital ratio measure changes in prices, while the mp term measures s
stochastic component of earnings. To the extent that price changes are more


                                      10
claim to other technologies as well as that corresponding to gross private
domestic inveatment.           Variation in the investment returns of these other
technologiea or factors would show up in the error term. Third, investment
is measured with error, and this measurement error contributes to the error
                                                                         -
term -


 R1(t-c+l)     —   R'(I/k    1/k 1,mp) + (mpt+1   measurement error, etc. term) (19)

         Unfortunately, there is no reason to believe that any of these error
term components are serially uncorrelated, uncorrelated with investment to
capital ratios or investment returns, or uncorrelated with instruments
(return forecasting variables). In the regressions described above, there is
then a danger that a coefficient ascribed to the investment returns with no
productivity shock (the first term in (19)) is in fact due to spurious
correlation with the error term. Lacking convincing statistical assumptions,
this possibility is acknowledged, but no correction is made for it. The
consumption based model suffers from the same problem: unobserved preference
shocks, components of consumption that enter nonseparably in the utility
function (for example, the service flow from durables), and measurement error
all contribute to the error term, but there is no reason to expect the error
from these sources to obey the orthogonality restrictions that the forecast
error obeys.


A. Construction of investment returns


     The investment data are real gross private domestic investment.            For
each given choice of parameters, a capitaistock series is constructed by
accumulating past investment, using the capital accumulation rule (14)
Then, investment to capital ratios are formed, and quarterly returns (from
t-l to t) are calculated from investment to capital ratios at t-1 and t
according to (15) .         Overlapping quarterly observations of annual investment
returns from t-4 to t are constructed by accumulating quarterly returns.


     Investment is a quarterly aggregate, but value weighted returns are




important to changes in returns and expected returns than dividend changes,
leaving out changes in marginal products may have a small effect on the
results,


                                      11
point-to-point.   As a crude adjustment for this difference, the value
weighted returns in the rest of this aection are shifted so that they go from
approximately the center of the initial quarter to the center of the final
quarter. This dating convention is illustrated in Fig. 1.             Other variables
have conventional dating: returns dated t used as forecasting variables a
from the beginning to the end of quarter t, real variables dated t are
aggregates for quartet t.




             Annual returna                                Quarterly returns
     t-4                                t                   t-1.                     t

 Jan Feb Mar Apr             Dec Jan Feb Mar            Oct Nov Dec       Jan Feb Mar

                                                    I
                                                                      H                        I




             R1(t 4     t)                                   LRI('l
               RW(tLe 4 t)          -

                                                                           1/W
     Fig. I. Dating convention for real value weighted returns (R                )       and
                              investment returns (R1)




     Three parameters govern the relation between investment returns and the
investment to capital ratio: the adjustment coat parameter a, depreciation S
and the productivity of capital mp. When the adjustment cost parameter a is
zero, the annual investment return collapeea to R'(t-4 4 t) —          (l6)(l-t-mp)4,
and the quarterly return to R1(t-l 4 t) — (l+6)(l-i-mp),       so these parameters'
main effect is to control the mean return The adjustment cost parameter a
controls the sensitivity of investment returns to investment to capital
ratios, and thus the variance of investment returns.


     However, the parameters have alaoat no effect on the relative
sensitivity of investment returns to investment to capital ratios at
different dates, and thus the correlation of investment returna with other
variables,    Some numerical examples of this insensitivity are presented
below.


     Given that the parameters (a, 6, mp) control the mean and standard


                                   12
deviation of investment returns, but have little impact on its timing or
correlation with other variables, the parameters of the investment return are
chosen as follows: I) depreciation 6 is chosen arbitrarily, and then 2) the
marginal product mp and the adjustment cost a are chosen together to make
meen investment return equal the mean real value weighted return and to
equate the standard deviation of the fitted values of regressions of real
value weighted and investment returns on eight leads and lags of the
investment to capital ratio, The resulting parameters are given in the note
to table I.


     The reason for this choice of standard deviation is that the regression
of value weighted returns on investment to capital ratios leaves a much
larger residual than the projection of investment returns on investment to
capital ratios.      This residual may be attributed to other factors, or to
marginal productivity shocks (see equation (19)).       Thus, this choice of
standard deviation is designed to produce a series of about the same standard
deviation as the investment return component of value weighted returns, the
first term of equation (19) .    Since most of the results are driven by the
correlsrion of investment and value weighted returns, or their regressions on
various variables, this scaling is not crucial to the results.


     A puzzle of the q theory is that adjustment coat estimates seem
implausibly high. They imply that very large fractions of GNP (often greater
than 1) are lost to adjustment costs.    This is analogous to the consumption
based puzzle that large coefficients of risk aversion seem to be required.
With the technology (13)-(14), the fraction of investment lost to adjustment
costs is (aJZ)(I/lc)2. a is around 13 (see note to Table I), I/k is about the
same as depreciation, .1, so the fraction of investment lost to sdjustment
costs is about 7%.     The fraction of output lost is I/y x 7%, or around 1%.
Thus the puzzle of implausibly high adjustment costs is not present in these
parameters.

                            Insert fig. 2 about here

     Fig. 2 presents s plot of quarterly observations of annual real returns
on the value weighted NYSE portfolio and corresponding annual investment
returns, end shows that they are well correlated.           -




                                  13
                               Insert fig. 3 about here

       The arbitrary choice of depreciation rate (5 —     .1   in fig. 2 and below)
has almost no effect on the resulting series.             To demonatrate, fig.    3

presents investment returns for three values of depreciation, S —         0.05,   —
0.1,   and S —   0.2.   In each case the other parametera are picked as before ic
match the mean value weighted return and the standard deviation of its
projection on investment to capital ratios. (The resulting parameters are
given in the note to table I.)            Fig.   3 shows that the corresponding
investment returns are nearly identical, though the parameters vary widely in
economic terms. In particular, the timing of the peaks and troughs is almost

completely unaffected by the large changes in parameters.

                               Insert fig. 4 about here

       In fig. 4, the adjustment cost parameter a is varied, while keeping the
mean investment return equal to the mean value weighted return with the
marginal product mp.       (The parametara are given in the note to table I.) As
claimed above, fig. 4 ahows that e controls the standard deviation of
investment returns, with essentially no effect on their cyclical timing and
thus their correlation with other variables.        Thus the correlation between
investment returns and real value weighted returns evident in fig. 2 is
essentially independent of parameter choices, as claimed above.


B. Correlation between investment and value weighted returns.


       Table I presents some regressions and correlations designed to
quantitatively assess the correlation between investment returns and real
value weighted returns apparent in fig. 2.

                              Insert table I sbout here

       The message of table I is that the correlation visible to the eye in
fig. 2 is statistically significant at conventional levels. The correlation
coefficient between value weighted and investment returns ranges from .241
for quarterly returns to .385 for annual returns and is as high as .449 for
first quarter annual returns.


       Table I also includes regressions and correlations of value weighted



                                    14
 returns with investment growth and CNP growth.        Both have about the same
 correlation with value weighted returns as the investment return, and graph
of investment and CNP Browth against value weighted returns look very much
 like fig. 2. Thua the correlation of fig. 2 is not a sensitive result of the
nonlinear function relating investment returns to investment data. The point
of the paper is to explain this correlation, rather than to find a particular
nonlinear transformation of investment that produces a suddenly high
correlation with stock returns.


C. Forecasts of investment returns and value weighted returns


     Table II compares forecasts of real value weighted returns and forecasts
of investment returns, at both annual and quarterly horizons.       The
forecasting variables are chosen from the literature that documents the
forecastability of stock returns (see footnote I).          These are the term
premium, the corporate premium, the lagged real value weighted return, and
the dividend price ratio. (See the data appendix for sources.)


                          Insert table II about here

     For each forecasting variable a preliminary regreasion was run to
determine if the variable aggregated over the previous year or previous
quarter provided a better forecast of value weighted returns.             This
prelieinary regression is presented in part 1 of table II, and suggests the
use of an annual horizon for the term premium and dividend price ratio and a
quarterly horizon for lagged returns and the corporate premium,5            In
addition, the investment to capital ratio in the previous quarter is used as
a forecasting variable.


     Parts 2 and 3 of table II present single regressions of quarterly and
annual returns on the forecasting variables.   The coefficients of value
weighted returns on each of the forecasting variables are significant at




50f course this procedure leads to       a danger of overfitting, so the
probability values of the value weighted return forecasts are optimistic.
However, even if one set of variables was used without looking at the
results, it could not be made independent of the literature-wide fishing
expedition that has produced these forecasting variables, so this procedure
was followed to make sure the better forecasting variable was not overlooked.


                                  15
                                                                  returns.6    The
conventional levels, except lagged returns for annual
investment return coefficients are of the sane sign and roughly of the same
magnitude as the value weighted return coefficients, with the exception of
the dividend price ratio.    To test whether the coefficients are in fact
equal, the difference between the value weighted return and the investrie
return is regressed on the forecasting variables, in the column marked
"VP-mv," As the table shows, we cannot reject that the coefficients are
equal for all the forecasting variables except the dividend price ratio.


     To assess the importance of the particular adjustment cost technology
used to form investment returns, value weighted returns were regressed on
contemporaneous and lagged investment to capital rstios, a fitted return was
calculsted from this regression, and used in place of the investment return
in the column aarked "VP -   Fit."        Interestingly, the fitted return performs
worse than the investment return for all variables other than the dividend
price ratio, for which it is nearly identical.             Thus, though the fitted
return (by construction) improves on the investment return for the objective
of a high correlation between er-post returns and for matching the projection
of returns on investment to capital ratios, it then does worse in matching
er-ante returns. This observation provides some evidence that the investment
return calculated through the adjustment cost technology is more than a proxy
 for the projection of value weighted returns on investment to capital ratios.


      Parts 4 and 5 of table II           present multiple regression forecasts of
 returns, using all the forecasting variables together. They also report the
 joint probability values and R2s from multiple regressions on all the
 forecasting variables except the dividend price ratio.  (The individual
 coefficients of these regressions are omitted to save spate, since they were
 similar to those reported for the multiple regression including the dividend
 price ratio, except that the investment to capital ratio enters more strongly
 when the dividend price ratio is absent.)


      All together, the forecasting variables are jointly significant



 6Poterba snd Summers (1988) and Cochrane and Sbordone (1988) note that the
 variance ratio of stock returns is one at annual horizons but lower for both
 shorter and longer horizons, which is the same observation.


                                     16
predictors of value weighted returns: the     test for the joint significance
has a probability vslue of 0.03% for quarterly value weighted returns and
0.01% for annual value weighted returns, with R2s of .12 an .22.      Only the
dividend price ratio is an individually significant predictor of value
weighted returns. However, the other variables are jointly significant, both
in multiple regressions that include the dividend price ratio end those that
exclude it.


     When the difference between value weighted and investment returns is
regressed on all the forecasting variables, the individual variables except
the dividend price ratio are even less significant.     The exception is the
investment to capital ratio with annual returns, which enters with a 3.94%
probability value.    More importantly, the coefficients on all variables
except the dividend price ratio are now jointly insignificant, so we cannot
reject that the investment return and value weighted return forecasts based
on all variables except the dividend price ratio are the same.     As with the
aingle regressions, the fitted return formed by projecting value weighted
returns on investment to capital ratios performs worse than the investment
returns in explaining forecasts of the value weighted return in multiple
regressions.


     Parts 4 and 5 of table II also document the similarity of multiple
regression forecasts of value weighted returns and investment returns by the
correlation of and regressions between the two forecasts.          Without the
dividend price ratio, the correlation of the two forecasts is .875 quarterly
and .938 annual, and statistically significant. Fig. 5 plots these forecasts
of quarterly real value weighted and investment returns and demonstrate their
correlation to the eye. Interestingly, the correlations of return forecasts
are much higher than the correlations of the returns themselves.


                          Insert fig. 5 about here

     However, the dividend price ratio significantly forecasts the difference
between value weighted and investment returns, and lowers the correlation
between the two forecasts. Fig. 6 presents forecasts of quarterly investment
and value weighted returns including the dividend price ratio.


                          Insert fig. 6 about here



                                17
     The pattern of these results suggests that all variables except the
dividend price ratio have a common business cycle component that forecasts
value weighted and investment returns equally, but the dividend price tatio
contains another, longer term component that forecasts a long term component
in value weighted returns not found in investment returns7. The fact that
each of the variables significantly forecast value weighted returns in single
regressions and jointly in multiple regressions, but only the dividend price
ratio is individually significant in multiple regressions, suggests that the
variables except the dividend price ratio are all forecasting the same
component of returns but the dividend price ratio forecasts a different
component. The long run interpretation of the dividend price ratio forecasts
is suggested by the difference between fig. S and fig. 6. In both figures,
the cyclical movements in the value weighted return forecasts are matched by
cyclical movements in the investment return forecast, but in fig. 6, with the
dividend price ratio added, the value weighted return forecast waves slowly
around the inveatment return forecast, in response to long horizon changes in
the dividend price ratio.


D. Regressions of investment and value weighted returns on investment to
capital   ratios


     Table III presents single and multiple regressions of value weighted
returns, investment returns, and the difference between value weighted
returns and investment returns on investment to capital ratios.         These
regressions address all three issues- -forecasts of returns based on
investment to capital ratios, the association of returns with subsequent
investment to capital ratios, and the projection of returns on contemporary
investment to capital ratios,

                            Insert table III about here

     The first column of each part of table Ill (columns 1, 6, 11, 15 and 21)
and figa. 7 and B present the slope coefficients from single regressions of
value weighted returns and investment returns on investment to capital
ratios.




7Fama and French (1988b) suggested this interpretation of dividend price
ratio forecasts of returns.


                                   18
                       insert fig.a 7 and 8 about here

    As shown in fig. 7 and 8, the pattern of single regression coefficients
is similar, but the value weighted return coefficients are slightly shifted
in time. The size of the shift is about the same for annual as for quarterly
returns.   The shift is about two quarters for lagged investment to capital
racios, near t-8, declines to one quarter near t and vanishes for leada of
the investment to capital ratio, by t-t-3 or t+4,        However, the single
regressions of value weighted less investment returns on investment to
capital ratios (columns II and 13) show that the only evidence against
equality of value weighted and investment return coefficients comes at I/k(t)
and I/k(t+l) quarterly end l/k(t-2), I/kC,t-l) and I/k(t) for annual returns.
Thus, only the part of the shift of fig. 6 and 7 near I/k(t) is statistically

significant


     Since investment to capital ratios are serially correlated, they should
forecast investment and hence value weighted returns. The single regressions
in table III show that they do: i/k(t-2) forecasts quarterly value weighted
teturns from t-l to t with a probability value of 2.12% (col, I), and
I/k(t-S) forecasts annual returns from t-4 to t with a probability value of
4.34% (column 5),8    Furthermore, we do not reject that the forecasts of
investment and value weighted returns from lagged investment to capital
ratios are the same in the single regressions of value weighted less
investment returns (columns 11, 13).


     Also as a result of serial correlation in investment to capital ratios,
investment returns are associated with future investment to capital ratios in

single regressions, though they only depend on investment to capital ratios
at times between t-4 (annual) or t-l (quarterly) and t in a functional or
multiple regression sense, In fact, the highest predicted single regression




8The return series in these forecasting regressions is shifted forward in
time one month relative to the usual timing in return forecasting
regressions. Normally, the return from Jan 1 to March 31 would be regressed
on fourth quarter investment to capital ratio, whereas in these regressions.
the return from February 1 to April 30 is regressed on the fourth quarter I/k
ratio, as explained in fig. 1. Experiments revealed slightly higher forecast
power in the usual timing, but not enough difference to warrant an extra set
of tables. Also, equally weighted return forecasts are more significant with
either timing.

                                19
 coefficients do not occur until several quarters past t. (See figs. 7 end 8).
Tsble III shows chat the single regressions of value weighted returns on
 future investment to capital ratios are indeed highly significant (columns I,
15), and thst the equality of the investment return and value weighted return
coefficients on future investment to capital rstioa is not rejected (cclua
11, 13).


       The first set of multiple regressions in each part of table III      is
designed to capture the shape of the relation between value weighted returns
and investment to capital ratios (columns 2, 3, 16, 17 and 18) and compare
that to the shape predicted by the model for investment returns (columns 7, 8
and 22, 23). Columns S and 23 present the partial derivatives of the
investment return function with respect to investment to capital ratios,
which are close to the multiple regression coefficients.         The multiple
regression of value weighted less investment returns on investment to capital
ratios (columns 12 and 14) tests the equality of the investment return and
value weighted return multiple regression coefficients


       Value weighted returns are firat regressed on investment to capital at
t-l and t (quarterly, column (U) and t-4 and t (annual, column (16)), to try
to recover what should be the most important coefficients, These regressions
recover the right signs and approximately the right relative magnitudes, but
are slightly lower in absolute magnitude than the corresponding investment
return coefficients. This is a result of the fact that the parameters of the
investment return were chosen to match the standard deviation of projections
on eight leads and lags of investment to capital ratios, but investment
returns are mostly related to I/k(t) and I/k(t-l) (quarterly) or l/K(t-4)
(annual), while the projection of value weighted returns on I/k is more
spread out.


       Annual value weighted returns are then regresaed on all the investment
to capital ratios of which they should be a function, from t-4 to t (column
17).    Here, we find that the t-4 to t-l investment to capital ratios enter
negatively as thay should, but not with the relative magnitudes predicted by
the model.    The model predicts a much larger coefficient for t-4 than for
t-3, t-2 and t-1 (see columns 22 and 23), but t-l has the largest coefficient
in the value weighted return regression.



                                 20
     The model predicts that only investment to capital ratios at t-4 through
t (annual) or e-l to t (quarterly) should enter in a multiple regression.
Thus columns 3 and 18 add two future and two past investment to capital
ratios.   With the possible exception of one future coefficient in each
regression that enters at about the 10% level, the ocher investment to
capital ratios do not enter.     Also the fact that investment to capital
ratios at times other than t-4        t (annual) and t-l, t (quarterly) do not
enter the single regressions of value weighted less investment returns
(columns Il, 13) provides confirmation on this point.


     The multiple regressions of value weighted less investment returns on
investment to capital ratios in part 3 (columns 12, 14) test whether the
differences   in multiple      regression coefficients     are   statistically
significant. The     statistics reject the hypothesis that all the multiple
regression coefficients are equal. However, most of this rejection is due to
the coefficients contemporaneous to returns, as seen in the joint
statistics for only the other coefficients.



     Thus, the single and multiple regressions in part 3 of table ITT suggest
that the major difference between the regressions of value weighted and
investment returns on investment to capital ratios is the shape of the
relation between returns and contemporaneous investment to capital ratios
(I/k(t-4). .I/k(t) annual and I/k(t-l), I/k(t) quarterly), rather than in
differences of the projection of returns on investment to capital ratios
hefore or after the return period, which would reflect different forecasts of
investment and value weighted returns or different associations of value
weighted and investment returns with subsequent investment to capital ratios.



     The set of multiple regressions marked "forecasts" in each part of table
III investigates forecasts of returns from several investment to capital
ratios taken together. The first forecasting multiple regressions (columns 4
and 19) show thmt all the forecastability comes from the investment to
capitsl ratio immediately prior to the return period: t-2 for quarterly
returns and t-5 for annual returns, in that investment to capital ratios for

prior periods are not individually or jointly significant given these.



                                 21
Hence, forecasts of returns from earlier individual investment to capital
ratios are just due to the serial correlation of investment to capital
ratios.


      The next forecasting multiple regressions (columns 5 and 20) telce th
argument one step further: they show that the t-2 (quarterly) and t-5
(annual) investment to capital ratios in turn get their forecast power from
their ability to forecast investment to capital ratios contemporary to
returns, c-l and t quarterly and t-4          t annual.   Hence, investment to
capital ratios forecast returns because they forecast future investment to
capital ratios aod only because they forecast future investment to capita].
ratios -



      Part   3 of table III confirms this view, in that investment to capital
ratios before t-l (quarterly) and t-4 (annual) do not forecast the difference
between value weighted returns and investment returns in single or multiple
regressions.


      Table III was replicated with equally weighted returns end with
investment to GNP ratios in the place of investment to capital ratios.     The
pattern of results in both cases was so similar that the tables are omitted
to save space.


F. Forecasts of GNP growth from investment returns and value weighted returns


                   Insert table IV and figs. 9, 10 about here

     Table IV presents forecasts of ONE growth from lagged returns. The first
and second parts of table TV present the slope coefficients of single
regressions of ONE growth on lagged value weighted and investment returns.
These coefficients are also displayed in fig.s 9 and 10. The pattern of the
coefficients is roughly the same, though the overall magnitude of the
coefficients of ONE growth on investment returns is larger. The figures also
suggest a shift of the single regression coefficients, as was the case of
single regression coefficients of returns on investment to capital ratios.
Value weighted returns from t-3 to t are individually significant for
quarterly ONE and value weighted returns from t-4 to t are individually
significant for annual ONE, confirming Fama's (1981) and Barro's (1989a)


                                 22
(1989b) results.


        The last column in the first two parts of table IV presents single
regression coefficients of CNP growth on value weighted less investment
returns, to test whether the single regression coefficients on the two
returns individually are the same. There is some evidence that they are not
at the 10% level, but only two out of twenty coefficients are significant at
the 5% level. The 10% rejections are concentrated around t-3 and t-2 where
the shift between the two coefficients is largest, rather than near t-l or t
where the magnitudes of the coefficients and the magnitude of their
difference are largest.      In particular, the large difference between the
coefficienta near t visible in figs.         9 and 10 is not atatistically
significant.


        Parts 3 and 4 of table IV present multiple regressions of GNP growth on
lagged investment returns and value weighted returns. (Multiple regressions
using up to ei-ght lags were run, but the additional lags were insignificant.)
In both cases the nearest lags are the most significant predictors of CNP.
The regressions of CNP growth on investment return lees value weighted return
do not reject that the coefficients are individually and jointly equal.




ILLS. Concluding Remarks


        The simple implementation of a production based asset pricing model in
this paper predicted that stock returns and investment returns should be the
sane.      This idea was used to explain the forecastability of real value
weighted stock returns, and the fact that stock returns forecast real
variables including investment and GNP.           Projections of returns on
contemporaneous investment to capital ratios were also included as a
diagnostic.


        Forecasts of investment returns end value weighted returns appeared to
be the same for most of the forecasting variables.          In this sense the
shifting investment opportunities measured by the investment returns explain
the forecestsbility of stock returns.




                                   23
     Forecasts of future investment to capital ratios and GNP growth from
investment returns and value weighted returns also sppeared to be the same.
Investment returns are only functionally related to contemporaneous
inveataent to capital ratios, and their ability to forecast future investment
to capital ratios and GNF growth in single regressions is due only to aerial
correlation in investment to capital ratios and correlation of investment to
capital ratios with aubaequent ON? growth. Hence the equality of value
weighted and inveatment return foreoasta of future economic activity means
that the ability of stock returns to forecast future economic activity is
attributed only to their correlation with contemporaneous investment returns
and diaappeara in a multiple regression context.


     Other successes include findings that ex-post investment returns and
value weighted returns are highly correlated and that the projection of
investment and value weighted returns on inveatment to capital ratios matchea
in many reapeots.


     However, investment returns did not explain the component of value
weighted returns forerastable by dividend price ratios am dividend price
ratios seemed to forecast a long horizon component in value weighted returns
not present in inveatrsent returns. This component ?   value weighted returna
might reflect a long term movement in productivity, which is an unmeasured
component of investment returns in this paper's empirical implementation.


     Also, the shape of the function relating value weighted returns to
investment to capital ratios was significantly different from that of the
investment returns.      The single regression coefficients exhibited a
statistically significant one quarter shift near time t, and the pattern of
multiple regression coefficients, though qualitatively the same, was
quantitatively different, and the difference was statistically significant.
Unoertainties in the timing of investment may account for some of the shift.
For example, if investment purchased this quarter does not give rise to
productive capital until next quarter, this could account for a one quarter
shift. The difference in the pattern of the projection of annual returns on
investment to capital ratios suggests a technologies in which the multiperiod
return depends more strongly on events in the middle of the return horizon
rather than just on the two ends.



                                24
     There are several promising direc Lions in which this model can be
extended.   With a model for the benchmark return, the parameters of the
investment return can be estimated by generalized method of momenta, and
overidentifying restrictions tested;    alternate forms for technology may
improve the fit, including gestation lags and adjustment costs to changing
the level of investment; and variations in marginal products may be
estimated. Most importantly, the implications for cross sectional variation
in returns, lost here by aggregation to a single technology, may be explored
using components of investment or industry or firm investment data.




                                25
                                                       APPENDIX

Data Sources and Transformations



       The following basic series were used. The Citibase series are quarterly
1947:1-1987:4, in 1982 dollars, the others are monthly, 1926:1- 1987:4.


Source          Series name                                 Description

C1ITIBASE          G1F82               Gross private domestic investment--fixed investment
                   GCDS2               Personal consumption expenditures--durable goods
                   GCN82               Personal consumption expenditures -   -nondurable   goods
                   GGSE2               Personal consumption expenditures--services
CRSP               VWRET               Total return on value weighted NYSE portfolio
                   VWRETX              Return excluding dividends on value weighted NYSE
Ihbotson-          YSTR                Treasury bill return

Sinquefield        GETR                Government bond portfolio return
                   CBTR                Corporate bond portfolio return
                   CPI                 Consumer price index


The investment series was divided by 4 to yield quarterly investment rather
Lhan annual rate. The following transformations were employed:

       1) Investment to capital ratio (I/k) : The capital accumulation rule
(14) implies the following transition rule for the investment to capital
ratio i
                1t+l                              it
       tt+l —
                                                        -
                                                                     .                     (Al)
                         (1   -
                                  6)        1 +
                                        [
The investment to capital ratio was assumed to be at the "steady state" value
i* in 1947:1, where i* is defined by the fixed point of (A.l) with investment
growth Sec to its mean value, and then (A.I) was used to find investment to
capital ratios at future dates.


       2) Real value weighted returns (RW): The monthly real value weighted
return was formed from VWIRET - GPI, and was accumulated to quarterly returns
with the timing illustrated in fig. 2.




                                                  26
     3) Term premiun, corporate premium and dividend price ratio. Term is
CETR - IJSTR, Corp ts CBTR - IJSTR. VWRET and VWRETX were both accumulated for
a year. Then d/p — (annual VWRET -    annual VWRETX )/ (1 + annual VWRETX) forms
dividends brought forward at the market return (VWRET), divided by end of
period price. (This is shown in the appendix to Cochrane (1989b).)




                                 27
       C               I        I                                       I




       C
       T          . Vaue weighted return
                — Investment return
                I              F



       45 50 55
                                                                    I


                               60        65   70   75      80 85 90
                                          Date




Fig.   2: Quarterly observations of annual real returns on the value weighted
NYSE portfolio and annual investment returns.         Investment returns are
calculated from investment to capital ratioa. The parameters to, 5, mp) of
the investment tecbnology are chosen to equate the mean investment and value
weighted returns, and to equate the standard deviation of the projectiona of
investment and value weighted returns on eight leads end lags of the
investment to capital ratio.




                                    28
    0         1I             I             I




    0
    ND




    0
     0


      45 50 55 60 65 70 75 50 55 90
                                      Dote
Fig. 3: Quarterly observations of annual investment returns with depreciation
6 — .05, .1 and .2.     The other parameters are seYcted as in fig. 2 and
presented in the note to table I. The point of the graph is that investment
returns are insensitive to the choice of depreciation rate S.

     0
     0
     ND




     0
      0

         45 50 55 60 65 70 75 50 85 90
                                      Date
Fig. 4: Quarterly observations of annual investment returns    with three
                                                         In each case the
different choices of the adjustment cost parameter a.
marginal product mp is chosen to match the mean investment return and the
mean real value weighted return. The point of the graph is that a controls
the standard deviation but not the timing of investment returns.

                                 29
         0
  N
  "—s CD
  C
   I,
   q)

         C"




           45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85                                   90
                                               Dote
Fig. 5 Forecasts of quarterly value weighted end investment returns free
linear regressions of returns on the term premium, corporste premium,
return. and investment to capital ratio,                              lagged
                                           The regressions ere presented in
tsble II.



                          I       I
             —VW return forecast
        C . '-Hnvestment return forecast
  N
 ',— (0
   C

        C']
  C)
  a:

                      1       I            I      I
                                                                 I
          45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85                                   90
                                           Dote
Fig. 6 Forecasts of quarterly value weighted and investment returns from
linear regressions of returns on the tens premium, corporate premium, lagged
return, investment to capital ratio and dividend price ratio.            The
regressions are presented in table Ii.


                                      30
     c\J        E VW return
                     nvestrnent return




     (NJ




            I    I    i   I   i   I



      —10 —8 —6 —4 2                            0   2     4      6      8
                                           / date
Fig. 7. Single regression slope coefficients of quarterly investment return
and quarterly real value weighted returns (from t-l to t) on investment to
capital ratios at t-8 to t+6, with one standard erYor bands on the value
weighted return coefficients.  The regressions are presented in table III,
column 1.


     cc

     CD




     (LI



      —10 —8 —6 —4                         —2   0   2     4      6      8
                                       I/k date
Fig. 8: Single regression slope coefficients of annual investment returns and
annual real value weighted returns (from t-4 to t} on investment to capital
ratios at t-8 to t+8. with one standard error bands on the value weighted
return coefficients. The regressions are presented in table III, column 6.



                                      31
               VoWe weighted retunn

  CQ
 Q)
  C)
  4-
  4-

  00
       (0




         —8                      —4                         0
                               Return date
Fig. 9 Single regression slope coefficipnts of quarterly real CNP growth on
past and future quarterly real value weighted returns and investment returns.
The regreSsion5 are presented in table IV.




       aj


  C
  C)
       C
 4-
 4-    (0


 00    c'J




         —8                      —4                         0
                               Return date
Fig. 10 Single regression coefficients of annual real GNP growth on past and
future annual real value weighted returns and investment returns,         The
regressions are presented in table IV.


                               32
Table I. Regressions and correlation of real value weighted returns on
investment returns, investment growth and GNP growth



1. Quarterly returns

Right hand variable Coeff. t stat. p value(%)           R2 Correlation     Std. error


                       0.506     3.163    0.186    0.058       0.241        0,069
Investment returns
                       0.566     3.103    0.226    0056        0.237        0.068
Investment growth
                       1.941     3,914    0.013     0.086      0.294        0.0Th
GNP growth


2. Annual returns with no overlap (first quarter to first quarter, etc.)

                       Coeff. t stat. p value(%)          K2 Cotrelation   Std. errcr
Sample

                       0.719     2.685     0.634    0.202       0.449       0.128
First quarter                                                               0.139
                       0.614     2.578     1.384    0.166       0.407
Second quarter                                                              0,141
                       0.489     1.853     7.173    0.096       0.306
Third quarter                                                               0137
                       0.722     2.569     1.412    0.164       0.404
Fourth quarter


3, Overlapping annual returns, with corrected standard errors


Right hand variable Coeff. t stat. p value(%)             K2 Correlation Std. error

                       0.622      2.820    0.541      0.148     0.385       0.113
Investment return
                       0.716      3.060    0.259      0.130     0.360       0.103
Investment growth
                       2.147      3,921    0,012      0.163     0.404       0.097
GNP growth


 4. overlapping biannual returns, with corrected standard errors


                                 t stat. p vsiue(%)       K2 Correlation   Std. error
 Right hand variable Coeff.

                       0.591      2.355    1.979      0.124     0.352        0.130
 Investment return
                       0.744      2.516    1.288      0.116     0.340        0.116
 Investment growth
                       2.100      3.790    0.021      0.157     0.396        0.119
 ONE growth




                               (continues on next page)



                                          33
                                 (Table I, continued)
Note to table I:


     Coeff.     gives the single regression slope coefficient of real value
weighted returns on the variable indicated in the first column.                      p value"
gives the percent probability value of a two sided test, based on the t-
statistic.    "Correlation" gives the correlation between real value weighted
returns and the variable indicated in the first column.                    "Std. error" gives
the standard error of the correlation coefficient.


     The standard errors in part 3 and 4 are constructed as in Hansen (1982)
and Newey and West (1987) to correct for serial correlation due to overlap.
Annual returns use 8 positive and negative covariancas (twice the overlap)
and biannual returns use 16. The data sample is 1947:1 -                  1987:4.

     Investment return parameters are picked so that the mean investment
return is equal to the mean value weighted return, and so that the standard
error of the projection of value weighted and investment returns on eight
leads and lags of the investment to capital ratio are the same. These are the
same investment returns plotted in fig. 2. The paraaeters and statistics for
resulting percent returns are:

                6        a             mp   Mean VW Mean mv. S.d. JW S.d. mv.

Quartlery:      0.1     13.044    0.152           1.69      1.70           7.24      3.42
   Annual:      0.1     13.219    0.156           7.33      7.34          15.53      9.37
 Biannual:      0.1     13.409    0.156          14.64     14.65          21.49     12.46

     The parameters for the eperiments in S and a                reproted     in fig. 3 and 4
are these annual parameters and
                      Fig. 3                             Fig.4
                 S       a       rap               5       a        isp
               0,05 50.946 0.088                  0.1     9.914 0.147
               0.2   2.842 0.318                  0.1     6.610 0.141




                                            34
Table IL Comparison of value weighted return forecasts and investment return
forecasts



1. Percent probahility values for univariate forecasts of quarterly (Q) and
annual (A) real value weighted returns, using quarterly vs.                                             annual

forecasting variables



Value weighted return horizon:             Q             Q              A           A
Forecast variahle horizon:                 Q -           A              Q           A
            Term                           507           0.53       0.66          1.12
            Corp                           0.94          1.68       1.23         18.88
            Ret                            2.51         61.41      50.97         52.45
            ri/p                           1.44          0.26       0.16           0.28



2 Single regression forecasts of quarterly returns (from t-l to t)


                       VW Return                Invest, Return              VV -    mv    '1W -   Fit
Forecasting
variable           Oneff.      p   value        Coeff.       p value             value p value
 Term r-2          0.16            0.53         0.10             0.05            24.10       4.95
 Corp t-2          0.35            094          0.16             0.23            12.44       5.95
 Ret t-2           0.16            2.51         0.15             0,00            88.56      28,35
 ri/p t-2           1.32           0.26          0.11           70.70             1.22       1.53
 I/k t-2           -1.53           2.12         -1.71            0.00            79.96      53.09


3. Single regression forecasts of annual returns (from t-4 to t)

                       '1W   Return             Invest. Return              WV    - mv    '1W -   Fit
Forecasting
Variable           Coeff.      p value          Coeff.       p value p value               p value
 Term t-5          0.35             1.12        0.35             2.51            99.57      37.89
 Corp t-5          0.68             1.23        0.59             0.32            70.99      18.23
 Ret r-5           0.12            50.97        0.24             0.66            48.86      46.90
 ri/p t-5           5.02            0.28        0.80            48.47             0.02       0.02
 I/k t-5           -4.74            4.34        -7.40            0.00            25.35      83.91


                                     (continues on next page)




                                           35
                                     (Table II continued)
4,   Multiple    regression forecasts of quarterly returns (from t-l to t)

                         WV Return              Invest, Return      '7W    - mv    WV    - Fit
Forecasting
Variable           Coeff.      p value      Coeff.        p value    p value         p value
 Term t-2           0.09        11.02            0.06       3.47          55.26         20.09
 Corp t-2           0.17        20.71           -0.04      52.47          11.86         18.13
 Ret t-2            0.03        69.18            0.10       0.03          33.79         90.50
 d/p t-2            1.08         1.06           -0.28      25.15           0.54          0.58
 I/k t-2           -0.77        26.33           -1.53       0.30          28.04         10.88
 Joint         p value          0,03                       0.00        2.32            1.30
 Joint         no d/p           2.32                       0.00       24.79           15,33
 R                              0.12                       0.29        0.07            0.08

 Regression w/o d/p:
 Joint x p value                0.61                       0.00       49.24           26.85
 R                              0.09                       0.28        0.02            0.04
Correlation of WV, investment return forecast: 0.664, s.e.                    :   0.088
Correlation of forecasts without dIp:          0.875, se,                     :   0.035

Regression:        '7W ret. forecast —           0.12 + 0.88 Investment ret, forecast
                           p value (%) —        19.5    0.20     R —    0.44
Without d/p: '7W ret. forecast —                -0.02 + 1.02 Investment ret. forecast
                   p value (%)                  69.6    0.04     R      0.77


5. Multiple regression forecasts of annual returns (from t-4 to t)

                         WV Return              Invest. Return      WV -     mv     '7W -   Fit
Foretasting
Variable           Coeff.      p value          Coeff.    p value    p value         p value
 Ters t-5           0.26        18.17           0.23        2.36          92.19         48.01
 Corp r-5           0.41        12.91           0.06       51.05          19.64         31.04
 Ret t-5           -0.30         8.02           -0.05      46.05          13.44         74.83
 dip t-5            4.60         0.05           -0.57      39.89           0.00          0.00
 I/k     t-5       -2.83        14.81           -7.10       0.00           3.94         19.85
 Joint x       p value          0.01                       0.00            0.00          0.07
 Joint         no dip            1.29                      0.00            7.09         29.02
 Joint x       no d/p,l/k        1.01                      5.42           30.68         22.06
 R                              0.22                       0.52            0.18          0.17

 Regression w/o dip:
          p value               4.03                       0.00           58.61         51.27
 R                              0.11                       0.51            0.03          0.02

Correlation of '7W, investment return forecast: 0.610 se.,: 0.112
Correlation of forecasts without d/p:          0.938 se. : 0.179

Regression:        WV ret, forecast —           0.396 +   0.642 Investment ret. forecast
                        p value (%) —           0.45      2.54                -   0.37
Without dip:       '7W ret, forecast            0.318 +   0.715 Investment        ret. forecast
                           p value (%) — 0.00       1.61                      —   0.88
                                   (continues on next page)


                                           36
                            (Table TT continued)


Note to table II:


     Coeff" gives OhS regression slope coefficients.    "p va1ue gives the
percent probability values of two aided c-tests  of the corresponding slope
                         p value" gives the percent probability valuea     for a
coefficients. "Joint
   test of the joint significance of the forecasting variables.
                                                                       Joint

w/o d/p" gives the percent probability value of a       teat for the joint'

significance of all variables except the dividend price      ratio.    The tows

labelled 'w/o dip" give partial results for corresponding [nultiple
regressions using all variables except the dividend price   ratio.


     Forecasting variable definitions: Term is the Government         bond less

treasury bill return. Corp is the corporate bond return less the treasury
bill return. VW ret, is the real value weighted return, with conventional
timing (Ret. (t) is the return from the beginning of qusrter t to the end of
quarter t, as with corp). dip is the dividend price catio. Term and dip are
                                                                           t-2)
based on returns for the year ending in the indicated quarter (t-5 or
VW ret. and Corp are returns for the quarter t-5 or t-2.              uk is the
inveatroenticapital ratio in the indicated quarter. See the data appendix      for

sources.


      Return variables: The annual value weighted and investment return
variables are overlapping quarterly observations of annual returns.            The

variable labelled "Fit" is the fitted value of an OhS regression of     the value

weighted return on contemporaneous and lagged investment to      capital ratio.
 The regression coefficients used to form efiti! are given in table II    columns

 2 and 17.

      Annual return standard errors are adjusted using a Hansen (1982) -
             (1987) correction, using 8 covariances, or twice the overlap.     All
 Newey-West
 correlation standard errors include this correction. Each regression uses as

 much of the sample 1947:1- 1987:4 as possible.




                                  37
Table III. Regressions of returns on investment to capital ratios



1. Quarterly real value weighted returns (t-l to t)

                Single                     Multiple                         Multiple (forecasts)
Column no-       (1)               (2)                  (3)                  (4)                  (5)
             Coeff P val       Coeff P val       Coeff        P val Coeff P val Coeff P val

I/k(t-4)     -1.04      8.30                     -0.75        59.05     -1.47      33.32     -1.17      42.21
I/k(t-3)     -1.21      5.16                      1.39        58.46      3,03      21.31      2.11      40.14
I7k(t-2)     -1.53      2.12                      1.78        57.66     -3.24       4.46      1.51      63.24
I/k(t-l)     -1.69      1.42   -5.33      0.01   -6.14         7.19                          -9.10       0.73
  I/k(t)     -0.74     28.21   4.05       0.19   0.17         96.10                           5.71       0.12
T/k(t+l)      0.45     52,24                      1.29        68.72
T/k(t+2)      1.26      5.29                      2.49         9.45
t/k(t-e-3)    1.84      0.14
I/k(t-i-4)    1.68      0.22
       R2                      0.09              0.17                   0.05                  0.11
Joint x2 p value(%)            0.05              0.06                  45.04                 29.81
\'bls, in joint y               All               All                   -4-3



2. Quarterly investment returns (t-l to t)


                Single          Multiple                          Multiple (forecaats)

Column no.:      (6)               (7)            (8)                 (9)                  (10)
             Coeff P val       Coeff P val       Grad          Coeff P val Coeff P val

I/k(t-4)     -1.77     0.00    -0.01     87.97                -0.53     36.13      -0.02     85.32
T/k(t-3)     -1.88     0.00     0.08     63.17                -1.22     22.72       0.08     59.56
I/ic(t-2)    -1.71     0.00    -0.10     61.74                -0.21     75.84      -0.10     61,18
I/k(t-l)     -092      0.05    -8.47      0.00   -8.70                             -8.45      0.00
  1/k(t)      0.79     1.27     8.46      0.00    8.63                              8.42      0.00
I/k(t-i-1)    1.59     0.00     0.00     98,41
I/k(t+2)      1.79     0.00    -0.03     77.46
I/k(t+3)      1.72     0.00
T/k(t+4)      1.42     0.00
       R2                      0.98                            0.25              0,98
Joint x2 p value (%)           0.00                            0.73             94,93
Vbls. in joint y2              All                            -4,-3



                                  (continues on next page)




                                         38
                                  (Table III continued)


3. Value weighted returns -     investment returns

               Quarterly (t-l to t)                        Annual (t-4 to t)

                Single         Multiple              Single             Multiple

Column no. :     (11)            (12)                  (13)              (14)
            Coeff P val       Coeff P val          Coeff P val       Coeff P val

I/k(t-7)                                            3.45    13.94     2.72    37.97
I/k(t-6)                                            3.25    14.48    -1.98    44.86
I/k(t-5)                                            2.66    25.35     2,41    38.48
I/k(t-4)       0.74 21.58     -0.74    60.07        1.06    64.86     5.33    14.74
I/lc(t-3)      0.66 2904       1.31    60.85       -1.31    49.47    -2.67    40.00
I/k(t-2)  0.17 79.96           1.88    55.97       -3.37      1.96   -1.91    49.33
l/k(t-1) -0.76 27.58           2.34    50.02       -4.22      0.35   -4,52    10.61
  l/k(t) -1.53  1.89          -8.29      1.93       337 6.51         -3.41    30.01
1/k(t.e-1) -1.14  8.01         1.28 69.26          -1.51    46.74     4.64      9.89
I/k(t-'-2) -0.53 39.93         2.53      9.48      -0.00    99.90     2.07     42.30
I/k(t+3)   0.12 82.45                               0.70    75.25
I/lc(t+4)      0.27   60.88                         0.58    80.20
I/k(t÷5)       0.30   57.65                         0.41    85.92
I/k(t+6)       0.19   74.62                        -0.09    55.78
I/k(t÷7)       0.04   94.63                        -1.04    65.17
j/k(t+8)       0.20   75.14                        -2,10    34.66
                                      0.14                                   0.16
Joint    p value (%)           0.01      2.06                         0.00      3,51
Vbls. in joint xZ              All      No t-l,t                      All      No t-4. .t




                               (continues on next page)




                                        39
                                             (Table III continued)

4. Annual real value weighted returns (t-4 to C)


                  Single                                   Multiple                             Multiple (inrecars)

Column no. : (15)                       (16)                (17)                (18)             (19)                (20)
                Coeff P val          Coeff P val Coeff P val             Goeff p val Coeff P val Coeff P val

I/k(t-7) -1.93 41.80                                                      2.73     34.49      0.67 83.40          3.04 29.34
I/lc(t-6) -3.37 16.85                                                    -1.77     49.03      4.11 15.11         3.30 16.49
1/k(t-5) -4.74 4.34                                                       2.21     42.24     -8.97      0.63     3.58     18.92
I/k(t-4) -5.83 0.51                  -7.24 0.33          -1.11 74.06     -3.99     26.50                        -4.30     22.58
I/Ir(t-3)       -5.45 0.26                               -2.98 39.94     -2.67     39.07                        -2.42     45.29
I/k(t-2) -3.72 2.56                                      -2.07 43.39     -2.07     44.07                        -2.62     32.66
1/lc(t-l) -0.78 64.49                                    -9.96  1.09     -4.52     11.07                        -8.61      1.91
  1/k(t) 2.91 11.08                  4.98 1.43           15.20 0.03        5.67 6.59                            15.23      0,03
1/k(t-s-1)       5.51 0.66                                                4.57 10.21
I/Ic(t+2)        6.48 0.29                                                2.11 42.18
          R2                          0.18                0.26             0.30               0.09                0.28
Joint x2 p value(%)                   0.90                0.35             0.76              19.62               44,54
Vbls. in joint x                       All                All               All              -7-6              7, -6,-S




5. Annusl investment returns (t-4 to t)


                    Single               Multiple                         Multiple (forecasts)

Colunin no. :         (21)                   (22)            (23)           (24)                 (25)
                 Coeff P val           Coeff p val           Cr ad     Coeff P val          Coeff P val

I/k(t-7)         -5,42      0.00        0.01    96.84                  -1.83      39.49      0.00 99.19
I/k (   r-6)     -6.62      0.00        0.21    46 .38                  2.77      10.31      0.22 41.25
I/k( t-5)        -7.40      0.00       -0.20    30.18                  -8.60       0.01     -0.21 28.31
I/k (   t-4)     -6.89      0.00       -9.31     0.00        -9.45                -9.32      0.00
I/k (   t -3)    -4.13      0.00       -0.00    99.00        -0.09                 0.00     98.87
I/k(t-2)         -0.35     60.04       -0.15    54.05        -0.09                -0.14     52.44
I/k(t-1)          3 .44      0 .01     -0.00    99,87        -0.09                -0.01     98.66
  I/k(r)          6 .28      0.00       9.08     0.00         9.36                 9.04      0.00
I/k(t+l)          7 .01      0.00      -0.07    78.30
I/k(t+2)          6.43       0.00       0.04    90.10
                                       0.99                           0.46                   0.99
 Joint x2 p value (%)                  0.00                          26.06                  63.52
Vbls. in joint x                       All                             -7, -6              -7,-6, .5




                                         (continues on next page)


                                                    40
                                 (table III continued)
Note to table III:


     "Coeff" gives the OLS regression slope coefficients. "P val" gives
percent prc''bility values for two sided ttests of the slope coefficients,
"Grad" give   the partial derivative of the investment return with respect to
investment to capital ratios, evaluated at the "steady state" investment to
capitel ratio (see the data appendix),         "Joint    p value (%)" gives the
percent probability value of a              test for joint significance of the
coefficients listed in "Vbls. in joint


     Minual return standard errors used to calculate probability values
include a Hansen (1982)        NeweyWest (1967) correction for serial correlation
due to overlap, using with eight covarisnces (twice the overlap).            Data
sample is 1947:1 -   1967:4,    less leads and lags.




                                     41
Table IV. Return forecasts of ONE growth



1. Single regressions of quarterly ONE growth on quarterly returns



                              Return used to forecast ON?

Return date Value weighted                    Investment                71.7 -   Investment
            Coeff.    t      p val     Oneff.       t      p   val   Coeff.       t     p val
    t-8     -0.99 -0.90 36.71             -6,58-2.67        0.83     0.65   0.55        58.19
    t-7     -0.30 -0.24 80.69             -2.23-0.85      39.68      0.25   0.21        83.16
    t-6     -2.10 1.67        9.71        -2.36-0.84      40.34      -1.53 -1.30        19.44
    t-5      0.97    0.84 40.31           -2.50-0.94      34.76       1.58  1.31        19.21
    t-4      1.33    1.06 29.19           2.40  0.86      39.23       0.75  0.63        52.79
    t-3      2.80    2.40     1.74        3.54  1.38      17.02       1.93       1.80    7.30
    t-2      3.85    3.48     0,06         7.63    2.99     0.32      1.99       1.76    8.02
    t-l      4,87    4,21     0.00        13.11    5.21     0.00      1.69  1.30 19.66
    t        4.45    3.58     0.04        17.67    6.91     0.00      0.44  0.36 71.63
    t+1     -0.87 -0.71 47.59              7.82    2.61     0.98     -2.64 -2.06  4.06
    t+2     -1.12 -1.00 31.83             -1.19 -0.39 69.74          -0.84 -0.66 51.20



2. Single Regressions of annual ONE growth on annual returns,
   using overlapping quarterly data and corrected standard errors.


                            Return used to forecast ONE

Return date Value weighted                    Investment              7W - Investment

            Coeff.    t      p val     Coeff.       t      p val     Coeff.       t     p val
    t-8     -2,84 -1.81   7.18            -3.79   -0.97   33.17      -1.54 -0,62 53.45
    t-7     -2.04 -1.26 21.00             -4.26   -1.08   28.36      -0.38 -0.14 88.68
    t-6     -0.76 -0.46 64.50             -3.17   -0.83   40.52       0.57  0.23 81,53
    t-5      1.95  1.16 24.74             -0.18   -0.05   95.76       2.29  1.05 29.52
    t-4      5.05    2.79     0.60         5.03    1.77     7.93     3.45        1.79    7.61
    t-3      6.30    4.22     0.00        11.06    4.35     0,00     4.42        2,16    3.27
    t-2     10.28    4.89     0.00        16.97    6.99     0.00     4.06        1.83    6.97
    t-1      9.98    4.60     0.00        20.48    7.86     0,00     2.33   1.00        32.10
    t        7.60    3.42     0.08        19.24    6.08     0.00     0.24   0.10        92.10
             3.01  1.35 18.00             12.47    3.28     0.13     -2,00 -0.71        47.86
    t+2     -1.32 -0.62 53.80              2.87    0.68 49.89        -2.72 -0.86        39.10


                             (continued on next page)




                                     42
                                      (table IV, continued)

3. Multiple regressions of quarterly CNP growth on quarterly returns

                                   Return used to forecast CNF

Return date Value weighted                         inveatient            1/W -     Investment

                Coeff.      t       p val    Coeff.      t      p vat   Coeff.       t     p val

    t-4          1.03     0.88 38.29             3.14   1,01 31.26       0.74       0.63 52.68
    t-3          2.10     2.05       4.19    -0.23    -008 93.91         1.71       1.66    9.83
    t-2          3.02     2.91       0.41        1.57 0.56 57.92         1.72       1.52 13.00
    t-1          4.39       3.96     0.01    13.27      5.13     0.00    1.58       1.18 2387
     R2                              0.16                        0.19                       0.04
Joint x2 p value (%)                 0.00                        0.00                      11.21



4. Multiple regressions of annual CMI' growth on annual returns
   uaing overlapping quarterly data and Newey-Weat corrected standard errors.

                                   Return used to forecast CNP


Return date Value weighted                         Investment             1111 -   Investment

                 Coeff.      t      p val    Coeff.      t      p val   Coeff.       t     p val

    t-4          -0.27    -0.13     89.79     6.69      1.59    11.46    0.09       0.03   97.22
    t-3          2.33      1.54     12.56    -2.49      -0.54   58.90    2.66       1.25   21.19
    t-2          4.05      2.78      0,61    -5.24      .1.34   18.17    3.13       1.76    8.10
    t-1           5.79     2.45      1.53    25.53       5.79    0,00   -1.13      -0.40   69.02

                                     0.33                        0.47                       0.06
        R22                          0.00                        0.00                      18.87
Joint         p value (%)



Note to table IV:

        "Coeff." gives the OLS regression alope coefficient of real CNP growth
(CNP/CNE'1) on the indicated return at the indicated date.                         'ft" gives the t

statistic. "p val" gives the percent probability value of a two sided teat
using the t statistic. "Joint                    p value (%)" gives the percent probability
value of the y2 test for joint significance of all returns used to forecast
                                                                                                   -
GMP growth.         Annual return standard errors include a Hansen (1982)

Newey-West (1987) correction for serial correlation due to overlap, using
eight covariances (twice the overlap)




                                            43
                                    Ref erenees


Abet, Andrew 3. (1980) "Empirical Investment Equations: An Integrative
     Framework" in "On the State of Macroeconomics" Karl Brunner and Allan
     Meltzer eda. ,   Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 12
     39-91.

Abel, Andrew B., and Olivier S. Blanchard (1986) "The Present Value of
     Profits and Cyclical Movements in Investment," Econometrics 54 2 (March)
     249-273.

Balavera, Ronald S., Thomas P. Cosimano, and Bill McDonald (1989) "Predicting
     Stock Returns in and Efficient Market: Theory and Evidence"       Working
     Paper, Department of Finance, University of Notre Dame (February)

Barro, Robert S. (l989a) "The Stock Market and the Macroeconomy: Implications
     of the October 1987 Crash," in R. W. Kaiaphios, R. C. Kormendi, andS. W.
     H. Watson, eds., Black Monday and the Future of Financial Markets (Dow
     Jonea Irwin, Homewood Illinoia)..

Barro, Robert S. (1989h) "The Stock Market and Investment," Harvard
     University Working Paper (May).

Bossearts, Peter and Richard Green (1989) "A General Equilibrium Model of
     Changing Risk Premia: Theory and Tests" Review of Financial Studies,
     Forthcoming

Braun, Philip A. (1989) "Intertemporal Aaset Pricing and Capital Investment,"
     Manuscript, Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago.

Breeden, Douglas T.. (1979) "An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with
     Stochastic Consumption and Investment Opportunities," Journal of
     Financial Economics 7, 265-296.

Breeden, Douglas T., (1986) "Consumption, Production, Inflation and Interest
     Rates: A Synthesis," Journal of Financial Economics 16 3-39.

Breeden, Douglas T. , Michael R. Gibbons and Robert H. Litzenberger (1989)
     "Empirical Tests of the Consumption-Oriented CAPM," Journal of Finance
     44 231-262.

Brock, William A. (1982) "Asset Prices in a Production Economy" in The
     Economics of Uncertainty and information Jon S. McCall Ed.

Brock, William A. (1980) "Aaset Pricing in An Economy With Production: A
     'Selective' Survey of Recent Work on Asset Pricing Models" in Dynamic
    Optimisation and Mathematical Economics, Pau-Tai Lin Ed.

Cochrane, John H. (1988) "Production Based Asset Pricing" NBER working paper
     No. 2776

Cochrane, John H. (1989a), "The Sensitivity of Tests of the Intertemporal
     Allocation of Consumption to Near Rational Alternatives," American
    Economic Review 79 319-337.


                                  44
Cochrane, John H. (1989b) "Explaining the Variance of Price Dividend Ratios,"
     NBER Working paper No.

Cochrane, John H. and Argia M. Sbnrdone, (1988) "Multivariace Estimates of
     the Permanent Components of CNP and Stock Prices" Journal of Economic
     Dynamics and Control 12 255-296.

Donaldaon, John B. and Rajnish Mebra (1984) "Comparative Dynamics of an
     Equilibrium Interteaporal Asset Pricing Model," Review of Economic
     Studies, 51 (3) (July) 491-508.

Eacrella, Arturo, and Cikas A. Hardouvelis (1989) "The Term Structure as a
     Predictor of Real Economic Activity," Working paper, Federal Reserve
     Bank of New York (March).

Fama, Eugene F. (1981) "Stock Returna, Real Activity, Inflation and Money,"
     American Economic Review, 71:4 (September) 545-565.

Fama, Eugene F. (1988) "Term Structure Forecasts of Interest Rates, Inflation
     and Real Returna" manuscript, University of Chicago.

Fama, Eugene F. and Robert R, Bliss (1987) "The Information in Long-Maturity
     Forward Rates" American Econcmic Review 77, 680-683.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth K. French (l988a) "0ermanent and Temporary
     Components of Stock Priccs," Journal of Politica Economy 96 246-273.

Fame, Eugene F. and Eenneth R. French (19885) rtoividend Yields and     Expected
     Stock Returns," Journal of Financial Economics 22 3-25

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French (1989) "Business conditions and
     Expected Returns on Stocks and Bonds," CRSP Working Paper 220

Fame, Eugene F. and Merton H, Miller (1972) The Theory of Finance (Dryden
     Press, Hinsdale, IL.).

Ferson, Wayne E. and George M. Constantinedes (1989), "Habit Formation and
     Durability in Aggregate Consumption: Empirical Tests," Working Paper,
     Graduate School of Businesa, University of Chicago (June)

Hansen, tars Peter(l982) "Large Sample Properties of Generalized Methcd of
     Moments Estimators," Econometrica 50, 1029-1054.

Hansen, Lara Peter and Robert J. Hodrick (1983) "Risk Averse Speculation in
     the Forward Foreign Exchange Market: An Econometric Analysis of Linear
     Models" in J. A. Frenkel,        Ed. ,   Exchange   Rates and international
     Economics University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Hansen, Lars Peter, and Scott F, Richard (1987) "The Role of Conditioning
     Information in Deducing Testable Restrictions Implied by Dynamic Asset
     Pricing Models" Econometrica 55, 587 - 613.

Ingersoll, Jonathan E. Jr. (1988), Theory of Financial Decision Making
     (Rowman and Littlefield, Totowa N.J.)



                                 45
Lo, Andrew W. and Craig A. MacKinlay (1988) "Stock Prices do not Follow a
     Random Walk: Evidence From a New Specification Test" Review of Financial -
     Studies 1 41-66.
Lucas, Robert E.     Jr.   (1978) "Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy"
     Econometrics 46, 1426-1446.

Newsy,   Whitney    K.   and   Kenneth    D.   West     (1987),  "A    Simple,
     Poaitive-Semidefinite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent
     Covariance Matrix," Econometrics 55 (may) 703-708.

Pocerba, James M. and Lawrence H. Summers (1988) "Mean Reversion in Stock
     Prices: Evidence and Implications" Journal of Financial Economics 22,
     27-59.

Ross (1978) "A Simple Approach to the Valuation of Risky Streams," Journal of
     Business 51, 453-475.

Stock, James and Mark Watson (1989) "New Indexes of Coincident and LEading
     Economic Indicators," Working Paper, Kennedy School of Government,
     Harvard University, and Department of Economics, Northwestern University
     (April).

Sundaresan, Mahadevan (1984) "Consumption and Equilibrium Interest Rates in
     Stochastic Production Economies," Journal of Finance 39, 77-92.




                                   46
