NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

JOINT CROWDOUT: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY OF THE IMPACT OF FEDERAL GRANTS
ON STATE GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES AND CHARITABLE DONATIONS

Lawrence Lindsey
Richard Steinberg

Working Paper No. 3226

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1990

Research was supported by a grant from the Program on Nonprofit Organizations
We also thank the National Bureau of Economic Research for
at Yale University.
use of its TAXSIM computer program. We gratefully acknowledge the assistance
of Andrew Mitrusi for his expert computer work, and Charles Clotfelter, Steven
Craig. Bruce Kingma, Helen Ladd, William Reece, Aris Spanos, Patricia K. Smith,
and William T. Smith II, and undoubtedly many others for helpful remarks. An
earlier version of this work has circulated as a working paper from Duke
This paper
University's Center for the Study of Philanthropy and Voluntarism.
is part of NBER's research program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the
Office of Policy Development, or the Bush administration.

NEER Working Paper #3226
January 1990

AN EMPIRICAL STUDY OF THE IMPACT OF FEDERAL GRANTS
JOINT cRownouT:
GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES AND CHARITABLE DONATIONS

ON

STATE

ABSTRACT

We estimate the effect of exogenous federal expenditure cutbacks on state
social service expenditures and on charitable donations. In the process, we

estimate tax and income effects and explore the impact of community
Data consist of a unique three-year panel of
environment and "need" variables.
aggregate itemized giving by state and income class and government expenditures
federal grants on state
by state. Our results confirm the 'flypaper effect' of
spending and show statistically significant but partial crowdout of charitable
The flypaper effects appears to dominate the crowdout of donations,
donations.
so that federal grants are especially productive of overall social service
Finally, we find that the state's poverty rate is a particularly
expenditures.
strong and positive determinant of charitable giving.

also

Lawrence Lindsey
Harvard University and
Office of Policy Management
Executive Office of the
President
Old Executive Office Building
Washington, DC 20500

Richard Steinberg
Department of Economics
V.P.I. & S.U.
Blacksburg, VA 24061-0316

Many social services in the United States are provided vy oem governments and private nonprofit
organizations. Direct federal provision of social services is relatively smaji, although indirect federal funding of
social services is substantiaL Instead of direct provision, federal grants are prov*ded to states, and to a lesser
extent to nonprofit organizations, to provide social services. State governments supplement this federal spending
on social services with state tax revenues. Nonprofit organizations supplement those funds they receive through

federal grants and governmental 'contract' purchases of services by soliciting donations'.

The interaction between federal, state, and nonprofit activities has not been empirically estimated.
Researchers have examined two cases of 'simple crowdout': the effects of federal grants on state government

spending2 and the effect of total government spending, federal and state, on donations3. Earlier attempts at
estimating the complete set of interactions among these providers have faced severe data limitations4.
The objective of this paper is to remedy this void. We merge data on individual giving, tax price, and
income with data on state spending, federal aid, and demographic characteristics. We are therefore able to move

beyond the existing work in this area and estimate a complete model of the interaction among the providers of
social services. This permits us to estimate the likely effect of changes in federal grants on total social service
provision.

Social service spending within a state comes from three sources: federal grants, state and local taxation,

1See Musselwhite and Salanion (1987) for a statistical breakdown.

2See, for example, Craig and inman (1986) and the references contained within.

3See Abrams and Scbmitz (1978 and 1984), Reece (1979), Pacque (1982), Amos (1982), Jones (1983),
Steinberg (1985a), Kingma (1989).

41n unpublished works, Steinberg (1983, 1984) attempted to estimate the full set of relationships using
allocations to local United Ways as a proxy for local donations. The adequacy of this proxy remains unclear.
However, preliminary estimates obtained from the National Survey of Philanthropy by Schiff and Steinberg
(1988) show much more promise.
1

2

and private donations. The ultimate effect, including feedbacks, of an exogenous one-dollar increase in federal

grants on spending by state and local governments and by private charities is known as "joint crowdout." The
extent of joint crowdout is crucial for evaluating the efficacy of federal grants for social services.

Consider three possible ranges of values for the extent of joint crowdout: less than or equal to -1,
between

-1 and zero, and greater than zero. If joint crowdout is less than or equal to -1, then an additional

dollar of federal grants reduces state, local, and nonprofit expenditures by at least one dollar. Additional federal

grants are therefore ineffective at best (if joint crowdout is exactly -1), and may be counterproductive (if joint
crowdout is less than -1).

On the other band, if joint crowdout is greater than zero, then additional federal expenditures are
especially effective at providing social services. In this case, the additional federal money will be matched by

increased spending by states and donors. Each additional dollar of federal spending will produce more than
one dollar of additional social services.
if the joint crowdout parameter is between zero and -1, then it can be said that "partial" crowdout occurs.

That is, additional federal spending will reduce state and donor spending by some fraction of the added federal

effort. In this case, additional federal spending will increase total social service provision, but by less than the

amount of added expenditures. Thus, the effectiveness of federal pants is reduced, but not eliminated.
The empirical estimates of joint crowdout will also help resolve debates regarding other mechanisms for

social service provision. Most notably, further light will be shed on the tax expenditure debat; recently joined
by Roberts (1987) and Andreoni (1989), of whether it is more efficient for the government to subsidize donations

through a tax deduction or to make equivalent expenditures directly. These results could also broaden the
analysis of the effect of tax reform on charitable donations (Steinberg, 1986), beyond the direct impacts on price
and income simulated by Lindsey (198& 198Th), among others.

In order to estimate the joint aowdout effect, we rely on a three-year panel of giving and government
spending in each of the 50 states. Most previous studies of the issue lacked information on the location of the
donor, and so were unable to discern the effects of spatially-varying factors such as state government spending

and community characteristim. Schiff (1985), Abrams and Schmitz (1984) and Hochman and Rodgers (1973)

had locational data, but were restricted to a single crowsection. This reduced their ability (relative to a panel
data set) to account for possible excluded variable bias. Wilson (1963) employed a panel of city-level data from

3

the consumer expenditure surveys. Unfortunately, these surveys combined charitable and personal gifts, such
as

Christmas presents, when reporting geographically disaggregated data.
Section II of this paper summarizes the e,dsting literature on simple and joint crowdout. The data and

empirical specifications are described in Section UI. Section IV presents and discusses our estimates of the

parameters of the model. Section V presents a summary.

II) The Theories ol Crowdout

The empirical work on the interaction of federal, state, and private charitable provision of social services

has been limited to the problem of simple crowdout. This crowdout takes two forms: the effect of aggregate
government spending on aggregate donations (simple donative crowdout), and the effect of federal spending on

state spending (simple government crowdout). We consider each in turn.
Simple Donative Crowdout. In many cases, social services are funded both by private donations and by
government spending. These sources of funding are unlikely to be independent.

Stated explicitly, simple

crowdout is the derivative of aggregate donations with respect to government spending, after allowing for
equilibrating adjustments (mutatis mutandis)5. A derivative between zero and negative one indicates partial
crowdout. Total crowdout is indicated by a derivative of negative one with 'super crowdout' occurring when the
derivative is less then negative one. Negative aowdout, or 'crowdin' occurs in the case of a positive derivative.

Donor motivation determines whether crowdout will be partial, total, super, or negative. Consider rst

the case of a pure public good in which the only motivation for private donors is to increase the aggregate level
provided. In this model, government expenditures and the contributions of others are a perfect substitute for

the individual's own giving. Wan (1982) and Roberts (1984) have shown that if the set of private donors i5 fixed,

5By mutatis mutandus we mean to allow equilibrating adjustments between donors. Thus, in computing the
response of each donor, we do not hold constant the giving of other donors. Rather, we compare changes in
aggregate donations in Nash equilibrium. There is further ambiguity in the literature, as some authors examine
the response of equilibrium to a balanced-budget change in governmental expenditures (appropriate for
examining the effect of a change in the overall level of government expenditures), while others hold tax rates
constant (appropriate for examining the effect of a change in the targeting of federal grants across communities).

Our simple crowdout estimates in this study conform to the latter concept, as lederal grants are regarded as
retargeted. Our joint crowdout estimates blend both concepts: federal tax rates in a community are held constant
with respect to grants to that community, but lal taxes are assumed to vary in balanced-budget fashion with
induced changes in state government expenditures.

4

there will be total simple crowdout for balanced-budget changes in government expenditures. This conclusion

follows from the perfect substitutability, in the Hicksian or compensated sense, of government expenditure for
private donations.

Bergstrom, Bluine, and Varian (1986) showed that if the set of donors is endogenous,

crowdout may be partial, though even in this case, crowdout will be total if there

is

sufficient overlap between

the sets of don on to competing causes (Bernheim, 1986). Much less can be said a nriori for mixed public goods.

These goods deliver utility from the 1 of giving which is distinct from the utility obtained from the iiJ of
provision of the good. For mixed public goods, donors would regard government expenditures and the giving
of others as imperfect substitutes, or possibly even complements, for their own gift. Mixed public goods are
commonly associated with donations because a private good is either jointly produced or consumed with the
public good financed by the donation. Joint consumption goods include prestige, admiration, job advancement.

the warm glow of doing right, or the lukewarm glow of following the crowd6. Joint production goods include
newsletters or front-row seats provided by recipient organizations as a fundraising strategy (Posnett and Sandier,
1986).

An a nriori case for the extent of a-owdout is difficult to make. Cones and Sandier (1984), Schiff (1985)
and Steinberg (1987) showed that this is the case even when the giving of others is a substitute for one's own gift

and all other goods are normal. The reasons for the ambiguity include the possibility of an anomalous income
effect for some donors and possible feedback effects among all donors. Given a particular tax regime and level

of donations by others, each donor has a most-preferred level of government spending on a particular activity.

Beyond this point, an increase in government spending, accompanied by the reaction of other donors to this
change, causes the donor's utility to fall.

This is because the value of the increase in the provision level is

outweighed by the value of foregone consumption caused by the accompanying tax increase. Thus, incremental

government expenditures will lower the real income of donors, if donations area noimal good (as is likely), then
added government expenditures will produce crowding out due to an income effect. This would be on top of the

crowding out due to the substitution effect. Super crowdout becomes a possibility.

6More detailed analyses of these motivations for giving can be found in Tullock (1966), Ireland and Johnson

(1970), Anow (1974), Long (1976), Margolis (1981), Rose-Ackerman (1982), Sugden (1984), and Andreoni
(1989).

5

On the other hand, some donors may view the public good as underprovided. These donors obtain an
increase in real income from added government

expenditures. The income effect and substitution effects would

work in opposite directions, leading to an ambiguous overall result for crowding out. Crowdout would be
negative if the income effect outweighed the substitution effect; zero, if the two effects were equal; or partial if

the substitution effect outweighed the income effect. In spite of this theoretical ambiguity, Steinberg (1987) argues
that partial crowdout should be the most common.

Rose-Ackerman (1981) outlined other factors which would produce negative crowdout (crowdin).
Government grants sometimes require private matching and so may stimulate giving. Alternatively, donors may
view

receipt of grants as a signal that the organization is meritorious or efficient. Finally, grants may be

accompanied by strings which affect the ideology or output mix of the nonprofit organization. The changes
wrought may make the nonprofit more attractive to potential donors. Rose-Ackerman (1987) pointed out the

reverse possibility that governmental grants can free an ideological nonprofit organization from the sorts of
compromises necessary to attract donations.

Government Crowdout. The second type of simple crowdout, simple government crowdout, refers to

the effects of exogenous changes in federal intergovernmental grants on state spending. The level of private
activity in these studies is assumed to be constant, usually at a level of zero. The theoretical analysis of the sign

and magnitude of the aowdout parameter depends both on the model of political decisionmalcing used and on

the form of the grant. We consider each in turn.
The dominant model of political decision making has been the median voter model7, first proposed by
Hotelling (1929) and formally developed by Bowen (1943). In this model, the collective decision reflects the

preferences of the swing or median voter, so that half of the remaining voters want more and half less of the

publicly-provided good. A change in the level of federal aid, or in the price of providing incremental state
services will only affect the outcome if the budget set facing the median voter is changed, or if the ranking of
voters is changed in such a way that the identity (and hence preferences) of the median voter is altered.
Controversy over the median voter model arises in two areas: doubt that equilibrium exists or can be

7Tbis is not the only model. Undsey (1987a) looks at variations which incorporate the likelihood of voting.
Romer and Rosenthal (1979), Filimon, Romer and Rosenthal (1982), and Craig and Inman (1986) employ various

models of games between bureaucrats or politicians and voters. In a model specific to the crowdout problem,
Roberts (1984) employs Stigler and Peltzman's model of vote-maximizing bureauaats.

6

characterized as the most-preferred point of the median-preference voter, and questions about the empirical
procedures commonly employed to identify the median voter and test the theory. There are many reasons to

doubt whether representative governments will accurately reflect voter preferences.

Rules controlling the

election process, the setting of the legislative agenda, and the process of coalition formation, may well produce

a different outcome than that preferred by a majority of the voters.
Some of these theoretical difficulties are less likely to arise in the present case of one-dimensional choke

(that is, the choice of a single public-expenditure level from R1). if the preferences of voters are single-peaked,

issues of agenda setting and coalition formation become irrelevant. Rules which limit voting may change the
identity of the median voter, but do not change the characterization of equilibrium. On the other hand, although
we model the problem as a one-dimensional choice, coalitions may form to trade off social service expenditures

against some other dimension of political choice in the real world.

Even if a unique equilibrium exists at the most-preferred point of the median voter, there is some
question whether this equilibrium will ever be implemented. Voters are commonly offered a limited range of
choices in any one election, and the sequence of referenda may not indude the equilibrium point. Those given
control over the agenda can rig results in their interest. For example, Romer and Rosenthal (1978) showed that
when a single alternative is offered to a low level of status-quo expenditure, voters who prefer a modestly lower

amount of spending than that proposed would support the referendum. Thus, the outcome would support a
higher level of spending than that desired by the median voter On the other hand, vote-maximizing politicians
have an incentive to select positions preferred by the median voter, either directly, or through their offerings of
referenda.

The problem of identifying the median-preference voter can be quite difficult. In the absence of direct
measures of preferences, it is common to identify the median-preference voter as the median-income citizen in
the community. This identification is strictly valid only under very restrictive assumptions on the income

distribution in the community and the price and income elasticities of demand for housing (if a property taxis

used) (Bergstrom and Goodman, 1973). Moreover, the process of voting has different costs and benefits for
different citizens, and some may systematically abstain. Rubinfeld (1980) reported differences between voters
and non-voters in local school elections. An earlier papa by Rnbinfeld (1977) found that renters were less likely

to vote than were homeowners. Thus, the voter with the median income among all citizens in a community is

7

unlikely to be the median among yiflrn•
Once the median voter is identified, there are problems in speci'ing his or her budget set. Ladd (1975)
showed that the existence of a tax base other than residential real estate might produce a higher level of taxation.

The existence of commercial and industrial property in the local tax base opens the possibility that the tax will
be shifted forward in the form of higher prices, and not borne by the local residents.

Lindsey (1987a) investigated a number of possible alternatives to the median voter model.

In one

alternative, he considered a planning model in which the preferences of the median voter were neglected.
Instead, planners, faced with an array of prices for raising revenues from different sources (due to differential
incidence and federal deductibility), pick a least-cost (to the state) solution for each expenditure level.

In this

case, a complete set of prices of different options becomes a better description of the budget set faced by
decision makers. Alternatively, pluralitymaimiing politicians may care about non-median citizens as long as
they are likely to vote. In this case, a weighted-average budget set of all of the voters in the state provides the

best measure of the actual budget set faced by decision makers. The weighted-average approach may also
provide a good approximation when the median-voter model fails for other reasons.

Lindses empirical tests found that the weighted average price model dominated both the traditional
median-voter model and the cost-minimization model in explaining state decision making. In the present study,

we employ both the weighted average price model and a new variant of the median price described below.

The Nature of Government Grants. In addition to the issue of political decisionmaking. the effect of
government grants on state spending depends on the nature of the grant glven. The simplest case to analyze is
general, non-matching assistance such as revenue sharing which the state may spend as it chooses. Thi5 type of

grant does not alter the — of incremental spending faced by any individual voter, but does provide increased

purchasing power. Hence, regardless of the identity of the decisive voter, the effect on political equilibrium
should be identical to the effect of an increase in this voter's income.
It would seem that non-matching grants which are targeted to specific programs should have much the

same effect as general grants, for there is no way of determining what the state would have spent on the
particular service in the absence of the grant.

Federal requirements are met as long as post-grant state

expenditure on the project exceeds the amount of the grant. Any funds which are freed may be spent on other

projects or on tax relief. The targeted grant would have only income effects as long as pre-grant state

S

expenditures on the targeted program were at least as great as the grant. If pre-grant state spending were less
than the amount of the grant, then the difference between the grant and the pre-grant level of spending would
be

committed to the targeted project, and the income effect would be limited to the pre-grant level of state

spending.

Thus, theory implies that most of the effect of non-matching grants would involve a simple income effect.

This income effect should, in theory, be widely diffused among the various projects supported by the state, and
on tax reductions. One would expect a very small effect on incremental expenditures from nomnatching grants.

However, most empirical studies find this not to be the case. In these studies, estimated incremental
spending on the targeted project is many times the level implied by the estimated income elasticity of spending.

This has been dubbed the 'flypaper effect as money seems to stick where the targeted grant is placed. Moffut
(1984) ascribed this anomaly to nonlinearities in the marginal voter's budget set. Hamilton (1983) suggested it

was the result of the underlying technology of public goods production, for example, scale economies. Craig
and Inman (1986) suggested that non-median voter models were the explanation, with benefitting interest groups

lobbying against reductions in state spending following the receipt of federal aid.
Regardless, the received wisdom suggests that general non-matching grants will decrease state spending

from its own resources (partial simple government crowdout) while increasing total spending. Received wisdom

is less clear about the effect of targeted non-matching grants, which may produce simple government crowdin.
Matching grants, if open-ended, should have substitution effects as well as income effects as they will
alter the relative prices faced by the voters. However, many matching grants have caps on the amount which will

be matched. U the cap is not binding, then both income and substitution effects result. If the cap is binding,

then the marginal price is unaltered and there should be no substitution effect. Nonetheless, inframarginal
matching will result in increases in 'virtual income' (Burtless and Hausman, 1978) and hence cause income
effects.

Joint Crowdout. The combined effects of exogenous federal changes on state spending and donor
spending, allowing for feedbacks between the latter two, is known as joint crowdouL The Sstencc of these

feedbacks indicates that joint crowdout is not simply the sum of simple crowdout and simple government
crowdout. The only theoretical treatment of joint aowdout is Steinberg (1987), who relied on a decisive (not
necessarily median) voter model in which the voters are cognizant of private donations and of simple crowdout,

9

and vote accordingly. In this model, each individual regards the donations of others, state spending, and federal
spending as perfect substitutes for one another. However, the individual's donations may involve private benefits,
and so is regarded as different from the other sources of spending. Furthermore, the individual gift is considered

as atomistic in the total level of spending. The individual takes these factors into account both in voting for
additional state spending, and in contributing.
The effect of these assumptions is to make the price of state spending on a particular good proportional

to unity divided by unity plus the simple crowdout parameter. If there is total crowdout, the price of buying
additional goods with state spending is viewed as infinite, as an additional dollar of state spending will not

produce any additional net spending on the good8.

Thus, such

goods would only be provided by state

governments when donations are zero. On the other hand, goods with crowdin effects represent very good buys

from the view of the voter, so state level provision of these goods would be much higher, ceteris naribus.

Steinberg (1987) showed that joint crowdout can be partial, zero, or negative in political-economic
equilibrium. For joint crowdout to be partial, it is sufficient that giving by all individuals be a normal good, voter

choice sets are convex and have interior equilibria, and simple crowdout is non-negative. As these conditions

seem not only plausible, but likely, partial joint crowdout would be the most common result. As noted above,

if simple crowdout is total, then either government or donor activity must be zero, and joint crowdout is
undefined. A similar result would occur if simple crowdout falls in the super crowdout' range.
Finally, if simple crowdout is negative, joint crowdout may be partial, zero, or negative.

State

government spending will fall in response to a non-matching grant, though total spending, including the grant,
will rise. If the added donor spending exceeds the decline in state spending, then negative joint crowdout exists.

Partial or zero crowdout would exist if the response of individual donors is small relative top governmental
crowd out.

III) Empirical Specification and Data

8The marginal price would fall to the Bergstrom-Goodman level when governmental expenditures increase
to the point where they drive donations to zero. This implies that the voter choice set is not convex, with the
usual complications. Fortunately, important nonconvexities are less likely when simple donative crowdout is

10

Snecification. The preceding theoretical anaiysis provides the basis for specifying tbc empirical model,
We assume that federal intergovernmental grants to each state are exogenous9, and determine the likely ultimate

impact of these grants on donations and on state governmental expenditures. We estimate several variants of
the following reduced form:

CHAR1
}

= f(PCHARIII.PCHARIt,PSIt,YIi,,YJt,TARGiI,GENII,DEMi)

Si t

where:

I indicates an income group
indicates state of residence
indicates year
CHAR is donations per itemizer
S measures state social service expenditures per capita
PCHAR is the price of donations; if subscript i is omitted, this is the weighted price across income
groups.
PS is the price of state spending
Y measures donor income; if subscript i is omitted, this is the average per-capita income across income
groups.
TARG is per-capita federal grants targeted for social services
GEN is per-capita nontargeted federal grants
DEM is a vector of demographic and taste variables

The level of aggregation varies among variables and equations, and, indeed, we have varied the number

of equations across specifications. Many variables are aggregates for states in particular years, such as percapita federal targeted transfers to Ohio in 1980. Others are further subdivided by income class, such as peritemizer gifts by donors in Ohio with Adjusted Gross Income between $40,000 and $50,000 in 1980. The latter

disaggregation permits calculation of price and income elasticities which are the most commonly studied
determinants of giving.

9More precisely, nonmatching grants arc assumed to be exogenous.
endogenous, but the matching g is assumed to be exogenous.

The kth

of matching grants is

11

However, every income group in a particular state responds to the same federal transfer payment and
state demographic characteristics, so these variables are not disaggregated1

O•

Though these variables do not vary

with income class, variation across time (for the federal grant variables) and states (for both demographic and

grant variables) enables us to estimate their importance. The state government spending equation is entirely
aggregated across income classes as the dependent variable, state spending, does not vary with income class.
All our estimates utilize the log-log functional form, resulting in elasticity estimates for all continuous

variables. Our basic model (henceforth referred to as the two-equation model) estimates the two equations
above by ordinary least squares (OLS). Estimation by the seemingly unrelated regression technique (StJR) is

preferred, for better estimates of standard errors can be obtained from integrating the information contained
in the cross-equation correlation of errors, but SUR is problematic in this case. The CHAR equation employs
900 observations (6 income groups times 50 states times 3 years), while the S equation employs only 150 (50
states times 3 years). This problem suggested ow second basic specification, the seven-equation model. In this
specification, we estimate six separate equations for the dependent variable CHAR, one for each income class.
Each equation employs 150 observations, and the six CHAR equations are estimated simultaneously with the S
equation by SUB.

Theory implies that the giving of each person depends on the giving of others in the state and on state
spending. In reduced-form estimation, this implies that the exogenous determinants of giving by others and state
spending belong in the donations equations. Consequently, we include a weighted sum11 of prices facing different

income groups as well as the price facing the donor's income group. Similarly, we include per-capita income in

10lndeed, the demographic variables are not even disaggregated by year, though this reflects data limitations
rather than proper estimation technique. To the extent this induces measurement error, the coefficients on the
demographic variables will be biased (generally toward zero). Note also that because these variables vary across
states but not across time or income group, their coefficients will be confounded with any state-specific intercepts,

complicating the interpretation. See the discussion below under 'data'.
1'Prices for itemizers in each of the six income groups are weighted by the estimated number of itemizers
in that category in the gate population. Noniteniizers face a price of unity (see below), and they are added in.
The result is divided by the estimated number of taxpaying units in the state.
We also tried including the entire vector of prices and incomes across income groups to explain giving
in each income group. Although this procedure produced interesting estimates for the state spending equation,
it produced apparent nonsense for the giving equations. Presumably this is because the functional form forced
the elasticity of giving with respect to the price of, say, the average donor in the first income group to be the
same for donors in the first and second income groups, thus losing the distinction between own- and cross-price.
Detailed results are available on request from the authors.

12

the donor's state as well as the average pci-capita income in the donor's income dass.

In other variations, we vaiy the definition of the dependent state-spending variable, and modify our
measure of PS, the price appropriate for determining state spending. These variations are described in greater
detail in the section on data below.

flaa In order to estimate the model, three sets of data are required: on state and local spending,
demographic conditions, and tax and charitable giving status. Each set of data required a different source and
the resulting estimates were performed on a merged data base containing information on all sources.

Income, giving, and tax variables were obtained using the National Bureau of Economic Research
TAXSIM model. This computerized model of the U.S. personal income tax is designed to process the Individual
Tax Model File Public Use Samples prepared by the Internal Revenue Service. Each Public Use Sample contains

detailed information from a stratified random sample of tax returns. In 1979, this sample contained 173,359
returns. The sample sizes for 1980 and 1981 were 171,391 and 144,205 respectively. TAXSIM converts the raw

data on each taxpayer in the Public Use Sample into information on the income, tax liability, and marginal tax
rates of the taxpayer population as a whole.

Donations. Special tabulations using the NBER TAXSIM program provided data on charitable giving

for each state by inrome class. We limited our analysis to the 50 states, omitting taxpayers who filed in the
District of Columbia or who lived abroad. Within each state, taxpayers were divided into six income classes
based on their Adjusted Gross Income (AG!): under $10,000, $10,000-$26,000, 520,000-530,000,530,000-540,000
$40,000-$50,000 and over $50,000. In order to protect the confidentiality of taxpayers, the Internal Revenue

Service does not provide the state of residence for taxpayers earning over $200,000. These taxpayers comprise

less than 02 percent of the taxpayer population, and were omitted from the sample. Though these taxpayers

were rare in the period studied, they contributed a disproportionate amount of aM gifts, 103 percent, 10.8
percent, and 11.3 percent in the three sample years. Thus, we are likely to underestimate the amount of
erowdout.

The tax model 6le contains information on the charitable giving of each taxpayer who elected to itemize

deductions rather than use the wro bracket amount Our measure of giving, CHAR, includes claimed gifts of
both cash and property. This property is usually in the form of securities such as stocks and bonds, real estate,

or works of art. The actual deduction taken by the taxpayer is limited to 50 percent of adjusted gross income

13

(AG!) in the case of cash gifts and 30 percent of AG! for gifts of property. Donations in excess of these

limitations are usually deducted in future years in the form of a carryforward deduction.

Government Snendin. Data on state and local spending and federal support for that spending were
gathered from the Commerce Department's Government Finances annual series. In order to test for possible
differences in the importance of various types of spending on donor behavior, two state spending variables were

considered. SI represents per-capita state and local spending on elementary and secondary education, higher
education, welfare, health and hospitals, housing and urban renewal, and natural resources, parks, and recreation.

This broadest measure of state spending includes virtuaily all facets of gate activity which may complement, or
supplement, private donor activity. 52 represents per-capita state and local spending on all of the above except

for housing and urban renewal and natural resources, parks, and recreation.
Federal support for state and local spending was divided into two categories - grants targeted to social

programs likely to be related to donations and to state social service expenditures (TARG), and general ((lEN)
grants, including both nontargeted grants and grants which are targeted for purposes other than social programs.

Our measure of TARG is 'federal support for education and welfare expenditures,' as reported in the
Goverument Finances series, expressed in per-capita terms12. Open-ended matching grants were removed from

TARE in order to maintain the exogeneity of this measure13. The effect of federal matching provisions is
incorporated in our measure of the voter-price of state spending. GEN consists of 'total federal transfers to
states" (per-capita) minus TARG and minus open-ended matching grants.
Prices. Federal tax deductibility lowers the net-of-tax cost of contributing to charity, as itemizers receive

a tax refund which is proportional to their donations. In effect, this net-of-tax cost of providing a dollar to the
charity is the price of donating (POlAR). State and local taxes are also deductible, lowering the effective price

of state spending for a typical voter. These considerations require calculating four prices for each taxpayer.

121n order to obtain per-capita figures, we used Census data on state populations on July 1, 1979 and July
I, 1981. The figure for July 1, 1980 was obtained by averaging the 1979 and 1981 figures because official figures
for the 1980 Census are based on an April 1 enumeration.
13The two federal open-ended matching programs during this period were Aid to Families with Dependent
Children (AFDC) and Medicaid. States could elect to receive AFDC grants under one of two formulae - a closeended one, or the open-ended formula used for Medicaid. In 1979, all but four states chose the latter formula
(Missouri, South Carolina, Arizona, and Texas were the exceptions). in 1980 and 1981., only Arizona and Texas
remained in the close-ended program. For these states and years, AFOC was not subtracted out in generating
TAR 0.

14

['CASH represents the price of making a gift of money. This price depends upon the taxpayer's federal

and state tax rate, as well as on the eligibility of the taxpayer to deduct the charitable contribution at the federal
and

state level. As a general rule, ['CASH can be represented as:

['CASH = 1- ERATE FDED - SPATE

SDED + FRATE

SRATE SDED

FDEI)

where:

FRATE is the taxpayer's federal marginal tax rate
FDED represents federal itemizer status, and is unity for itemizers, zero for others
SRATE is the taxpayer's marginal state rate
SDED represents the deductibility of charitable gifts at the state level. This rigw-e would be unity only
if the taxpayer itemized on the state tax return and if charitable giving were an itemizable
deduction in that state. Otherwise, the value of SDED would be zero.

The final term in the above equation represents the deductibility of state taxes at the federal level. If

a charitable gift is deductible at the state and federal level, some of the combined effect of lower state and
federal taxes is offset because the lower state tax figure will mean a lower level of itemized deductions at the
federal level, thus increasing federal taxes.
tn some states, the interaction between charitable giving, state taxes and federal taxes is more complex.

For example, Minnesota allows federal income taxes to be deducted at the state leveL TAXSIM computes the

actual price for each taxpayer by evaluating the effect of charitable giving on both federal and state taxes,
accounting fully for such idiosyncrasies in state tax codes.

There are two generally recognized and interrelated problems in cala.laring the price of donations exact

sample dependence of price on income, and endogeneity of price. The first problem is common in cross-

section data sets that lack information on state taxes. Because all taxpayers in a cross-section face the same
federal tax code, price can only vary when taxable income varies sufficiently to push taxpayers into different tax

brackets. In turn, taxable income can only vary if gross income varies or if deductions and credits vary.
If the cause is of such variation is variation in deductible charitable donations, then our price measure

is endogenous. if the cause is variation in income, then there is no sample variation in — after controlling
for income (which we must do to disentangle the price from the income elastici®. If the cause is variation in

other deductions or credits, then any variation in the price of giving is due to variation in those taste and

l5
demographic variables which lead taxpayers to select differing levels of other deductions. In this case there is
no independent sample variation in price after controlling for taste differences (which we must do to estimate
donative demand curves properly). Thus, price elasticity cannot be estimated.
That problem

does

not infect the present data set, for variation in state tax schedules over space and

variation in state and/or federal tax schedules over time provide exogenous and independent variation in the price

of giving. However, the second problem, the endogeneity of price, remains. Several solutions to this problem
have been implemented in the literature. The most common solution, following Feldstein (1975), is to employ

an exogenous proxy lot price denoted the "6rst-dollar price'. The first-dollar price uses the marginal tax rate
the donor would face if he or she contributed only one dollar, rather than the price they actually lace (which can

be made endogenously larger by a sufficiently large donation). This is the solution we adopt here, although we

take it one step further and calculate the marginal tax rate appropriate when both donations and state tax
payments are zero. We take this extra step because, in our expanded model, deductible state tax payments are
also an endogenous source of variation in the price of giving14.

Feenberg (198) proposed a related solution. He employed data on state tax rates to break the sample
dependence of price on income, and used a first-dollar measure of price. Because this proxy is correlated with

the 'truC marginal price relevant for donor decisioninaking, but not with the error term, he employed rffst-

dollar price as an instrumental variable, not as a regular control variable (as had been the practice before
Feenbergf5. The ideal solution was implemented by Reece and Ziesehang (1985). They developed a maximum

likelihood routine that takes account of all of the nonlinearities in the donor budget set directly16.

PASSETisthepriceofmakingagiftofproperty. Mostofthevalueofsuchgiftsisintheformof

We should note, however, that choice of the price variable made little qualitative difference to our results
(see the discussion in the section on price elasticities below). Evidently, the sort of endogeneity bias resulting
from use of last-dollar price is much less important with the aggregate data we employ than with the microdata
employed by some other authors.

15n results not reported here, we tiled the same strategy with less success. Evidently, the quality of the
instrument is such that you need many more observations than we had available to obtain estimates with small
standard errors. Feenberg employed a much larger data set containing observations on individual donors, and
still had relatively funy estimates. Also, the instrument has a different mean than true price, as discussed below
in the section on price&
16'flj maximum likelihood routine is difficult and expensive to estimate, and the advantage over flrst-doUar
price, while important for microdata, is unlikely to be large for the aggregate data employed here. Thus, we have
eschewed this option.

16

appreciated property-- property which has increased in value since the time the taxpayer purchased it. By giving
property to a charitable organization, the taxpayer not only receives a deduction, but also avoids the capital gains

tax on the appreciated portion of the gift. Thus, PASSET depends not only on the federal and state ordinaiy
rates and deductibility status, but also on the federal and state capital gains tax rates17. As a general rule,
PASSET 1s

PASSET = PCASH - AFPC

(FCGRATE + SCURATE)

+

ANt

SCORATE FDED

FRATE

where:

APPC is the appreciated portion of a gift of property
PCGRATE and SCORATE are the federal and state capital gains tax rates, respectively
all other variables are previously defined.

PCI-IAR represents a weighted-average price of giving both cash and assets. The weights of cash and

assets in total giving reflect the shares of cash and assets in total giving for the taxpayer's income group. For
each of these prices, the price assigned to an income group within a state represented the average price of all
taxpayers in that income group in that state, rather than the price that would be faced by a taxpayer with the

average characteristics in that income group.

A final measure of price, PS, was constructed to represent the relevant price of state spending facing

voters in the state. Three factors determine PS: the federal tax consequences of state spending, open-ended
matching provisions in federal grants, and the political model underlying state decision-making18. The first factor

17Since the tax file does not contain data on the amount of appreciation in the value of contributions, the
appreciated portion of a gift of property was assigned using a Monte Carlo process and data from a survey of
taxpayers regarding their gifts of appreciated property. The survey of donors to a major charitable organization
gathered income and gift information from a total of 14,0(X) donors. That data formed the underlying distribution

to which taxpayers in the Individual Tax Model File were matched by TAXSIM. Regrettably, results of the
survey remain confidentiaL

18A fourth factor, the extent to which the decisive voter is able to shift tax consequences of his decision onto
others (including other personal taxpayers, corporate owners facing corporate taxes, and citizens of other states
paying excise taxes on exports) is neglected here, If states vary in the extent of tax shifting, our price coefficient
will suffer from measurement enor bias, It would be quite difficult to improve our measure here, as even in
simpler settings tax incidence remains controversiaL Further, the way in which tax shifting affects equilibrium
depends upon the political model underlying decisionmaking.
A fifth factor, the effect of simple donative aowdout, is also neglected, As noted earlier, donative
aowdout increases the — to the decisive voter of obtaining an increase 'in social service expenditures via
increased state spending. However, if the crowdout parameter is identical across states and time (and, indeed,
our estimating procedure assumes that it is), this omission should bias only the size of the price coefficient, and
-

17

is

straightforward: PS generally is unity reduced by the decisive voter's marginal federal tax rate if an itemizer,

unity otherwise. Again, the calculation is more complex for some states owing to deductibility of federal from
state taxes.

Federal open-ended matching programs reduce this price fractionally. In effect, matching allows the
decisive taxpayer to shift a fraction of the costs onto the residents of other states. We incorporate matching by

taking the weighted average of the —

above

and that price divided by unity plus the matching rate19. The

weights reflect the share of the state's matched expenditures in the measwe of overall state spending, and were

appropriately different for ow two measures of state spending (Si and S2). Close-ended matching grants have
no effect on the marginal price of state spending as long as the cap is binding (which it always is), and so are
neglected20.

Because we remain agnostic on the political model underlying state decisionmaking, we calculate the relevant

marginal tax rate two different ways, resulting in two different measures of price. The first way produces the

variable PSMEAN by employing a weighted averan of tax rates in the state. The second way produces the
variable PSMED by employing a weighted median of tax rates in the state. In both cases, we employ our
modified first-dollar tax rate - the marginal tax rate applying if the taxpayer contributed only one dollar and paid
only one dollar in state taxes.

For both these measures, the weights are the same. First, we weight married couples filing jointly

as

representing two potential voters, not one. Second, we weight each taxpaying unit to reflect the probability that
members of that unit will vote. Statistics on voter participation rates by age and income class were obtained from

edt poll information following the 1984 election. These statistics were applied to the tax returns to compute a
new sample weight for each taxpayer based on the estimated likelihood that the filer will vote21. Regardless of
the true political model, absthining voters are likely to have less importance in deter"' ining political outcomes,

not its statistical significance.

19See footnote 13 for details of the calculation of matching rates.

20As noted earlier, dose-ended grants lower the inframarginal price, resulting in an increase in 'virtual
income? Because we do not incorporate this effect, our measure of income (not price) is flawed.
2tThe exact procedure follows that of Lindsey (1987a), who developed the FSMEAN measure but did not
apply his weights to calculate a PSMED measure of voter price.

18

but the appropriateness of PSMEAN versus PSMED depends upon the true political model.

income. As in the calculation of prices, disposable income should be regarded as endogenous Lu our
formulation. The reason is that the endogenous decisions on state spending and personal donation affect state
and federal taxes, hence after-tax income. Our solution is the same as for prices. We calculate federal taxes
owed

if donations and state spending were zero, and

subtract this from adjusted gross income. This measure

avoids endogeneity bias but introduces measurement bias, as before. However, in results not reported here, we
obtained very similar estimates using other income measures (including after-federal-tax income, after-federaland-state-tax income, and a traditional first-dollar after-tax income measure in the absence of donations but not

state spending).

In reduced fonn, income of others should matter (as determinants of state spending and of aggregate
donations) as well as income-class specific income. Following the pattern for prices, we include a variable

measuring others' income, but unlike before, we do not need to construct a weighted average of our income
variables. Instead, we simply used state per-capita income as reported in Statistical Abstract of the United States.

Demonaohic Variables. To isolate the effect of crowdout, we must remove the influence of confounding

taste differences between states. Control for interstate variations can be accomplished either by including
separate dummy variables for the states in the regression equations or by using demographic variables which are
likely to explain the variation of tastes across states. Part of what makes Vermont's tastes different from

Geora's may be the greenness of the mountains or the redness of the clay soil, while most is probably due to
demographic differences. Because we obtained only a single cross-section of demographic variables, the

coefficients on these variables reflect state-specific latent variables as well as demographic effects. The use of

demographic variables therefore incorporates the effects of state dummies, but places more structure on the
variation in state-specific intercepts and utilizes more information to estimate this structure.
We therefore use a series of variables designed to measure the demographic conditions of each state.

Data on these demographic factors were obtained from the 1980 Census. The number of pupils per 100
inhabitants, denoted PUPILS, was used to control for demographic differences in the need for state and local

We also explored the traditional dummy-variable specification for individual effects. We found this
specification less compelling for the reasons specified in the text. Nonetheless, we discuss — elasticities from
this procedure below. Full results are available from the authors.

19

education spending. Higher levels of population of school age should raise demand for education spending.

MILEAGE, or road mileage per capita, was induded to control for the possible effects of population dispersion
on state spending. To the extent scale economies exist in social service provision, higher values of mileage are
likely to raise the level of social service spending as any given quantity of provision is likely to cost more.

NONWHITE measures the percent of the population which was classified as nonwhite in the Census.

This variable could determine both the taste of donors and taxpayers (as nonwhites may have a different
propensity to give for cultural reasons) and the perceived need for social services (as nonwhites may be perceived

as having special affirmative action needs beyond those associated with poverty, or, conversely if the electorate

is less willing to support social services when many of the recipients are nonwhite). We cannot identify these
separate effects in our reduced form, but can remove the confounding effects of both upon crowdout estimates
by including this variable.

URBAN measures the percent of population living in urban areas, again using the Census definition.
POVERTY reflects the percent of the population living in poverty. Because these variables reflect characteristics

of both the donor and recipient population, interpretation of their coefficients is as problematic as for the
variable NONWHITE.

HOMEOWN, which measures the fraction of the state's households that own their own homes, is likely

to be negatively related to the demand for social services. Homeowners have been shown to be more sensitive
to increases in property taxes than have renters.
While any of the demographic variables may be correlated with the error term in a time series, this study

employs only a single cross-section for these variables. While this introduces the possibility of measurement
error, it allows us to take these variables as predetermined when explaining donations or state spending. Finally,

one might object that some of these variables seem likely to explain state expenditures but not donations. This
is irrelevant in reduced-form estimation, for, as state spending partly determines donations, any determinants of

state spending can have impact on donations.

In results not reported her; we also included dummy variables to represent the year in which the
observation was collected. These two dummy variables were never significant (singly or in combination) in any

To the extent that endogenous state expenditures determine the dropout rate, the coefficient on this

variable may suffer from endogeneity bias.

20

equation, so we do not report any regressions containing these variables.

IV) Results

In general, we present results for eight specifications. Models one through four explain the broader
measurc of state spending, Si whereas models four through eight explain S2. Models one, two, five, and six
employ two equations (one explaining total giving and one explaining state spending), and models three, four,
seven, and eight employ seven equations (six explaining giving in each income class and one explaining state
spending). Finally, models one, three, five, and seven utilize a weighted median measure for the price of state

spending (PSMED), while the remaining models use a weighted mean measure (PSMEAN).

The models are all reduced forms, and so include the same explanatory variables (PC}IAR, PS, Y,
although two
TARCI, GEN, PUPILS, MILEAGE, NONWHITE, URBAN, POVERTY, AND HOMEOWN),

details vary. Most obviously, the price of state spending depends upon the model, and varies (across FS1MED,

PS1MEAN, PS2MED, AND PS2MEAN) as indicated in the previous paragraph, with the same measure
employed in all equations within each model. A second disparity results from the differing levels of aggregation

of the dependent variables. The distinction between average price of donations within an income group and
average price of donations across all income groups is meaningless for the state spending equation, as the
dependent variable is not income-class specific. The situation is similar for donor income. Thus, only the
aggregate price of donations and income variables are included in the state spending equations.

It is difficult to say which is the best modeL Of course no meaningful statistical comparison can be
made between the Si and S2 models, which simply explain different dependent variables. One can test for the
superiority of the seven-equation over two-equation specifications using a slight variation in the specification to

nest the latter in the former24. F-tests strongly reject the nesting constraints, arguing for the superiority of the

seven-equation specifications. On the other band, the coefficients on own-price of donations are far more

The variation is necessary because of the differing levels of agregation and the inclusion of the variables
reflecting average price of donations in other income groups and average income in other income groups in each
donation equation. If we exclude these variables from both the two- and seven-equation models, then the twoequation model is the special case where the coefficients of all right-hand variables in the six donations equations

are identical acoss equations. One can reject this constraint at better than .0Th

-

21

plausible in the two-equation models (see the discussion below), with significant wTong signs in all equations.

Thus, we report both types of models. Evidence is also mixed for the comparison of the two measures of the
price of state spending.

In the seven-equation models, the median price outperformed the mean price as

measured by system R2 (3874 versus 3680 for Si, 3632 venus 3478 for S2). In the two-equation models, the
median price again did better as measured by corrected R2 for the state spending equations (.8401 versus .8232
for Si, .8156 versus .8002 for S2), although the mean price of state spending had a slight edge in the contributions

equations (3050 versus .7025 for both PSI. and P52). Overall, models three and seven are slightly preferred over
the alternatives.

Crowdout. In table I, we report our estimates for joint crowdout of donations and state spending by

targeted federal grants. We report corresponding estimates for general federal grants in table II. These
estimates are derivatives25, not elasticities, and indicate the dollar change in the indicated category of spending

caused by a one-dollar increase in federal grants. Equivalently, the estimates indicate the decrease in the
indicated expenditure categoty caused by a one-dollar decrease in federal grants, as our estimating technique

imposes symmeuy of response to increases and cutback

Both the sign and magnitude of joint crowdout of donations by targeted grants varied across the
specifications, with the preferred specifications indicating that a one-dollar federal grant increase ultimately
results in a 4.6 cent donative decease (significant at the 6% level using a two-tailed test). This sort of partial
aowdout is evidenced in all four seven-equation models, but crowdout appears numerically and statistically less
significant when the mean-price measures are employed.

In contrast, the two-equation models imply partial

crowdin, with federal grants resulting in donative increases of up to 63 cents (also significant at the 6% level for

the median-price model, insignificant for mean-price).
In common with other studies, state spending seems to increase by more than the federal targeted grant.
Because targeted grants are administratively spent by the states, we have subtracted one from the derivative of

state spending with respect to targeted grants to obtain the change in own-flnanced S' reported in table I. Thus,
our preferred estimates indicate that a targeted federal grant of one dollar will increase Si by about $1.28 above

To convert our coefficients to derivatives, we multiplied by the average ratio of donations or state spending
to the indicated type of grant. In so doing, we first converted donations ner itemizer into compatible terms with
federal spending Der canita. Standard errors were computed the same way, and should be regarded as
conditional on the sample.

22

Table I: Joint Crowdout Estimates (or Targeted Federal Gnats

3

4

5

6

8

1

2

7

ModelNuinber

7

7

2

2

7

2

2

7

Numberof
Equations

Si

Si

Si

Si

52

52

52

52

Measure of S

mean

med

mean

med

mean

med

mean

med

-.0017
(.0038)

-.9

-.00i9

-.0009

(.0042)

(.0038)

(.0042)

-.03i7

-.029i
(.0098)

-.0317

-.0291

(.0091)

(.0096)

.0045

.0119

(.0144)

(.0i47)

.0044
(.0144)

(.0147)

-.0201
(.0098)

(.0102)

-.0201
(.0098)

(.0102)

.0054

.0117
(.0086)

Measure of PS
cbange in:

Cl
C?

(.0091)

0
C4

.0054

.0117

-.0169

(.6)

(.008i)

(.0117)

-.0018
(.0126)

(.0117)

-.0017
(.0126)

-.0456
(.0246)

..025i

.0652

(.0383)

(.0258)

(.0354)

(.0383)

..0458
(.0246)

-.0250
(.0258)

1.2766

12413
(.2731)

1.1908
(.2229)

1.1829
(.2552)

i.i908

(.2361)

(.2229)

1.1829
(.2552)

2.2310
(.2374)

(.2743)

2.2560
(.2251)

2.2070
(.2581)

(fl43)

CS

(.0081)
-.0020

C6
.0241

TotaIC

.0652
(.0353)

own-Fmanccd

1.2766

S

(.2361)

1.3413
(.2731)

2.3418

22654

(.2387)

(.2758)

Total
Spending

-.0169

.0120

23162

Standard anon are in parentheses below parameter estimates.
Ci represents total contributions in income group L

-.0019

.0241

2.1450

2.1579
(.2565)

23

and beyond the grant ($1.19 for 52). This pauern holds across all eight models.
Overall, targeted federal grants appear to be especially productive in increasing social service

expenditures, with the total of joint crowdouts (adding back the 1 to indude federal-financed S) leading to a
multiplier greater than 2 in all cases. In the preferred specification for Si, the $1.28 increase in own-financed
state expenditures more than makes up for the 4.6 cent decease in donations, leading to an overall increase of
$2.23 per targeted federal dollar.

A similar pattern emerges for general federal grants. The preferred specifications indicate
numerically and statistically smaller partial crowdout of donations of about 2.1 cents per dollar. Unlike
before, the sign of the donative crowdout derivative does not vary across specifications, and most

specifications indicate numerically and statistically greater crowdout. For example, model 1 estimates 6.2

cents of crowdout per dollar (significant at better than 5%).
The distinction between own-financed and federal-financed state spending is not meaningful for
general grants, which, by construction, are not targeted towards the appropriate state spending measures.

Our preferred estimate for Si indicates that a one-dollar federal general grant increase results in an increase
in state social-service expenditures of about 51.46, so that total spending increases by about $1.44. This

general pattern is repeated in all specifications, with the state spending derivative ranging from $1.15 to $1.61.
Thus, even nontargeted federal grants appear to be especially productive in generating social-service

expenditures, despite the partial crowdout of donations. General federal grants appear less productive than
targeted grants, but both are surprisingly productive.
Joint crowdout is directly revealed by reduced-form estimation (since we do not include any variables
to hold state spending constant in the donations equation or to hold donations constant in the state spending

equation), but simple crowdout can be inferred from reduced-form estimates26. We estimate the simple

crowdout of donations by targeted federal grants at -.0139 for the referred SI specification. That is, we
infer that if state spending had not been allowed to respond to the change in federal grants, donations would

26h effect, we estimate the parameters of the structural model S = a + b(D + F), D = c + d (S + F) by
indirect least squares. The parameten b and d are estimates of the simple crowdout of state spending and
donations, respectively, and can be identified as quotients of reduced-form parameters. Because the structural
coefficients are a nonlinear function of reduced-form estimates, the usual problem complicates calculation of
standard errors for the structural modeL

24

Table II: Joint Crowdout Estimates for GaitS Fedeni Giants
ModclNumber

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Numbcrof

2

2

7

7

2

2

7

7

Si

SI

Si

Si

S2

52

52

52

mcd

mean

mcd

mcan

med

mean

med

mean

-0000

-.0002
(.0030)

Equatiocis
?,tcasure of S

Measure of PS

-.

change in:

Cl

(.0029)

-.0002
(.0030)

(.0029)

(.8)

(.9)

(.0068)

-.0025
(.0069)

C3

-.0034
(.0110)

-.0110
(.0107)

-.0033
(.0110)

-.0110
(.0107)

C4

-.0079
(.0076)

-.0097
(.0076)

-0079

-.0097

(.0075)

(.0076)

.0011

C2

-.0052

-.0078

-0053

(.0066)

(.0066)

(.0066)

-.0078
(.0066)

-.0055

(.0089)

-.0089
(.0093)

.Q()55
(.0089)

(.0093)

-.0379
(.0226)

-.0209
(.0183)

-.0402
(.0190)

-.0619
(.0281)

-.0379
(.0286)

-.0208
(.0188)

-.0402
(.0190)

1.6097
(.2028)

1.4621

1.6097
(.2028)

1.1512

(.1882)

(.1783)

1.3103
(.1901)

1.1512
(.1783)

1.3103
(.1901)

1.4412
(.1891)

1.5695
(.2037)

1.2724
(.1922)

1.1304

1.2701

(.1805)

(.1793)

(.1910)

CS

C6

TotaiC

-.0619

(.0281)
1.4621

S

(.1882)

Total
Spending

.0011

-.0025

1.4002

13718

(1903)

(.2048)

Standard errors are rn parentheses beneath parameter eslnnates.
Ci rcprescnts total contributions in income group i

1.0893

-.0089

25

have fallen by only 1.4 cents instead of 4.6 cents. Joint

aowdout is so much larger than simple owdout because

state spending moves in the same direction as federal grants, so that donations are responding to a $2.28increase

in government spending when there is a $1 increase in federal targeted grants. In contrast, simple crowdout of

state spending is larger than joint crowdout. We estimate that if donations had not been allowed to fall by 4.6
cents,

then own-financed state spending (Si) would have risen by $1.34 instead of $L28. The same patterns apply

for the S2 specifications and for general federal grants. For example, simple crowdout of donations by general
federal grants is estimated at -0.6 cents and simple crowdout of state spending at 51.49 in model 3.
Is Charity a Giffengood? Clearly, the answer one expects is 'nO,' and yet our preferred specification
yields paradodcal results. When we estimate any of the two-equation models, the coefficient on the log of ownprice is negative, statistically significant, and numerically similar to the bullc of published estimates27.

Surprisingly, when we estimate any of the seven-equation models, we obtain coefficients on the log of price which

are always positive and statistically significant in five of the six giving equationP, indicating a significant' wrong
sign.' In table 111, we report these estimated price elasticities from the eight main specifications and several

additional alternatives.

The basic difference between the two- and seven-equation specifications is that the former exploit

between-income-group price variation as well as within-group, while the latter employs only within-group
variation. If within-group variation were small relative to between-group, we would be less able to detect the

influence of price in the seven-equation models and would expect statistical insignificance. However, this would

21There appears to be a rough consensus that giving is price elastic, with most point estimates of elasticity
around -1.2 (Clotfelter, 1985). However, the evidence from panel data sets seems to call the consensus into
question. aotfelter himself obtained a much lower elasticity in his (1980) panel study when he employed a
difference specification to remove the confounding influences of latent explanatory variables. His cross-section
elasticity estimates of -1.40 fell to -033 and were not statistically significantly different from zero. Although he
attributed much of this deaeasc to lagged eflths, he did not estimate lags in a first-difference framework, so
his estimates may be biased. Broman (1986) estimated a cn.ilar model from a different panel, and found that
slow adjustment accounted for — a small fraction of the decline in estimated elasticity when employing first
differences. In preliminary results, Daniel (1988) estimated a fixed-effects covariance model (basically a multiyear extension of flrst-differencing) and obtained an estimated — elasticity of -0.03, rndgniAcantly different
from zero. in summary, recent evidence leads one to question whether donations respond at all to the tax-price
of giving, but there is no other evidence that donations are a giffengood. See the discussion in Slemrod and
Shobe (1988).

ZOne wag suggested that we really ought to be doing a one-tailed test on the price coefficient, so that our
perverse results indicate that — is insignificant, rather than significant with the wrong sign. While correct from
both a technical and marketing standpoint, that suggestion doesn't make our price coefficients any less of a

punk.

26

Table Ill: Estimated Own.Price Elasticities for Donations
Equation for:
C

Cl

C2

CS

C4

C6

CS

Model #
Two-Equation
Models
1

(0.20)

-2.85'"

2

(0.20)

-2.72'"

5

(020)

-2.85"

6

(0.20)

-3.61'"

ID

(030)
Seven-Equation

Models
3

4

7

8

9

10

1k

2.91"

2.84"'

(1.29)

(0.76)

2.90"

2.41'"

2.10"

(1.29)

(0.87)

(0.71)

2.91"

284'"

(1.29)

(0.76)

131'"

0.83"

(0.40)

(0.39)

1.48"

0.07

(0.33)
0.29

(031)

2.41"

LU
(0.71)

(0.49)

(0.40)

-0.09
(0.42)

062'

0.41

(0.37)

(0.30)

1.05"

1.75

-1.34

.0.22

(135)

(0.85)

(032)

2.36
(1.43)

-1.28

-0.19

0.20

0.69

(022)

(057)

(033)

(0.44)

013
(031)

(0.75)

0.44

(LOS

0.43

(038)

(0.29)

(0.41)

2.72"
4.97"
(2.44)

3E

1.04"
(0.40)

0.29

(031)

(0.87)

(1.28)

3D

1.47"'
(0.49)

0.83"
(0.38)

2.90"

(1.41)
3C

1.44"
(0.69)

iii'"

(0.40)

(1.29)

1.95

SB

1.40"
(0.70)

3.09"

2.35"

(0.99)

(0.90)

1.69"
(0.67)

2.69"
(1.26)

0.48

(054)

0.98

(0.62)

0.07

(0.33)

0.62"
(0.26)

2.21"'

in'"
(0.49)

0.46

(0.36)

.436"
(0.46)

0.99'"

0.83"

(035)

(036)

(0.28)
0.72
(0.49)

0.78

134'

0.41

(137)

(0.69)

(0.65)

0.41

0.94'"
(021)

Key 'significant at 10%; "significant at 5%; '"significant at 1%; all using a two-tailed test.
Standard enors are in parentheses beneath parameter estimates.

Ci indicates that the elasticity is for gising in income groupi C without a subscript indicates the
parameter was constrained to be equal across I

27

not explain sinnificant wrong signs. Thus, we tried several variations. Models 9, 10, and 3C report

experiments with variable deletion. The only right-hand variables in 9 are own-price and the intercept; the
only right-hand variables in 10 are own-price, own-income, and the intercept. Model 3C is identical to model
3 except for the exclusion of the variable representing average price of giving (aaoss income groups) in the
state. All three were estimated by OU. Most of the estimates from model 9 arc statistically insignificant,

but there are still three wrong signs (one significant). Similarly, there was only one statistically significant

wrong sign in model 10, but three other estimates had the wrong sign. All of the elasticities had the wrong
sign (four significantly) in model SC.
In model SB, we substituted dummy variables for each state and year for the time-invariant
demographic variables and estimated by SUR, We could not include both sets of variables in the same
equation because, as discussed previously, the time-invariant demographic controls are equivalent to a

structure imposed on state-specific dummy variables. The elasticity estimate for the richest income group

looks nice' for this specification, but all the other estimates had the wrong sign (three significantly).
Model 3D was identical to 3, but we replaced our observations on giving in each state, year, and

income group with observations on the average giving across time in each state and income group. We tried
this specification because variation in price within income groups may be more sensitive to transitory

fluctuations than price across income groups. For contrast, we estimated model ID, the equivalent two-

equation specification. Once again, the elasticity estimate looked good (if a little high) in the two-equation
case, but bad in the seven-equation case (with all signs wrong, three significantly).

Model SE was identical to 3, but a restriction was placed forcing the coefficient on own-price to be
identical across the six giving equations. This restriction was rejected (at nearly the .01 level), but
nonetheless did little to explain the wrong sign, which remains highly significant for all equations.
As indicated earlier, we employ a first-dollar price of giving to eliminate possible endogeneity bias.
However, this proxy for the true marginal price is biased. Under a progressive tax system, the marginal price

is always greater than or equal to the first-dollar price, with the size of the gap between the two proportional
to the size of one's donation. This imparts a bias on estimated price elasticity when the true elasticity is
negative which operates in the right direction to explain our current paradoxical results. That is, the
estimated slope of the donation demand nun will be greater than the true slope (in a numeric, not absolute-

28

value sense), and a sign flip is logically possible. However, the size of this bias i5 likely to be small for the
current tax code and range of observed giving, as few donors push themselves into very different tax brackets
solely because of the size of their donations, and our data aggregates away some of this bias. Nonetheless, to

test is explanation, we estimated model 3A, which is like model 3 but substitutes a marginal own-price for
the first-dollar price of giving. Unfortunately, all signs remained wrong in model 1k, with one significantly

wrong. Although we are trading off one bias (due to the systematically different mean of the proxy) for
another (due to endogeneity of price), the results from model 1k do not encourage us to believe we have
found the full explanation for the perverse signs.

Cross-price Elasticities. We estimate two cross-price elasticities in the giving equations - one for the

gifts of others in the state, and one for the price of state spending. We estimate one cross-price elasticity in
the state spending equations, measuring the effect on state expenditures of the average price of donations in
the state.

The cross-price of others' giving had a positive sign in all of the two-equation specifications, and was
statistically significant at the .05 level in models 2 and 6. This result suggests that giving by others is, in some
sense, a substitute for one's own giving. However, this cross-price had a generally negative sign in the sevenequation specifications. For example, in model 3, all cross-price elasticities were negative, significantly so for

the lower four income groups. Since specification 3 is mildly preferred, the evidence is slightly stronger for a
'bandwagon effect,' in which giving by others is a complement to one's own gift.
The cross-price of state spending on giving was negative for all two-equation models (significantly so

for the mean-price measure), and generally positive in the seven-equation models. For example, this crossprice elasticity was positive for five out of six income groups, significantly so for three groups in model 3. It

was positive for all income groups (significantly for two) in model four. Again, the evidence is mixed, with
slightly stronger evidence favoring the substitutability of state spending for giving in donor preferences. This
cross-price result is also consistent with the generally negative estimates of the simple crowdout parameter.
The cross-price of donations in the state spending equation was negative and significant at the .01
level in all eight specifications, with point estimates clustered around -2,7. Thus, although the cross-price
elasticity of state spending in the donations equations suggest (mildly) that the goods axe substitutes, the
cross-price elasticity of donations in the state spending equation suggests that the goods are complements.

29

The asymmetry in estimates here is not too troubling, as there are quantity constraints on donor/voters which

imply complex income effects which are not fuiiy removed by inclusion of our income variables.
Income Elasticities.

Two income elasticities are estimated for each giving equation- one for own

income, and one for average income in the state. Only the latter elasticjty was estimated for the state
spending equations.

Giving emerges as a gonna! but inelastic good. Point estimates for the own-income elasticity of
giving ranged from 0.21 to 0.24 in the two equation models, with standard errors of 0.04. The pattern is
similar (if more chaotic) for the seven-equation models, with generally larger point estimates and a couple of
insignificant wrong signs.

The cross-income elasticity provides further evidence on the relation between own gifts and gifts of

others, for a higher level of others' income results in a higher level of others' giving. However, this effect

is

confounded by considerations of need. A higher level of others' income may indicate less poverty, reducing

the need for contributions of any sort. To some extent, the latter effed is removed by inclusion of the
poverty rate as a control variable, but the number of 'near-poor' may be correlated with per capita state
income. Our estimates for this parameter are almost always negative, but only rarely significant at the 10%
level. The sign is consistent with both explanations if giving of others is a substitute for own giving.

State spending also emerges as a normal but inelastic good. Point estimates for the income elasticity
of state spending cluster tightly around 0.25 for the median-price equations (significant at .01), and 0l3 for

the mean-price equations (significant at .10). Again, the income elasticity may be confounded with needbased state social service expenditures, but inclusion of the poverty rate as a control variable reduces this
difficulty.

Demomnhic Variables. One striking pattern crosses all specifications - the poverty rate is a positive
determinant of donations, and a negative determinant of state spending. A s4n.ilar relation between poverty
and giving has been seen only inconsistently in previous studies (see Qotfelter (1985)). The semi-logarithmic
formulation for this variable implies that a one percentage-point increase in the poverty rate causes a three
percent increase in giving (under the two-equation specifications) and between a one and six percent increase

in giving by various income groups (with most tstim2tes between four and six percent) under the sevenequation specifications. The coefficient is statistically significant at the

.01

level for all but the poorest

30

income group. in contrast,

a

one percentage-point inaease in poverty appears to cause a deaease in state

social service spending of about one tenth of one percent in all specifications (also significant at .01). The

latter effect is consistent with

a fear of

in-migration of the poor if the state is too generous with its social

service expenditures (Smith, 1988), but that fear does not appear to inhibit private donations.

Further evidence supporting need-related giving is provided by the coefficient on PUPILS. Gifts are

positively related to PUPILS in all estimates, and this effect is significant for all two-equation specifications

and for most income groups in the seven-equation models. This variable also has a significant positive
coefficient in the state spending equations.

Giving also appears to respond positively (at the .01 level) to the percent of population living in
urban areas, another plausible measure of need. In contrast, the positive coefficient on this variable in the
state spending equations was never statistically significant.

The coefficient on NONWHITE was negative and significant for aggregate giving. In the seven-

equation models, this variable was only significant for the wealthiest income class. As indicated earlier, it is

unclear whether the coefficient on NONWHITE reveals more about the effect of the recipient's race or the
effect of the donor's race on giving, as we have no variables directly measuring the donor's race.
NONWHITE was insignificant in the state spending equations.

MILEAGE had a generally insignificant effect on giving, and a strong positive effect on state
spending. Finally, HOMEOWN had a positive effect on both giving and state spending, generally significant.

The sign in the state spending equation is contrary to expectations, as homeowners have been found to be

more sensitive to increases in property taxes than renters. The result for both equations may partly be the
result of a permanent income effect, or may reflect taste differences or a different environment.

V) Conclusions

The efficacy of federal grants depends, in large part, upon the reactions

of voters and donors. While

expenditure levels do not tell the whole story, federal grants would not appear useful if each federal increase
was matched by a decrease in the combination of state government and private nonprofit support for social
services. In this paper, we provide pioneering estimates of the parameters of this 'joint crowdout".

31

Combining information from IRS Public Use Samples of Individual Income Tax Returns with
information on government spending and demography, we develop a three-year panel of average giving in

each of six income groups and fifty states and state spending and federal grants in each state. We divide
federal grants into those grants specifically designed to be spent on social services (targeted grants) and those

not so designed (general grants). We then estimate a reduced form in which contributions and state
spending each depend upon federal grants, income, prices, and demographic variables.

Our results indicate that federal grants of either sort are quite productive of soda! service
expenditures. Despite crowding out an estimated 4.6 cents of donations, a marginal dollar of targeted grants
results in an estimated $1.22 increase in state spending from its own resources, so that total expenditures

increase by $2.fl A general grant is less productive, but still results in impressive expenditure increases.
We rwd that a marginal dollar of general federal grants results in a 2 cent decrease in donations, a $1.46
increase in state spending for a total expenditure increase of $1.44. Although these state expenditure
increases appear implausibly large, they are consistent with the results of other studies which have found the
so-called flypaper effect (federal money sticks where it hits).

These induced expenditure changes are in part a reaction to the federal grant and in part a feedback
reaction between state spending and donations. We find that if state spending were somehow held constant,
a marginal targeted federal grant would only result in a 1.4 cent decrease in donations. Similarly, if
donations were somehow held constant, we estimate that own-financed state government spending would rise
by $134.

We employ two measures of the price of incremental state spending. One represents the mean, and
the other the median after-federal-tax cost of a dollar of state income taxes to the average voter in each
state. In both cases, we take account of the number of voters in each taxpaying unit and the likelihood that
each unit will vote, based on exit poii data. The median likely-voter price measure appears to be superior on
statistical grounds, though evidence on this point is equivocal.

Giving appears to be quite sensitive to measures of need such as the poverty rate, the number of
pupils per 100 inhabitants, and the percent of population living in urban areas. We find that a one

percentage-point increase in the poverty rate in a state will result in an estimated three percent increase in
giving. In contrast, state spending on social services is tower in states with higher poverty rates.

32

The importance of crowdout estimates to public policy is such that it would be useful to turn to a
variety of other data sources and specifications. Our current data restricts us to considering cowdout of

could be learned from survey
donations by tax itemizers with adjusted gross income under S200,(X)0. More
data. In particular. crowdout of non-monetary donations (volunteer labor and in-kind gifts) may prove
expenditures such as user fees.
important. Federal grants may also interact with non-tax-financed state

Finally, for-profit firms may respond to federal cutbacks by providing service on a fee basis.

One would also want to know more about the behavioral response of recipient nonprofit (Inns,
here).
which could only be learned from a survey of nonprofits (Schiff and Weisbrod, 1986, make a start

nonprofits, or does it result
Does the increase in donations following a federal cutback come 'for free' to the

from increased and expensive solicitation efforts which reduce the net productivity of donations? Wbat share
of incremental donations is allocated to incremental service provision? Ben-Ncr and Van Hoomissen (1989)

make a start here by examining crowdout of labor employed by nonprofit firms, perhaps a better proxy for

output than

is

donations. One would also want to know about crowdout for more finely focused outputs -

is

want crosscrowdout of education spending different from crowdout of aid to the poor? Finally, one would
national comparisons to fully assess the theory of federalism.
REFERENCES
Abrams, Burton and Mark D. Schmitz, 'The Crowding-Out Effect of Governmental Transfers on Private
Charitable Contributions,' Public Choice, 1978, 33 No.1 ppl9-37.

'The Crowding-Out Effect of Governmental Transfers on Private Charitable Contributions:
Cross-Section Evidence: National Tax Journal December 1984, 37, pp.563-568.
-

Amos, Orley M. Jr., 'Empirical Analysis of Motives Underlying Individual Contribution-s to Charity.' Atlantic
Economic Journal. December 1982, 10, ppA5-5Z
Andreoni, James, 'Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and Ricardian Equivalence,' Journal
of Political Economy. December 1989, 97.

Arrow, Kenneth 3, 'Gifts and Frh9nen,' PhiloSonhv and Public Affairt Summer 1974,1, pp. 343-361
Ben-Ncr, Avner and Theresa Van Hoomissen, 'The Deter...inaat.t of the Relative Size, Structure and
Evolution of the Nonprofit Sectoc Evidence from New York State, 1981-1986,' Working Paper,
University of Minnesota, 1989.

Bergstrom, Theodore, and RI. Goodman, 'Private Demand for Public Goods,' The American Economic
Review. June, 1973, 63 ppi8O-296.
Bergstrom, Theodore, Lawrence Blume, and Hal Varian, 'On the Private Provision of Public Goods,' 1k

_____

33

American Economic Review. September 1986, 76 No.4, pp. 789-793.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, "On the Voluntary and Involuntary Provision of Public Goods,' The American
Economic Review. September, 1986, 76 No.4, pp. 789-793.

Bowen, R.R., 'The Interpretation of Voting in the Allocation of Economic Resources, Ouarterlv Journal of
Economies. 1943, 58, pp. 27-48.

Broman, Amy 3., 'Statutory Tax Reform and Charitable Contributions: Evidence from a Recent Period of
Reform,' Working Paper, Michigan State University, 1988.

Burtless, Gary and Jerry A. Hausnian, 'The Effects of Taxation on Labor Suppl Evaluating the Gary
Negative Income Tax Experimenr Journal of Political Economy. 1978, 86, pp.1103-1130.
Clotfelter, Charles, 'Tax Incentives and Charitable Giving Evidence from a Panel of Taxpayers,' Journal of
Public Economics, 1980, pp. 319-340.
Federal Tax Policy and Charitable Givia 1985, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Comes, Richard and Todd Sandier, 'Easy Riders, Joint Production, and Public Goods,' The Economic
JournaL September 1984, 94, pp.580-598.

Craig Steven G. and Robert P. Inmn 'Education, Welfare, and the 'New Federalism": State Budgeting in a
Federalist Public Economy,' in Haney Rosen, editor, Studies in State and Local Public rinance,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 1986.

Daniel. Joseph, 'the Price and Income Elasticities of Charitable Giving: New Evidence from a Panel of
Taxpayers,' Working Paper, University of Minnesota, 1988.
Feenberg, Daniel, 'Are Tax Price Models Really Iden&ied The Case of Charitable Giving,' National Tax
Journal. 1988, 41, pp. 629-633.

Feldstein, Martin, 'The Income Tax and Charitable Contributions: Part I - Aggregate and Distributional
Effects,' National Tax JournaL 1975, 28 No.], pp.81-100.
Filimon, Radu, Thomas Romer, and Howard Rosenthal, 'Asymmetric Information and Agenda Control: The
Basis of Monopoly Power in Public Spending, Journal of Public Economies. February 1982, 17,
pp31-70.

Hamilton, Bruce, 'The F1aper Effect and Other Anomalies,' Journal of Public Economies. December 1983,
22, pp.347-362.

Hocbman, H. and J Rodgers, 'Utility Interdependence and Income Transfers Through Charity,' in Boulding,

Pfaff and Pfaff, cdt, Tters in an Urbathed Sodetv. 1973. Belmont, Cab Wadsworth Publishing
Co.

Hotelling, Harold, 'Stability in Competition,' Economic JournaL 19, 39, pp. 41-57.
Ireland, Thomas R. and David Johnson, The Economies of Clarity. Blacksburg Va.: Center for the Study of
Public Choice, 1970.

Jones, Philip R., 'Aid to Charities,' International Journal of Social Economics. 1983,10 No.2, pp. 3-11.
Kiugma, Bruce, 'An Accurate Measure of the Crowd-out Effect, Income Effect and Price Effect for
Charitable Contributions,' Journpl of Political Economy. 1989, 97, pp. fl97-1.

_____•
____•
____
____

34

Ladd, Helen F., 'Local Education Expenditures, Fiscal Capadt and the Composition of the Property Tax
Base,' National Tax Journal. 1975, 28, pp. 145-58.
Lindsey, Lawrence B. "The Effect of the President's Proposal on Charitable Giving' National Tax Journal,
March, 1986, 39 No.1, pp.1-fl
'Federal Deductibility of State and Local Taxes: A Test of Public Choice by Representative
Government", in Rosen ed., Fiscal Federalism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987a.
"Individual Giving Under the Tax Reform Act of 1986', in The Constitution and the Indenendent
Sector. Washington: Independent Sector and United Way Institute, 198Th.
Lon& Stephen, "Soda! Pressure and Contributions to Health Charities,' Public Choice. Winter 1976, 31,

pp35-6•
Margolis, Howard, 'A New Model of Rationa!

Choice,'

January 1981, 91 pp.265-279.

Moffitt, Robert, 'The Effects of Grants-in-Aid on State and Local Expenditures: The Case of AFDC,"
Journal of Public Econcxnics. April 1984, 23, pp. 278-306.
Musselwhite, James C. Jr., and Lester M. Salamon, 'flmngii.g Public/Private Roles in Human Services,' in
The Constitution and the Indenendent Sector. Wachington: Independent Sector and United Way
Institute, 1987.
Paque,

Karl-Heinz, 'Do Public Transfers 'Crowd Out' Private Charitable Giving? Sonic Econometric
Evidence for the Federal Republic of Germany,' Kid Working Paper No. 152, August 1982.

Posnett, John and Todd Sandier, 'Joint Supply and the Finance of Charitable Activity,' Public Finance
Quarterly. April 1986, 14 No.2, pp. 209-fl
Reece, William S., 'Charitable Contributions: New Evidence on Household Behavior,' American Economic
Review. March 1979, 69, pp.l42-l5l.
and Kimberly Ziescliang, 'Consistent Estimation of the Impact of Tax Deductibility on the Level of
Charitable Contributions,' Ecnnometrica. March 1985, 53, pp.271-293.

Roberts, Russell D,, 'A Positive Model of Private Charity and Public Transfers,' Journal of Political

Economy. February 1984, 92 No.1, pp.136-148.

'Financing Public Goods,' Journal of Political Eaxiomy. 1987, 95 No,2, pp.420-437.
Romer, Thomas and Howard Rosenthal, "Political Resource Allocation, Controlled Agendas, and the Status
Quo," Public Choice. 197% 33.
and
. 'Bureaucrats vs. Voters: On the Political Economy of Resource Aflocation by Direct
Democracy,' Quarterly Journal nf Economia, November 1979, 93, pp362-587.

Rose-Ackerman, Susan, 'Do Government Grants to Charity Reduce Private Donations?,' published in
Michelle Whit; ed., Nonorofit Firms in a Three Sector Eamomv. Washington D.C.: The Urban
Institute, 1981.
"Charitable Giving and Excessive Pundraising,' Quart cr1, Journal of Ea,nnmia, May 1982, 97,
pp.195-212.

Ideals vs. Dollars: Donors, Charity Managers, and Government Grants,' Journal of Political
Ecomnnv, 1987, 95 No.4, pp.810-823.

