NEAR WORKING PAPER SERIES

COMPETITION AND HUMAN CAPITAL ACCUMULATION:

A

THEORY OF INTERREGIONAL SPECIALIZATION AND TRADE

Julio J.

Rotemberg

Garth Saloner

Working Paper No. 3228

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetta Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1990

for helpful
Froot, David Scharfatein, and Larry Summera
Foundation for
conversations and the National Science Foundation and the Sloan
in
financial support. This paper ia part of NBER'a research programs
are those of
International StudIes and Labor Studiea. Any opinions expressed
Research
the authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic

We wish to thank Ken

NBER Working Paper #3228
January 1990

COMPETITION AND HUMAN CAPITAL ACCUMULATION:
A THEORY OF INTERREGIONAL SPECIALIZATION AND THADE

ABSTScI

a model with several regions whose technological ability and factor
We consider
endowments are identical and in which transport costs between regions are nonfirms
negligible. Nonetheless,certain goods are sometimesproduced by multiple
all of which are located in the same region. These goods are then exported from
the regions in which their production is agglomerated.Regional agglomeration of
firms for
production and trade stem from two forces, First, competition between
the services of trained workers is necessary for the workers to recoup the cost of
acquiring industry-specifichuman capital. Second, the technology of production
is more efficient when plants are larger than a minimum efficient scale and local
demand is insufficient to support several firms of that scale. We also study the
policy implications of our model.

Julio

J. Rotemoerg

MIT
Sloan School of Management
Room E52-434
Cambridge, MA 02139

Garth Saloner
MIT
Department of Economics
Cambridge, MA 02139

Regional agglomeration in the production of goods is pervasive: the Swiss specialize in the production of watches and chocolates; Silicon Valley in computers; and shoes,

haute couture, and movies originate disproportionately in Italy, Paris, and Hollywood
respectively. Regional specialization extends evento product subcategories. Within automobiles, luxury sedans tend to come from Germany, sports cars from Italy, and reliable
forms of basic transportation from Japan. While, as the Heckscher-Ohlin model has it,
some of this regional agglomeration results from differences in factor endowments, much of
it is difficult to explain in that manner. For example, regional specialization in industrial
products such as shoes and watches does not seem to be driven by the abundance of any
particular factor.

The standard alternativeexplanationof regional agglomeration (e.g. Marshall (1920),
Melvin (1969), Markusen and Melvin (1981) and Ethier (1982)) is that, for given inputs,
the output of an individual firm is larger the larger is the aggregate output of other
firms producing the same good in the same region. So, for example, the level of inputs
required by a new watchmaker to produce a given output is lower if that entrant locates in
Switzerland where there are other watch manufacturers. Romer (1986) and Lucas (1988)
have shown that external returns of this type can also explain the fact that some nations
seem to remain forever more advanced than others.

of external economies of this kind is the spillover of knowledge i.e.,
the possibility that knowledge acquired by one agent can be used by others. In order for
knowledge spillovers to provide a compelling explanation, however, it must be the case
A possible source

that they are somehow localized. If an engineer in Taiwan can reverse engineer a product
of Silicon Valley as easily as an inhabitant of Silicon Valley, there is no good reason for
1

regional concentration

of computer companies.

Marshall (1920) posits instead that the external economies arise from proximity to
specialized inputs. As noted by Helpman and Krugman (1985), unless there is a natural

for the production of these inputs in the region, this explanation
The puzzle is simply rolled back to the previous production stage: Why do

comparative advantage
is incomplete.

the producers of inputs locate in the region?
Our theory is that the location decisions of the firms and their input suppliers are
interdependent. Input suppliers find it advantageous to be located where they have several

potential customers because competition among their downstream customers assures them
a fair return. In the absence of such competition, the relatively immobile suppliers would
be subject to the monepsony power of the downstream firms. Foreseeing that monopsony
power would be used

to drive

down input prices, potential input suppliers would not

choose to invest ex ante in the accumulation
efficiently.

This critical

role

of the capital necessary to supply the inputs

of competitionin securing a return to suppliers

is one

of the

elements in Porter's (1989) broad treatise on regional agglomeration.

For concreteness, the particular input we focus on is industry specific human capital
which is costlyfor individuals to acquire, such as the specific hand-eye coordinationneeded

to cut diamonds or the skills which facilitate the creation of a new

If trained workers

can choose among several potential employers, they will be paid as a

function of their marginal product. By contrast,
and

chocolate concoction.

if there

is only one potential employer,

it is impossible to write contracts that specify the level of training, there is no reason

for this monopeonist to pay trained employees any more than untrained employees earn
(in this industry or elsewhere). The hold-up problem described by Williamson (1975)
with the prospect of a single potential employer, workers do not find it
worthwhile to accumulate human capital. Moreover, if entry by firms is costly, firms will
themselves refrain from entering if they can expect to be the only firm in the industry.
arises. Confronted

The industry can only exist with several closely located competitors.

If there is a minimum efficient scale below which each firm cannot operate profitably,
the necessity of having several competing firms for an industry to be viable implies that the
2

in the producing region
region's output may haveto be substantiaL In particular,demand
itselfmay be insufficient to accommodate the requisite numberof firms. Then the onlyway
of ensuring competition among firms is to have several of them locate in one region and
between spatially separated
produce for the world market We show that trade emerges
even though there
regions with the same endowments and access to the same technology

are transport costs anti it is technologically feasible to produce all of a region's consumption
locally.'
Our theory involves an externality. The presence of other firms is necessary for each
trade
firm to have access to suitable workers. However, unlike the alternative theory of
based on external returns, we do not require that the presence of other firms lower the
is
input requirement for producing output. instead, the technology for producing output
the same in all regions.

it
Because each firm needs other firms to be present for workers to become trained,
might be though that our model has multiple equilibria in someof which no firm produces.
This would be true is we insisted that the entry decisions of firms all be made simultaneas
this choice
ously. instead, following Farrell and Saloner (1985), we model firms making
their intentions to each
sequentially so that, through their actions,they can communicate
other. This makes it impossible for equilibria with no productionto coexist with others in
which production is positive.

One of the most important implications of the traditional theory of trade based on
external returns is that nations can be made worse off as a result of trade (see Graham
are possible as well. These
(1923) and Ethier (1982)). In our model such losses from trade
losses are intimately linked to the existence of multiple equilibria. In some equilibria (the
the
only one region produces the good even though, in autarky,
agglomerated equilibria)

good is producedin both regions. At these agglomerated equilibria the importing region
costs so that
can be worse off, In our model this happensbecause there are transportation
an imported good costs more than a locally produced good. In Ethier (1982) it occurs
froos those rn th. ,srlr
1
tb.t whil, monopy power pisy. e rol, in our story, our formsi ,nod.l 1. roth diff.rd
sod Y.iien
in those
lit retur, on m000psosysod trede (Feeostrs (1980), Mazkusen sod Robson (1980), McCuiioch Sr. vsbis in(19))
th.t
.qu,librum hsvs
modeli monopsonistsSr. acti,. in equilibrium.By contrait, in our modol, the only
sever'.1 firm, competingfor isbor.

i.ct,

3

when one region producesnothing other than the good subject to external returns. This

can lead its price in terms of the other good to rise relative to autarky (even though it is
producedmore effIciently) because factor demands rise in the producing region.
We show that, in our context at least, the equilibria with losses from trade are not
robust. They, again, depend crucially on the absence of any mechanism that allows the
agents to tell each other that they would like to produce the good subject to the externality,2 Formally, losses from trade can occur in our model if workers must make their
decision whether to become trained simultaneously. To capture the possibility that workers can communicate their intentions to each other we consider a variant of our model in
which workers become trained in sequence. In this case,
trade can only be beneficial.

the equilibrium is unique and

One difference between our theory and the traditional external returns approach is
in the role ascribed to antitrust policy. In the traditional theory, relaxation of antitrust
policy can be socially desirable. Cooperation among firms can lead them to internalize
whatever externality leads the production by one firm to lower the input requirements
of the others. This logic has led Jorde and Teece (1988), for example, to conclude that
antitrust exemptions are essential for certain US high-technology industries to succeed in

a world scale.
By contrast, in our theory as well as in Porter (1989), society benefits from competition. The more competitionamong firms the potential suppliers of labor expect, the more
willing they are to make industry specific investments. Thus a vigorous antitrust policy
can play an important role in promoting the creation of viable export industries,
Section 1 presentsthe simple partial equilibrium setting in which workers decide simultaneously whether to acquire industryspecific human capital. Section 2 embeds this
model in general equilibriumand considers trade among ex ante identical regions. That
section has several subsections in which we discuss the patterns of trade that emerge as the

number of goods and the number of regions that trade varies. In one of these subsections
we present our argument that if workers decide whether to become trained in sequence,
2The

Io elfare.lo activity .quilibria in the rather differe,t pecunier)'externalitymodele ofMurphy,Shleifer and Viehny

(1989) lack robuitnee. for the same reuon.

4

every region benefits from trade.
In section 4 we consider the policy implications of our theory.

In particular we study
industrial policy, tariffs, and antitrust. Industrial policy encompasses those policies that
governments pursue to affect the location of industries. In our model, such policies can
raise welfare in the region imposing them. The reason is that the goods subject to the

externality are sometimes produced disproportionately in one region. But, the presence
of transport costs implies that regions benefit from having such goods produced locally.
Therefore, policies that ensure local production of these goods can be desirablefrom the
region's point of view.
While tariffs can be a tool of industrialpolicy, they can also be imposed in situations
where they do not affect the regional pattern of production. The usual "optimumtariff"
argument implies that, after workers in the other region have become trained, importers
benefit from such tariffs beacuse they improve the importer's terms of trade. However,

the exporting region who foresee that tariffs will be levied, have a smaller
incentive to become trained. So, the perception that tariffs will be imposed raises the
equilibrium price of the good in the exporting region. We show that, as a result, tariffs
workers in

which are foreseen when workers seek trainingunambiguously lower welfare in both regions.

This strengthens Lapan (1988)'s argument against tariffs.

1. The Partial Equilibrium Model
We assumethat skilled labor and entrepreneurial activitiesare the only factors of production. The "entrepreneur",who is also a skilled worker, must perform preparatorywork

it to function. We assume that the entrepreneur
has disutility of effort e for performing those activities. If he is successful in creating a
firm that actually operates, however, he derives utility of v from his success.
Thus v—c, which we assume to be positive, is the net utility from becoming a successful

necessary to create the firm and enable

entrepreneur. We focus mainly on the case where v — e is arbitrarilysmall. As we shallsee
below, the role of these assumptions on the costs and benefits of managing is to eliminate
the indifference between producing and remaining idle that characterizes standard zeroprofit competitive equilibria. We suspect that introducing even a minimal level of market
S

power would have essentially the same effect.

The other factor of production is skilled labor. At the margin,each skilled worker
can produce one unit of output. However, one of the central parameters in our analysis
is the minimum efficient scale of production. We capture the presence of efficient scale by
assuming that, to produce at all, the entrepreneur must employ S skilled workers including
himself (i.e., he must hire S- 1 additional skilled workers). An entrepreneur is thus deemed
successful, so that he receives v in utility, if his firm has S skilled workers.

S is a measure

of minimum efficient scale, but there are constant returns to scale when the firm produces
more than S. These assumptions can be formalized as follows:

L(OS)L(S)5

0<1, and
L(9S)=0S if 0>1
if

(i)
(2)

where L(Q) is the amount of labor required to produce Q units,

S determines the number of firms that the industry can accommodate. If S is zero
thenproduction
constant returns to scale globally and an arbitrarilylargenumber
of firms can be present at the same time. For very large values of S the industry can
accommodate at most a single firm, i.e., it is a natural monopoly. In between, the number
of firms that can operate in equilibriumfalls as S increases.
In order to obtain the requisite skills to be useful in this industry a worker must obtain
training at a cost of h to himself. If the worker chooses not to obtain training, he can earn
w in an alternative occupation. Thus a worker will only be willing to become trained if he
can earn w + h in this industry.
The entrepreneur is the sole residual claimant of the firm: he collects revenues from
customers and pays the other workers. So, in addition to his net utility from performing
the entrepreneurialfunction, he earns whatever profits there are in equilibrium. Despite
the fact that the "entrepreneur" receives both the profits and the net utility of success,
for clarity in what follows we shall refer to the entrepreneuras the agent who makes the
decision to form a firm and enter the industry, and the firm as the agent that, once created
by the entrepreneur,makes the operational decisions of the firm such as what wages to
offer workers.

6

The quantity of this product that is demanded equals D(P) where P is the price.
What matters for the form of equilibrium outcomes is the relationship between demand
and minimum efficient scale S. In particular, consider the demand when price equals
marginal cost w + h, D(w It). Then the outcomes depend on the ratio of D(w + h) to S.
In particular, let:
(3)
where "int" denotes "the integer part oP. Then we will show that the form of the equilibria

dependson N.
contrast the industry outcome when there is only a single firm in the
industry — and hence it is a monopsony purchaser of skilled labor — with one in which
firms compete for skilled workers. Since wage competition to attract workers is a critical
aspect of our theory, we explicitly examine firms' strategies in bidding for workers. By
Our goal is to

contrast, strategic interactions in the output market are unessential to our argument. We
therefore assume that whenever there is more than one firm in the industry there exists a
fictitious Walrasian auctioneer which clears the output market. If there is only one firm,
however, we make the natural assumption that it is able to exercise its monopoly power
in the output market in the usual way.

I

individuals decide to become enThe timing in our model is as follows: First,
trepreneursand perform the preparatorywork necessary for creating their firms (incurring
disutility e in the process). Second, workers, including the entrepreneurs, decide whether
to obtain training. We denote the number of workers who obtain training by L. Third, the
firms simultaneously announce wages {tii,. . , tZ}. Fourth, workersdecidewhomto work
.

for.

If two or more firms offer the highest wage, workers are assumed to spread themselves

uniformly across those firms. Finally, productiontakes place and goods are sold at a price
P which the Walrasian auctioneer sets to clear the goods market.3

Our subgame perfect equilibriumrequires that: (i) Entrepreneursare successful; (ii)
to maximize
Workers make optimal training decisions; (iii) Firms choose {t1,. .. ,

ti}

5We could hew con.ided anotherlIegein which firma decide which of their workere they actually eeL to produce goods.
This would not change the enslyir the firma would aek all the workera to produce. The reason is that labor u the only factor
of productin end labor cost. are sunk at the tin,. the declionof how much to produce ii made.

7

{i,.

. .,
profits; and (iv) workers make optimal employment decisions given
We consider two cases separately. In the first case N is greater than or equal to 2

while in the latter case it is smaller. In the former case it is feasible for two or more firms
to produce at minimum efficient scale when the "competitive" price w + h prevails. In the
latter case that is not feasible: The industryis a natural monopoly.

LL Case (i): N 2
We show that, for v sufficiently close to e, the equilibrium has N firms and produces

the "competitive" outcome, In particular, prices and wages equal marginal resource costs
= w h, and the number of workers who obtain training is
(including training), P =
exactly the number required to satisfy market demand at that price (L = D(w h)). To
do this, we begin by exogenously specifying the number of entrepreneurs N that enter,
and examine equilibria of the subgames that ensue.
(a) 2 < <N
We informally describe why the competitive outcome is an equilibrium of the subgame.

In Appendix A we provide a formal proof and in Appendix
one that can emerge in equilibrium.

B

we show that it is the only

Consider first the entry decision of entrepreneurs. With

P° =

w

+ h = tZ1', firms

break even as long as they can produce at minimum efficient scale. Thus entrepreneurs
gain v — e by entering as long as N is in the range specified. From the workers' point of
view, anticipatingwages of w + h, any worker is indifferent between getting trained at a
cost h (and receiving a wage of w + h) and not becoming trained and taking alternative
employment at a wage w. Moreover, since all firms offer the same wage in equilibrium,
workers are happy to spread themselves uniformly across the firms. Thus workers have no

If a firm unilaterally lowers its wage it
attracts no workers,4 if it raises its wage it loses money on each sale since then sZ' > P° =
w + h. So the firms have no incentive to deviate,
incentive to deviate. Finally, consider the firms:

'To be more prec., the Srm .ttrac no orlri 'ith the po.sibl. exception of the entrepreneur himself. If S > 1 this
will ensure the.t the firm doesn't deviate by lowering the ..e. It S = 1 the "flrm can off the entrepreneu? (in hi, role Se
killed vorher) w + 1. — (a —.) and still attract him. Even in this extreme case, however, the amour by which the w,.ge can
fail beloww + i. vanishe, as a s vanishes.

-

8

To understandthe motivations of the agents, consider first the finns' wage announcements. In equilibrium the firms correctly anticipatethe market clearing price. Any firm, if

it believes that its rivals are offering wages below the equilibrium market price, will itself
offer a tiny amount more than the highest wage being offered by a rival, attract all the
workers, and thereby maximize its profits. This logic drives the firms to bid the wage
up to what they believe the market clearing price will be. That is to say, they behave
analogously to Bertrand rivals in homogeneous goods output markets.
The workers, for their part, understand that the wage will be bid up to the price
which will be set to clear the market given that L workers are employed. They therefore
correctly anticipatethat the wage will equal D1 (L). Therefore, additional workers obtain
training until the number trained workers drives the market clearing price down to the
wage at which a worker is willing to become trained and work in this industry, w + h.
Although the industrycan accommodate up to N firms in the competitive equilibrium,
the competitive outcome can be sustainedwith just two firms in the industryand the entry

of additional firms doesn't affect the price or wage that results (as long as
N). This
is because Bertrand competition drivesthe equilibrium wage to the level of the final goods
price with just two firms in the market.
Firms make zero profits in equilibrium. However,entrepreneurswho haveentered are
not indifferent about producing. They derive utility v from producing. Therefore, each

entrepreneur tries to attract sufficient workers to produce at least S. So, trained workers
can feel sure that entrepreneurs who have entered will competefor their services and drive
the wage to

w

i>

+ h.

N
(b)
The only possible equilibria have the wage equal to w + h.5 We show, however, that
for v sufficiently close to e there is no equilibrium where the wage equals w + when
N > N. To do this we suppose, in contradiction,that the wage equals w + and consider,
Fm

Fm

seriatim, the possibility that an equilibrium exists where (i) NS or more workers obtain
training, and (ii) fewer than NS workers do.
'The proof to Appeodix

B eppliesto this cees ee .eIL

9

If NS workers or more obtain training and all obtain employment in this industrythe
market clearing price is equal to D(NS) <w + h. But then if all the firms produce, the
workers are spreadevenly over the firms and the entrepreneurs earn v — e+D' (fTS) — (w +

to e, this expression is negative(because D'1(S) <w + h).6
If fewer than NS workers obtain training it is not possible for all N entrepreneurs to

h). For

v sufficiently close

be successful, i.e., there are insufficient trained workers for every entrepreneurwho entered
to produce at minimum efficient scale, But then the unsuccessful entrepreneurs could have
done better by not entering (and saving the disutility of effort e).

(c)

=l

If only one firm has entered and some number of workers, L, has obtained training,
the firm will pay themjust slightly above their alternative wage w and charge a priceequal
to:
max{D1(L),argmaxD(z)(z

—

w)}.

(4)

The first expression is relevant when L is small so that the firm hires all the trained workers
and charges a price whichclears the market. The second expression is relevant when L is
very large so that the firm can act in the usual monopoly fashion in the goods market.
Note that after the workers have obtained training,no-one has an incentive to deviate:
Workers will work for this firm because they do not have a viable alternative. The result,

of course, is that, anticipating that they will not be compensated for their training costs,
workers do not obtain training in the first place. This in turn means that the single
entrepreneursuffers in vain his disutility of effort e.
(d) Entry
We havediscmed these outcomes by fixing the initial number of firms and have shown

that entrepreneurs gain utility in equilibrium if the number of them who enter is between 2
and N but lose utility otherwise. We now turn our attentionto the questionof the number
of entrepreneurs who will enter initially.
As in other models of external economies, the entry decision of firms is subject to
eThe rsxneinjng cease here. those whereeome of the trsjned workere er. not employed in thu induatry,or where eome of the
th. workers who end up unemployed end the entreprueUrn
entrepreneurswho h*ve entered do not produce - er. uninteresting:
who do not produce in equilibrium could he,, done better by not obtainingtreining or not enteringrespectively.

10

entrants will
a coordinationproblem. If potential firm i believes that no other potential
workers know
enter, then it won't enter either. If it is the only firm that enters, potential
trained. Thus the firm
that it would end up paying a wage of w and will not become

e.
on the other hand, firm
would not have a workforce and the entrepreneurwould lose If,
and
I believes that another firm will enter, then workers will obtain the necessary training,

the entrepreneur will gain v — e.
We follow Farrell and Saloner

and assume that potential entrants must decide
decides whether to enter
whether to enter in sequence, i.e., the second potential entrant
will enter. This ensures that firms
only after he knows whether the first potential entrant
their intentions vis-a-vls entry through their actions. In the case where
(1985)

can communicate

than making all firms decide
only a few firms will ever enter this seems more appealing
forces firms to make their decision in
whether to enter simultaneously. That assumption
the absence of any information about what other firms are planning.7
With sequential entry the Farrell and Saloner (1985) reasoning eliminates no-entry
has N equal to N. All entrepreneurs
equilibria in this case. Indeed, the only equilibrium
the N'th entrant enjoys
that can possibly receive positive utility in equilibriumenter. Since
has already entered, if there has
—
positive utility v e by enteringif another entrepreneur
entrant, knowing
in fact been a prior entrant, it enters too. But then any prior potential
v — C too. The
that the N'th entrepreneur will follow, enters and obtains net utility of
— e no more than N
result is that the first N entrepreneurs enter. For sufficiently small v
to suffer a loss in utility.
firms enter because the N + l'st entrant would be sure
1.2. Case (ii): N < 2

where it is impossible for
This is the second major case, the natural monopoly case,
sell at the competitive
two firms to both produce at minimum efficient scale S and also
under laissez faire. The reason is that,
price w + it. In this case the industryis not viable
trained when there is
as we saw above, there is no equilibrium in which workers become
the number of
a single firm. We also demonstratedthat firms cannot break even when
Ai long a' there ii an interval of tune
.equenc of movie to be exogenoully epecified.
and Siloner
'lnfe.ct, it i not fl*0..ry for the
acted ahin to enter the lame outcome re,ulti. FaXTelt
if
firm,
endogenoucly
can
like
which
entry
place,
during
the lame effect a' eequedaah entry to their model.
(1985) alec .ho that etr.e p0hz can have .uentially
11

existing firms N exceeds N.
to exist.

Therefore, equilibria

with more than one active firm also fail

1.3. Discussion
The results of the model can be summarized as follows. If
D(w + h)

2S, the

competitive outcome emerges. The social marginal resource costs are w + h, and the
competitive output when price is equal to those costs is D(w h) The number of workers
who become trained is exactly sufficient to
produce that quantity, the maximum number
of entrepreneurswho can create firms that produce at minimum efficient
scale enter, and

competitionamong them drives the wage up to w±h. If, on the other hand, D(w+h) <2S
so that demand cannot support two firms
operating at minimum efficient scalewhen price
is equal to marginal costs (including
training),the industry is not viable. No firms enter
and the good is not produced. This outcome results because the firm cannot commit not
to exploit the workers once they have obtained their training, and hence
they have no
incentive to become trained.
This latter conclusion hinges critically on our assumption that workers choose their
training before they have had any formal relationship with the firm. We are thus ruling
out any initial long term contractwhichguarantees the workers a
wage of w + h if they do
become trained. Similarly, we are ruling out
in
which
the firm trains workers
arrangements
at a cost of h to itself. In the presence of such employer-provided
training the wage could
be w and the allocation would be the same as when the worker is sure to be
paid w + h if
he becomestrained.
Our assumption that these alternativearrangements are
impossible is only a convenient simplification. We expect that similar conclusions would follow in the more
realistic
setting where such contracts are possible but involve a variety of costs which are absent
when (as in the case of multiple firms) the workers make their own
training decisions.
Such costs arise because long-term contracts that specify future
payments as a function
of worker training are hard to enforce and because it is difficult for firms themselves to
provide the appropriate training.
Consider first

the "solution" where the firms assume responsibility for the training
12

of the workers, i.e., they train their workers at a cost per worker of h to the firm. The
immediate problem with this is that the workers may not all be equally suitedfor training
or may need different types of training. For instance, training may improve the skill of
some workers but not

that of others. if workers know whether training will improve their

skill ex ante while firms only discover this ex post, the equilibria with two firms considered
above induce the right workers to obtain training. By contrast, if the firm pays all workers
w

ex post and simply pays for their training, it is likely to obtain a rather mixed groupof

trainees.8
Similar problems arise if the firm signs a contract committing it to pay w + h to
workers who obtain training. The difficulty here is in defining "training" in a way that is
contractually implementable if the contract only specifies that a specific training course
must be taken, then the difficulty is the same as when the firm provides the training
course itself: adverse selection results in the "wrong" workers becoming trained. Instead,
the firm might try to write a contract that specifies a required level of acquired skill, The

that it is much more difficult for a third party to verify skill itself than
the completion of some training course, So, the workers cannot be sure that the firm will
not attempt to exploit them ex post by claiming that they are insufficiently skilled and
problem here is

therefore do not qualify for a skilled wage.

2. General Equilibrium Models
In this section we consider general equilibrium models in which trade among regions
arises precisely because workers only obtain training if they can be sure of competition
among firms located within the region in which they work. We show that equilibriumcan
entail the emergence of "developed" regions that trade high wage goods among themselves
and who also trade th'ir high wage goods for the low wage goods of "undeveloped" regions.
We build up to a model with three regions and two high wage goods, by first considtwo
ering two simpler models. in Section 2.1 we consider a model with two regions and
goods. We derive conditions under which equilibrium entails one developed region which

•

'In prsctãc. tho.. volunteeringto join treining progrem could vol1 end up being tho.e
c likelyto include thoee.tho re unemployed presely beceusethey &re not very erntable.
13

Iet euithte for trrnrng. They

produces

a high wage good of the kind we analyzed above, and which exports it to the

undeveloped region which produces only a low wage good. In Section 2.2 we then consider
a model with two regions and two high wage goods. We derive conditions under which
each region specializes in one of the high wage goods, exporting it to the other. Finally,
in Section 2.3, we combine these elements in considering a model with three regions hut
only two high wage goods.

2.1. A Model with Two Regions and Two Goods
One of the two goods, good Y, is of the kind analyzed above: it can only be produced
by workers who have received training, each skilled worker can produce a single unit of Y,
and there is a minimum efficient scale S. The other good, Z, which acts ss the numeraire,
is also produced with constant returns to scale but there is no minimum efficient scale.

One unskilled worker can produce

units of good Z. Good Z serves as a competitively
supplied good that is produced in both regions. The presence of such a common good
ensures that, in some sense at least, workers are paid the same in both regions. As in
Heipman and Krugmao (1989) the presence of this good achieves at least a limited form
of factor price equalization.
There are M workers in each region, each of whom supplies one unit of labor inelastically. These workers are geographically immobile, they can only produce in their own
region. We assume that M
produce

>

so

2S so

that there are sufficient workers for two firms to

at minimumefficient scale in each region.

Each individual's utility function is given by:

U(C) + C — hit — IceS + cc,,v
Fe

where

(5)

C represents the consumption of good i. The ic's are indicator variables; irk is one

if the individual becomes trained, it0 is one if he becomes an entrepreneur,ic,, is one if the
individual who has become an entrepreneur produces at least S units. Hereafter we shall
assume that v

—e

is arbitrarily small.

Goods are costly to transport between regions. In particular, an amount

t of good Z
is spent when one unit of good Y is transportedfrom one region to the other.9 Thus a well
9For simplicity ws igoosetramport costs on good 5.
14

meaning social planner would avoid interregional trade, if possible. Assuming an interior
solution where both goods are produced, a Pareto Optimal allocation where each region
is self sufficient would have C, set at a level where marginal utility equals marginal cost,

i.e., where U'(C) = w + h. Such a Pareto Optimum would thereforeinvolve training L*
individualsin each region where L* satisfies:
(6)
since L*/M is the per capita consumption of good Y. Finally, since entrepreneursderive
utility from owning active firms, this productionshould be spread across as many firms of

minimumefficient scale

as possible.1°

that our assumptions on preferences make this general equilibriummodel essentially identical to the partial equilibrium model of section 1. If we write d(p) for the
amount demandedby each individual as a function of the price, then utility maximization
implies U'(d,,) = p, or d(p) = U''. Since there are M individuals in each region, the
Note

aggregate amount of Y demanded in one region as a function of price is now given by

D = Md = MU'1 = M() = L.

(7)

For both goods to actually be produced in positive quantities at the Pareto Optimal
allocation it must be possible to satisfy the total domestic demandfor good Y by employing
domestic workers. This requires

that L* be no greater than M.

We now analyze the conditions underwhichequilibria exist which result in the Pareto

Optimal allocation, and those under which equilibrium involves interregional trade. We
assume free entry into the production of good Z so that the wage in terms of Z is w.
The issue then is how many firms enter industry Y. As before we assume that entry
decisions are made first. There are two main cases to consider, depending on whether or
not

L > 2S.

2.1.1. Case (i): L > 25
WhenL exceeds 25 there is sufficient demand for two firms to produce at minimum
efficient scale in both regions. There is then an autarkic equilibrium in which each region
'°Noto thM if — e 1. Ie.rge, the Pareto Optimum would involve creating even more Snua and havingthem produce at
than minimumefficient irate in order to allow more individuale to experience the joy of entrepreneurahip

15

N = int(Lt/S) active firms. Once N firms have entered, L workers are happy to
obtain training and the firms have enough workers to produce at minimum efficient scale.
The Farrell and Saloner (i988) reasoning we employed in the previous section implies that
this is the only autarkic equilibrium. The Pareto Optimaloutcome is thus an equilibrium
when trade is impossible. It obviously remains an equilibrium when trade is allowed
between regions since there is no incentive to for interregional trade at this equilibrium.
has

Even though the Pareto Optimal outcome is an equilibrium, there may also exist

another class of equilibria when there is free trade, These equilibria have regional agglomeration; one of the regions produces all of good Y and the other produces only

Z. These

of the
are the only other
regions both produces some of Y domestically and also imports some. To see why, suppose
to the contrary that there are two firms producing Y in one of the regions and that this

equiiibria. In particular

there do not exist equilibria in which one

region aiso imports Y. Suppose workers in the exporting region earn w + h. Then, wages

must equal w + h t in the importing region. But that would mean that more workers in
the importing region would obtain training. Similarly, if the wage in the importing region
is w + h it is less than that in the exporting region and workers do not have an incentive
to become trained there.
The agglomerated equilibria, if they exist, can be of two types depending on the
magnitude of M. The first applies when M is "large" in a sense to be made precise
shortly. Then, the firms in the region that produces V pay their workers a wage of w + h
and charge w + It. Denote the producing region as the foreign region while home is
the importing region. The landed cost (including transportation) in the home region is
to + It + 2, so that home demand is MU"1(w + It t). Aggregate demand at a price of
to + It is therefore given by:

M[Lfl_1(w+h+t)
(w + It 2)
=MU (w+h)(1+A), where Ass
'
LTh-l(w±It)
= (1 A)L*, since MU°"(w + It) = L*.

(8)

The parameterA represents the per capita consumption of the high wage good in the
16

importing region relative to that in the producing region. Since U'1 is decreasing in its
argument, A is less than one. This is merely a. reflection of the fact that transportation
costs raise prices for the high wage good in the importing region above w + h so that per
capita consumption of it is lower there.
The maximum number of firms that can operate abroad at minimum efficient scale
is given by int[(1 + A)L"/5J. This is therefore the number of entrepreneurs that enter in
the agglomerated equilibrium. It is now clear what it means for M to be large: For this
type of equilibrium to exist M must exceed (I + A)L". Otherwise, even if all available
workers seek training, the market clearing price exceeds w + h. Such is the situation in the
other type of agglomerated equilibria which arise when M is less than (1 + A)L*, These
agglomerated equilibria, if they exist, have higher wages and prices.
In order for an equilibrium with agglomeration of either type to exist the transportation cost, t, must not be "too large". The reason is that, if t is high, the price of Y in the
importing region is high as well. Such high prices create an incentive for two firms to enter
and produce 2S. This incentive is even higher when M is less than (1 + A)L" since, in this
case, the price exceeds w + h in the exporting region as well. For purposes of illustrating
these incentives we thus focus on the case where M exceeds (1 + A)L".
Suppose, for argument'ssake, that the exporting region produces (1 + A)L* and that
two entrepreneurs enterin the importingregion and produceS each. Output in that region
is 25 which, by assumption is less than L*. The equilibrium pricecan now have one of two
forms depending on the sign of U'(25) — U'(L * (1 + A)) — t, If it is negative, the difference
between the prices in two regions when each region consumes its entire production is less
than t. Thus there is no incentive to trade in this case; the price in the home region is
—
U'(2S) and that in the foreign region is U'(L" (I + A)). If, instead,U1(2S) U'(L * (1 + A))
is greater than t, there would be an incentive to trade if both regions consume their entire
productionof Y. Therefore, the home region imports some of good Y and the equilibrium
price abroad Pf is between U'(2S) and U'(L * (1 + A)) while that at home equals F' + t.

In this case:
U'_1
(F')] = (I + A)L" + 2S.
M{U'1(F1 + t) +
17

If t is zero and S > 0, the equilibrium is of this second type and Pt exceeds w + It.
However, the larger is 2, the more likely that the resultingequilibrium with trade has pf
bigger thanw + It or that U'(2S) — U'(L * (1 + A)) —i is negative. In either case the domestic

t

price exceeds w + It so two entrepreneurs can enter in the importing region, produce at
minimum efficient scale, offer their workers w + It, and make nonnegative profits. But
then the Farrell and Saloner reasoning implies that they will enter. There thus cannot be

of the productionof Y in one region if 2 is sufficiently big.1t
Similarly, for a given 2, there always exists a sufficiently small (t) such that for S

agglomeration

,(t), pf + 2 is larger than w It. Thus, the findings of this subsection can
be summarized as follows: if S is small relative to 2 the unique equilibrium is autarkic,
otheowise there are multiple equilibria: both the autarkic equilibrium and
equilibria in
which one of the regions specializes in the productionof Y exist. We argue in our section
on gains from trade (and prove in Appendix C) that if workers also make their training
smaller than

decisions sequentially in each region, the Farrell and Saloner reasoning eliminates the
equilibria withagglomeration. Thusthe autarkic equilibria are more robust when L' > 25.

2.1.2, Case (ii): L* <2S
As long as Lt exceeds 5, the Pareto Optimal allocation with no trade is still feasible.
However since L' < 25, it is not possible for two firms to operate at minimum efficient
scale in each region and so, for the reasons explored in Section 1, there is no laissez-faire
equilibrium in which the good is producedby each region for its own consumption.

The only possible equilibria where good Y is supplied in positive quantities must
therefore have only one region supplying the good, as in the equilibrium with
agglomeration
of the previous subsection, For such an equilibrium to exist here aggregate demand at a
price of w + It must exceed the sum of the firms' minimum efficient scales, i.e., we must
have (1 + A)L
2S.
Compared to autarky, trade for these parameter values is clearly beneficial to both
regions. Under autarky, since U <25, the regions do not get to consume good Y at all.

The change from autarky to free tradekeeps the wages of workers the same. On the other
"A .imiIaz irguineM deznon,frate. that such agglomeration ii imponible (even for sero tI ifM is substantially smaller than
(1 + x)L'.

18

hand consumers gain the consumer surplus:

j

in the producing region and

j

[U'(a)_(w+h)da

[U'(a)

- (w + h + t) do

(9)

(10)

in the other region.
Trade is driven by external returns. The presence of numerous trained workers makes
it possible for the two firms producing good Y to be viable in one region. Similarly, the
assurance of competition among firms makes training worthwhile for workers. However,
the external returns are not the usual ones. They might rather be viewed as a pecuniary
externality: The presence of another firms affects the competitionfor workers and this
makes workers available to both firmswhere one firm cannot obtain workers by itself.
Figure 1 is useful for describing the outcomes as L*/S varies. The Pareto Optimal

we can support the Pareto
Optimal allocation without trade as an equilibriumonly if L/S is greater than 2.12 The
reason is that otherwisewe cannot have two active firms in each region, and with only
allocation involves no trade as long as L*/S

1. However

one firm there is not sufficient competitionfor skilled workers. When La/S is between
2/(1 + A) and 2 the equilibrium has positive productionof good Y in one region. In this
region, the equilibriumhas internationaltrade even though the Pareto Optimalallocation
is feasible and does not involvetrade. The reason for this is that it is necessary for a region
to produce a relatively large amount of the good for there to be effective competition for
workers.

For L/S between I and 2/(1 + A), by contrast, the Pareto Optimal allocation has
in neither. This
production in both regions while the equilibrium involves production
of trade raise
region arises because A is strictly less than one. Put differently, the costs
in the region that does not produce the good above w + h. This reduces sales of Y
prices

and makes it more difficult for both firms in the producing region to exceed their minimum
efficient scale.
k3For u5kie*Iy 1rge

L/S thi, ii th only ,qnhbrum.
19

The Pareto Optimal allocation continues to involve positive production for certain
values of L*/S below 1. Let denote the highest S for which the Pareto
Optimalallocation
involves positive production. Then
is smaller than 1/(i + A). But for L/S between
1/Cl + A) and 1 there is no production without government intervention.

L/

2.L3. The Gains from Trade
When

L is less than 2S trade is beneficial in that the regions can consume the good

L

with trade but not without trade. When
is greater than 2S, the autarkic allocation
remains an equilibriumeven with free trade. This does not establishthat free trade is as
good as autarky in this case because, for sufficiently low transportation costs, there also
exist equilibria, whereonly one region produces good Y. In these equilibria the importing
region is worse off.

These losses from trade as a result of multiple equilibria are analogous to those explored by Graham (1923), Melvin (1969), Markusen and Melvin (1981) and Ethier (1982).
A slight difference with Ethier (1982) is that he obtains losses from

trade only when the exis
in
the
porting region ful'!y specialized
production of the goodsubject to external returns.
These losses are analogous to those we obtain in the absence of transport costs when M
is less than (1 + A)L*. They come about because, in this case, the
price in the exporting
region exceeds the autarky price w

h. In our model with transport costs, by contrast,
we obtain losses from trade even when the exporting region is not fully specialized.

The equilibria in which trade leads to losses rely on a coordination failure. Workers in
the importing region do not believe that other workers will enter in sufficient numbers to
make the industryviable. This leads them not to get trained when they expect
(1 + A)L*
workers to get trained in the other region. Because these equilibria rely on the inability

of workers to communicate to each other their willingness to become trained one would
expect them not to be robust to changes in the informational structure. This is what we
argue next.
Following Farrell and Saloner (1985) we capture the possibility that workers can com-

municate to each other their intentions by assuming that they take the decision to become
trained in sequence. First one worker has the option of becoming trained, then another and
20

trainees.
so on. Once a worker becomes trained this becomes known to all other potential
that the location of
To ensure that the two regions are treated symmetrically we assume

the worker who has the option of becoming trained alternates between the two regions.
and so on.
First one worker in one region has the option, then a worker in the other region
autarkic equilibria
We show in Appendix C that if trainingdecisions take this form, the
modification in the game,
are the only equilibria when L* > 25. Thus, with this small
trade is always beneficial.
2.2. A Symmetric Two-Region Version
one region
The outcome involving trade is the previous subsection is asymmetric: only
ends up slightly betteroff as a result.
produces good Y and, because of the transport costs,
has two high-wage
We now present a symmetric version of the two-region model which
goods.

is
The technology for producing goods Y and Z remains the same as before. There
there are
now also a third good, X, whose technology is identical to that of good Y. Thus
firms employing
now two goods which are producedby a relatively small number of large
specialized labor.

The preferences of the representativeworker are now given by:

U(C) + U(C) + C — ,chh

— e5e

+ ?cV

(U)

A benevolent central planner would avoid the transport costs on goods X and Y by
X while the other
having 2L trained workers in each region, half of whom produce good
half produce good Y. Again, however, if is smaller than 25, there is no equilibrium
where goods X and
where both goods are produced in both regions. The only equilibria
leads to the
Y are producedinvolve regional specialization even though this specialization
expenditure of transport costs.
all
In this model with two goods, it is much less likely that one region will produce
no
the goods requiring the input of trained workers. The reason is that if 2(1 + ))L* > M
Y to the entire world. Then, the
region has enough workers to supply both goods X and
has two specialized regions which trade
only equilibriumwhere both goods are produced

L

-

21

with each other. One region produces the world's demand for good X and the other the
world's demand for good Y

2.3. An Asymmetric Model with Three Regions
Combining elements developed in each of the previous subsections, we now show that
our model is capable of explaining the coexistence of multiple "developed" regions and

an "undeveloped" region in which the "developed regions" export high wage goods to the
less developed region, and also trade with each other. The less developed region has lower
wages than the developed region. Moreover workers employed in the export sector of the
developed region earn wages that are higher than the average for the region as a whole.
To derive these results we consider a model in which there exist the same three
goods

X, Y and Z but where there are three identical regions. Demand in any one region for
X (or Y) at a price of w + h is too small for two firms to produce at minimum efficient
scale (i.e., L < 2S), but the overall demand from all three regions is sufficient to do so
((1 + 2A)L 2S). Moreover, 2(1 + 2A)L*, the aggregate demand for both
exceeds M, so that no one region can produce both on a world scale.

X and Y,

Then the only equilibriumwhere all three goods get produced has two "developed"
regions each of which exports one high wage good and imports the other, and one "less
developed" region which imports both X and Y. All three regions produce good Z. In
what follows we refer to the region that produces X (Y) as Region X (Y), and the region

that produces only Z as Region Z.
To develop implications for wages, note first that some workers in the developed region

earn w while other earn w + h. This means that the average wage in the region exceeds
that in the undeveloped region where all workers earn w. Moreover, the wage of those
employed in the exporting region of the developed region is w + h so that it exceeds the
average wage in the region.
This is also an implication of the symmetric model of the previous subsection. This
implicationof these models is consistent with the evidence of Katz and Summers (1q89).

They find that, in industrializedcountries, the average wage paid by a country's exporting
industries exceeds the average wage paid in that country'smanufacturingsector as a whole.
22

Our model also gives some guidance as to why Katz and Summers (1989) and others
havefound it difFicultto account for inter-industry wage differences by looking at differences
in the amount of formal educationthe workers in different industries possess. In our model,
wages are determined by industry-specific skill which is often obtained in ways other than
through formal education. For example, workers often acquire those skills on the job.'3
This could explain why the wages of workers who move from one industry to another
change in ways that are related to the inter-industry wage differentials. Workers who have
acquired some industry-specific skill in one industryand move to another where those skills

a reductionin their wages. Conversely, workers who have
acquired skills that are not valued in the industry in which they are currently employed
are not valued, will experience

but which are valuablein the one they move to will raise their wages by moving.

3. Industrial/Commercial Policy
In our models the production of some goods involves high wages while that of other
goods does not. In such contexts, protection has been viewed as beneficial by numerous
authors e.g. Hagen (1958), Bhagwati and Ramaswami (1963), Katz and Summers (1989).)
We are thus led to explore whether

a region can gain by unilaterally deviating from free

trade.
We considertwo types of deviations. In the first, which we call industrialpolicy, the

central authority attempts to encourage the emergence of a specifically targeted industry.
In the second, the central authority is not interestedin changing the pattern of regional
specialization but nonetheless taxes imports whose production requires skilled labor. While
industrialpolicy often involves the use of tariffs, we distinguish between the two policies
because the first tries to affect the composition of trade without trying to affett its level
while the second affects mainly the level.

3.1. IndustrialPolicy.
Industrial policy can be carried out using various tools. One approach is to give a
subsidy to firms who produce the desired good. Suppose, for example, that we are in the

'

Of coull. one might attempt to control for that in part by including yearn of experience' v.riable. in the regrcean,ae Ic
.kiii.
typically done. However euch vwaee do not identify time epent on the job acquiring indcetry-.paciftc

23

simple case ofSection 2.1 where there are two regions but only a single high wage good.
The central authorityin one region, acting unilaterally, can ensurethat the high wage good
is produced locally by offering a subsidy to firms who produce the good. In particular,
suppose it announces that in the event that the domestic firms face foreign competition
they will receive a per unit subsidy, u, which is such that

= to /t — MU''((l + A)L°).

(12)

Then, two firms will be willing to enter the domestic market and to produce enough output
to satis' world demand even if they do not in fact end up exporting at all in equilibrium.
The reason for this is that if the foreign market is somehow foreclosed to them, equilibrium
in the domestic market will entail an equilibrium price of P° = MU'1((1 + A)L°) and a

wse equal to to

/t14

No foreign firms will enter this market if they know that the domestic firms have
been offered this subsidy. They will decide to stay out of the market since they will be

unable to export and their domesticmarket is not sufficiently large to support minimum
efficient scale production for two firms. Therefore, if the central authority announces its
subsidy plan before any entry decisions are made, the outcome will be that the domestic
firms will be the sole world producers of the high wage good. Moreover, since the central

authority only had to commit to paying the subsidy in the event that foreign competition
materialized, domestic dominance of the industryis achieved without any subsidy actually
being paid ft quihbrium.
This outcome is desirable from the perspective of domestic residents since the utility
of the region that produces the high wage good is higher than the utility in the other
region. In the symmetric model of Section 2.2, however, the subsidy to one good makes
no difference. There each region can only produce one high wage good and that is the
equilibrium outcome with or without the offer of the subsidy on a single good. While the
UT0 gee thia note Snt that donoeotioconsornera are willing to000oorno (1 + AL at a price of Mt7't(l + AlL'. The revenue
per unit that the firms receive (incinding the euheidy) to

MU''(I + A)L' + w + S — ?rJ'1(1 + A)L
Thuo the

fir are willing to bid the wageup tow +

S

= w + It,

and so worSen are prepared to obtain training.

24

subsidy can determine which of the high wage goods the domestic industry produces by
"targeting"

that good, the country is indifferent in that model as to which of the goods it

produces.

In a slightly richer model, however, the subsidy can be socially costly. Suppose, for
example, that foreign workers can more easilybecome trainedthan domestic workers. This
could arise for example where the high wage good involves a new technology and where
the workers of the foreign country have built up some relevant industry-specific know-how
with the old technology. In that case efficiency may call for production to be done by
foreign firms whereas the offer of a subsidy may lead to the emergence (and dominance)
of a domestic industry. Not only would foreign consumers be hurt by this since they must
bear the transportation costs, but even domestic consumers may be hurt. While they save
the transportation cost they would otherwise have to pay, they now pay for the higher
training costs of the domestic workers. The industrial policy can also be implemented by
imposing a prohibitive import tariff on the targeted good. By announcing the tar.ff before
foreign firms make their entry decisions, and thereby convi'ving them that the domestic
market is foreclosed to them, they can be deterredfrom entering. The end result, again,
will be the emergence of domestic firms as the sole world producers of the good. This is

a

simple case of "import protection leads to export promotion"

3.2. Nondiscriminatory Import Taxes

In this section we study tariffs which reduce the volume of trade but do not affect the
pattern of specialization. This analysis is thus closer in spirit to traditionai analyses of
tariffs which are conducted assuming that a country will continue to import the good on
which a tariff has been levied.
To make sense of such policies in the context of our model it might be best to have
in mind the symmetric model of section 2.2 with M less than 2(1 + A)L, In that model
free trade has one of the high wage goods, X produced by one region while the other,
Y is produced by the other. Suppose that, as described in the previous subsection, one
region imposes a prohibitive tariff on good X so that it is sure to export X. The analysis
'°S.s Kruginsn (1584) for th. oriin1 .tatement of thu

poulbUity.

25

of this subsection then corresponds to the analysis of relatively small tariffs on V levied
by the other region. Such moderate tariffs on V will not affect the regional pattern of
specialization in this case.
We show

that the benefits from tariffs depends critically, as in Lapan (1988), on

whether the government that imposes the tariff takes the agents in the other country
by "surprise", In our model this depends, in particular, on whether workers in the foreign country correctly predict the imposition of the tariffs when they make their training
decisions.

that the foreign workers do not correctly anticipate the imposition of
the tariffs. Then (1 + A)L" of them become trained for the production of V. A tariff on
Suppose first

imports of V lowers the demand for V. Thus, for the market to clear the equilibrium price
for Y must be less than it' h and the wage of foreign trained workers will thereforealso be
beow w h. As long as the tariff is not too large, so that the wage for trainedworkers still
exceeds to, the skilled workers will prefer to be employed producing V and its output will
not change. Because the tariff lowers the price charged by the foreign firms, small tariffs
on imports of V helps the domestic region. This is the standard optimal tariff argument.
Now suppose that workers in the foreign region do correctly anticipatethe imposition
of the tariff when they make their training decisions. Since they correctly anticipatethe
reduction in demand that will follow the imposition of the tariff, fewer of them obtain
training. Indeed, the number of foreigners that obtains training adjusts until their wages
equal w + h and the price charged abroad equals to + h. If the ex post tariff is r, the
number of workers that obtain training is:

MU''(w h) + Muv_1((1 + r)(w + fi +t)).
Since

(13)

the price charged abroad is thus independentof the anticipated tariff rate,

domestic residents lose from the tariff. Domestic consumption falls and the unit price paid

to the foreign firms is unchanged. Domestic residents would be better off if the country
could commit never to levy a tariff.
These conclusions are similar to, though stronger, than Lapan's. Lapan (1988) shows
that when the production of output occurs before a government can levy a tariff, the
26

incentive to raise tariffs

is

larger ex post than ex ante. However, his framework is one

where countries trade because they are intrinsically different. As a result, in his model a
small tariff is desirable even ex ante. Here, by contrsst, all tariffs are undesirable ex ante
so countries are sure to gain by committing themselves never to levy a tariff in the future.
One resson to stressthese resultsis that they differ radically from thoseof the standard
models

that explain trade among similar countries. Standard models of this type stress

increasing returns and monopolistic competition as motives for trade among regions As

in Gros (1987), Venables (1987) and Helpman and Krugman (19S9'. ur.der
these assumptions tariffs are generally desirable even whin they are correctly antiripaed.
can be seen

What we haveshown is that Lapan's (1988) case againsttariffs applies even more strongly
in a model where Identical countries trade with each other.

4. Antitrust Policy
In the models we have presented the perfectly competitive outcome emerges even if
there are only two competing rivais. In practice, however, paucity of competitors may
endow the firms tn the industry with market power over their customers and suppliers.
In particular, the firms may be able to restrict their consumption of inputs and thereby
reduce the amount they pay to their input suppliers.

This can occur, for example, when firms interact repeatedly and implicitly collude.
Suppose in particular that after entrepreneurs have entered and workers have obtained
training, prices are set and demand is realized over many periods. Then the firms may
be able to implement a collusive norm in which wages are set below the competitive level.
That norm may be sustainable if firms fear that any unilateral deviation from the norm
will lead to a breakdown in cooperation in which wages return to the competitive level.16
Each firm would then weigh the short term gain from offering a slightly higher wage while
others keep their wages at the collusive level, with the future loss that results from the
elimination of the collusive gain. The result is that, as long as the number of firms is not
too large, they obtain an outcome that is similar to that of perfect collusion. To keep the

that as long as no more
"See Fried,nsz, (tan) fort thecry slong then tines for cohesion in output prices.

discussion manageable we will assume

27

than S firms are present

they achieve the fully collusive outcome; the pay their workers to and charge a price given
by (4). By contrast, if there are more than 1 firms, the competitive outcome obtains.
We are interested in examining

the effect of a strong antitrust policy. We focus in

particular on the vigor with which merger policy is established and enforced.17 We assume
that, initially, there are N > S firms. The more vigorous the antitrust enforcement, the
less likely it is that a set of mergers Will be toleratedwhich reduce the number of firms in
the probability that the antitrust authoritieswill prevent
3uch an increase in concentrationbe given by p. That is, p. denotes the probability that
—
competition will characterize the industryand (1 p) is the probabilitythat the firms will
an industry to

or fewer, Let

collude perfectly and drive the wage down to to,

that the initial number of firms, N, is such that they can all operate
at efficient scale when the price is to' h. For it to be worthwhile for workers to obtain
We suppose

training they must expect to earn to h on average. Since they earn to when antitrust
enforcement is lax, they must earn to h/p when antitrust enforcement is vigorous. Since
the wage and price are equal In equilibrium when firms are competing, this implies that
the price equais to + h/p as well when there is effective competition.
In order for the trainedworkers to be fully employed in the event that antitrust policy

+ h/p.). Therefore,
the number of workers who obtain training is decreasing in the probability that antitrust
policy enables the firms to collude, (1 — p.): A higher probability of collusion means that
fewer workers obtain training. In the limit, if the probability of collusion is one (so that p
is vigorous, the number of workers that seek training must equal D(w

equais zero), no worker becomes trained.
When the firms collude they set a wage of to and hire all the trained workers. Thus
sales equal D(w h/p.) and the price must again equal to
collusion raises the price whether collusion takes place or not.

h/p. So the potential for

We now consider international trade. Suppose that, as in the model of Section 2.1
there are two regions but only one high wage good. Suppose that in the domestic region

"In lbs U.S., for example, the Departmentof Justice has considerable latitude in decidingwhich mergers it will challente
and has set out 'Onidelines' it uses in reachingthose deoisioss. The guidelines are subject to reviuion and those in effect at
any tune isacs substaostial room for interpretstioo. Accordingly mergerpolicy can fluctuate substantially from administration
to adoniniutratioo.

28

the probability of collusion is zero. By contrast, in the foreign region the probability of
competition ,u is less than one i.e., the foreign region has a weak antitrust policy Then,
for a sufficiently 8mall (but strictly positive) foreign j. the foreign regionmust become the
importer of good Y.
This can be seen

that the foreign region is the only producer
of Y. Then the total number of trainedworkers abroad L1 is MU'(w hji)
h/ji + tj which is decreasing in So, for sufficiently low
as follows. Suppose first

.

M[U''(w

:

h)

-

U't(w m h + t> L + 2S.

Then, 2S workers find it profitable to become trained at home if two firms enter here.
even when
Knowing this two firms do enter and the foreign wage falls below w
workers
do
not
benefit
foreign firms compete. But, this means that in this case foreign
from obtainrng training. The only equilibrium has the domestic region, with is tough
antitrust stance, exporting the high wage good,
Thus the country with the vigorous antitrust policy is better off than the country
in which collusion is tolerated, This simple example sugges. that relaxation of antitrust
rules, particularly in industries where human capital accumulation is important, can weli
be detrimental to a region's welfare. Insofar as cooperation between firms allows them to
exploit workers more ex post, fewer workers will obtain training and the region will suffer.
This concern for a strong antitrust policy in order to ensurevigorous competition between
purchasers of inputs echoes that of Porter (1989) who makes this argumentstrongly for
similar reasons.

This result may appear surprising because in the usual models of external returns
cooperation among firms is beneficial. When the externality is technological, so that
increased output by one firm reduces the inputs needed by another, an agreement between
the firms is beneficial since it allows the firms to internalize the externality, leading to a
socially desirable output expansion. Similarly, in the case of localized knowledge spillovers,
research joint ventures may improve social welfare. By enabling all the members of the
joint venture to benefit from the research carried out by them in the joint venture, the
externality from research is mitigated. Indeed, this is precisely the argument used by
29

.Jorde and Teece (1988)18 Our paper serves as a warning that the appearance of external

returns is not enough to justify cooperation among firms. In particular, although very
large research consortia might lead to greater sharing of the fruits of the research, they
may also reduce the compensation of their employees, and thus reduce their incentive to
acquire the knowledge and the skills needed to conduct the research.

5, Conclusions
We have presented

a model of regional agglomeration in the production of specific

goods where the principal motor behind a region's exports is the healthy competition
among many suppliers located there. Competition ensures that workers earn high wages
if they acquire industry-specific

human capital which, in turn, makes human capital accu-

mulation attractive and the industryviable.

The main message from the model is that even where it is technolocaliy possible
to obtain the same allocation with trade as without trade, trade serves a useful role. It
allows industriesto operate on a sufficiently large scale that it is possible to have several
firms producing the same goods in one location and thereby reap the benefits that flow
from regional agglomeration.
While we have focused on the salutary effect of regional agglomeration on the abuse

of monopsony power, there may be other reasons why regionalagglomeration enhances
human capital accumulation. That is, it is an open question whether the mechanism by
which having several local firms creates an incentive for human capital accumulation is
through the Lcreased competition they generate.
For example, a different advantage of regional agglomeration may be that it provides
some assurance to workers that they will remain employable in the industry if conditions
change in the future. That is, workers may prefer it if there is a diverse range of activities
in the area that use their industry specific skills in case demand conditions or production
techniques change in a way that eliminates the activity they choose to be employed in.
This preference for diversity might exist even if long-term wage contracts can be written

'

on
industries In our view
[W]e point out that our antitrust policy ... imposesunnecessaryrestrictions high technology
strict antitrust enforcement is generally not needed in the circumstances we contemplate, because international competition
and new and unewected entry is especiallystrong?

30

specifying the wage that the worker will receive in a particular activity, so that monopsony
power is not an issue.
Consider just three specific examples. Workers employed in the production of midsized automobiles may want to be located near plants that produce small automobiles in
case demand shifts in the direction of the latter. Or workers employed producing computers
based on a proprietaryoperatingsyctem, but whose skills are not specific to that operating
system, may prefer it if plants producing computers basedon alternativeoperatingsystsnr

'at

are located nearby in case theirs becomes obsolete. Finahy, is could slmpl be
ne
worker is concerned that he will not get on with his .upervisor or cworkers, and iike to
know that if he becomes unhappy in his job that he can easily shift to another
While the existence of such diversity may be importantto workers making their train
ing decisions, it is not clear why it cannot be achieved within

a single enterprise. That is.

one firm couldencompass a range of technologies, products,plants, and divisions. Multiple
firms might have an advantage if workers are concerned about the possibility of bankruptcy

and if two firms someh have a combined probability of ankruptry that is lower than
those firms would have when rolled into one. Or it might be that workers are concerned
about the "corporate culture" and that it is difficult to maintainseveral "cultures" in separate divisions within the same company. Such rationales for regional agglomeration must
be highly speculative for the moment. Sorting out which of them, or others not suggested
here, can survive the scrutiny of formal modeling is a questionthat awaits future research.
Anotheropen area for research is the extent to which competition is actuallyassociated
with high wages, extensive industry specific training and exports. One problem is that,
in practice, it is hard to gauge when an industry is relatively competitive. Nonetheless it
is worth providing some anecdotal examples which appear to support the model. First,
centrally planned economies have little actual competition for workers between the various
firms and are notorious for their inability to export highwage goods. Second, consider the
automobile industry. Japan, the most successful exporter of high quality mass-produced

cars, has a relatively large number of firms in this industry. Similarly, Italy has several
producers of high performance cars which are very successful exporters, In contrast, Italy
31

has only one large mass-production auto manufacturer, FIAT, whose exports to the US
are minimal. Interpreted within the context of our model, the high performance Italian
cars and the mass-produced Japanese can can be thought of as high quality goods which
use relatively skilled workers while FIAT can be thought of as a lower quality producer
who employs less skilled workers. These anecdotes suggest
of

the empirical validity

of the model is warranted.

32

that a more careful exploration

References
Bhagwhati, Jagdish and V. K. Ramaswami: "Domestic Distortions, Tariffs and the
Theory of Optimum Subsidy," Journal of Political Economy, 71, February 1963.

Ethier, Wilfred 3.:"Decreasing Costs in International Trade and Frank Graham's Argument for Protection," Econometrica, 50, 1243-69, 1982.
Farrell, Joseph and Garth Saloner: "Standardization, Compatibility, and
Innovation,"
Rand Journal of Econorziics, 16, Spring 1985, 70-83.
Feenstra, Robert C.: "Monopsony Distortions in an Open Economy:A Theoretica;
Analysis,"Journal of InternationalEconomics,1O, May 1980, 213-35.
Friedman, James W.: "A Non-Cooperative Equilibrium for Supergaires,"Review of
Economic Studies, 38, January 1971, 1-12.
Gros, Daniel: "A Note on the OptimalTariff, Retaliation and the Welfare Loss from
Tariff Wars in a Framework of Intra-Industry Trade", Journal of International
Economics, 23, 1987, 357-67.

Graham, Frank: "Some Aspects of ProtectionFurther Reconsidered," Quarterly journal of Economics, 37, 199-227, 1923.
Hagen, Everett E.: "An Economic Justificationfor Protectionism," Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 72, November 1958, 496-514.
Helpman, Elhananand Paul R. Krugman: Market Structure and Foreign Trade, MIT
Press, Cambridge, 1985
:Trade Policy and Market Structure, MIT Press, Cambridge, 1989.

Jorde, Thomas M. and David 3. Teece, "Innovation, Strategic Alliances, and Antitrust," UC Berkeley, November 1988, mimeo.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Lawrence H. Summers: "Industry Rents:Evidence and
1mphcations,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1989, 209-90

Krugman,Paul R: "Import Protection as Export Promotion,"in Henryk Kierkowski
(ed.), Monopolistic Competition and International Trade, Blackwell, Oxford,
1984.

Lapan, Harvey E.: "The Optimal Tariff, Production Lags and Time Inconsistency",
American Economic Review, 78, June 1988, 395-401

33

of Economic Development",
Lucas, Robert E. Jr.:1'On the Mechanics
etary Economics, 22, July 1988, 3-42.

Journal of Mon-

General Equilibrium and Trade
Markusen, James R. and Arthur J. Robson: 'Simple
Journal
of Economics, 13, 668-82, 1980.
Canadian
Sector,"
with a Monopsonized

with
Prices and the Gains from Trade1981.
and James It. Melvin:"Trade, Factor
of
14,
450-69,
Journal
Economics,
Canadian
Increasing Returns to Scale,"
Macmillan, 1920.
Marshall, Alfred :Principles of Economics, London,
Market Monopsony and the Allocation
McCuiloch, Rachel and Janet L. Yeiien:"Factor
Economics,
10, May 1980, 237-47.
of
International
Journal
of Resources,"

of Trade," Canadian
Melvin , James It.: "Increasing Returnsto Scale as a Determinant
Journal of Economics, 2, 389-402, 1969.
the
Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny:9ndustriahzationand
Murphy Kevin M., Andrei
1003-26.
October
1989,
97,
of
Political
Economy,
Journal
Big Push,"
The Free Press,
Porter, Michael F.: The Competitive Advantage of Nations,

New

York, Forthcoming.

and Long Run Growth", Journal of Political
Romer, Paul M.:"Increasing Returns
1002-37.
Economy, 94, October 1986,

with Differentiated Products: A
Venables, Anthony J.: "Trade and Trade PolicyJournal, 97, 1987, 700-17.
Economic
Model,"
Charnberlinian-Ricardian
and Antitrust Implications,
Williamson, Oliver E.,: Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis
New York: The Free Press, 1975.

34

(B)

(A)

(C)

(D)

(F)

(E)

Eqm. exists

__________

FTn,
Eqin.

without trade

exists with trade but
is not robust

exists with trade an
is robust

exists wto
positive prut.tio

No eqs..

—

P.O.

involves

no trade

pro

ar

P.O. involves prodoctioo
and trade

P.O. involves no production

1

Figure

production in Pareto

(A)

No

(B)

P.O.

(C)

Autarky

(D)

Autarky

(E)

Autarky

involves

is the

l

Optimum

S

Equilibriun and Pareto Optimality

or in equilibriun

production and trade but there
P.O. but

is the P.O.,
is the P.O.

there

is no production in equilibrios

is no production in equilibrium

but equilibrium requires regional agglomeration and trade
There

equilibrium (which

(F)

2

2

(l*?)

s

are multiple equilthria

is not robust)

and an

An

agglomeration

autarkic equilibrium

Autarky is the P.O. and the unique equilibrium outcome.

Appendix A
Existence of The Competitive Equilibrium
In this appendix we prove the assertion in Section 1 that a competitive equilibrium
exists when 2

< N < N.

The subgame equilibrium strategies are as follows: L workers obtain training. The
wages that firms offer are: (a) if L < S all firms set sV = 0; (b) if S < L <25 one of the
— c for c
firms sets tiq = 11(L) + and the others set tfij = 11(L)
arbitrarily small; (c)

if 25 <

L

+

D(w

ii) there are two cases to consider: (I) N < Nt
11'(L). (ii) N > Nt: In his case Nt firms set

int:

In this case

= 11'(L)
the firms set sZ,j =
sD
and the remaining firms set their wage equal to 0; (d) if 11(w + h) <L < 11(w), firms all
set tD1 = 11'(L); and (e) If 11(w) < L firms set w = w. In case (e) a minor modification
is required for the rule that workers use in allocating themselves across firms since there
are too many workers to be employed at wage w in this industry. Here we assume that
L 11(w) workers elect to work in other industries. The 11(w) workers that remain in this

industry distributethemselves uniformly across the N firms.
We first demonstratethat the firms' wage strategies are equilibriumstrategies.
Case (a): Since here fewer than S workers obtain training, no firm is able to operate at
minimum efficient scale. Thus they all refuse to hire workers (set ttq = 0).
Case(b): Sincethe number of workers who obtain training exceeds S but is less than 25,
only one firm can operate at minimum efficient scale. Since the entrepreneurthat succeeds
in being the one who hires the worker derives utility of v, they are each prepared to bid v
to the workers, or each, for the right to be their employer. (Note that since e is a sunk
cost at this stage it is irrelevant). Since the market clearing price will be 111(L), the
winning firm is willing to pay 11'(L) + to each worker to be the sole producer. Since

the losing firms will not attract any workers in equilibrium, they are prepared to offer a
tiny amount less than the wage of the "winning firm". Doing so keeps the winning firm
"honest" and eliminates an incentive for him to shave his wage offer.
Case (c (H):

if the I, workers are hired the market clearing pricewill be 11(L) which exceeds

w + h. Since all N firms can produce

at minimum efficient scale in this case, they will bid

the wage up to D(L).
Case (c(ii)): Here there are insufficient trained workers for all N firms to operate at
minimum efficient scale. N is the number of firms that can operate at minimum efficient
scale. As in Case (b) the entrepreneurs are willing to pay v to be successful. Since there
are
workers per successful firm, the firms are willing to pay a "premium" of
per
worker to

attract them to the firm and be successful, Once the workers are all employed

the market clearing price will be D'(L). Thus the successful firms bid

D''(L) —

for

workers. Unsuccessful
firms bid 0.
Case(d): Here all

firms can produce at minimum efficient scale. Once the woreLs are
hired the market clearing price will be D'(L). Firms therefore bid the wage up to this
level.
Case (e): If firms offer w, workers are indifferent between being employed in this industry
and beingemployed elsewhere. Therefore it is consistent with optimizing behavior for only

D'1(w) workers to take employment in this industry. But then the market clearing price,
if they are employed, will be w. Thus firms bid the wage to w.

u

Thus the firms are willing to carry out the proposed strategies for any number of
that become trained. Those strategies are therefore subgame perfect. We turn
now to the training strategy of workers. The proposed equilibrium strategy calls for
workers to obtain training. If that number obtains training, Case (c(i)) is the relevant one
workers

L

and the wage that is offered is D..(L*) = w+h. Since they recoup their training expenses
the workers are prepared to obtain training.
No additional workers are prepared to obtain training, however. If one additional
worker obtains training, Case (d) becomes the relevant one. The wage that is offered is
+ 1) <w + h, so that the deviatingworker is unable to recoup his training costs.
Similarly, none of the L workers has an incentive to deviate by not obtaining training.
Each worker who obtains training in equilibrium in indifferent between obtaining training

at a cost h and earning

w + h and not obtaining

training and earning w.

Appendix B
Uniqueness of the Competitive Equilibrium
In this Appendix we show that the equilibrium in Section 1, where the price and wage

h, is unique. The proof of this proposition proceeds by contradictionfor a series
of exhaustive cases. Denote the price that is charged in a candidate equilibrium by P
and the highest wage that is offered in equilibrium by iD.
C a' h: There cannot be an equilibrium where the highest wage offered to
trained workers is less than a' h since at least one of the workers would be able to deviate
equal w

r

by not obtainingtraining and make himself better off.

a' + h: In an equilibrium like this it must be the case that
the entirepool of untrainedworkers becomes trained because tD > a' + ii. Since the pool of
untrainedworkers is sufficient to satisfy demand when the price is a' fi, the price must be
(ii) ti, > a' + Ii and

below w

Pt

h for the market to clear. But then for v — e very small at least one entrepreneur

can make himself better off by not entering.
a' + h and fi <a' + /s: When the price is below the wage, firms that hire
(iii)
workers lose money. But then for v — e very small at least one entrepreneur could do better
by not entering.

+ h and E > a' + h: Here a firm will deviate and offer a wage above
The reason is that a firm can raisethe wage infinitesimally, attract all the trained

(iv) ti' = a'

a'

fi,

workers and increase its profits.

Appendix C
Uniqueness of Equilibrium with Sequential Training Decisions
In this Appendix we consider the case where L* > 25 and workers get trained in
sequence. We show that, in this case, the outcome where L(1 + \) workers get trained in
one region while none get trained in the other is not an equilibrium. The only equilibrium
is the autarkic one where L* workers get trained in each region.
Workers in each region are ordered from 1 to M. The first worker is the fl-st to
be given the option of becoming trained. If he declines he cannot later become 'rained
After that, the first worker at home is given the option, then it is given to the second
worker abroad and so
Let s1' denote the strategy for the i'th worker at home while
denotes the j'th foreign worker's strategy. These strategies can take only one of two
values; we let s equal one if the worker becomes trained and zero otherwise. The strategy

for the i'th worker dependsonly on the number of workers that have decided to become
trained before him. Thus:

m=1

n=1

s(=ff(4,s)
v,i=I

i=1...M,

n=1

that at least two firms enter in each region and that Xh workers become
trained at homewhile XI workers become trained abroad. Given our interest, assume that
Suppose

the equilibrium prices can be of two forms. If U'(X') — U'(X1)
is smaller than t, then the price at home is UI(Xh) while the price abroad is U'(Xf) and
there is no trade. if it is greater than t, good Y flows from the foreign to the domestic
X1 exceeds Xh.

Then

region. The equilibrium price abroad

P' is bigger than U'(Xf) while the equilibrium price

at home, Ph equals Pf + t and is smaller than U'(X').
We showed in section 2.1.1 that if the equilibrium is of the former type when 2S
workers get trained at home and as many as (1 + A)L workers get trained abroad, the
equilibrium is unique. So, consider the latter equilibria, if 2S workers become trained at
home, then no more than M[U'(w + h) + U'1(w

+ h + t)J — 25 workers are willing to

become trained abroad. On the other hand, 2S workers are willing to become trained at
The eneyiie woW4 be undanged lithe fire deciai on trenlng were taken by the firet worker

eS

home,

home as long as the number of foreign trained workers does not exceed K1

h)

U''(w + it — t)] — 25, which is larger.

The discrepancy

comes

M[U''(to +

from the existence of

transport costs whose presence ensures that the price abroad must be below to
to equal to + it

it if

it is

at home.

We now show that,

if the strategies followed

by foreign workers are subgame perfect,

at least 25 domestic workers become trained. Consider first subgames in which fewer than

K1 wnrkers

ever become trained abroad. Then, 25 workersor more

will

become trained

at home. To see this note that the M'th domestic worker is strictly better off' by becoming
trained if 25 — 1 workers got trained before him. Similarly, the M — l'st domestic worker
will enter if exactly 25—2 workers got trained before him. By doingso he, just like the last
worker, recoups his training cost and lowers the equilibrium price. This reasoning extends

baiw ards so that the M — 25'th worker is sure to become trained if other workers did
not get trained before him.
We now argue that it is impossible for K1 workers ever to become trained abroad.
'th worker
Suppose there exists a subgame where tbe i'th foreign worker becomes the

K'

to become trained

there. That worker would refrain from acquiring training

+ it) U°1(w + it t)] — (K' — 1) = 25
it — t))

domestic workers already trained.

always be present. The
were

Kh

—1

i

—

1+

if there were

M[U'1(w + it + t) —

In equilibrium, such a number will

l'th domestic worker would definitely become trained if there

domestic workers already trained before him.

If he does not become trained,

it + t (By the definition of Kh). By entering, he lowers the price
of Y and recoups his training cost even if his decision to become trained triggers further
training of domestic workers, Similarly, the I — 2'th domestic worker will get trained if
good

Y will

cost to +

there are only Kd — 2 workers trained before him. This argument extends backwards so
that the I — Kd — l'th domestic worker becomes trained.

far we have argued that the home region produces at least 25 which justifies the
entry of two firms we initially assumed. In fact the argumentcan be strengthened to show
So

that the home region produces V and the autarkic equilibrium prevails. Suppose that, on
the contrary, the foreign region produces V x which is less than K1 where x is positive.

For z sufficiently large the home region will import Y. The backwards inductionargument
implies that the domestic region will then produce M1U'1 (w + h) +

U'1(w + h — t)] —
(L* + z) = MU1(w + h — t) — z which exceeds 25 because L + z is less than K1.
But, then, the price and wage abroad equal w + h — t which is impossible. So z must be
sufficiently small that the foreign region does not export the good. But, then, x must be
zero for otherwise the foreign price and wage would again be below w h.

