                          fiBER VOR1CING PAPER SERIES




                     A CONVEX HODEI. OP EQUILIBRIUM GROWTH




                                Larry E. Jones
                               Rodolfo Manuelli




                            Working Paper No. 3241




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Caipbridge, MA 02138
                                 January 1990




We would lik, to thank Roger Hodrick, K.n Judd, Ed Prescott, and Nancy Stokey
for their generous coents. V. also acknowledg, very helpful conversations
with William Brock and Hugo Hopenhayn. Remaining errors are ours, of course.
Financial support from NSF i. grat.fully acknowledged. The first author also
acknowledge. financial support from The Sloan Foundation. This paper is part
of NBER's research program in Growth. Any opinion. expressed are those of the
authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic R.narch.
                                                      NBER Working Paper #3241
                                                      January 1990


                             A CONVEX MODEL OF EQUILIBRIUM GROWTH


                                                ABS THACT


Our aim in this paper is to exposit a convex model of equilibrium growth. The model is strictly in
the Solow tradition. The model has two features which distinguish it from most other work on the
subject. These are, first, that the model is convex on the technological side and, second, that fixed
fatten are explicitly included. The difference between our model and the standard single sector
growth model lies in the fact that the marginal product of capital does not converge to zero as
the level of inputs go to infinity. Existence and characterization results are provided along with
some preliminary analyses of taxation and international trade policies. It is shown that the long-run
growth rate in per capita consumption depends, in the natural way, on the parameters describing
tastes and technology. Finally, it is shown that some policies have growth effects while others affect
only levels. It is demonstrated that in a free trade equilibrium with taxation national growth rates
of consumption and output need not converge.




     Larry E. Jones                                   Rodolfo Manuelli
     J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of                  Graduate School of Business
     Management                                       Stanford University
     Department of Managerial                         Stanford, CA 94305-5015
     Economics and Decision Sciences
     Northwestern University
     Evanston, IL 60208
1. Introduction

Why do some countries grow quickly while others do not? Why is it that some countriesseem
endlessly mired in poverty while other similar ones suddenly take off in a period of exponential
development? Is growth affected by the taxation and foreign trade policies of governments? Can
a government, through appropriate choice of policy "trigger" a spurt of growth? To what extent
can we trace the success of certain countries in recent years to explicit policies on the part of their

governments?

These are important questions that have received considerable attention from scholars interested in
growth and development. Specifically, there is a wealth of evidence describing episodes of growth
and stagnation as well as the government policies in effect in each country. Corbo at al (1985],
Krueger [1978], [19861 and Reynolds (1985] document national growth experiences and present de-
tailed analyses of trade and macroeconomic policies.

Iii contrast, there is a relative paucity of purely theoretical studies of the causes of growth. The
reason for this neglect is fundamental. The standard version of the natural class of models to look at
have the prdperty that in the long run there is no growth and that—under small discounting—output
per capita converges to its steady state level independently of initial conditions (see, for example,
Scheinkman [1976].)

More precisely, the standard version of the natural class of models at which to look (i.e., those of
capital theory) have the property that the only potential sources of growth are sustained exogenous

increases in factor supplies (e.g., population growth) and exogenously given technological chauge
(see, for example, Solow (1957] and the resulting literature). Thus, except for the possibility of
exogenous technological chaage, these models of growth lead one to the startling conclusion that
there is no growth in per capita terms. Rather, depending on initial conditions, in simple versions
there is growth until the capital stock reaches a steady state where thiiigs settle down permanently.
This is true (roughly) independent of the discount rate and preferences

In terms of the implica4ions for cras country analysis, if countries are assumed to have the same
preferences and technologies but are allowed to differ in terms of their endowments (initial conditions

in this setting), the convergence results predict that country specific differences in output per capita
will tend to disappear in the long run.

The fundamental problem with this literature is that when faced with the phenomenal sustained
growth in per capita output that many countries have experienced, the only explanation the models

                                                   3
bave to offer is exogenous technical change; and they are silent about cross country differences, Of
course, one cannot expect to obtain satisfactory answers to the questions raised above in this case.
The natural first step to remedy this problem is to try to endogenize the process of technical change.
Unfortunately, at least if this is done in the most obvious way (i.e., through the introduction of a
second capital good-knowledge) this avenue suffers from the same problems.

More recently, three different models of capital Formation have been proposed to deal with this
problem. These are the externality/increasing returns model discussed in Romer [1986], the model
of human capital formation proposed in Lucas [1988], and the model of new goods introduction with
learning by doing advanced in Stokey [1988] and Schmitz [1989). These are all variations on the
more standard (i.e. Solowian) model of capital theory. They all, however, depart from the usual
theory in one important way. This is that iii their specification of technology, the three models all
rely either on important nonconvexities in the production set or on the absence of fixed factors.'

Our purpose in this paper is twofold. We want to show that a natural generalization of the standard
convex technology used in the early analysis of growth models is sufficent to generate long run
increases in consumption per capita. Additionally, we show how different government policies can
affect the long run behavior of the economy. In a multicountry setting different policies are shown
to induce enough heterogeneity so that in a free trade equilibirum it is possible for the growth rates
of consumption and output of any two countries to be permanently different.

In related work, Rebelo 119881 also analyzes a convex model of endogenous growth. He concentrates
on special forme of preferences and technologies designed to give rise to optimal paths which have
constant growth rates. This necessitates an assumption that fixed factors (e.g., labor) do not enter
the production functions for investment goods. lie also stresses the role that policy can play in
determining the long run (i.e. growth) properties of the model and gives closed form solutions for
growth rates in some cases.

TO indicate why convex technologies are sufficent to generate growth, consider the savings decision
of an individual with preferences given by the discounted present value of instantaneous utility If
the interest rate equals the inverse of the discount factor, the individual chooses a smooth pattern of
consumption over time. Because in a representative agent model individual and aggregate consump-
tion coincide, aggregate consumption is stable over time—that is, there I. no growth. On the other
hand, if the interest rate acted. the inverse of the discount rate there is an incentive to increase

  2 These models are based on work done by Arrow (1962) and Uzawa (19e51. For an early analysis
explicitly modelling the role of endogenous technical change see Shell [lQGfl and [1973].

                                                   4
consumption in the future. The higher interest rate causes the time profile of consumption to be
upward sloping. Then, it follows that to guarantee unbounded growth it is necsary to prevent the
interest rate from falling to the level of the inverse of the discount factor.

A standard arbitrage condition is that the interest rate equals the marginal product of capital. It
is then clear why the standard version of the neoclassical growth model cannot deliver long run
growth: as the stock of capital per worker increases, its marginal product is assumed to decrease
without bound and, hence, for some level of capital, it equals the inverse of the discount factor At
this point desired consumption is constant over time and the process of capital accumulation stops.

Note! however that a convex technology requires only that the marginal product of capital is a
decreasing function of its stock, and not that it decreases to zero as the amount of capital per
worker grows without bound. The technologies that we study are generalizations of the idea that the
marginal product of capita! remains bounded, and are extensions of the linear technology pioneered
by Gale and Sutherlaod [1968] and that were already considered by Solow [1956).

To understand how government policies can affect growth, consider a tax on saving (or more generally
a tax on capital income). This lowers the after tax rate of interest and, consequently, flattens the
desired time path of consumption. Of course, in a genera! equilibrium setting this results in lower
growth.

Because capital accumulation decisions are ultimately controlled by the after tax rate of return it
is possible for the growth rate of two countries—that have the same preferences and technology—to
differ. The intuition is simple. Consider two identical countries—a high tax and a low tax country.
It can be shown thai after one period the low tax country accumulates more than the high tax
country. It follows that this lower rate of accumulation translates—under some circumstances—into a
lower growth rate.

The analysis seems to suggest that any policy that increases the rate of return to capital must have
long ran effects. This, however, is not totally correct. The reason is that some changes can have
only short term effects without changing the long run prospects of the economy. A natural example
is given by considering an open economy. If trade policy has the effect of artificially increasing
the price of capital goods1 trade liberalization must increase the rate of return on investment and!
hence, spur growth. Whether this effect is permanent or not depends on what other technologies
individuals have access to in order to shift wealth over time. In particular, if there is international
capital mobility it is possible that lowering trade barriers only results in growth up until the point

                                                   5
where the domestic rate of return again equals the international rate of interest, with no long run
changes.

This simple analysis highlights the complexity of the effects of government policies, and it shows
that partially removing distortions need not increase the growth rate even in cases in which the
changes are in the right direction.

In this paper we concentrate on the analysis of tax and foreign trade policies not because they are
the only ones that are relevant but because they seem a natural first step. As the paper shows,
any distortion that increases the price of the relevant capital goods will have a negative impact on
growth. Of course, monopoly power and a large number of regulatory policies can have this effect.

In the next section we introduce our notation and make a short digression on the standard version
of the model from capital theory. Section 3 contains the existence and characterization results
along with sufficient conditions for equilibrium with sustained growth. In section 4 we conduct a
preliminary detailed analysis of a special case. In Section 5 we analyze the effects of distortionary
taxes. Sections 6 and I contain extensions of the results to a simple dynamic model of international
trade. Finally, we offer some concluding comments in Section 8.

2. Notation and a Digression

We will follow the standard capital theory notation. At each time period t = 1               there are
n +2 goods available for use: labor, 4, ii typn of capital, k, and consumption, Ct. There is a single
technology for turning capital and labor into output. This will be denoted by F(k,t). For simplicity,
we will assume that labor is supplied inelasticaily and that It = I for all t. Define f(k)   = PVC, 1).
Let x = (to,..., Zn) denote investment at time t.

We will consider a representative consumer formulation with utility function given by U(c1,...) =
Efltu(ct)

Thus, the problem faced by the consumer (social planner) is to choose ct, Li k to maximize E/3'u(ci),
subject to

     (1) c.+Ezjscf(k);
     (2) k11       (1— 66)k11 + z     I= I      TI;


     (3) zc,k1        0;


     (4)    k   0 given,

                                                  6
where 0    6     Li =   I...   n, is the depreciation rate.

Assume that u and / are concave and C' and note that we have followed the industry standard by
assuming that there is linear depreciation.

To explain a key aspect of the standard model let n = I. Now assume that lime_.f'(k) = U (e.g.
F is any of the standard forms). Then the model is of the standard variety. If 6 > 0 and 1(0) > 6,
it follows that there is a (unique) k > 0 such that 6k > f(k) for all k > k. It follows immediately
that jfk0 < k', k k and jfk0 > k, that k1 C k0 for all I. In particular, k is necessarily bounded.
Hence sustained growth is not feasible. (Actually this only requires that lunk_f(k) < 6.)

In contrast to the approach outlined above, we will not assume that the marginal product of capital
goes to zero as the stock of capital per worker increases without bound.

3. A Version of the Model with Growth

We now present conditions that guarantee the existence of a solution and then explore the possibility
of long run growth.

Let Y be the collection of feasible choices (i.e. infinite sequences oft's, c's and k's). It follows from
(2)—(4) that there exists a sequence of nonnegative constants B such that c1, rg, k1         B for all
and all sequences in V.

Proposition 1: Let U E9tu(ct) and suppose that u is monotone increasing, continuo,s,            bounded
below and that there exists an a > 0 end (1 <           with afi < 1 such that i4B,) U + a' for all t.
Then   the planner's problem of maximizing U over the set Y has a solution.

Proof: Note that, by assumption, Y C fl1[0, 31]s+2 which is compact in the product topology.
Since Y is clooed (due to the continuijy off) it follows that it is compact.

It is then sufficient to show that U is defined on all of V and that it is continuous in the product
topology. That U is well defined on V is immediate given the bound B. What is left to show
is that U has the requisite continuity properties. Let c" be a sequence of sequences converging
to e in the product topology. It follows that c' — c for all t and, because is is continuous,
that iz(c) — u(c) for all t. Thus by the Lebesgue Dominated Convergence theorem (/3tu(c7) is
dominated by fVU + (fl) 7 for some iC 1) (l(c")                 U(c) as desired.                 QED.

The condition on the maximal growth rate of output is similaz to that presented by Broth and Gale
[1969] in the context of factor augmenting technical progress. Although it is possible to find a tighter

                                                    7
bound than B, some restriction on the maximal growth rate of consumption is necessary, as the
following example indicates.

Example: Let 1(k) = bk, u(c) = cI0/(t — o). Moreover, assume $[(l — 6) + b]'° > 1 It is
straightforward to verify that the sequence c = ab[(l —5) + (1 — a)b]tka is feasible for all cv (with
     =   [(1—6) + (1— a)b]tka) and that Efltu(c) = cc ifa is sufficiently small.

Thus, as long as per-period utility cannot grow too fast things are okay. Note that there are several
obvious situations in which the conditions of the proposition are satisfied. First among these is when
ii is bounded. Second is when the maximal feasible growth rate of consumption is less than I/fl.
Note that neither of these is essential, however. If u is of the form u(c) =     c''/(l
                                                                                     c) o > 0 the
                                                                                          —


condition is satisfied as long as the maximal feasible growth rate inc is less than (1/fl)1/0. (This
example plays a central role in Lucas [1988].) Although we assumed that is is bounded below, this
is not necessary for the argument.

The next issue to examine is under what conditions the solution to the planners problem displays
long run growth. To do this we present a condition on the technology and the discount factor that
is sufficient to generate long run growth.

Condition 0
         (1)     Consider the model described by (J)—(4). In addition, asnme that 1(k) ? h(k), where I.
               is concave, homogeneous of degree one and C' Yb e


         (a)    Asswne that the'i exists a vector   keilk 00, such that if 4j >0

                                                                  1=1       a.


 In the special case it =      1,   the production function must be of the type 1(k) = bk + g(k) with
j3jb+ 1—6] > I. Then the simplest example of the type of technologies we have in mind is that
studied by Gale and Sutherland [1968] who considered 1(k) = bk

Condition 0 will not be satisfied if the representative consumer is very impatient (low /9) or if the
economy is not productive (,f(k) must be bounded below along some ray). Next we prove that if
condition G is satisfied,consumption grows without bound.

Theorem 1: Asnme condition G is satisfied. Then: any optimal soittion (c} is chartcterized
by

         (a)    If then is a single capital good (a = 1), lim4 = oo, and iniiestmeat is positive for alit:

                                                      B
      (b) In th case of mNltiple capital goods tim sup 4 =

Proof: To shorten the proof we first establish (b) and then indicate how to prove (a).

(b)   It suffices to show that liminfil(4)   = 0. Suppose to the contrary that Iiminfu'(4) = u >0. A
standard manipulation of the first order conditions for the planner's probtem shows that if (4
is a solution it must satisfy

              .1(4)> E/3'(l — bj)''ts'(4,)fj(k÷)              for   alit and i =   1,2.,,   vi.



Given   the assumption that t'(c,)        ii, we have that


                                    u0(4) u,9'(1 —

Since   timinfu'(4) =   u,   it follows that for all E> 0 there exists t such that u'(4) (1+ E)ü Then,
for all such t,
                                      1+ E Lfl'(l —
Let the right hand side be denoted d,, where d1 1+ E

We next show that this inequality contradicts condition G. horn condition G it follows that there
existsa >Osuchthatifk1 > 0j3[h1(k1)+l—6jj ? i+a, i= 1,..., n. LetE< rninja/2[1—fl(I—öj)j.
Consider the following function H


                    H(k,x) =     f1— A)''k+E(I_AyX,_1_,1— Ed1k
where    k E and (1 — A)' is the diagonal matrix that has elements equal to (I — 5i)' For any
fixed nonnegative sequence (rg), H isa concave function of k and, given z1 = z, the equality

                                —
                                    6)'-'fj[(I—A)'k ÷E(— A)'4,1_11 = d1

indicates   that it attains a maximum at k =        Thus,

                               H(k;,e) H(k,z)         H(k,O) for alike R.

Hence, to obtain a contradiction it suffices to show that ff(k, 0) cannot attain a maximum. Let km
be given by km = m - k where m IR.f4. and k is as in condition G. It follows that


                             R(k_,0)EflhEh((IA)1'&m)mEdki.
                                                     9
Using homogeneity of degree one of it and exchanging summation signs,

                         ft(k,O) = EE3''(1 — bj)'$h1(&)mkj — mEd,kj.
                                    1=1 •=1

Given that




              E(k,O) Eu +a) —$ — &)çfl'—'u                       —                 —




                           = rnE(1 + i

                             m>
                                              -   —öj)
                                                         —




                                    2(1     13(16)jki.
Given that not all kg's are zero, E(&m, 0) goes to infinity as in           goes   to infinity. Since for all
k, 11(Jc, 0) ft(k, 0), this implies that 11(L, 0) goes to infinity as well. This completes the proof of
(b).

(a) Under standard Inada conditions it follows that a policy of zero invtment (and decreasing
consumption) cannot be optimal. Therefore, assume that investment is not zero in some periods.
Specifically, let t be the first period such that z >0. Then,

                                     u'(c,...i) ? v.'(c,)/3(f'(k) + 1—Si.

However, given zgt = 0, it follows that c_1 > c and u'(ct_l) c                u'(Cg).   The two inequalities
combined imply that
                                           fl[f'(k,)+l—o]=d< 1
Construct, as in the proof of (b) a function H(k) given by

                                          71(k) = $[f(k) + 1 —6) — dk

By the previous condition this function has a maximum at k.. Using the same arguments as in the
proof of(b), it is possible to show that H(L) is unbounded, giving rise to the desired contradiction.

Note that if z1 >   0,   for all t, the Euler equation and condition C show that the sequence u'(ct) is
decreasing and, hence, that Ct increases monotonically to infinity.                                   Q.E.D.

The Theorem implies that for the one capital good case it is legitimate to use the Euler equation at
equality to characterize optimal path1.
                                                      J.0
4. A Specific Example

In the rest of the paper we concentrate on the one capital good case. Condition C then take the
form j3(b + 1—61 > 1, where 6 = urn f'(k). In this section we wilt explore a specific example of the
                               k—co
model outlined above in some detail. Our aiuli here is to explore the intricacies of the model more
completely to see what determines the growth behavior along the optimal path. In section 5, we
wilt conduct some preliminary analysis of the predicLed effects of policy on growth rates

We will first restrict attention to preferences given when the period utility function, is, is of the form



The first question to be addressed is that of existence. As noted above, for this type of utility
function existence is guaranteed as long as the maximuim feasible growth rate in consumption is less
than (1/fi)'1'. Clearly this necessitates a joint restriction on fib and a where is the limiting
marginal product of capital. We have:

Propodtion 2: Assunte that i3(b + 1 —              c 1 and that 4c) = c'/(1 — u) then an optimal
pmgrtm exists.

Proof: Choose > Oso that /3(6+1 —ô+)'° <land k such that f'(k) <6+t fork? k. Then
by concavity of f it follows that

                          f(k)<f(L')+f'(L)(k—k) f(k)+(b+fRk—k)

fork? &.

Letaf()—(b-I-and76+. Tlien,fork>k wehavethatoutputisboundedby

                                             f(k)a+ik
Thus for k, & consumption is bounded above by

                                                 =a+

                                            = a + + (1 —
Because utility is increasing in the initial capital without loss of generality we assume k. k. It
follows that

            e(7+t_6)t(ko+aE+ [_6)i),
and

                                                    II
                = (t + 1— 6)1(7                   + 1'(k0 + aE(i + l 6)' )j = (y + 1—
                                        +1 —6)

Therefore    u(g) S (t+ 1    —   6)(e)tu(z.), where u(:) is bounded. Thus, convergence of




is   guaranteed if fib + 1   —
                                 6)'     cI   by Proposition I.                                Q.E.D.

Note that this proposition taken together with Theorem 1 can put reasonably right restrictions on
the parameters of the model such that we have both existence and growth. Of course, 10 > 1 and
the growth condition is satisfied, Proposition 2 puts on "0 restrictions whatsoever.

       .ks far as optimality of sustained growth is concerned, an appeal to Theorem 1 gives the result
that growth will occur along the optimal path as long as /3(6 + I —6) > I. Moreover, an analysis of
the Euler equation allows us to say much more given our choice of utility functions.

In this case, the Euler equation gives


                                                = c:,i[,'(k,+,) + 1—61

or
                                       OE c..i/c = [i3&'(4+,) + I — 5)]IIC
Since kt+i is increasing over time and f'(oo) = 6. we see two important facts immediately.

First, we see that along the optimal path, growth rates are declining over time (0, ,+,)•

Second, note that although 0, decreases, it is bounded away from zero and converges to 9• E
[/3(6+1 _o)]Ik. Thus, the model predicts sustained growth with a long-runexponential component.

Note that, quite naturally, this steady-state growth rate is increasing in 3 and 6, and decreasing
in 6 and a (since /3(6 + 1 — 6) > I). Thus, the steady-state growth rate is higher if capital is
more productive, the agent is more patient, depreciation is less, or the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution is higher. It is interesting to note that although the form of the period utility function
does not determine whether or not there is growth, it does determine what the asymptotic rate of
growth is.

The existence of an asymptotic growth rate that is consistent with exponential growth is somewhat
special. With sufficient curvature in the utility function, it is possible to have consumption growing

                                                         12
over time at ever decreasing rates, with the asymptotic rate equal to zero. To see this consider the
exponential utility function .i(c) =        En this case the relevant Euler equation is


                               4÷1 —4   = Atn1fl(f'(4+1) + I — 6)].

It follows that 4+, —4 converges to a constant as k goes to infinity, with the asymptotic growth
rate of consumption equal to zero and the level of consumption going to infinity.

One implication of the one capital good model with fixed labor supply is that capital's share of
output approaches one asymptotically. Using condition C it is possible to study multiple capital
goods models in which one of the stocks is interpreted as human capital. In that case examples can
be constructed such that the share of output corresponding to labor and human capital does not
converge to zero.4

5.   Taxation and Growth

In this section we will begin our attenipt to answer some of the policy questions raised in the
introduction. In particular, we will consider the effects on growth rates of various taxes. As we will
see, whether or not tax policies affect growth depends on the exact form of the policy, but some
indeed do. That is, static distortions of certain types affect not only levels of output but also can
have significant impacts on growth rates.

Of course, the difficulty here is that while it is standard that an optimum is equivalent to a com-
petitive equilibrium in models without distortions, this no longer holds (in general) when taxes are
introduced.

We concentrate on the study of capital income taxation. To simplify the analysis we will assume
that firms do not face dynamic problems. That is, in every period firms rent capital and hire labor
in spot markets. Because of the assumption of constant returns to scale, factor payments exhaust
output. From the firms maximization problem it follows that each input is paid its marginal product.
The rental price of capital, qi, is simply qi = f'(k,) while the wage rate is w1 = f(k) — ktf'(ki).

The representative consumer solves the following problem


     IThu(c)
     One such example is presented in Jones and Manuelhi (1988], where it is shown that by choosing
the parameters of the model Labor share can be any number between zero and one.

                                                 13
subject to

    c1+xj+r(qt—6r)kc<q.kg+w,+T. t=O.L...,withko>Ogiven.

In writing the budget constraint we have already set the price of capital equal to the price oF
consumption. Of course this requires that Xe > 0 in equilibrium. TI either the relevant version
of the condition G of section 3 is satisfied or the initial capital k0 is sufficiently small this is not
restrictive. We have also assumed that the tax is levied on the returns of capital net of depreciatiDn
costs. It is possible to show that this is equivalent to a tax on dividends h firms are allowed to
deduct depreciation. The depreciation rate, ôi.. need not coincide with the 'true" depreciation rate
5. We have not allowed the consumer to borrow or lend. This is not restrictive in the framework
of a representative agent. Moreover, we can read off the implicit equilibrium interest rate from the
first order conditions of the consumer's ijaxijuization problem. Finally, the term 7 corresponds to
transfers received from the government that the consumer considers independent of his behavior,
In equilibrium, the requirement of a balanced budget corresponds to r(qj — 6,.)k1        = fl. With this
condition it will follow that, in equilibrium, Ce +   .e f(tc).

To establish the existence of an equilibrium we taLe an indirect approach. We construct a series of
modified economies with no government sector. We then show that the equilibrium prices for one
such modified economy can be used to construct the equilibrium prices of the economy with taxes.

We first consider the sequence of economies indexed by z = (zs)      t = 0,1      with planner problems
given by:




     c + zg < J(kt) + z
             = (1 — 6)k + x,,

where fife) = (1 — r)f(k) + r&.k.

     This does not correspond to 'accelerated depreciation" (if 6, > 6) because it does not affect the
value of the remaining stock of capital. In this sense, it tends to overstate the effect of an accelerated
depreciation scheme. It can be shown that this is equivalent to the introduction of an investment tax
credit such that the household/firm receives a refund of 6,. dollars per dollar spent on new capital
goods, this will have the same impact on growth as has in this interpretation.

                                                      14
At this point (:c} should be interpreted as a', endowment sequence. For any sequence      satisfying
0 ; B. where B. is as in Proposition 1. the modified plannersproblem is well defined and
the solution is unique due to strict concavity. Denote tile optimal sequence of capital by k,(:). We
first need to show that there is a sequence such that a fixed function of ki(r) reproduces the same
sequence z. Formally, we have:

Lemma 1: Consider any z = (z.) stick that :*e[O. Bd and tel kdz) be the solutéon to the planners
pmôiemfor the modified economy. Let G(flg = r(f(k(:9—b,kt(:)). Then there erists f svch that
G(f) =
Proof: Foranysequencek=(k1) 1=0,1,2,... defineh(k,z)by:



For any fixed z define the correspondence r() by

            r(r)E ((ks)suchthat lc' (1—6)k, andkt+i
Finally, define the space Y = flQ(U. B,), wi,ere B is an upper bound for any feasible capital stock
sequence. For example, B1 = 1(L) with L+1 = fR) + (L — 6)E satisfies the assumptions. The
set Y is compact in the product topology. The correspondence C(:) is continuous and, for each z,
a closed subset of Y and, consequently, compact. Moreover, given nY all kcl'(z) also belonz to Y.
The social planner's problem for the modified economy can be described as:

     maxh(k,z).



By the Theorem of the Maximum the set of maximizers is an upper hemicontinuous correspondence
of z. Because the objective function is strictly concave, this set is a singleton arid the maximizer,
{k.(z)}, is a continuous function of z. By construction, the mapping C is a continuous function of
k and, consequently, of z. G maps the compact, convex set Y into itself and, thus, it has a fixed
point z'                                                                                     Q.E.D.

If we index modified economies by sequences z, it is standard to use the results from Debren [l954
to show existence of a competitive equilibrium. Moreover, the results of Prescott and Mehra [1980]
show that we can support tile same allocation by just. looking al a sequence of markets for capital
and labor. If the solution is interior the prices should be given by

                                   = f'(k1(:)) = (I — r)f'(ki(;)) + rb,
                                                  [5
                                        = f(kd:)) —

Note also that, at the fixed point C, the feasibility constraint for both the original and themodified
economy coincide. That is f(k1(z))+:; = f(k(z)).

We are now ready to establish existence of an equilibrium.

Theorem 2: Assume that the eristence conditions of section 3 art satisfied. There exists an
eqnilibritm for the economy                       The equilibnum prices are given by q =
                              With distortionarg totes.

f'9(x)) and uq = f(k1(:)) — kt(z)f'(ke(f)), and the equiliónizm allocation corresponds to that
of the planner'sallocation for the modified economy when z = z•.

Proof: For z = e the planner's allocation solves the representative consumer's competitive prob-
lem


      maxE9u(c.)
      subject to

      c + Xe < (f)k, + w(f) +
          = (1 — 5)k, + z

By definition of q and w and letting 77 = (q; —                we have that 41(z)ks + ih.(z) + z e
(1— r)qk + r6,k + w +17, where the equality holds identically in k. Given that the right hand
side detennines the budget constraint for the representative consumer in the original economy, it
follows that the two budget constraints are identical. If c1(z),r(r"),k,(C) is the solution to the
competitive problem faced by the representative consumer in the modified economy when z =
it must also solve the equivalent problem for the consumer in the original economy. The firms
problem, being static, is automatically satisfied by our choice of prices.                     Q.E.D.

To chatacterise the equilibrium with distortions we use the first order conditions for the modified
planner's problem at z = C. The Euler equation (that always holds jfk0 ii sufficiently small) is:

                              = u'(c1)j3[f'(k.1) + 1—6 + ,jb,. —

Notice that ii 6, < f'(k) for all k, the asymptotic growth rate of the marginal utility is given by
max[1,fl(b+1—6+r(ö, —bD].

It follows that if 6, = 6 and if r is sufficiently large the economy will converge to a steady state.
In general positive i's will result in a decrease in the asymptotic growth rate relative to the no

                                                  16
tax situation. The case 6, = b results in an asymptotic growth rate that is similar to the no tax
situation. This case corresponds to a situation in which all the additional income generated by
capital (b) is not taxed because it is considered equal to depreciation (6,).

The case ,9(b + I — S + r(6, — 6)) c   1   is interesting to illustrate the difference between "growth" and
"level" effects. In this case the economy reaches a steady state with the steady state capital stock
satisfying
                                fl[f'(k,)+ 1 —6+r(6 —f'(k,))] =           1



Where k, indicates the steady state capital stock when the tax rate is ?.

If, starting at the steady state,- the tax rate is lowered while still keeping the expression for the
discounted marginal return less than one, the impact of this change is to generate growth until the
economy reaches a higher steady state. In this case changing , only has level effects.

If, on the other hand, si(b + 1—6 + r(6 —             > I a decrease in r has the effect of increasing the
asymptotic growth rate of the marginal utility. It then follows that changes in taxation may have
level or growth effects depending on the importance of the initial distortion.

To summarize this discussion we have

Proposition 3: Proportional tare, on capital income can affect 60th whether sustained growth will
occur in equilibrium and its as jmpt ofit level. ha particalar, the imposition of such a tar could move
the economy from the region of sustained equilibrium growth to one where the,. is no growth in the
long run along the equilibrium path.

We   must point out that to emphasize the impact of capital income taxation we have assumed
constant marginal tax rates. Our approach to existence S robust to tax rates that depend on both
aggregate capital stock and that vary over time.

On the other hand, our description of the tax code was kept very simple to emphasize the rote of
capital income taxation on growth. Due to the convexity of the problem it is possible to analyze
more complex tax policies as in Brock and Turnovsky (1981], and Judd (1985J, (19861, (1987]. ThiS
paper is complementary to those studies ii' the sense that it provides an existence result that extends
to arbitrary time varying tax rate. A similar approach can be used to study differential taxes on
specific forms of capital as well as labor income.

Finally, it is possible to obtain the same qualitative raults if instead of taxing capital income,
the government levies a tax on nonhuman wealth. In this case Becker (1985] has shown that the

                                                       17
competitive equilibrium allocation is the solution to a planners problem. In this case, the problem
being soLved has the lower discount factor, 0(1.— r). Our analysis ci section 3 applies directly, and
it follows that taxation ,nay reduce the asymptotic growth rate even to the point of causing the
economy to converge to a steady state.

6.   Growth and International Ttade

'lb this point, the results, although suggestive, do not really answer the questions put forth in the
introduction. That is, although we have shown that government policies can impact growth rates
in nontrivial ways (if they affect intertemporal margins), this has been in a closed-economy setting
Our goal in this and succeediu& sections is to begin to analyze these questions in a world with
international trade. To accomplish this we will begin by considering the simplest generalization of
the economy analyzed to this point winch adiiiits interpretation as being with many countries.

Consider an economy with two consumers with utility functions given by


                                  Ui(c)=E4u1(c1),         i=l,2

They are endowed wash labor t         1 for all i and t and initial capital stocks k and k.     We
will assume that the two individuals "live" in distinct locations. Formally, there ate two types of
consumption goods, two types of investment goods, and two types of labor. In what follows, we will
assume that the consumption and investment goods are freely substitutable while labor is not (i.e.,
transportation costs ate zero for consumption and investment goods and infinite for labor). Thus, &
country I, defined by the lack of labor mobility.

In each country there is one Arm with production function given by 4 = F'(ê,),i = 1.2. As
above, we will assume that F is homogeneou. of degree one and define b1 limx —. oobF'(k, fl/Ok.
Again, labor is assumed to be inelastically supplied.

We consider a setting iii winch country one taxS the return on capital in place irrespective of
ownership, that is, country two's residents have to pay country one's taxes if they rent capital to
firrt in country one. Country two imposes no taxes, but residents of country one are taxed by their
own government on the income generated by their capital which they rent to Arms in country two.

Fee trade guarantee. that the price of consumption and investment good' I. equal in both countries.
lii this simple setting there I. only one good that can be traded: capital. The reason for this is
simple: differeaces in (after tax) rates of return generate ofThetting capital Rows. The key price that
determines the allocation of world resources is the rate of return in each country.

                                                    18
Fn order to make our point that difrerences iii country policies can induce differences in long run
growth even in the absence of any barriers to trade, it is sufficient to show that autarky is an
equilibrium. If this is the case the analysis ci the previous section shows that country one's growth
rate is lower.

In Proposition 4 we formalize this idea.

Proposition      4: Let the tax on capital inrome in cosntr one ôe r and assume           = 6. Assume
u(O) = oc and 6, = 63 = 6> O,j3[(1 —r)(6—6) + 1]> 1 and $2[b—5+ 1]> 1 and that the existence
conditions art satisfied cov.ntrp by country. Then.

       (a) If f'(k) = f2()fi = j3, and z1 = &3, there exists k such that if k k P, the fine
          trade equilibrium allocation corresponds to autarky.

       (6) If f'(k)   f2(k)     6k, then the eqailibnum allocation is autarkij, independent of initial
conditions.

Proof: The proof strategy is simple: compute the autarkic allocation for each country and then
show   that residents of country one do hot c•ant to invest in country two and vice   versa.


Let (c,k,x) be the solution to country i's planning problem (a modified planning problem for
country one) and let the gross before tax rate of return be given by

                                   1+rjg/'(kfl+l—b i=1,2.
This simply reflects a standard arbitrage condition that equalizes the rates of return within a country
between   holding real and financial capita!.

(a) Proposition A.1 in the appendix shows that k k for all t. Thus the after tax rates of return
faced by residents of country one are given by


                          (1— r)f'(kfl—oJi- land (1— rflf'(k?) —61+1.

Therefore, given concavity off, f'(kt) ? f'(L?) and residents of country one will never choose to
invest in country two.


To complete the proof w need to show that residents of coutitry      two will choose not to invest in
country one. This will be the case if and only if

                               f'(k?)+ 1—6? (1—r)(f'(k)—61+1.
                                                    19
Note that the left side converges to + I — 6 and hence for k large we have

                                 6 + 1—6 (1— rflJ'(k) —6] + I

Because the capital stock in each country increases, if     a k the rate of return in country one is
bounded above by (1 — r)[f'(k) —6) + t and country two's residents do not invest in country one.
This completes the argument.

(b) The argument is similar to (a) with f'(k) replaced by 6 everywhere. As f'(k) is independent
of k initial conditions play no role in this case.                                       Q.E.D.

There are several things to note about this result.

First, as promised, under the stated conditions, we are able to give a very precise characterization
of the competitive equilibrium with taxes—it is atitarky. This will allow us to make very strong
statements about the effects of taxes on growth below (in country 1).

Second, note that in the absence ofgovernment distortions. autarky is not & competitive equilibrium.
 In case (a) countries trade to equalize rates of return on capital if k > k. In case (b). there is
 trade due to differences in discount rates and utility functions (rates of return are automatically
 equalized here due to the special form of the production Function). Thus, it is immediate that the
 goverrnnent policies have effects since they move us from an equilibrium with trade to one without.
 What is missing still i that the effects are on growth rates (i.e., not just on levels).

 Third, note that we have assumed that physical capital is perfectly mobile in our formulation.
 It is straightforward to check that the result remains true in a world in which investment goods
 are perfectly mobile but physical capital in place cannot be moved so long as consumers initial
 endowments of capital at time zero were located entirely in the home' country.

 Fourth, note that we have continually renormalized prices so that consumption costs one (unit of
 account). Alternatively, one could normalize all prices in teams of time zero consumption goods. It
 is straightforward to check that the proof given will not work in Ibis case. This is nothing but the
 standard difficulty in determining what constitutes investment income (or saving) in a world with
 forward contracts. Basically, the problem i. that autarky gives rise to different time paths of prices
 in the two countries so that consumers in the high price country would not want to buy their own
 output. In this case, one can still get the conclusion of the proposition by, in addition to having
 taxes on capital, introducing tarifib on imports. With the appropriate choice of tariffs, autarky will
 again be the equilibrium and the basic conclusion (that policies have growth effects) will still be
  valid. This is, of course, the nonrecursive analog of our assumption about taxation of capital income.

                                                    20
Fifth, note that the only way we used our assumptions that 12j = is, and th = A2 in the proof of
part (a) was to guarantee that k? k (or all t. Alternatively, one could obtain the same result by
having country I tax foreign investments at a different (higher) rate than domestic ones.

Finally, note that the analog of our Proposition 3 generalizes in this case as well.

Proposition 5: Assume that .I[( I — r)(b — ?') + I] <    1,   that J,(b+ 1—6) > 1, that the assumptions
for eristence an satisfied country by country aud that f = . Then, if it1 = is2, there is a k such
that if k > k k , the equilibrium is autarky.

Proof: Choose k        that $iRl — r)(f'(k) —6) + L] = 1. [tis a standard argument to show that
                      so

the autarkical values of k in country I converge monotonically to k. Given this, the arguments
of Proposition 4 can be used to show that the rates of return in the taxed country are never high
enough tojustify investment there by residents of the untaxed country.                         Q.E.D.

We turn now to the question of characterizing the social optima in our two country world.

Proposition 6: Assume that flj(b+ 1—6) > I, i =        1,2, and that the other assumptions of Theorem
I an satisfied. Then, in any social optimum (with positive weights on both individuals) consumption
of the i-th individual satisfies

                           4(c) $1It(C1){f'(kgj)+ 15}                    1,2

where k1 = (1/2)(k +ki).

Proof: Consider the problem of maximizing

                                                   +

subject to the obvious technological constraints. It is immediate that optimality requires equal split
of the capital stock across the two countries.

Further, it is straightforward to show that at the optimum

                                      ai0t4(4) =

Finally, note that the results of section 3 can be generalized to show that the Euler equation holds
in this case. Thus it follows that

          a,flt4(c) + a,/Jtu,(c7) = (c$ti4(4+1 + Q2J4' 4(c+j1[f'(ks+L) + 1—5)
                                                 21
Substitution and simplification give the desired result.                                         Q.E.D.

Taken together. Propositions 4, 5, and 6 allow us to make simple direct comparisons about gowtii
raL of consumption in country I with alit1 witlioul distortions. In particular, the results allow us
to conclude that the difference between growth rates iii the tax and no-tax competitive equilibrium
in country 1 correspond to a reduction in the marginal product of capital from f'R) — S + Ito
(I —           — 5) + 1. In particular, with preferences of the form u1(c) = c'/(1 — o). the
asymptotic growth rate of consumption is lower with taxes than without in an international setting.
Moreover, if fl1 = ih consumption grows at a slower rate in country 1 than in country 2. Similarly.
under theconditionsoiProposition 5, itfollows thatif/31(b+l—S) > Land /li(i1_r)(6_6)+1) 'Cl,
the competitive equilibrium without taxes has growth in both countries while that with tax has
growth only in country 2.

A. a final comment, note that Proposition 6 shows that the results of Becker (1980j concerning the
asymptotic distribution of consumption when Jj and j32 are different do not generalize to a growth
setting. In particular, although it follows (from the fact that cj/3tu'i(c) = a23u;(c?)) that the
ratio of marginal utilities goes to zero, this implies that the consumption of one agent goes to zero
only if aggregate consumption is bounded. In our case, the ratio of consumption goes to zerowhile
 both grow without bound

 7. Growth with Tariffs

 In this section we begin to explore   some of the implications of the model for the analysis of trade
 policy and of policies that tax international flows of capital. We need to modify the basic one good
 model in order to explore the effects of import tariffs. The simplest way of doing this is to consider
 a Ricardian model of trade in which differences between the home and the foreign country aredue
 to different technologies.

 We will show that, depending on other restrictions, changes in trade policy may have permanent
 effects (effects upon the asymptotic growth rates) or just temporary effects ( effects on the level but
 not the growth rate of the economy).

 We modify the basic model of Section 3 to allow for a different marginal raw of transformation
 between investment and consumption. The technology is given by

       4+aZ, Sf(kt),
            = (1 — 6)k + z,
       (c1,x,) O,u 1.
                                                     22
To describe the path of this economy in autarky we can follow the same argument as in Section 3.
It is a straightforward extension to show Ihat the relevant growth condition" is flRb/a + l—6 > I.
It then follows that if the country is sufficiently inefficient in the production of investment goods
(a is sufficiently large), the competitive equilibrium will converge to a steady state. Specifically, an
argument similar to Proposition 3 shows that if 3(6/a + 1 — 6] C 1, output converges to a steady
state, with the steady state capital stock k given by the solution to 13fJ'(k)/a + I — 6] = 1. In
generaL, the higher the value of a the lower the asymptotic growth rate and the welfare of the
representative agent. (It is simple enough to consider the case where the technology is given by
ajc + a,z C f(k1), for (ol a,) I. In this case the size of ai does not affect the asymptotic
growth rate, although it does reduce welfare. Basically, to affect growth rates we need to distort the
marginal rate of substitution between consumption at different dates, while an inefficiency in the
consumption sector simply makes consumption equally more expensive in every period.)

For simplicity we assume that the rest of the world has a = I. As in any Ricardian model, under
free trade there is specialization. The home country produces only consumption and it imports
investment. If the initial capital stocks are the same for all countries, there is no international
borrowing and lending and the trade balance is zero in every period. Note that even in a world in
which all countries have access to the same technology, there could be international trade if initial
capital stocks were different. This, of course, corresponds to the equilibrium of a closed economy
with heterogeneous agents that we studied in section 6. Our results about asymptotic growth rates
remain unchanged but trade is in general not balanced.

If we assume /3((6/a) + 1 — 6] > 1 our argument is Section 3 shows that the international price
of the investment good relative to the consumption good is one. Suppose that the home country
prohibits international borrowing and lending and that it imposes a tariff on imports of investment
equal to r. That is if investment goods are purchased abroad, their domestic price (in terms of
consumption) is 1 + r.

Without going over the details of the argument, it is easy to see that if 1 + r > a the equilibrium
is autarky. This is because it is more expensive to purchase the good abroad than to produce it
domestically. The asymptotic growth rate of marginal utility of consumption is, simply, f3R&/a) +
  —6].

Keeping the assumption that there is an infinite tax on international borrowing and lending, assume
that the import tariff is lowered so that 1 + r2 c a. The representative household salves the following
problem:

                                                  23
    max        u(cg)
    st. ci+pczsw,+qkt+Tg
                 = (1 — 6)k1 + r,

where p, is the relative price of investment, q1 the rental price of capital, w1 the wage rate, and l' a
transfer from the government. Of course although the household views the transfer as independent
of its own actions, in equilibrium we must have 1211 =           i.e., the government has a balanced

budget

If zt > 0, we must have p, = 1 + r. It is possible to show that the equilibrium allocation solves
a modified planner's problem (in essence the argument is similar to the one used to establish the
existence of equilibrium with distortionary taxes), that LI > 0, and that the first order conditions
are given by
                             u'(c1) = d(c÷, )(f(k.1 )/( I + tn + I —6)

In this case the asymptotic growth rate of the ratio of marginal utility is 0(61(1 ÷ r.) + 1—61 which
is greater than ORb/ct) + I — 6]. Therefore, ii. this case, trade liberalization has 'growth effects."

Consider next an economy where international capital flows although not prohibited, are subject
to a tax r. Specifically, let L be the amount tent by the home country to the rest of the world. If
(1 + rg) is the world interest rate the representative agent faces the following decision problem:
     'flax

    st. ct+pazt+Ltwt+qgk.+(1+rt(1—r)]La_j+T,
             (L,,c1,z1) 0.
The interpretation is simple: households have to pay the government a tax of      per dotlar of interest
received. In equilibrium, we must have rzxt + rkrIL = 7L

Notice that! as stated, residents of the domestic country can lend to the rest of the world but cannot
borrow from it. This assumption simplifies the analysis of the recursive problem. As it is well known,
if borrowing is allowed we need to supplement die standard sequence of budget constraints so as to
prevent individuals from borrowing infinite amounts. Lu the version with borrowing allowed, and
if domestic residents have to pay a tax on international borrowing, it must be the case that, for
large k the rate of return on domestic investment is less than the rate at which households borrow.
Therefore, at least for large k, the optimal amount of borrowing is zero.

Formally, the decision problem faced by the household is how to allocate investment to the two
possible intertemporal technologies: the domestic technology that has rate of return equal to

                                                   24
(f'(k)/(l + '-4 + 1 — 6), and the international technology that has 1 + r( 1 —        as its rate of
return. We assume 4{1 + r(l — 7k)]> 1. For this problem it is possible to show that the equilibrium
allocation is the solution to a modified planners problem. To map this economy into that of section
5. notice that this is an economy that has two technologies for capital accumulation: the standard
technology given by f and another linear technology given by I + r(1— rkY

Consider first the case b/( I + r) + 1 — > I + a( I — &). This says that the domestic technology
dominates, and that the optimal solution simply has L1 = U for all 1. Of course, the asymptotic
growth rate of the marginal utility is given by 3(6/(1 + r4 -I- I —61. Consider a policy that lowers
m but that still leaves the domestic rate of return higher than the after tax rate of return in the
international market. This change will have no effects upon the equilibrium decisions. In this case
decreasing taxation of capital flows has no impact while a decrease in r has, as we argued before,
"growth" effects.

However the case b/(1+ r4+ 1—6 c 1+r(I — r) is different. In this case the domestic technology is
eventually dominated. A standard no rate of return dominance argument establishes that domestic
output will never exceed f(kL) where k' solves:


                              f(kL)/(l + r) + 1—6 = I + r(1 — r.)

Because we assume J(I + r(1 — ri)) > I, we can argue that consumption must be increasing at
& faster rate than in the case of portfolio autarky. Output, however, remains bounded. In this
economy households save in international markets and use the proceeds to finance an ever increasing
level of consumption.


In this case, trade policy can have only level effects. Consider two countries that are identical
except for import tariffi; let r C r3. Moreover, assume that

                                b/fl + + 1—6<1 + r(1 — rj)

The argument we used above shows that output will eventually converge to f(kf) where kf solves

                                        + r) + 1—6 = 1 + r(1 — re)

Clearly kt > , and a decrease in ,- can temporarily increase output but it will eventually level
off at a higher value. (We have not shown convergence but equilibrium for each economy solves a
 modified" planner's problem. We cat' then use the methods of Section 3 to establish convergence.)

                                                25
It is also interesting to study the impact of a decrease in . Specifically, tet ,- < r and assume that

b/(1 + r) + 1—6<1 + r(1 — re). Consider a country that has a tax equal to r and has reached a
steady state level of output 1(k2), where k, solves the obvious equality of rates of return equation. If
the tax is lowered to r, this will imply that the new steady state must have f(k1) C f(k2)(the new
steady state has a higher rate of return), and this is accomplished by reducing domestic investment
and increasing savings in international markets. thu. behavior would look like a classic instance of
"capital flight" triggered by the loveriiig of the barriers to capital flows, Of course, this change will
also result in a higher growth rate of consuiiiptioii and higher welfare. In this instance capital flight
is beneficial because it corresponds to a shift in the composition of national savings towards a larger
share of it invested in the "foreign technology" that has improved.

Although in the model it is clear what we mean by taxation of capital flows, it is not obvious
how such a policy can be implemented. In particular, what prevents individuals from exporting and
importing the consumption good (that has a zero tariff) in such a way as to mimic the intertemporal
flow of income generated by borrowing and tending? The simple answer is that nothing prevents
them from getting around the system in the context of the model. In the real world, however,
exchange controls can serve as an effective way of enforcing the poticy. Whether they are enough to
replicate our setup is a question that deserves further attention.

We think that this exercise is valuable. It shows that in a very simple model with a trivial laissez
faire equilibrium the effects of removing distortions one at a time are not obvious. The growth or
level effects of a change in trade policy or barriers to capital mobility depend on the levels of the
other policies. There is a sense in which it indicates that one must "Look at everything' before
reaching policy conclusions and it highlights the not so obvious interrelations between trade regimes
and international capital flows. It indicates that "comprehensive' studies of policy changes (Krueger
 [1978], [1986J and Corbo, et. at [1985]) are more appropriate than sharply focussed investigations
 that ignore the policy package in place.

 8.   Concluding Comments
 To finalize the paper we offer some comments on the results, related literature, and future research.

 I) Our goal in this paper has been to develop and analyze a model in which the growth rate of
 output and consumption are both positive and endogenous. In so doing, we have implicitly provided
 answers to the questions raised in the introduction.

 The analysis implies that principal determinants of growth rates include both economic fundamentals
 (pazameters of tastes and technology) and government policy variables. In particular, because

                                                    26
of the relatively simple structure of the key equatioii to understand growth the model suggests
concentrating on the factors affecting the rate of return on investment. Besides the obvious preference
and technological parameters, it indicates thai government policies that affect the rate of return on
capital have an impact on growth,

It is tempting to attribute the bulk of recent differences in growth histories between countries (e.g.,
Korea and Japan versus the U.S.) to differences in tastes (i.e., betas) rather than differences in
policies. Although this is in principle consistent with the model, the difficulty with this view is in
rationalizing the apparent changes in growth rates across time in a given country (e.g., Korea pre
and post 1959—see Krueger [1986!).


For this reason, it is compelling to concentrate on government policies as the primary explanation
for differences in growth. In this regard, it is of i''terest to interpret the recent work of Makin and
Shaven [1987]. Their study indicates dial tiargirial income from capital is taxed at much higher
races in the U.S. than in Japan. Within the context of the model, this is perfectly consistent with
identical tastes in the two countries and the observed growth patterns. (See comments 4 and 5 below
concerning the welfare effects of different growth rates.)


2) The presence of increasing returns to scale is neither necessary nor sufficient to generate sustained
growth. That it is not necessary follows from the arguments of section 3. That it is not sufficient
follows from the conditions imposed by Romer [1986) or, more directly by considering the following
technology F(k,t) = katt2 with a1 +a2 >1 and 0< L <1. The arguments of section 3 can be
applied to show that for this economy sustained growth is not feasible. Similarly, the existence of
growth does not depend on exact linearity, the lack of fixed factors or the specific form of the utility
function. The crucial feature to attain sustained growth seems to be that the marginal product of
capital remain bounded away from zero. Whether this is generated by a convex technology or not is
not essential. in the example of increasing returns we need a1 ? ito guarantee that this marginal
product remains bounded away from zero.


3) The model is a useful vehicle for discussing whether specific policies have level" or growth"
effects. This, however, should not be read as implying that policies that have growth effects have
a larger impact upon the representative agent utility. The reason for this is that our existence
condition essentially implies that growth has a small impact upon utility. For utility to be defined,
it is necessary that the growth rate of instantaneous utility does not exceed 1/fl. Therefore, the
importance of consumption growth is bounded. Put differently, the model is continuous in all
parameters including policy parameters. We have shown that small changes can result in movements

                                                  27
from sustained growth to a region where there is a steady state. By continuity, these small changes
cannot have large effects on the utility of the representative agent.


4) Given the convex structure of our model and the lack of
                                                           externalities the competitive equilibrium
                                                                                                  the
is Pareto optimal. Therefore, the mode! gives too simple an answer to the question of which is
                                                                                                     well
optimal policy. It is simply laissez faire. In models with increasing returns/externalities it may
be the case that some of the policies that we ñnd distortionary are optimal. For example, in the
                                                            it is likely that the optimal policy requires
presence ofexternalities generated by the stock of capital,
                                                      this policy will also increase the growth rate to
subsidizing investment. In the model of this paper
a suboptimal (too high) level. Seecomment 5.

                                                          too much growth. Consider, for example,
5) It isfairly simple toshow that some policies may generate
the capital   income taxation problem of section 6. The two instruments that the government has
are the tax rate r and the depreciation allowance 6,.. If 6,. > 6 (of course this requires 5,. > 6), the
asymptotic growth rate of the marginal utility is higher than in laissez fain. In this case, for large
 the government's transfer to the representative household is negative; that is, the government uses
 lump-sum taxes to subsidize the returns to capital. Another more realistic fiscal policy is to tax
 consumption and to use the proceeds to subsidize purchases of the investment good. In this case the
 tax on consumption acts as a lump-sum tax. (The only taxes of consequence in thismodel are those
 that change the relative prices of the different consumption goods; a uniform tax on consumption
 does not affect the marginal rate of substitution between consumption at different dates and, hence.
 it is neutral.)6 The decrease in the effective price of investment (the after tax price) raises the rate
 of return on capita!, increases investment and, consequently, growth. In the context of our model,
 policies that artificially increase the growth rate are detrimental to welfare.

 6) The next step in this research program is to incorporate a realistic pattern of productivity shocks
 to the model, as was done by Brock and Mirman [1972) for the standard one sectormodel. (We can
 consider shocks that can take on a finite number of possible values within our framework without
 any changes.) Allowing for variable labor supply will allow us to study a model that generates both
 fluctuations and growth. In such a model we will not need to make any special assumptions about
  detrending. This is particularly important because in its current nonstochastic version the model
  doe, not predict that, asymptotically, all relevant variables will grow at the same rate. A specific

    6 In a veision in which the supply of labor is elastic the consumption tax is distortionary: it
  affects the trade off between consumption and leisure. Depending on preferences, the interteinporal
  decision may not change, resulting in no effects on growth rates.

                                                     28
example is the laissez faire version of our two country world when the discount factors are different.
In that case output grows at the same rate in both countries but aggregate consumption does not.
At a general level we cannot rule out differential growth rates and therefore the possibility that most
detrending procedures are not appropriate

The second reason why we think this extension is interesting is because it will allow us to evaluate
macroeconomic policies in terms of their lull effects; that is both in terms of their stabilization
and their growth effects. Current models that abstract from the possibility ofsustained growth must
of necessity concentrate on only one dimension.

Additionally the role of taxation in multigood multicapital economies needs to be explored. Our
analysis shows that when there is more than one capital good (this is the case in our study of the
open economy) the details of the tax code and other distortions are crucial to understand the long
run effects.




                                                  29
                                           References
Arrow, Kenneth J. The Economic Implicatious of Learning by Doing." Rev. Leon. Studies 29
         (June 1962): 155—73.
Becker, Robert. "On the Long-run Steady State in a Simple Dynamic Model of Equilibrium with
         Heterogeneous Households." Q.J.E. 95 (September 1980): 375—82.
Becker, Robert. "Capital Income Taxation and Perfect Foresight.' .1. Pu6lic Leon. 26 (June 1985):
         147—67.

Benveniste, Lawrence. Two Notes on the Malinvaud Condition for Efficiency of Infinite Horizon
       Problems.' 1. Econ. Theory 12 (April 1976): 338—46
Brock, William A., and Gale David. Optimal Growth under Factor Augmenting Progress.' J.
         Leon. Theory 1 (October 1969): 229—43.
Brock, William A., and Mirman, Leonard 3. Optimal Growth and Uncertainty: The Discounted
         Case." I. Leon. Theory 4 (June 1972): 479—513.
Brock William A., and Thrnovsky, Stephen J. The Analysis of Macroeconomic Poliéies in a Perfect
       Foresight Equilibrium." Internat. Leon. Rev. 22 (February 1981): 179—209.
Cass, David. 'Optimum Growth in an Aggregative Model of Capital Accumulation." Rev. Leon.
         Studies 32 (July 1965): 733—40.
Corbo, Vittorio, Krueger, Anne 0., and Ossa, Fernando, (eds). Export Oriented Developmenl Skate-
       gies: The Success of Five Newly indvstnahnng Countnes. Boulder and London: Westviev
       Press, 1985.
Debreu, Gerard E. "Valuation Equilibrium and Pareto Optimality." Proc. NaL 4cad.         Sc;. 40
         (1954): 588-92.
Gale, David, and Sutherland, William a. Analysis of a One Good Model of Economic Develop-
       ment." In Afathemalics of the Decision Sciences edited by George Dantzing and Arthur
         Veinott. Providence: American Mathematical Society, 1968.
Judd, Kenneth L. The Short-Run Analysis of Fiscal Policy in a Simple Perfect Foresight Model."
         J.P.E. 93 No. 2 (April 1985): 298—319.

_____ "Capital Gains Taxation by Realization in Dynamic General Equilibrium." Working Paper.
         Evanston, Illinois: Northwestern Univ., 1986.

______    "The Welfare Cost of Factor Taxation in a Perfect Foresight Model." J.P.E. 95 (August
          1987): 695—709.

Krueger, Anne. 'The Importance of Economic Policy in Development: Contrasts Between Korea
       and Thrkey." Working paper. Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, 1986.
______    Libemlization Attempts and Consequences. Cambridge, Mass.: Bollinger Publishing Co-
         (for NUER), 1978.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. "On the Mechanics of Economic Development." .1. Monetary Econ. 22 (July,
          1988): 3—42.

 Makin, John H., and Shoven, John B. Are There Lessons for the United States in the Japanese
        Tax System." In Contemponzrij Economzc Problems: Deficits, Taxes, and Economic Adjust-
         ments, edited by Phillip Cagan. American Enterprise Institute, 1987.

                                                  30
Prescott, Edward C., and Mehra R.ajnish.      Recursive Competitive Equilibrium: The Case of
        Homogeneous Households." Lconomesrica 48 (September 1980): 1365—79.

Rebelo, Sergio. 'Long Run Policy Analysis and Long Run Growth." Working Paper. Rochester,
       N.Y.: Univ. Rochester, 1988.

Reynolds, Lloyd C. Economic Growth in the Third World New Haven and London: Yale University
        Press, 1985.

Romer, Paul. "Growth Based on Increasing Returns Due to Specialization." A.E.R. Papers and
        hoc. 77 (May 1987): 56-62.
        "Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth." .J.P.E. 94 (October 1986): 1002—37.

Scheinkman, Jose A. "On Optimal Steady States on Sector Growth Models when Utility is Dis-
       counted" .1. Leon. Theory 12 (February 1976): 11—30.

Schmitz, James. "Imitation, Entrepreneurship, and Long-Run Growth" J.P.E. 97 (June 1989):
       721—39.

Shell, Karl. "A Model of Inventive Activity and Capital Accumulation." In Essays on the Theory
        of Optimal Eeonom:c Growth, edited by Karl Shell. Cambridge! Mass.: MIT Press, 1967.
______ "Inventive Activity, Industrial Organization and Economic Activity." in James A. Mirrlees
       and Nicholas H. Stern (eds.) Models of Economic Growth London: The Macmillan Press
       Ltd., 1973.

Solow, Robert E. "A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth." Q.J.E. 70 (February 1956):
       65—94.

______ "Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function." Rev. Econ. Stat. 39 (August
        1957): 312—20.

Stokey, Nancy L. Learning by Doing and the Introduction of New Goods? JFK96 (August 1988):
       70 1—17.


Stokey, Nancy C., Lucas, Robert E., and Prescott, Edward C. Recursive Methods in Economic
       Dynamics. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, (forthcoming) 1989.




                                              31
                                            Appendix

In this appendix we prove that if we compare two planner's problems, one for the original economy
and one for the modified economy of Section 5, the latter has a lower investment rate. Consider first

the original problem

    (OF) max

    subject to    c +z f(k),
                       = (1— 6)k    + r,
Let the optimal investment function be g(kO) (to indicate that the tax rate i is zero) when the
planning horizon is it periods and the initial capital stock is k. Denote the optimal consumption by
c,(k). Thus,

     c(k) = f(k) —g(k,O)

A standard result for the one sector growth model is that c4(k) is an increasing function of k ( see
Stokey, Lucas, and Prescott (1989].)

Next, consider the modified problem

     (MP) max

     subject to     c1 + Zg 1(k1) + Zt

                         = (1— 5)k + z.,

where {zg} is taken to be exogenous, 1(i) = (I — r)f(k) + rSk, and 5, f'(k) for all It.

Let the optimal investment function for this problem, when z is equal to its fixed point
[z1 = r(f(kg(z)) — 5,)] and the planning horizon is n periods, be g(kr). We want to show that
g(k,O) > g(k, r) for aD It and ri

Proposition A.1; Assume that the conditions for existence are satisfied. Then for all pa and It,
g(kO) g(k,r).
Proof: The argument is by induction. Consider the case it = 1 aiid suppoee to the contrary that
gi(k,r) > 91(kO). Because investment is positive for the (MP) economy, the fitst order condition is

                                              = f3u'(cflf'(kr)
                                                  32
However we have c C c0 and Ct > a1 because k[ > k1 Thus.

                                         = s'(c) > u'(co) Øu(c)f'(k,)


Because t/(cr) > u'(ca), we must have f'(k1') > f'(k1). But f'(k) = f'(k)+ r(ô, —f'(k)). Therefore,
the previous condition is equivalent to r(6 — f(k)) > 0 which is a contradiction.

Next assume that the statement is true for n and we show that it also holds for n ÷ 1.

We need to consider two casn.

casea:       frJ>k,      j=1,2,.., ri.
To prove this. suppose to the contrary that g,+t(k,r) > g÷1(k,O). Therefore, we must have
g.,.1(k, r) > 0. Consequently, if we construct the function h(e) given by:


4(c) E u[J(k)+z0—g4.j(k, r)+c]+5u[f(k[—c)+zi—g(kr )1+. - .+ruLf(k:—u—or—'c)+z,—go(k, r)I.


it attains a maximum at = 0. The first order condition is simply

                                      = E7...iY(1 — 6)2t'(cj)J'(k!)


Notice that, for at! fr /'(k) c f'(*). Therefore,

                                      < E7...1fl1(1 — sYLuffrflt(fr!)


By the inductive hypotbesi we have that


                         = f(k') —gn+ii(kj'.) ? flkJ) — g+j_(frLO) = e,(kJ).


Therefore,
                                     <E'1Ø'(1 —


By monotonicily of cj, concavity civ and I, and the assumption that *7       frj We have


                                               —


                                                    33
On the other hand the optimal solution for the problem (OF) requires

                             U'(Co)   E7..1$'(l _6)i'u'(c(k))f'(kj)

These two equations together imply that u(c0) > ii'(4) or that f(k)—g41(ki, 0) < f (k)—ga+j(k, )
which is a contradiction

caseb:      Forsome t<t<n, k( <ks.
Note that since k > k1 by hypothesis this case requires that for some j + 1 < I, r,+i >0. We now

argue that if tj4.I >0 then r, >0 s = 0,1         j. Without loss of generality assume that j + I is
the first time that x >0. Then a standard first order condition ror the growth problem is

                           li'(ca) > u'(cj+j)/3[f'(kj+i) + 1—61> u'(c1+,)

where the last inequality follow! (ron, condition G. Thus ej1 > c1 and cj.j + zjl > CJ +
   or f(k1i) > f(kj). This, however, requires            > k1 which contradicts z = 0.

 It then follows that z0 and tI are positive. In this case the Euler equation is:

                             U'(C&) = u'[f(ki) — g(k1,0)1(f'(kt) + l—1

 Because x > 0 by assumption, we have

                                   = 13u'(f(kt) — g(kL r)1[J'(t) + 1—6)

 By the inductive hypothesis g,(kt,r) C g(kf,0). Also, j(kf)       c f(t)• Thus,

                             u'(c) < 13u'[f(kt) — g(et,0)](f'(k)+ 1—6]

 If k > k1 we have iil(co) c u'(4). These inequalities imply:
                        — gckr,omf'(k;) + 1—61> u'V(kj) — g(k1,0)][f'(ki) + 1—6]

  Given that each term is monotone decreasing in k the inequality implies k < k1 which is a
  contradiction.

                                                                                        be used to
  To finalize the proof, standard arguments (see Stokey, Lucas and Prescott [19891) can
  show that the infinite horizon investment rules for (MP) and (OP) are given by           g(k, r)
                                                             .                                Q.E.D.
  and lhn,..g(k,0), respectively.
                                                    34
