                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            SPECULATIVE DYNAMICS




                               David M. Cutler

                              James M. poterba

                             Lawrence H. Summers




                            Working Paper No. 3242




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, NA 02138
                                 January 1990




We are grateful to Fischer Black, John Campbell, John Cochrane, Kenneth French,
Ken Froot, Lars Hansen, Bertrand Jacquillat, Andrew Lo, and Julio Rotemberg for
helpful discussions, and to the National Science Foundation andreaearch
                                                                Sloan
Foundation for research support. This paper is part of NBER's           progran
in Economic Fluctuations and Financial Markets and Monetary Economica.  Any
                                                         the National Bureau of
opiniona axpressed are those of the authors not those of
Economic Research.
                                            NBER Working Paper #3242
                                            January 1990


                                 SPECULATIVE DYNAMICS



                                       ABSTRACT

     This psper presents evidence on the characteristic speculative dynamics of a wide
                                                       facts.   First, returns tend to
range of ssset returns. It highlights three stylized
be positively serially correlated at high frequency. Second, returns tend to be
                                                                       of asset values
negatively serially correlated over long horizons. Third, deviations
from proxies for fundamental value have predictive power for returns. These patterns
                                                                       real estate,
emerge repeatedly in our analyses of stocks, bonds, foreign exchange,
collectibles, and precious metals, and they appear too strong to be attributed only to
small sample biases. The pervasive nature of these patterns suggests that they may be
 lie to inherent features of the speculative process, rather than to variation in risk
factors which affect particular markers.




     David M. Cutler           James H, Poterba          Lawrence H. Summers
     NBER and MIT              NBER and MIT              NBER and Harvard
     50 Memorial Drive         Department of Economics   Department   of Economics
     Cambridge,   MA   02139   Room E52-350              Lirtauer 229
                               50 Memorial Drive         Cambridge, MA 02138
                               Cambridge, MA 02139
    The traditional efficient markets wisdom that asset returns are un—

forecaatable has recently been challenged by a number of empirical findings.

Studies of the historical time series of common stock returns in the United

States, for example, have uncovered serial dependence in returns and also

shown that lagged dividend—price ratios can forecast a substantial fraction of

return variation.     Unfortunately, these results are difficult to interpret,

because the underlying data set has been analyzed so many times in the search

for predictable patterns in returns.

    This paper provides nev evidence on the robustness of these findings.        Pe

use data on stock and bond returns in 13 different countries, on the returns

to holding five major currencies, as well as on returns to investing in gold,

siiver, real estate, and a variety of collectible real assets, to explore the

predictability of asset returns.    Our results uncover several patterns which

characterize the returns on most speculative assets.     First, excess returns

exhibit positive serial correlatthn at short horizons, typically over periods

of one or several months.     Second, returns are weakly negatively correlated

over longer horizons,     Finally, crude measures of the deviation between prices

and fundamental values, the analogues of the dividend—price ratio for the

various assets we consider, appear to forecast future returns, particularly

over long horizons.     Unfortunately, the limited availability of data for many

of the assets we consider renders the evidence for the second and third

propositions somewhat weaker than that for the positive short run serial

correlation.

     This paper is divided into five sections.     The first section presents

Monte Carlo results on the statistical power of the autocorrelation and

regression tests for return predictability which we use in our subsequent

analysis.   We find that for plausible specifications of the stochastic process
                                        2

generating returns, regression tests are likely to yield higher power than

autotorrelation tests.   This finding mppesrs even when the observable proxy

for the asset prite fundamental is measured with substantial error.   It may

attount for the findings of earlier researth on the U.S. stotk market, whith

have shown that dividend—price ratios have substantially greater power than

lagged returns in foretasting future returns.

     The next two sections apply the autooorrelation and regression tests to

returns data from a variety of different asset markets.   Section two analyzes

the autocorrelations of excess returns, demonstrating the pronounced
                                                                     pattern
of positive high—frequency autocorrelation and the weaker tendency for long—

horizon returns to exhibit negative serial correlation.   The evidence suggests

this pattern in a variety of specific marketa, even after accounting for the

oroas—correisriona of returns across countries.

     Section three coneidera the forecast power of measures of the deviarion

between prices and fundamental value for returns over various horizons.      The

findings are generally supportive of the foreoaat power of such measures,

although the results are significantly weaker than those for the historical

U.S. time series on stock returns.   The point estimates for moat markets,

however, suggest that as much as 30—40 percent of the devimrion between prices

and fundamental values is eradicated over a four year period.

     Predictable patterns in asset returns could result either from changes in

required returns or from inherent features of the speculative process in asset

markets, which lead prices to deviate from fundamental valuesJ   Section four



     1Shiller (1984), Black (1986) , Campbell and Kyle (1987) , DeLong,
Shleifer, Summers, end Waldmsnn (1990), and Curler, Poterba, and Summers
(1990), among others, discuss models of asset pricing that permit prices
to deviate from the rational discounted value of future cash flows.
                                         3

notes that several factors make existing theories of time—varying required

returns unlikely explanations for the stylized patterns of returns which we

observe.    First,   natural characterizations of ex ante returns do not generate

both positive and negative serial correlation in ex post returns.      Second, our

attempts to include explicit measures of market risk prernia, such as a moving

average of stock recurn volatility, do not reduce the forecast power of price—

fundamental deviations as they should if this variable's explanatory effect

results from omitted risk terms.    Finally, it seems unlikely that similar

processes generate required returns in the various markets we consider, since

the underlying asset fundamentals and risk factors are quite different,2

     The brief concluding section suggests that explanations focusing on the

nature of the speculative process itself,     rather than particular risk factors,

ire potentially more consistent with these stylized patterns.     Although we do

not present a formal model, we highlight particular features which we view as

promising for inclusion in such models,      These include traders who base their

asset demands on prior returns, as well as traders who adapt their portfolio

strategies in response to the ex post success of these different strategies.

We view modelling the behavior of speculative prices in such non—tradional

settings as a promising avenue for future research.



1.   Statistical Power of Tests for Return Forecastabilit'

     The limited time span of asset return data makes it difficult to detect

persistent deviations from martingale behavior.     This proposition, stressed by




     2Campbell and Hamao (1989) and Fama and French (1988a) point to
similar patterns in the predictable components of equity markets, the
former between the U.S. and Japan and the latter between industries, as
evidence that required returns explain these findings.
Summers (1986) with respect to first order autocorrelation coefficients, has

been demonstrated repeatedly even for tests based on higher order autocorrela—

tions.3       Not surprisingly, studies of stock returns have often failed to

reject the null hypothesis of serial independence even when the point es-

timates suggest substantively important mean reversion.

      Studies using broader information sets than lagged returns have achieved

more striking rejections of the null hypothesis that returns are unforecas—

table.4       These tests use lagged values of prices relative to crude fundamen-

tals, such as constant multiples of dividends or earnings, to forecast

returns.      In this section, we evaluate the power of these tests as well as

traditional autocorrelarion tests for detecting return forecastability.



1.1       Specification of the Null and Alternative Hypotheses

          We consider a simple frsmework in which required returns are constant,

so that in the absence of any transitory component in
                                                      prices, the ratio of the

price to the fundamental value would be constant.     Under the null hypothesis,

asset prices equal their fundamental value, and thus all movements in
                                                                      price
are due to changes in the fundamentsl. The alternative is that prices contain

both a transitory and a fundamentsl component.     Since the transitory component




     3Poterba and Summers (1988) present evidence on the low power of
regression tests and variance ratio tests of serial dependence in returns.
Both of these tests can be expressed as weighted sums of autocorrelations.

      4These studies include Campbell and Shiller (1988), Fama and French
(1988),  and Barsky and DeLong (1989).
decays over time, prices will display long run mean reversion.5         The teat for

these transitory components is then whether the excess returns implied by mean

reversion are predictable given lagged information.

      Formally, we write the model as;

(1)                 pt_p+ut
(2)                     —   Ptj ÷
(3)                 u   —   purl + v.
where   p   is the the logarithm of the real asset price6,     p   is the logarithm of

the fundamental component, which evolves as a random walk, and ut is the

transitory component, which follows a first—order autoregressive process.

Under the null,   u=O   and returns are white noise.      Under the alternative, as

Porerba and Summers (1988) show, returns (rt—pt—ptl) will follow an ARMA(l,l)

process and will therefore be partly forecastable on the basis of past

information.

        We assume that the econometrician can observe     z,   a noisy proxy for the

asset fundamental;

(4)                 ztp+wt,
where   w   is serially uncorrelated.   The proxy's information content depends on

the share of the variation in (zr_pt) that is due to the transitory component.

We parameterize this mm A—a/[o+a].         If   A—l,   then Zr equalsp.   Lower

values of A imply less precise information on the fundamental.




     5The alternative could equally well include changes in required
returns, with observationally equivalent predictions for the time series
properties of ex—post returns (Poterba and Summers, 1988), We consider
these two explanations for our findings in Section 4.

     6The asset can be thought of as a futures contract with a fundamental
value equal to termination value but no dividends.
                                                6

       We first consider the power of autocorrelation tests to detect the

fcrecastsbility of returns.         The probability limit of the first order eutocor—

relation is:

(5)                   plia(p1)     -(l-p)2c/(c + 2(l—p)u).
The analogous expression for higher order autocorrelations (j>I)           is
                                                                                plirnj)
=   pJ*p1ia(p1).       Under the fads alternative (a#O, p>O), autocorrelations at

all horizons will be negative, reflecting the reversion of prices to fundaeen—

tal value.     The autocorrelations become smaller in absolute value as the

persistence of the transitory component (p) increases.            Under the null

hypothesis (o=O), returns are uncorrelated.

       We consider autocorrelation tests based on the first order autocorrela—

tion coefficient alone, as well as the average of autocorrelations 1—12,            13—

24,   and 25—36.     The averages allow for the possibility that while any single

autocorrelation may be difficult to distinguish from zero,           persistent devia-

tions at all lags should yield more powerful tests.

      A second strategy is to predict returns using inforsation about the

relation between price and the proxy for fundamental value.            To do this, we

run regressions of the form:

(6)                Pt+k —   t    ak +          —     + ut+lk

where Pt÷1Ct is the k—period return beginning in period t+l.             The regression

specification corresponds to previous studies of return forecsstsbility.               For

common stocks, for example, if          z   were the logarithm of the real dividend,

then zt—pt would equal the log dividend—price ratio and this regression is

similar to that in Campbell and Shiller (1989) or Fsma and French (1988b)

The coefficients are subscripted by k to reflect the possibility of estimating

this equation for a variety of different return horizons.
      The probability limit of     k is:
(7)                          — (l_Pk)A.
                  plim(Pk)

which ia poaitive provided      o>O   (ao A>O).   As with the autocorrelstion
                                                                       from
coefficients, mean—reverting behavior will be difficult to distinguiah

random walk behavior when p ia near unity (the transitory component ia highly

                                                           variation in the
aerially correlated) ot when A ia near zero (little of the

deviation between fundamental and price is due to the transitory component).

        The regression specified in (6) could be estimated using non—overlapping

                                                     the information in the
k—period observations, but that would not use all of

data series.     Fully efficient estimation involves estimating (6) using

overlapping data.      Since 5t+lk is correlated across observations in this

case, ordinary least squares standard errors will be inconsistent.         We

therefore apply the technique developed by Newey and West (1987)        to compute

consistent standard errors; we allow for k—l autocorrelations of the error

term.




i.2     Correcting for Small Sample Bias

        gstimates of   k'   whether based on overlapping or non—overlapping data,

are biased in small samples.        In a finite data set, above—average returns in

one period will tend to be associated with above—average future prices, but

                                                                   the sample.
below—average future returns, since the average return is fixed in

This implies a negative correlation between current prices and future returns,



     7Hodrick and Hansen (1989) compare the statistical properties of
                                                             variable (as
regression tests using multi—period returns as the dependent
in (6)) with tests in which single—period returns are regressed on the sum
of lagged values of the independent variables (Zr_pt). Although they find
the latter to be superior, we focus on equationa like (6) for compara-
bility with earlier studies,
even if the series is a random walk.                     Even when prices are calibrated relative

to fundsmental vslues, if fundsmentsl—price ratios that ste below sversge were


preceeded by shove—average past returns, they will signal below—sversge future

returns.8     Regression evidence will thus indicate thst fundamental—price

deviations predict future returns, even though the subsequent returns msy he

independent of the fundsmental—price ratio.9

      To calibrate the small sample bias we must specify the process for

(which we denote             and the effect of              on        In most csses    is

sdequstely described as a first—order autoregression:

                             =
(8)                 TMti-l       *tLt    +

In the model shove, for example, =p*X.                     Because positive shocks tc returns

raise prices and therefore lower
                                 ZtPt, the errors in (6) and (8) will be
negatively correlated:                  C 0.    We also assume that the current value of the

fundamental—price ratio summarizes all the information in the history of

and    z which   can be used to predict returns, so that:

(9)                              lt       +    V1.
Given the correlation between the errors in (8) and (9), the errcr in the

returns equation may be written:                     -




(10)               °t+l          ur5't÷l +



     81n our specification of the null hypothesis, the fundamental—price
ratio is independent of past returns, and thus rhere is no small sample
hiss. For alternative specifications of the null hypothesis, including
some considered below, these error terms will be correlated, and there
will be small sample bias.

     9Even if all of the readjustment of the fundamental—price ratio to
its average occurs through changes in the fundamental, which are not a
component of returns, knowledge that the fundamental—price ratio is high
imparts information about past returns, and thus about whether future
returns will be above or below the sample average.
                                                         9

                                                                                    be
       Equation (9) doea            imply that returna further in the future cannot

forecast using the current value of the fundamental—price ratio.                                   Rather, it

                                                                 correlation
suggests that any such predictive power must operate through the

between current fundamental—price ratios snd future ratios, snd the predictive

                                                                                           For example, the
power of future fundamental—price ratios for future returns.

j—period ahesd return can be related to                        by:

                                           +
(11)                   r+     71/A
                                       in equation (6) equslsE                        the hiss in estimst—
where
        7jl&.              Since                                            y,
ing    k   is found by computing the hiss for                       and summing the results.

        The hiss calculation for                 proceeds as follows:

                       T               T
(12)                   S
                       t—l
                          tt÷ /tl
                                                              +
                    $l*[S1Pt*Mt+jl/1t)21
                                           T                                 1'


                   —
                       $l*(jl)     +
                                       t=l
                                           S   t(nt+              +       / S (p)2
                                                                            t—l


                   -
                       $l*jl)      +                 -


where            is the regression estimate of the (j—l)st sutocorrelation of
           j-l
        Recslling that         —   fll*31,        we can express the bias of                   as:



(13)                                   -       i1) + Pvq*[(j -              -              -
           Bias(;)
                               -                         -   j-l1     +           —
                                                                                      J1

Adding stross j to form the sum, we find the bias of


                                                                                               k
(14) Bias($k)      - BiasNj)
                       k
                                       =         -
                                                              k
                                                     Puq*)*S[jl -                  +                 -
                                                     10



                           +
                               p*(1_fl*E        [*
                                                      -
        We   simplify this expression using s result from Kendell (1973) on the

small sample bias in the jth estimsted aurocorrelarion for an AR(l) process:1°

                       -
(15)
             E()           f(l$)/(l_*)*(l_#J) +             2jJ]/ç-j).
The sum in equation (14) is then:11




(16)
             k—1                   I     1$                _k               k—I     -


              E[_JJ=____[(___)*(k_l___)+2Ej&
             j=1        T—k 1—      1—   j=1
                                                                                        I




                                    1      i+                      k            2
                           =   —   ——    [(—)*(k-I         —
                                                               —)  + —*(                    (k-l)*)j
                                   T—k     1—                  l—#       1— 1—$


                           =   - —- 1      k
                                          l—
                                                      —k—i
                                                               -
                                                                   (2k_l)k
                                                                   ——-H.
                                                                           l—
                                   T—k                 l—

Using    this expression and (15) to simplify (14) yields

                                                     k—i   +   k*      —
                                                                           (2k—l)
(17) Bias($k)      =   —        + p*(l—#)J*{                                        —
                                                           (I—)*(T—k)

                              is
                       - p,3*[(—)*(l-) + 2kJ/(T-k).
                                   is
     10Equstion (15) also shows that our autocorrelsrion coefficients will
be hissed. Under the null hypothesis of serial independence, the hiss of
the j—th order surocorrelstion is just —i/(T—j). We therefore add l/(T—j)
to each of our estimsted surocorreistions.

     11Since the biss in any surocorreistion is a function of (T—j), the
number of degrees of freedom for rhsr sutocorrelstion, hisses for dif-
ferent surocorrelstions cannot generslly be added. To form equation (16)
we assume that esch sutocorrelsrion has the ssme number of observations——
the fewest number for the set (T—k).  Since we use only (T—k) observations
in our subsequent empiricsl work, each surocorreistion will have only this
number of observations.
                                          11


Equation (17) gives the small sample bias as a function of the autocorrelation

coefficient for (Ztpt), the correlation between the errors in the return and

the fundamental—price equations, and the 'true" effect of the fundamental—

price deviation on one—period ahead returns.       To calculate this bias we

estimate   ,,       and     for each market, and then use the estimated values in

(17)   to evaluate the bias.12

       We tested this bias formula using Monte Carlo simulations of one period,
                                                                     We chose
12—period, and 48—period regression coefficients and biases.13

 .98, to match our empirical work, and considered 348 and 180 period samples.

The results suggest two sources of inaccuracy.       First, short horizon regres-

sions are more biased than the theory suggests, while adding together returns

lowers the bias.      With 348 observations, the one period regression coefficient

is 18%    larger   than the theoretical value,   The 12—period coefficient is only

il     larger than its theoretical value, however, and the 48—period coefficient

is 9% below its theoretical value.      With 180 observations, the average

coefficients for the one and 12—period regressions are 26% and 8% larger than

the theoretical value, and the 48—period coefficient is 29% below its theoret-

ical value.

        Second, our procedure for computing the bias underestimates the theoreti—

cal value, especially at longer horizons,        With 348 observations, our es—

timates of the bias are 1%, 10%, and 22% below the theoretical bias.         With 180




        12We estimate      under the null that         so that

     13We generated 20,000 random normal vectors for u and r and formed
returns and fundamental—price ratios assuming p1=0 and p0 <0. Since
is just a scale parameter when l=' the results are unafected by this
value.
                                             12

observations, the underestimates are 2%, 17%, and 37%.                  In the 48—period

regression, this second effect dominates the first, and thus our average

adjusted coefficients are positive at all horizons.                  In our empirical work

below, we simulate p—values for     '3k
                                          to account for these imperfect estimates,

      Equation (17) suggests rhat the small sample hiss may be quite larEe,

particularly if the fundamental—price ratio is highly autocorrelated.                  An

example is illustrative.      For the long horizon (1926—1988) US equity data, the

ordinary least squares estimates of       fl,g
                                                 and   fi1   are   81.45 and 1.43.   The first

order aurocorrelation of the logarithm of the dividend—price ratio is .98.

The regression in equation (10) yields
                                                 p      —97.96. These parameters imply a

bias of 14.87, almost one—fifth of the estimated coefficient.                 Further, since

the data series we consider below have at most 348 monthly observations,

compared to 756 for rhe long horizon US data, the biases may be even more

severe.

      These findings of small sample bias are important because they have been

neglected in many previous studies of return forecastability, such as Campbell

and Shiller (1989), Fama and French (l988b),            and Hodrick and Hansen (1989).

Our results suggest that these findings are far weaker than ordinary inference

suggests.



1.3   Monte Carlo Resulta

      For each Monte Carlo experiment, we draw random normal vectors with 348

observations for c, g, and        These vectors correspond to twenty—nine years

of monthly   data.1'4   We form returns and fundamental—price ratios from these



     14We focus on this relatively abort sample period because it cor-
responds to the data series we use below.
                                        13

vectors.     In each experiment, we define the alternative hypothesis by choosing

the autocorrelation of the transitory component (p), the share of the varia-

tion in one—period returns which is due to the transitory factor,       &



2(l—p)o/(a+2(l—p)c), and the share of the variance of the fundamental—price
ratio due to the fad (A).    We scale these variances by fixing the variance of

the fundamental innovation:            We define a corresponding null hypothesis

which equates the variance of returns, and the variance of the fundamental—

price deviation, to their values under the alternative.     In each case we use

the empirical distribution of the t—statistic under the null to find the

critical region for a one—sided .05 test.

        Table 1 reports Monte Carlo results on the power of autocorrelation tests

(Panel A) and regression tests (Panel B) for predicting returns.        The table

considers four possible stochastic processes for returns, reflecting drfferent

values of p and 5.     For the regression tests, we also present results for

proxies with different degrees of information content.     Since the autocorrela—

non     tests are independent of the fundamental—price ratio, they are unaffected

by A.

        Even with relatively noisy proxies, regression tests have significant

power to detect predictability in returns.    The results for   p.98    (implying a

half—life of the transitory component of 2.9 years) and    5. 75    (three—quarters

of the return variation due to the pricing fad) are the most       striking.   In

this case, regressions using one month returns have a 17.3% chance of reject—




     15By fixing the variance of the fundamental innovation, we unavoidab—
ly change the variance of the fundamental—price ratio as we vary A. This
preserves comparability of our results with those in Poterba and Summers
(1988). An alternative strategy would be to fix the variance of returns
and the variance of the fundamental—price deviation, and to allow S to
vary as we change the Monte Carlo specification.
                                         14

ing the null hypothesis when one—qusrtet of the variation in the fundamental—

ptice proxy is due to the fad, and a 30.5% thance when the share is one—half.

Longer horizon regressions allow an even greater chanoe of rejecting the null

hypothesis.   The power of a 48 month regression test is 65.4% vhen the fad

accounts for one—quarter of the variance of the fundamental—price ratio, and

75.5% when it accounts for one—half.     By comparison, the most powerful
autocorrelation test in this case has a power of only 9.6%.

     Figure 1 shows the distribution of the t—statistic for j5g under the null

and alternative, using the case p=.98,   6=25, and   A=l.   Each distribution is

calculated from 25,000 Monte Carlo replications.     The distribution under the

null is nearly normal, with slightly thicker tails than the asymptotic

distribution.16   The mean under the alternative, 2.94, is positive and large.

The extent of this shift shows the substantial power of the regression test.

The distribution under the alternative is also leptokurtotic, however.      The

2.5% critical values are —1.2 and 8.8.    It is thus inappropriate to consult

conventional t—tables for evalusting the results of long horizon regression

tests.17




      18
         Hodrick and Hansen (1989) report simulations of this regression
specification with a greater discrepancy between true and nominal size
than the simulations reported here.   Unlike our specification, the null
hypothesis in their model will have small sample bias. It is unclear
whether the discrepancy is due to this or to other differences in estima-
tion.

     17Stock and Richardson (1989) raise a similar point regarding the
interpretation of variance ratio statistics.
                                             15

2.     Autocorrelations of Asset Returns

        This section presents empirical evidence on the sutocorreistion proper-

ties of ssset retutns.       Our analysis considers returns from s number of stock,

bond, commodity, snd foreign exchsnge msrkets sround the world, ss well ss

from the sarkets for s vsriety of real assets.        Analyzing many markets

increases the statistical power of our tests.        In addition, while risk

considerations are likely to differ substantially across markets, the various

markets will share any patterns that are common to the process of speculation.



2.1     Asset Returns Data

        Stocks and Bonds: Our stock return data for the period 1960—1985 are

drawn from Morgan Stanley's Caoital International Peraoectivem (MSCI)J5                  For

each of the thirteen equity markets in our sample ——           Australia,    Austria,

Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Bletherlands,         Sweden, Switzer-

land, United Kingdom, and United States       — we calculate     monthly    excess   returns


Rt      am

(15)               Rt =      log(P1
                                      +
                                          0jt — log(P1 t-1 — log(l+i)




     18The MSCI data span the period 1969—1988.         For the 1960—1969 period,
we use data provided by Ihbotmon Associates.
                                            16

where            denotes the end—of—month price index for country             dividend
         j   ,
                                                                    j
                                                                        P1
psyments19, and       i    the monthly short—term nominal interest tate.     We compute

multi—period returns by summing the relevant           values.29

        The MSCI price index for each country is a weighted average of the prices

for a number of large firms in the country's equity markets.            These indices

generally do not correspond to other published indices, and often include

shares traded on several different exchanges.       Our data on government bond

returns are from Ibbotson Associates World Asset Module.       Short—term yields

are generally Treasury bill yields, or when those are unavailable, money

market yields.21       The data aample period for each country, for both bond and

stock returns, ia shown in Table Al.       For comparability to earlier studies, we

also report the results of autocorrelation tests applied to long tetm U.S.

historical data, drawn from Ibbotson Associates (1988), on equity and bond

returns.

        Foreian Exchanee:    We compute the excess return to holding foreign

currency assuming that investors making such investments hold foreign short—

term bonds rather than just currency.       This implies that the excess return to




            computes dividend yields as aggregate dividends paid over the
last twelve months divided by price at the end of the reference month.
For several countries, dividend yields in the early part of the sample
appear to reflect actual dividend payments rather than the aum of the
previous year's payments. We adjusted these yields to make them com-
parable with the later sample. Using "retrospective" yields will lead to
errors in the measured returns, but these errors are likely to be smaller
than those from omitting dividends.

     20Poterba and Summers (1988) analyzed real (not excess) returns
excluding dividends and computed from monthly averages of stock prices as
reported by the International Monetary Fund.

     21The discount rate is used as the short—term interest rate for
Italy, Sweden, and Switzerland.
                                                  17

a U.S. investor holding currency       j    is:
(19)        Rsi,t
                      —
                          log(E0sjt/Eusjti)                +
                                                               log(l+ij
                                                                          —
                                                                              log(l+i5)
where the first term is the nominal appreciation of country j's currency

relative to the dollar during month t.             We focus on the returns to investors

in each of five countries       — France,     Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, and

the United States     — from holding       the currency of the other four Countries,

yielding   1.0   bilateral currency returns.           Our sample period for exchange rates

begins in l974 since exchange rates were fixed in earlier years.                    Monthly

exchange rate data are from the International Monetary Fund, International

Financial Statistics.

       Commodities:       We define the return to holding gold and silver as the

change in the logarithm of end-of--month closing prices.                  This implies an

excess return of:

(20)     Rgoldt
                                                       —
                                                           ].og(l+i)
We use data from 1974—1988, the period when gold is actively traded in a

speculative market.        We also study the return to holding other metals, defined

as the monthly logarithmic difference in the industrial metals price index

compiled by the Commodity Research Bureau for the 1959—1988 period.                   The

components of the index are copper, lead and steel scrap, tin, and zinc.

       Real Assets:       We analyze returns on a variety of fixed assets: houses,

farms,   and various collectibles.          In most cases, we measure excess holding

returns under the assumption that these assets provide no service flow:

(21)       Rjt       log(Pt/P1ti)
                                        —   log(l+i)
This assumption is not strictly correct, and the magnitude of the resulting

measurement error is likely to vary across markets.
                                          18

        We use various dare sources for real asset information. House prices,

available quarterly from 1970—86, snd from Case and Shiller (1989).       These

dare are constant—quality house price indices measured for four differenr

cities.22     The data on collectibles, annual from 1967—1988, cover oriental

carpets, stamps, Chinese ceramics, rare books, coins, diamonds, end old master

paintings.     The data are from Salomon Brothers.    The farm price date are

annual from 1912—86.     For farms, we were able to compute a return including a

crude measure of rental income, which we define as aggregate farm income

divided by aggregate farm value.     The capital gain is the change in average

farm value per acre.     Thus, our return equation in this case takes the form:

(22)        farmt     lcg(Ff + farm,r — log(Pf5g.j) — log(l+ip5)
where
        farm,t is imputed per acre farm   income.    Data on average value per acre

were obtained from the Department of Agriculture (1981 and updates) .      Income
data are from Calling and Irwin (1989).



2.2     Summary Statistics

       Table 2 presents summary statistics on the means and standard deviations

of annual returns for the various assets we examine.      The first panel focuses

on equity returns and shows substantial disparity in the mean returns across

nations.    In Italy, for example, the excess return on equities averaged

negative thirty basis points per year during our sample, while in four

countries, the annual excess return exceeds six percent.      Similar, bur less




     221n order to avoid autocorrelation induced by measurement error,
Case and Shiller formed an A and B price index for each city, using
separate houses in each index.  Our autocorrelations correlate contem-
poraneous values of the A series with lags of the B series. The results
are very similar when the two series are reversed.
                                          19


dramatic, divergence appears for bond returns.

      Table 2 also shows the correlation between U.S. dollar returns on

different classes of assets.      The correlation between equity and bond returns

is .403.    The foreign exchange portfolio     — a weighted   average, using 1975 GNP

weights, of the returns on the pound, franc, yen, and mark
                                                                 — exhibits a
correlation of .006 with US, equity returns, and its correlation with U.S.

bond returns is    .323.   The real assets we analyze are highly correlated with

each other, but negatively correlated with many other asset returns.        Gold,

houses and collectibles all exhibit cross—correlations of over .45, but the

correlation between them and either stocks or bonds is small and negative: —

 059 and    —.164 for gold.    These findings suggest that our analysis of many

different assets provides evidence on the behavior of speculative prices

beyond that contained in equity returns.



2.3   The Characteristic Autocorrelogram of Speculative Returns

      Tables 3 through 5 present the return autocorrelograms for the various

assets,     For each asset, we report the average autocorrelation over eight

distinct twelve month intervals, beginning with the 1—12 month interval, then

13—24 months, etc.     We also report the first order autocorrelation coefficient

itself.23




     23We choose to study the autocorrelogram rather than the variance
ratio statistic as in Kim, Nelson, and Startz (1989), Lo and MacKinlay
(1989), Poterba and Summers (1988), and Stock and Richardson (1989). The
variance ratio is just a weighted sum of the autocorrelations. It is not
a weighted averase, however, since the sum of the weights increases with
the horizon being considered.   Since changes in variance ratios at
different horizons therefore do not shed light on changes in autocorrela—
tions over the same horizons, we prefer to work with the autocorrelations
themselves.
                                         20

     Table 3 presents the results for stocks and bonds, Table 4 the findings

for foreign exchange and precious aetals, and Table 5 the findings for real

assets.     In cases such as stocks and bonds, where we analyze data from several

countries, we also report the average autocorrelation (and its standard error)

at each frequency.    We compute the variance of the average using the procedure

developed in Poterba and Summers (1988) for estimating the cross—sectional

dependence of estimated statistics, thereby recognizing that the estimated

statistics are not independent across markets.24

     In evaluating the findings in Tables 3, 4, and 5, it is useful to recall

that very small deviations of returns from the martingale assumption can imply

large deviations of asset prices from fundamental values.     Summers (1986) and

Poterba and Summers (1988) consider an example in which the transitory

component of stock prices has a standard deviation of 30 percent, a half life

of three years, and accounts for three quarters of the variance in stock

returns.    Nonetheless it induces only an expected autocorrelation of —.007 in

monthly returns.

      The first pervasive characterimtic of returns in Tables 3—5 is positive

serial correlation over horizons shorter than one year.     For most of the

assets we consider, the first order monthly autocorrelstion is positive, and

the average is usually statistically significant.    The values range from .020

for gold,   .067 for exchsnge rates, .101 for common stocks, .238 for bonds, and




      24If the estimated autocorreistions at a given lag exhibited s
constant pairwise correlation ir across countries, and if the autocortels—
tions for esch country had constant variance 2, then the expected value
of the sample cross—sectional variance of these sutocorrelations would be
o2(1—ir).  Replacing the expected sample variance with its actual value, we
estimate ir as l—s2/u2. The variance of the sample mean fur N observations
on different countries, each with variance    2but with cross correlation
lr, is then o2(l+(N—l)ir)/N.
                                         21

.269 for industrial metals.   For silver, the exception to the rule, the serial

cotrelation coefficient is —.102.

     While some have argued that non—trading effects may be relevant in

assessing findings of positive aurocorrelation in monthly equity returns, this

explanation is implausible in the case of foreign exchange, gold or bonds.

Even in the case of equities, our focus on monthly data makes non—trading

unlikely as an explanation.25

     The estimated monthly autocorrelationa are not only statistically but

also substantively significant.     They very frequently imply negative expected

returns.    Consider the following example.   Suppose that in a given market, the

monthly risk premium is t.    The ex—ante risk premium on an asset will be

negative if pl*Rt<p.    For stocks, if one takes the risk premium to be .7

parcent per month and the standard deviation of returns to be 5 percent per

month   negative expected returnm would be observed more than 10% of the

time.26    For bonds, where the standard deviation is only slightly smaller but

the risk premium is much smaller, the calculation is even more dramatic.

        Substantial autocorrelation at short horizons is particularly difficult

to reconcile with traditional asset pricing models,    At the monthly frequency,

the probability of a negative expected return is (—p/p1e), where       is the


distribution function for returns.     As we expand the return interval, the risk

premium increases linearly while the standard deviation of returns rises with



     25Lo and MscKinlay (1989a) find little support for non—trading as the
explanation of positive autocorrelation in U.S. equity returns.

     26This calculation assumes that returns are normally distributed.
The probability of a negative expected return is t(—p/p1r), where 6' is the
standard normal distribution function and a is the standard deviation of
monthly returns. Assuming a distribution with thicker tails would
strengthen our conclusion.
                                         22

the square root of the interval length.       For k—period returns, therefore, the

chsnoe of a negative expected return ia   (—k5p/pc) where
                                                        ,
                                                                 k   is the autocor—

relation coefficient for this horizon.    The probability of a negative expected

return is therefore higher if a given autocorrelarion coefficient is observed

at high frequenciea.

     Positive aurocorrelation is not confined to one month returns.        By

subtracting 1/12 of the first month's aurocorrelarion from the average

aurocorrelations over the 1—12 month interval, one finds that average autocor—

relations between two and twelve months are positive for all of the asset

categories.    For equities, the average aurocorrelsrion at one month is .101

and the average over the next eleven months is .013.        For bonds, the cor-

responding values are .238 and .047, while for foreign exchange the average

aurocorrelarion at 2—12 months is .029.       For both stocks and bonds, markers in

the Unired Stares are less positively autocorrelared than are the other

markers.27    These findings strengthen earlier results, based largely on U.S.

equity returns, of positive serial correlation at high frequencies.28

     For collectibles, farms, and real estate, data limitations prevent us

from calculating the monthly return aurocorrelation,        Nevertheless, these

assets show positive serial correlation in returns at an annual frequency.

For house prices, the annual autocorrelation averages .206 for the four cities




     27While we focus on bonds of long duration, Gibbons (1989) reports
positive serial correlation in returns on short duration, nine— and
twelve—month U.S. bonds.

     28Porerba and Summers (1988) find these patterns using monthly real
and excess equity returns for the period since 1926.  Lo and MacKinlay
(1988) reach similar conclusions using daily dare (and hence focusing on
shorter time intervals) for the post—1962 period.
                                         23

in which data are available, while for farm returns (.727) and collectibles

(.365), the annual autocorrelations are even larger.

     Tables 3 through 5 also suggest the presence of negative autocorrelation

at longer   lags,   though the evidence on this point is less compelling than that

for positive high—frequency autocorrelation.     For both stocks and bonds, the

average of the l3th—24th autocorrelations is statistically significantly

negative.29    The correlation is also negative in U.S. historical data on

equity returns.     For bonds, the negative serial correlation persists, with

negative average autocorrelations at twelve month windows up to 60 months.

For exchange rates,    the average autocorrelation in the second year is ap-

proximately equal to its standard error.3°     There is also more pronounced

evidence of negative autocorrelation at longer lags, notably between three and

four years.    There is little evidence of negative autocorrelation in the

returns to holding mea1s. houses, or farmland, although Case and Shil].er

(1990) present evidence that annual real returns in the housing market are

negatively autocorrelated at longer horizons.     For collectibles, weak evidence

of negative serial correlation emerges at the three year horizon.

     The pattern of positive followed by negative return autocorrelation

explains why Fama and French (l988a) find that regressing multiperiod stock

returns on lagged returns yields stronger rejections of the null hypothesis of



     29The negative autocorrelations for stocks during the post—1960
period are noteworthy, since Kim, Nelson and Startz (1989) and others have
emphasized the sensitivity (noted in Poterba and Summers (1988)) of
evidence for mean reversion in U.S. stock prices to inclusion of the
Depression period.

     30me autocorrelograms estimated here using excess foreign exchange
returns look similar to those found by Huizinga (1986) for real returns.
This suggests that patterns in exchange rate movements do not work through
the effects of changing interest rates.
                                                 24

serial independence then do variance ratio tests.                The difference between

these tests is thst the vsriance ratio places declining positivi weight on all

sucocortelations up to a given lag length, while the return regressions plsce

                                        autocorrelations and declining
incteesing positive weight on low—order

positive weight on higher order autocorrelations.                Autocorrelation pstterns

such as those in Table 3, which change sign at different lags, are mote

difficult to deiect with a iest like the variance ratio which permits positive

and negative autocortelationa to cancel each other.



3. Predicting Returns Usina Information               on Fundamentals

         The results in the last section suggest that asset returns ate partly

predictable on the basis of lagged returns information.                 In this section, we

examine the extent to which returns over various horizons can be forecast
                                                 estimates of fundamental
using information on the deviation of price from

value.     We study returns over both short horizons            — one month —— as well as
longer horizons
                   —    12 and 48 monchs       — by estimating regression equations       of

the form:

                                              — Pt) +
(23)               rk        mk ÷   fik*(zr

As in     (6) above,         is the k—period asset return and (zr—pt) is the dif-
                       rrk
ference between the logarithm of a potentially noisy measure of fundamental

value and the logarithm of the asset price.

        We interpret   k as the fraction of the deviation           from the price fundamen—

                                                              If the current market price      is
.pgj.   that is eradicated over a k monch horizon.

one percent    gjpy    the price fundamental          z,   then returns over the next k

monchs will be higher by .Ol*Pk.              Regressions estimated over various horizons
                                          25

therefore allow us to study the speed of adjustment to deviations from our

price fundamental.

       To test the null hypothesis that returns are unpredictable, we compute

the bias—corrected t—statistic for     k using the Newey—West   (1987)   standard

error.     As Figure 1 showed, the distribution of this t—statistjc may be non-

standard in small samples, so it may be inappropriate to invoke large sample

theory for inference.      We thus simulated the t—statistic under an explicit

null hypothesis, and used the resulting distribution to find empirical p—

values.

       We use a similar, but more general, version of the null hypothesis from

our power calculations.     The model there restricted the link between fundamen-

tal—price ratios and returns to operate through the transitory component of

prices.    Under the null hypothesis, innovations in the fundamental—price ratio

and returns were uncorrelated, and there was no small sample bias.        We now

relax this restriction, allowing returns to be correlated with innovations in

the fundamental—price ratio, but maintaining that fundamental—price ratios

have no true predictive power for returns.      The null specification is thus:

                       —
(24)            r+l
(25)            t+l    —    ÷
                       —           +
(26)            Ut÷l       *9t+l
By comparison, in Section 1 we assumed that p07—O.      We use the values of        and


p,     given by the US data31, and simulate 10,000 values of the t—statistics.




     31For the equity and bond markets, and the metal index, we use the
values of p and
                   pgiven by the US data from 1960—88. For the exchange
rates, gold, and silver, we use the average values of p and      p
                                                                for the
four currencies against the dollar. The long horizon equities and bond
data use the values from the long horizon U.S. equities.
                                        26

We then calculate the p—value for each market.      The p—values for the average

acroaa marketa are found from the aame diatribution, after computing the

implied atandard error for the average.32



3.1   Meaauring Price Fundamentals

      For many aaaeta, our measurea of fundamentala are likely to he quite

impreciae.    This biases our teats azainat finding that the divergence between

price and the measured fundamental can forecast returns, since it amounts to

increasing the variance of wt in   z—p.      Nevertheless, under the null hypothe-.

sia that asset returns are unpredictable using lagged information, none of out

variables should exhibit any forecast power.

      For equity returns, the measure of fundamental ia a constant multiple of

the real dividend.    We then construct the logarithmic difference of this
fundamental value and the price, so our regression relates ex—poat returns to

the logarithm of the dividend—price ratio.      In the bond market, the efficient

markets hypothesis and the assumption of a constant risk premium impliea that

the long term interest rate is a weighted average of expected future short

term rates, with weights which depend on the atochaatic properties of short

rates.33     If short rates are a random walk, however, the long rate should

equal the short tate, and the fundamental value of the long term bond is

therefore the reciprocal of the short rate.      Since the actual price of the

long—term bond is the reciprocal of the long rate, we define     ZtPt   for bonds



     32We assume that the theoretical variance of the coefficient is the
average estimated variance for the different markets and use the procedure
detailed in footnote 24.

     33Shillet (1979) is one of many studies which presents this linearir—
ation and teats the associated model of the term structure,
                                                                    -
                                          27

as the logarithm of the long term interest tate minus the logarithm of the

short term interest rate.      Regressing long—term bond returns on this variable

is closely related to previous term structure equations, for example Shiller,

                                                                which have
Campbell, and Schoenholti (1983) and Mankiw and Summers (1984),
                                            between the levels of the long and
regressed ex—post returns on the difference

short term interest rates,

                                                      difficult then defining
      Measuring the exchange rate fundamental is more

the fundamental for either stocks or bonds.       The fundamental value of the

                                                    rate at which a sus-
exchange rate depends on the long run real exchange

tainable trade balance can be achieved         Rather than attempting to model

                                                                   rate
changes in terms of trade, we simply assume that the real exchange

consistent with long—run trade balance (zr) is a constant.        The logarithmic

difference between the fundamental end the current exchange rate is therefore

                                              rate.       We use the same approach
just minus the lugarithm of the real exchange
                                                                         the
with the metals, postulating that the fundamental is a constant, so that

price deviation is minus the logarithm of the real price.34



3.2   Empirical Findings
                                                             differences between
      Table   6   presents evidence on the forecast power of

fundamentals and prices in world equity markets.        The table reports regression

results for three return intervals: k — one month, twelve months, and forty—

eight months.      The regression coefficients for each horizon are bias—adjusted



     34We also experimented with allowing the fundamental value for
                                             with the long term reel
equities, exchange rates, and metals to vary
interest rate.  The qualitative conclusions were similar to those we
                                                          the standard
report below, although this modification typically raised
errors of our estimated coefficients, thereby lowering the statistical
confidence of our findings.
                                          28

using the ptocedure described above.      The value in parentheses beneath each

coefficient is the Newey—West (1987) standard error, allowing for autocortela—

tion at up to k—l lags.     In light of the non—standard shape of the t—diatribu—

tion as reported above, we also report (in brackets) the percentage of the

disttibution of t—statistics which lies     gpyg    the reported value.   Thus, for

the Australian stock market, where the coefficient (2.30) is reported in the

first row of column 1, the standard error of 1.74 implies a t—statistic of

1.32.     Only 10% of the estimated t—valuea in our Monte Carlo analysis were

greater than this value.

        The results on the forecastability of monthly returns are relatively

wesk.     The estimated coefficient on
                                         ZtPt has a   p—value less than .10 for only

three of the thirteen countries, although the cross—country average (reported

in the penultimate row) has a p—value of .07.       The point estimates, however,

suggest substantively important links between the dividend—price ratio and

subsequent returns.     The average value of   l'   0.75, implies that the ex—ante

risk premium is negative whenever dividend yields are less than approximately

forty percent below their average value.       The average   1 also suggests that
about three—quarters of one percent of any deviation between the current price

and our dividend—based price fundamental is corrected in the first month after

such a deviation appears.

        The center columns in Table 4 report regressions for twelve month

returns.     The pattern of coefficients is similar to the one month returns.         In

four of the thirteen countries, the coefficient has a p—values less than .10;

the p—value for the average, however, is .03.       The most notable outlier is

Japan, where the coefficient is negative and statistically significant.         For

the United States, where for comparative purposes the last row in the table
                                         29

                                              the forecast power of the
reports the long—horizon (1926—1988) results,
                                        recent years.
dividend—price ratio appears smaller in
                                                                   the price
     On average, approximately fifteen percent of a deviation from

fundamental is erased over the subsequent year.         Since the average value of

     is about seventeen times the average for     l'    the evidence suggests that
l2
                                                         returns grows
the dividend—price ratio's forecast power for one period

slightly as the horizon grows.     More importantly, however, since twelve month

                                                               which is partly
returns aggregate many consecutive one—period returns, each of

                                                        much clearer evidence
forecastable, the twelve month return regressions yield

on the link between the dividend—price ratio and subsequent returns.

      The final columns present evidence for 48—month returns.        Although the

                                  is limited, the results provide strong
sample size for these regressions
                                                                   The average
evidence on the predictive power of dividend—price ratios.
                                                   and our simple measure of
correction to deviations between the current price
                                                   horizon.         This estimate has
fundamentals is forty—one percent over a four year

a p—value of .06,     These results suggest that dividend—price ratios exhibit

                                                                    earlier
substantial forecast power for long term excess retutna, confirming

                                   data.
findings based on U.S. time series
                                                      nevertheless much weaker
      The statistical confidence of these results are
                                                           for the United
than might have been expected in light of earlier findings

States.     This is due to three factota.     First,   the corrections we make for

                                                              coefficients.
small sample bias significantly reduce the average regression
                                                             case of 48—month
Table   7   illustrates the detailed bias correction for the
                                                                              This
return regressions.      The average biam for the 13 countries is 26.67.

                                                  studies, is of first—order
correction, which has not been used in many prior
                                                             distribution of the
 importance.     Second, taking account of the leptokurtotic
                                         30

t—statistic under the null hypothesis reduces substantially the confidence

associated with any given t—statistic.     For the 348 month sample, the .05

cutoff in rhe 48—month regression t—statistic is 4.02, much larger than the

asymptotic value, which previous studies hsve used.     Finally, it appears that

the ordinary least squares regression relation between future returns and past

values of the dividend—price ratio is weaker in recent years.

     We now consider the forecastability of returns in the bond market.

Regressions relating multi—month excess returns on long—term bonds to lagged

values of the long—short yield differential are reported in Table 8.     The

results are less consistent than those from the equity markets and
                                                                   provide
weaker evidence on the forecast power of fundamental—price deviations.     For

one month returns, the yield spread has statistically significant
                                                                  explanatory

power in five of the thirteen bond markets we consider, and the cross—country

averaga ia also statistically significant. The coefficient implies about the
-same amount   of mean reversion as for the equity market: eight—tenths of one

percent of a fundamental—price disparity is corrected over a one month

hotizon.

     At the 12—month horizon, only two of the thirteen countries evidence

statistically significant links between yield differentials and subsequent

returns on long bonds, and the average is quite low.    At longer horizons, as
the column for 48—month returns shows, the standard errors on the estimated

coefficients increase and it betomea difficult to draw any conclusions.    Most
of the long—horizon coefficients are negative, contrary to the prediction of

our earlier analysis that high prices relative to fundamentals should
                                                                      signal
lower aubsequent returns.    None of the findings are precise enough, however,

to reject the null hypothesis that
                                   long—horizon bond returns are not forecas—
                                         31

table.     In conttaat, the resulta for the U.S. bond returns in the laat tow of

Table 8 suggest substantial return forecast power, but with only about six

percent of fundaaental—price deviations corrected over 48 month horizons.

        Table 9 presents the results of relating currency returns to the devia-

tion between real exchange rates and our estimate of their fundamental value.

These results also suggest little evidence for the predictability of returns.

While some of the point estimates, notably for the US, Japan, and the UK, are

quite large, most of the coefficients are small end have large standard

errors.     The average correction is only   9   percent after one year, and thirty—

one percent after four years, borh with very large standard errors.        Although

the results are weak, this is partly the result of the small samples we

analyze for exchange rates.     These samples make the small sample bias very

large (on average 59.32), and also require large t—ststistics to reject the

null.    The .05 cutoff in the distribution of the null, foc example, is 7.08.

        Table 10 presents results for commodity metels.     Once sgsin the point

estimates suggest that low fundamental—prices signal low subsequent returns,

but the ststisticsl confidence of these results is low.        For both gold and

silver, the estimated coefficients on 48—month returns imply that deviations

between prices sod fundamental values are more then eradicated over this

interval.    Although the t—stetistics in each case are well shove three, the

skewed nature of the distribution for this statistic renders the associated p—

vslues only .22 (silver) sod .06 (gold).

     Given the smell ssmples for the real essets, we do not estimate equations

like (6) for these sssets.    Gsee end Shiller (1990), however, report evidence

that rental—to—price ratios positively predict future returns in the cities

for which they have dare,     If the discount rste is constant, the rental—to—
                                          32

price ratio can be interpreted aa a constant multiple of the fundaaental—price

ratio.

     Our results on the predictive power of deviations between actual prices

and plausible measures of price fundamentals, while weak, suggest that earlier

findings that the dividend—price ratio forecasts stock returns in the U.S. are

psrt of m more general pattern across equity markets.        For all the assets

                                          at least 30 to 40 percent mean
except bonds, the point estimates suggest

reversion over a four year interval.      For most markets other than equities,

however, the brevity of our sample makes the resulting estimates imprecise.

     The pattern of both positive autocorrelation and reversion to iundamen—

tsls documented in this and the previous section is consistent with Frankel

and Froot's (1987)   survey evidence on foreign exchange market expectations.

They find that traders have extrapolative short run expectations, reflecting a

belief that trends persist, but long run expectations based on fundamentals.

This pattern is rational if excess returns on currencies exhibit positive

short term and negative long term autocorrelarion.        It is also the premise of

technical strategies which seek to catch trends in short—term investing, as

well as long—run "value investing" strategies of the type advocated by Graham

and Dodd (1934).     The remainder of   this   paper considers two alternative

explanations, one based on time—varying risk factors and the other on the

dynamics of speculative trading, which might explain these empirical regulari-

ties.
                                        33

4. Alternative Explanations for these Patterns

     One explanation of the stylized patterns in asset returns is that they

are caused by changes in risk factors over time.    Such an argument is dif-

ficult to rule out, since any failure of an asset pricing model can always be

attributed to the sismeasurement of risk,    Changing required returns appear

unlikely, however, to explain our empirical findings.

     First,   traditional models in financial economics have difficulty justify-

ing substantial risk presia, let alone substantial variation in these risk

premia.   Mehra and Prescott (1985) show that the average excess return on the

U.S. stock market since 1926 is too large to be consistent with plausible

estimates of risk aversion and the observed riskiness of stock returns,

Frankel (1985,   1986) argues that risk presia of more a few basis points are

not supported by standard capital asset pricing models.35   Yet, as our

foregoing results sugge&t positive autocorrelation in returns implies large

swings in ex—ante returns.

     Second, changing risk factors would not naturally produce the observed

autocorrelation patterns, particularly positive autocorrelation at high

frequencies.6    One would expect increases in risk that raise future ex—ante

returns to be capitalized into a current negative excess return.   For simple

                                                                      autocor—
specifications of the risk process, this would would lead to negative



     35Friedman (1985) shows that under standard capital asset pricing
models, the equity premium observed during this period is enough to sake
investors almost wholly concentrate in equity securities.

     36Marcus (1989) and Cecchetti, Lam and Mark (1989) among others argue
that changes in stock prices change the wealth of investors, affecting
their risk aversion and thus expected returns.  Whatever the merits of
this argument in the case of stocks, it is much less likely to apply in
the case of inside assets like bonds, or assets like gold and metals that
comprise only a small fraction of the representative investors' portfolio.
                                       34

relation at high frequencies. While it is possible to generate processes for

risk fsctots which ate consistent with the observed sutocorrelation in

returns, as for example in Poterbs and Summers (1988, footnote 27), they do

not agree with the processes suggestkd by empitical work on the evolution of

volatility.37

     Third, since returns on the various assets analyzed in the last section

are only weakly correlated, it is unlikely that a single risk—factor could

account for the statistical regularities in all markets.   Soae assets are

affected primarily by nominal factors while others are influenced primarily hy

real factors; some represent large shares of investors' wealth while others

represent small shares; some yield variable cash flows while others are a

source of stable income; some have finite horizons while others do not.      it

would be remarkable if a common risk factor could account for the common

patterns in returns on all assets.38   Indeed, it is not even clear how risk

should affect all the assets we analyze.    In the case of foreign exchange, for

example, risk affects both currencies being exchanged, and so does not even

have a predictable effect on the level of exchange rates.39



     37poterba and Summers (1986) and French, Sohwert, and Stambaugh
(1987) find that volatility exhibits substantial positive autocorrelation,
with little evidence of the complex dynamics needed to explain positive
followed by negative autooorrelation in returns.

     38Fot equities, changes in dividends may precede increases in risk
premia and lead to the appearance of spurious positive autocortelation in
ax—post returns. Even if this were correct, it is difficult to see how
analogous explanations could operate in the case of gold, long—term bonds,
or foreign exchange.

     39'rheories of exchange rate determination that rely on asset sub-
stitutability, for example, imply that the effect of exchange tate risk
will depend on the relative supplies of assets across countries and
savings propensities in different countries, variables which are likely to
change over time.
                                           35

     A fourth difficulty with the required returns explanation is the weak

empirical association between varistions in ex—post returns and changes in

measurable aspects of risk,    Campbell and Shiller (1989) find that while

dividend yields have predictive power for subsequent dividend growth in long

period U.S. dsrs, they do not have predictive power for interest rates or

other determinsnts of risk premia.    Cutler, Porerba and Summers (1989) have

trouble explaining more than half of the vsristion in U.S. stock returns on

the basis of news, even after controlling for changes in volatility.     Meese

snd Rogoff (1983) report similar findings in their study of the foreign

exchange marker.

     As further evidence on this point, Table II augments our estimates of the

link between equity returns and fundamental—price devistions, presented in

Table 6, to include a measure of marker volatility.      We define volatility as

the logsr±tiim of the sum of squared monthly returns over the previous year.4°

If part of the dividend yield's explanatory power srises from its proxy role

for risk factors such as volatility, adding volatility to the equation should

reduce the coefficients on the log dividend—price rstio.41


          also used volatility messures over longer horizons without
finding any differences.

     41The bias calculation derailed above extends easily to multivariste
regression. In the system

                      + ut+l,
        rr÷l   xt*bi
        Xt÷l   xt*A +        and
             — vt+l*puv + et+l.
        ut+l

where x=lxk, b1=kxl, Akxk,     v+1lxk,     and puykxl, the bias is:

                                           —
        biss(b1)
                   —
                       [(xt'xt)(xt'xt+l)        AJPuv.

If, further, A is assumed disgonsl, this reduces to s series of univsriste
biases, which may be summed as before to produce the k—period bias. Since
the sversge correlation across the 13 equity markets between the innova—
                                         36

      The results provide little suppott for the conjecture that risk factors

explain the link between fundamental—price deviations and subsequent rerutns.

The coefficient on the logarithm of the dividend—price ratio is virtually

unaffected by the inclusion of volatility.     In the 48—month regression, for

example, the average coefficient on the price deviation is 51.6, compared to

41.2 for the equation without the control for volatility.       Further, while

volatility generally has a positive effect on subsequent returns, it is often

quite small.    This increase in the average coefficient is the opposite of what

would be predicted if the relationship were due solely to omitted risk

factors.     In that case, controlling for risk should reduce   k   We have also

tried including real interest rates and other proxies for risk factors in the

equations, with results similar to those for volatility.



5.   Conclusions

     Cur empirical results suggest thdee stylized facts about speculative

returns.     First, returns tend to be positively serially correlated at high

frequency.    Second, returns tend to be (weakly) negatively serially correlated

over long horizons.    Third, deviations of asset values from proxies for

fundamental value have predictive power for excess returns,      These patterns

appear difficult to explain on the basis of time—varying required returns,         in

contrast, the similarity of these patterns in a wide range of asset markets

suggest the possibility that they are best explicable as a consequence of the

speculative process itself.




non  in the logarithm of dividend yields and the innovation in the
logarithm of volatility is .028, this seems appropriate.
                                         37

     Research directed at formalizing the dynamics of speculative markets is

just beginning.     One strand of research, for example Kyle (1985) and Black

(1986),    has considered the role of heterogeneoum investor information in

accounting for asset price movements.    A aeoond research program, typified by

Shiller (1984) and DeLong, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990), has

modelled asset market equilibrium when some investors are uninformed but

engage in transactions nonetheless.     Such "noise traders" may cauae prices to

deviate from fundamental values.     Finally, a third line of research tries to

formalize the role of "hiatory—baaed trading."      In Cutler, Poterba and Summers

(1990)    we outline a model of maser market equilibrium in which interactions

between rational investors, who base demand on expected future returns, and

backward—looking traders, can produce the stylized facts we document here.       We

consider two types of backward—looking inveatora; fundamentals traders, who

look at prices relative to perceived fundamentals, following strategies

advocated by, for example, Craham and Dodd (1934); and feedback traders, who

base demand on past returns.     Feedback trading would result, for example, from

portfolio insurance or margin—call induced selling, and ham been highlighted

by Kindleberger (1978) in his analysis of speculative bubbles.
     In this framework, positive short run serial correlation of returns can

result if some fundamentals traders lesrn news only with a lag, or if aome

feedback traders "lean into the wind" to prevent price movements, am central

banks do in the foreign exchange market.      Positive feedback traders who

reapond to such positive autocorrelation and who base their demand on past

returns can generate the pattern of positive and negative autocorrelation seen

in the data.     By prolonging the impart of fundamental news, positive feedback

traderm can lengthen the horizon oved which returns are positively aerially
                                        38

correlated.    They may also cause prices to over—shoot their long run value,

however, thus inducing negative serisl correlation at some horizon.    This

overshooting also causes the deviation of price and fundamental value to

predict subsequent returns.

      Further research is needed to explore models of speculation.    Leland

(1.987)   argues that if positive feedback trading becomes sufficiently impor-

tant, it is possible for the market to have multiple equilibria, ao that

discontinuous responses of prices to fundamentals are possible.    The effecc of

learning, with traders switching to trading strategies which have been

profitable, could generate important new dynamics in these models.    Perhaps

the greatest need, however, is to develop testable implications of these

models.    It may be possible to make predictions, for example, about the amount

of positive feedback trading and market volatility, volume, or other observ-

able market characteristics.    Sumh testable predictions are vital if the

literature on alternatives to traditional asset pricing models is to advance

beyond the realm of speculation.
                                        References

Barsky, Robert and J. Bradford DeLong, "Why Have Stock Prices Fluctuat-
           mimeo, Harvard University, 1989.

Bia   k',   Fischer, 'Noise,"   Journal of Finance 41 (July 1986), 529—542.

C2ophell, Jobo Y, and Yaaushi Hamao, "Predictable Stock Returns in the
     Uoited States aod Japan: A Study of Long—Term Capital Market Integra-
     tion" , HBER Working Paper No. 3191, December 1989.

Cirspbell,   John Y. aod Albert S. Kyle, "Smart Money, Noise Trading, and
        Stock Prioe Behavior", mimeo, Princeton University, 1987.

Cncphell, John Y. and Robert Shiller, "Srock Prices, Earnioga, and Ex-
     pected Dividends," Journal of Finance 43 (July 1988), 661—676,

Csspoell, John Y. and Robert Shiller, "The Dividend—Price Raho and
     Expectations of Future Dividends and Discount Factors", Review of
     Financial Stndies 1 (1989), 195—228,

Case, Karl K., and Robert J. Shiller, "The Efficiency of the Market for
     Single—Family Homes," American Economic Review, March 1989, 125—137.

Case, Karl E. , and Robert J. Shiller, "Forecssting Prices and Excess
     Returns in the Housing Market", mimeo, Yale University, l99D.

Cecchetti, Stephen C. Pok—sang Lam, and Nelson C. Mark, "Mean Reversion
                          ,


     in Equilibrium Asset Prices," N8ER Working Paper 2762, Cambridge MA.,
     November 1988,

Colling, Phil L. and Scott H. Irwin, "Has the Farm Asset Market Been Too
                     ,



     Volatile," mimeo, Dhio State University, May 1989.

Cutler, David M. James M. Poterba and Lawrence H. Summers, "What Moves
                     ,


     Stock Prices?" Journal of Portfolio Manazement l5(Spring 1989), 4—12.

Cutler, David M. James M. Poterba,
                     ,              and Lawrence H. Summers, "Speculative
     Dynamics and the Role of Feedback Traders", forthcoming, American
     Economic Review, May 199D.

Dehong, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence Summers, and Robert Weld—
     mann, "Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets", Journal of Finance,
     forthcoming, 199D.

Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French, "Permanent and Transitory Components in
     Stock Prices," Journal of Political Economy 96, 1988a, 246—273.

Fame,    Eugene and Kenneth French, "Dividend Yields and Expected Stock
        Returns," Journal of Financial Economica 22 1988b, 3—27.

Frankel, Jeffrey A.,"Portfolio Crowding—Dut Empirically Estimated",
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1DD (Supplement 1985), lDal—1Q65.
Frankel, Jeffrey A.," The Implications of Mean—Variance Optimization for
     Four Questions in International Macroeconomics" Journal of
     tional Money and Finence 5 (1966), 853—975.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Kenneth A. Froot, "Using Survey Data to Test
     Standard Propositions Regarding Exchsnge Rate Expectations," American
     Economic Review 77 (1987), 133—153.

French, Kenneth, C. William Schwert, and Robert Stambaugh, "Expected Stuck
     Returns and Stock Market Volatility," Journal of Financial Economics
     19 (September 1987), 3—3D.

Friedman, Eenjamin, "The Substitutability of Debt and Equity Securities",
     in B. Friedman, ed. , Corporate Capital Structures in the United
     Statei, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985.

Cihbons, Michael, "On the Volatility of Bond Prices", Carnegie—Rochester
     Conference Series on Public Pnjjty 31 (Autumn 1989), 139—176.

Crabam, Benjamin, and David Dodd,   Security Analysis (New York: McCraw
     Hill, 1934).

Modrick, Robert J. and Laze Peter Hansen, "Dividend Yields and Expected
     Stock Returns: Alternative Procedures for Inference and Measurement",
     mimeo, University of Chicago, 1989.
                                                                     of
Huizinga, John, "An Empirical Investigation of the Long—Run Behavior
     Real Exchange Rates," Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on P"hiic
     Policy 27 (1987), 149—214.

Ihhctaon Associates. Stocks, Bonds. Bills and Inflation. Chicago: Ibbotson
     Associates, 1988.

Keim, Donald and Robert Stambaugh, "Predicting Returns in the Stock and
     Bond Markets," Journal of Financial Economics 17 (1986), 357—390.

Kendall, Maurice C. Time Series, New York: Harper & Row, 1973.

Kim, Myung Jig, Charles R. Helson, and Richard Starte, "Mean Reversion in
     Stock Prices? A Reappraisal of the Empirical Evidence", MBER WorkinB
     Paper Mo. 2795, December 1988.

Mindleberger, Charles P., Maniac. Panics, and Crashes Mew York: Basic
     Books, 1978.

Leland, Hayne E. "Dn the Stock Market Crash and Portfolio Insurance",
     mimeo, University of California, Berkeley, December 1987.

Lo, Andrew W. and A. Craig MacKinlay, "Stock Market Prices Do Hot Follow
     Random Walks: Evidence from a Simple Specification Teat", Review of
     Financial Studies, (1988), 41—66.
Lo, Andrew W. and A. Craig MacKinlay, "An Econometric Analysis of Non—
     synchronous Trading", Sloan School of Management Working Paper No.
     3003—89—EFA, MIT, 1989.

7lar.kiw, N. Gregory and Lawrence H. Summers, "Do Long Term Interest Rates
       Overreact to Short—Term Interest Rates?, Brookines Papers on
       ic Activity 1:1984, 223—242,

Marcus, Alan J .,"An Equilibrium Theory of Excess Volatility and Mean
     Reversion in Stock Market Prices", mimeo, Federal Home Loan Bank
     Board, Reston: VA, June 1989.

Meese, Richard A. and Kenneth Rogoff, "Empirical Exchange Rate Models of
     the Seventies: Do They Fit Out of Sample", Journal of International
     Economics, (1983), 3—24.

Mebra, Rajnish and Edward Prescott, "The Equity Premium: A Puzzle",
     Journal of Monetary Economics 15 (1985), 145—162.

Newey, Whitney, and Kenneth D. West, "A Simple Positive Semi—Definite
     Heteroscedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,"
     Econometrica 55 (1987) , 703—706.

Poterba,   James and Lawrence Summers, "The Persistence of Volatility and
      Stock Market Fluctuations", American Economic Review, 76 (December
      1986), 1142—1151,

Poterba, James and Lawrence Summers, "Mean Reversion in Stock Prices:
     Evidence and Implications," Journal of Financial Economics 22 (1988),
       27—60.


Shiller, Robert, "The Volatility of Long—Term Interest Rates and Expecta-
     tions Models of the Term Structure," Journal of Political Economy 87
     (1979), 1190—1219.

Shiller, Robert, "Stock Prices and Social Dynamics," Brookings Papers on
     Economic Actiyjly 1984:2, 457—498,

Shiller, Robert, John Y. Campbell, and Kermit Schoenholtz, "Forward Rates
     and Future Policy: Interpreting the Term Structure of Interest
     Rates," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1983, 173—217.

Stambaugh, Robert, "Bias in Regressions with Lagged Stochastic Regres-
     sors," CRSP Working Paper No. 156, January 1986.

Stock, James H. and Matthew Richardson, "Is There Mean Reversion in Stock
     Prices? Drawing Inferences from Statistics Based on Multi—Year Asset
     Returns", mimeo, Harvard University, 1989.

Summers, Lawrence H. "Does the Stock Market Rationally Reflect Fundamental
     Values?", Journal of Finance 41 (July 1986), 591—601.

United States. Department of Agriculture. Farm Real Estate Market Develop—
          . August 1981 (and unpublished updates).
                Table 1: Power of Autocorrelation and Regression Tests

                                                     Return Protess Parameters
                                     p=.9g          p=.98       p=.99       p=.99
   Horizon                           8=. 25         8=. 75      8=. 25      5=. 75



                              A.   Autocortelation Tests

    1 Month                          .056            .068        .054        .060
 1—12 Month Average                  .064            .096        .057        .069
13—24 Month Average                  .064            .077        .061        .067
25—36 Month Average                  .O5             .062        .058        .059


                                   B. Regression Tests


                                             Proxy Signal/Variance Ratio   .01
    1 Month                           .057           .064        .053         .057
   12 Month                           .087           .121        .072         .007
   48 Month                           .006           .149        .087         .116


                                             Proxy Signal/Variante Ratio   .25
    1 Month                           .106           .173        .085         .120
   12 Month                           .279           .570        .214         .309
   48 Month                           .316           .654        .283         .538


                                             Proxy Signal/Variance Ratio   .50
    1 Month                           .168           .305        .130        .202
   12 Month                           .380           .732        .305        .661
   48 Month                           .402           .755        .366        .673

                                                                         = 1.00
                                             Proxy Signal/Variance Ratio
    1 Month                           .189           .341        .129         .201
   12 Month                           .306           .529        .236         .354
   08 Month                           .363           .621         .325        .486


Panel A shows the empirical power of a one—tail autotorrelation test, and Panel B shovs
the eapirical power of a one—tsil regression test, both with size=.05. The critical
values are found from the distribution of the test statistic under the null.  Each
simulation draws 348 observations for the null and alternative. Panel A is based on
20,000 simulation; Panel B is based on 5,000 simulations.
                          Table 2: Summary Statistics for Market Returns


                                       A. Equity and Bond Markets

                                  Excess Return (Relative to Short Term Yield)
                                                               Long Term
                                       Equity               Government Bond
                                    (1960—1988)               (1960—1988)

Country                           Mean      Std Devu                      Mean     Std Devn
Australi                          1.27        26.17                   —2.12           9.78
Austria                           1.60        12.70                    3,72           4.06
Belgium                           7.91        16.55                   —0.33           4.58
Canada                            2.29        18.55                   —0.17           7.22
France                            1.04        20.86                   —0.46           5.92
Germany                           2.76        17.98                    2,13           5.09
Italy                            —0.31        23.40                    0.03           7.56
Japan                             7.11        16.83                    0.96           5.00
Netherlands                       6.59        17.51                    1.74           6.27
Sweden                            6.38        18,43                   —1.20           5.68
Switzerland                       2.58        17.24                    1.80           4.51
United Kingdom                    3.87        22.28                   —0,27          10.55
United States                     2.62        15.18                   —0.45          10.05

                                          B. Alternative Assets

               Currency         Gold      Silver          Metals          Houses          Farms    Collectibles
Mean             2.19          —0.81      —5.20           —1.57            0.37            3.29        4.35
Std Devn        10.16          25.27      48.93           14.11            3.27            9.13       12.32


                          C.   Correlations for Annual U.S. Dollar Returns

               US Equities       US Bonds    Currpnc           Gold              Houses      Collectibles
US Equities       1.000
US Bonds           .403           1.000
Currency           .004            .323         1.000
Gold              —.059           —.164            .425        1.000
Houses            —.036           —.144            .566            .566          1.000
Collectibles       .306           —.084            .300            .458            .821           1.000


Note: Equity and government bond returns are in own currency and are relative to the
short term yield. The correlation matrix uses data for the United States only.   The
currency return is the weighted average dollar excess return to holding the Pound,
Mark, Yen and Franc, where the weights are 1975 GNP (in dollars). Appendix Table A—I
contains the sample period for the equity and bond market returns. Currency, gold and
silver returns are from 1974—1988. Industrial metals returns are from 1959—199. House
returns ate from 1970—1986. Farm returns are from 1912—1986. Collectibles returns are
from 1968—1988, and average the returns of the available assets each year. The sample
period for each correlation is the shorter of the two assets.
                                      Table 3: Autocorrelations for Stock and Bond Returns
                         Autocorrelations -- Excess Returns Relative to Short-Term Treasury Bills
                                          Months Averaged in Autocorrelations
                  1          1—12      13—24    25—36    37—48    49—60    61—72    73—84    85-96
Asset



Australia       .028         .002     —.022      .007     .012     .003    —.013    .004      .034
                .116         .070     -.040     —.002    —.007    —.024     .007    .012     —.014
Austria                                                                    —.022    .033     —.014
Belgium         .200         .018      .006      .040     .009     .016
canada          .057         .002     —.032     —.004     .007     .007    —.014    .019      .039
                             .007     —.021      .023     .003     .000    —.001     .030     .022
France          .083
                             .029     —.042      .002     .006    —.003    —.024    —.003     .044
Germany         .138
                             .044     —.040      .000    —.017     .019     .031    —.013     .031
Italy           .138
                .085         .020     —.025      .019     .004    —.016     .010     .017    —.013
Japan                                                                      —.022    —.005     .036
Netherlands      .114        .021     —.015      .004     .010     .002
                              .038    —.041      .022     .001     .000     .002    —.011     .035
Sweden           .134
Switzerland      .046         .017    —.019     —.017     .020    -.007    —.019     .008     .022
UK               .091         .002    —.015     —.015     .011     .009    —.005     .010     .019
US               .077       —.002     —.029      .004     .017     .019    —.016     .000     .041

                 .101         .021    —.026      .006     .006     .019    —.007     .008     .022
Average
                             (.006)    (.008)   (.005)   (.008)   (.009)   (.007)   (.009)   (.006)
                (.026)

United States    .106         .021    —.017     —.005    —.011    —.006     .000     .012     .013
(1926—1988)     (.036)       (.011)    (.011)   (.011)   (.011)   (.011)   (.011)   (.011)   (.011)
      cross- the for error standard predictedtext. the in indicated as assets, the of correlation
                                               the adjusts parentheses, in shown autocorrelation,
    average the of error standard The    autocorrelation.the is j and peried, time the of length
the is T where entry, each to (T—j) 1/ adding by bias—adjusted, are autocorrelations The pericxi.
    time indicated the in menths 12 or 1 the for autocorrelation average the reports entry   Each
   (.011)   (.011)   (.011)    (.011)     (.011)   (.011)   (.011)   (.011)    (.036)     (1926—1988)
    .000     .000     .004     —.010       .009    .001     —.010    .023       .033    States United
   (.007)   (.008)   (.007)    (.007)     (.005)   (.005)   (.005)   (.011)    (.041)
    .013     .012     .006     —.002       —.017   —.026    —.013    .064       .238          Average
   —.003    —.006     .000     —.016       .008    —.005    —.012    .027      .030               US
   .006     .017      .036     .031       —.014    —.039    .003     .026       .299              UK
   .010     —.012     .030     —.020      —.014    —.045    —.010    .083      .266       Switzerland
   —.006    .004      .008     .031       —.015    —.006             —.007     .116
                                                            .004                              Sweden
   .023     .006      —.001    .013       —.015    —.017    —.026    .043      .291       Netherlar.is
   —.032    .008      .056     .024       —.024    —.036    —.028    .062       .132           Japan
   —.010    .078      —.018    .018       —.049    —.026    —.003    .115       .514           Italy
   .051     .003      —.024    —.029      —.055    --.041   —.033    .106      477           Gernany
   .047     —.003     .004     —.039      —.012    —.011    —.009    .086      .230           France
   .004     .002      .011     —.020      —.015    —.007    —.008    .032      .116           Canada
   .012     —.025     —.022    —.023      —.006    —.005    .006     .110      .191          I3elgium
   .056     .060      —.010    —.013      .003     —.067    —.046    .119      .360          Austria
   .008     .022      .014     .012       —.010    —.032    —.013    .036      .078        Australia
                                                                        (1960—1988) Bonds Lcnq—Term
  85—96     73—84    61—72    49—60    37—48    25—36    13—24       1—12       1              Asset
                        Autccorrelations in Averaged Months
                              (contd.)   3 Table
                                       Table 4: Autncorrelations for Exchanqe Rates and
                           Autocorrelations —— Excess Returns Relative to Short-Tens Treasury Bills
                                            Months Averaged in Autocorrelations
Asset               1          1—12      13—24    25—36     37—48   49—60    61—72    73—84

Exchar3e Rates (Interest Pate Adjusted)
United States
  France      —.015            .059       .026    —.011    —.013    —.035    —.019    —.024      .024
  Germany         .002         .046       .014    —.016     .004    —.028    —.027    —.016      .019
  Japan           .088         .047     —.031      .036    —.028    —.023     .014    —.032
  UK              .103         .052        026    —.022    —.038    —.054     .008     .018
JaFrance          .005         .030     —.070      .042    —.040     .027     .031    —.008      .035
  Germany         .012         .012     —.068      .065    —.026     .003     .032    —.019      .050
  UK              .101         .031     —.017      .004    —.049    —.001     .025    —.012      .030
United Kiixidom
  France          .184         .015       .033    —.014    —.006    —.012    —.039     .009      .016
  Germany         .122         .018       .020    —027     —.004     .012    —.037     .016      .019
Gev
 France           .068         .020      —.035    -,0l5     .013     .006     .043     .001

Average            .067        .033      —.010     .004    —.019    —.011     .003    -.007      .021
                  (.037)      (.012)     (.012)   (.010)   (.013)   (.011)   (.010)   (.014)     (.015)
Metals
Gold               .020        .051       .017     .026     .007    —.019    —.007        .004    .033
                  (.075)      (.022)     (.023)   (.024)   (.025)   (.026)   (.027)   (.029)     (.031)
Silver            —.102        .002      —.022    —.013    —.002     .007     .013        .012    .030
                  (.075)      (.022)     (.023)   (.024)   (.025)   (.026)   (.027)   (.029)     (.031)
Industrial         .269        .061       .029     .018    —.015      044     .026        .001   —.026
  Metals          (.053)      (.015)     (.016)   (.016)   (.016)   (.017)   (.017)   (.017)     (.018)
Each entry reports the average autocorrelatioO for the 1 or 12 menths in the indicated time
perioi. The autocorrelations are bias-adjusted, by adding 1/(T-j) to each entry, where T is the.
length of the time pericd, and j is the autocorrelation. The saniple paricri for exchange rates,
gold and silver is 1974—1988. the sample for industrial metals is 1959—1988. The stardan error
of the averaqe autocorrelatiOn adjusts the predicted standard error for the cross-correlation of
the assets, as indicated in the text,
                      Table 5; Autocorrelations for Alternative Assets

                                        Autoc orrelation
Asset                          1 Year     2 Year     3 Year   Observations


House Prices — Average          .206       .083       .053
                                .032)     (.033)     (.062)

   Atlanta                      .062       .034       .009         65
   Chicago                      .391       .185       .081         65
   Dallas                       .129       .036       .063         65
   San Francisco                .243       .075       .058         66


Penn Prices                      727       .442      .306          76
                                .116)     (.118)    (.120)


Collectables — Average          .365       .011     —.103
                               (.160)     (.153)    (.152)


   Oriental Carpets             .725       .163     —.105          11
                               (.316)     (.333)    (.354)

   Stamps                       .573       .324      .105          20
                               (.229)     (.236)    (.243)

   Chinese Ceramics             .116      —.182     —.183          21
                               (.224)     (.229)    (.236)

   Rare Books                 —.070       —.115      .159          13
                              (.289)      (.302)    (.316)

   Coins                        .242      —.056     —.091          21
                               (.224)     (.229)    (.236)

   Diamonds                     .515      —.050     —.239          21
                               (.224)     (.229)    (.236)

   Old Hester Paintings         .456      —.007     —.364          21
                               (.224)     (.229)    (.236)



Each entry reports the autocorrelation for the year indicated. House price data are
quarterly from 1970:1 to 1986:2 (1986:3 for San Francisco); see Shiller and Case (1987)
for a description. Farm price data are annual from 1912—1986; the capital gain is from
Department of Agriculture (1988); dividend income is from Colling and Irwin (1989).
Data on other assets are annual from 1967 or later and were supplied by Salomon
Brothers. The standard errors for the averages take account of the cross correlation
between assets,  For the collectibles, the theoretical standard deviation is assumed to
he that for the asset with the fewest observations (11).
 Table 6:   Forecasting Excess Stock Returns Using Dividend—Based Fundamentals

                            1 Month                      12 Month                     48 Month
Country           l         p—value    2       12         p—value    2                 p—value   2
Australia      2.30 [0.10]            .014    32.77       [0.01] .240        85.07     [0.01]    .572
              (1.74)                          (7.80)                        (11.62)

Austria       —1.69 [0.95]            .004    —8.74       [0.68]    —.002    35.25     [0.41]    .032
              (0.90)                          (12.79)                       (56.08)

Belgium       —0.62         [0.711 —.004      —0.46       [0.52] .015        26.04     [0.37]    .202
              (0.91)                          (8.88)                        (31.47)
Canada         1.30 [0.23]            .004    27.07       [0.08]     .132    43.91     [0.14]    .249
              (1.81)                          (12.28)                       (16.65)
France            0.48      [0.28]    .005      8.94      [0.17]     .101    45.42     10131     .440
              (0.86)                           (6.05)                       (17.80)

Germany       —0.04         [0.50]    .000    11.04       [0.24]     .091    40.60     10.211    .395
              (1.03)                          (10. 30)                      (21.54)

Italy          0.59 [0.31] —.001              18.81       [0.12]     .063     5.20     10.51]    .000
              (1.21)                          (10.08)                       (40.33)

Japan         —1.10         [0.99]    .002    —13.19      [0.97]     .034   —56.71     [0.90]    .098
              (0.41)                           (4.56)                       (24.22)

Netherlands    0.46 [0.36]            .002     11.95 [0.26]          .089    71.09     [0.10]    .461
              (1.29)                          (12.11)                       (24.46)

Sweden        —0.23 [0.57]            -.002    12.32 [0.22]          .083    51.64     [0.29]    .278
              (0.97)                          (10.21)                       (40.52)

Switzerland    2.70 [0.06]            .014     28.20      [0.06]     .122    73.58     [0.17]    .291
              (1.64)                          (ii. 18)                      (33.52)

United         5.11 [0.01]             .018    43.90 [0.01]          .268    94.39     [0.02]    .516
Ningdom       (1.62)                          (11.62)                       (17.98)

United         0.54 [0.29]             .002    11.43      [0.21]     .080    20.06     [0.35]    .202
States        (1.00)                           (8.99)                       (21.17)

Ave rage       0.75 [0.07]                     14.16      [0.03]             41.20     [0.061
              (0.50)                           (4.50)                       (10.87)

US                0.01      [0.47]     .003    17.44      [0.06]     .077    66.58     [0.01]    .296
1926—1988     (0.78)                           (8.46)                       (14.45)

Each entry reports estimates of the coefficient                '1k     from the regression:

            Rtk=    + 01<
                                 +
                                $k*(Ztpt)     °tk
where z.. is the logarithm of the real dividend. Data are from 1960—1988; see Appendix
Table Al for specifics. The coefficients are bias—adjusted. Numbers in parentheses
are standard errors, calculated using the Newey—West procedure. The standard error of
the average accounts for cross correlation of the coefficients, as in the text. Number
in brackets are p—values for the null hypothesis that the coefficient is zero, based o
the Monte Carlo distribution of the adjusted t—statistic.
                Table 7: Calculation of Small Sample Bias for Equity Markets


Country                   8             l
                                              Components of Bias
                                                      P            p7      Bias


Australia               10332          3.60        0.95       —7887       1824

Austria                  7585         —0.95        0.98       —54.67      40.59

Belgium                  66.73         0.54        0.98       —73.62      40.69

Canada                   72.45         2.75        0.96       —93.08      28,54

France                   71.94         1.50        0.98       —81.85      26,52

Germany                  71.17         0.95        0.98       —87.al      30.58

Italy                    20.52         1.27        0.96       —52.56      15.32

Japan                   —18.03        —0.41        1.00       —60.30      38.68

Netherlands             101.91         1.71        0.97       —85.20      30.82

Sweden                   85.41         0.78        0.99       —77.33      33.77

Switzerland              85,08         3.62        0.94       —71,79      11.50

United Kingdom          107,44         4.28        0.96       —90.62      13.05

United States            38,43         1,27        0.97       —64.94      18.37



United States            81.45         1.43        0.98       —97.96      14.87

The table show the components of the small sample bias for 48—month dividend—price
ratio regressions. /543 is the unadjusted 48—month regression coefficient.      p and
    are the estimated coefficients for that country. The final column shows the bias
estimate,
  Table 8: Forecasting Long—Term Excess Holding Returns With Yield Spreads

                         1 Month    —                    12 Month —                  48 Month
Country            l     p—value    K2          l2       p—value    R2      48        p—value    2
Australia       0.11 [0.45] —.004               —7.66 [0.66]        .009   —26.45     10,69]    .029
               (1.17)                          (12.21)                     (34.76)

Austria        1.33       [0.01]    .023        3.27 [0.41] —.002            3.03     [0.50]   —.004
               (0.55)                          (9.16)                      (17.16)

                3.40                .036        25.82 [0.10]        .061    43.04     [0.37]    .020
Belgium                   [0.01]
               (1.04)                          (12.64)                     (53.00)

Canada         0.65                 .002        3.96 [0.29]         .007    —3.22     [0.59]    .006
                          [0.10]
               (0.49)                          (4.68)                      (12.13)

France          2.10 [0.00]         .042        3.07      [0.37]   —.001    —9.26     [0.71]    .015
               (0.53)                           (5.92)                     (10.53)

Germany        —0.05 [0.58] —.003              —1.65      [0.73]    .007    —5.87     [0.81] .031
               (0.17)                           (1.82)                      (3.95)
Italy           0.43 [0.131         .003       —0.24      [0.52]   —.003   —20.16     [0.69]     043
               (0.39)                           (6.58)                     (26.95)


Japan           0.76      [0.05]    .011       —0.11      [0.51]   —.004   —17,19     [0.81]    .092
               (0.45)                           (5.46)                     (11.63)

Netherlands     0.07      [0.40]   —.003       —2.99 [0.73]         .019   —13.63     [0.89]    .125
               (0.31)                          (3.22)                       (6.03)

Sweden          0.44      [0.09]    .002       —0.84 [0.59]         .001   —10.01     [0.921    .226
               (0.31)                          (2.65)                       (3.78)

Switzerland     0.22      [0.181   —.001       —1.28 [0.59]         .002   —12.52     [0.96]     136
               (0.24)                          (3.79)                       (3.66)

United         —0,14 [0.54] —.003              —2.33 [0.60] —.002          —53.98     [0.91]    .203
Kingdom        (0.88)                          (6.32)                      (22.00)

United          1.72 [0.021         .012        15.41 [0.05]        .081    —6.49     [0.62]    .004
States         (0.77)                           (6.00)                     (16.52)

Average         0.85 [0.01]                      2.65     [0.24]           —10.21     [0.78]
               (0.29)                           (2.44)                      (7.75)

US              0.13 [0.16]         .004         1,62     [0.01]    .055     5.57     [0.04]    .124
1926—1988      (0.13)                           (0.45)                      (1.63)

Each entry reports estimates of the coefficient                1k     from the regression:

             Rtk       °k +   kk(zt—pt)    +
where    z
         is the logarithm of the reciprocal of the short term interest rate. Data are
from 1960—1988; see Appendix Table Al for specifics. The coefficients are bias—
adjusted. Numbers in parentheses are standard errors, calculated using the Newey—West
procedure. The standard error of the average accounts for cross correlation of the
coefficients. Numbers in brackets are p—values for the null hypothesis that the
coefficient is zero, based on the Monte Carlo distribution of the adjusted t—statistic
 Table 9: Forecasting Excess Foreign Holding Returns Using Real Exchange Rates

                         1 Month                    12 Month                    48 Month
Country                  p—value    2       l2       p—value    2       48       p—value    R2


United States
France       —0.98       [0.80)    .003    —1,88     [0.59]    .129    34.43     [0.49)    .455
              (1.03)                      (14.21)                     (34.94)

Germany       —1.44      [0.88) —.002      —9.44 [0.70)        .071    —9.32     [0.67)    .252
              (1.03)                      (14.10)                     (33.66)

Japan          0.58 [0.40)         .007    29.72     [0.28]    .212   150.63     [0.01)    .715
              (1.79)                      (21.58)                     (13.82)

United            0.61   [0.35)    .019    18.74    [0,27)     .272   122.56    [0.06)     .813
Kingdom       (1,28)                      (13.17)                     (19.17)


fl
France        —1.29 [0.78) —.003           —0.17    [0.56)     .111   —28.81               .286
                                                                                [0.77)
              (1.16)                      (10.86)                     (24.39)

Germany       —1.64 [0.83] —.004           —8.97    [0.74)     .051   —67.42    10.91]     .024
              (1.15)                      (10.31)                     (20.32)

United         0.22      [0.53)    .009    21.28 [0,26)        .222    96,30    [0.10]     .592
Kingdom       (1.42)                      (14.12)                     (18.90)


United Kingdom
France       —0.87       [0.68) —.002      —9.06    [072)      .024    24,30    [0.49]     .366
              (1.66)                      (11.69)                     (24.75)

Germany       —1.46      [0.82]   —.004    —9.81 [0.75]        .032   —24.63    [0.74]     .187
              (1.41)                      (10.11)                     (28,18)


Germany
France         4,05      [0.06]    .033    63.00    [0.05)     .452    21,15    [0.49]     .086
              (2.28)                      (17.43)                     (21.42)


Average       —0.22 [0.65]                  9.34    [0.30)             31,92    [0.43]
              (0.55)                       (7.55)                     (22.38)

Each entry reports estimates of the coefficient                 from the regression:
                                                          1,k
               —    +            +
            Rtk                           °t,k
where   zis a constant and Pt is the logarithm of the real exchange rate. Data are
from 1974—1988. The coefficients are bias—adjusted. Numbers in parentheses are
standard errors, calculated using the Newey—West procedure. The standard error of the
average accounts for cross correlation of the coefficients, as in the text. Numbers in
brackets are p—values for the null hypothesis that the coefficient is zero, based on
the Monte Carlo distribution of the adjusted t—statistic.
       Table 10: Forecasting Precious Metal Returna Using Lagged Fundamentals

                         1 Month                    12 Month                    48 Month
Country             i    p—value   R2      u         p—value   R2               p—value    F2


Gold            094      [033]     .012   27.05      [0.17]    .235   13319      [006]     671
               (1.79)                     (13.06)                     (20.98)

Silver          2.92 [0.16]        .017   27.49      [0.20]    .188   109.00     [0.22]    .451
               (2.51)                     (14.68)                     (32.75)

Metal          —o.ig [0.55]        .000    14.05     [0.19]    .094    29.69     [0.37]    .150
 Index         (0.93)                     (10.51)                     (35.31)


Each entry reports estimates of the coefficient                  from the regression:
               —    +            +
             Rt,k   ak     fik*(ztpt)     °t,k
where    ia the logarithm of the reel price of the metal or the value of the index.
         p         is mssumed to he e constant. Data are from 1974—1968 for gold end
The fundamental     z
ailver, end from 1959—1988 the the metal index. The coefficients ate hias—ed[usted.
Mumbets in parentheses etc standard errors, calculated using the Mewey—5Jest procedure.
Numbers in brackets mte p—vmlues for the null hypothesis that the edjusted coefficient
is zero, based on the Monte Carlo distribution of the adjusted t—stetistic.
                Table 11: Dividend Price Ratios and the Effect of Volatility

                   I   Month Return        12 Month Return              48 Month Return
Country             l              l        l2         l2               48         '48

Australia          3.84        0.25       45.83     —3.85              108.26      8.36
                  (2,07)      0.70        (8.93)     (4.45)            (14.36)    (7.07)

Austria           —0.46        0.41       —11.32       0.09             57.24     17,90
                  (1.37)      (0.27)      (18.79)    (3.07)            (55.32)   (13.96)

Belgium           —0.48        0.73       —0.76        7.62             36.66     20.29
                  (1.01)      (0.38)      (9.77)     (3.04)            (24.08)   (11.65)

Canada             1.00        0.19        32.58    —4.23               55.56      1.26
                  (1.94)      (0.58)      (12.60)    (4.03)            (19.19)    (5.11)

France             0,08        1.33         9.04       1.02             55.59     —2.06
                  (0.99)                   (8.10)    (3.89)            (27.36)   (11.98)

Germany            1.29        0.39       29.40      8.08               64.57     14.67
                  (1.22)      (0.38)      (11.68)   (3.28)             (20.43)    (9.57)

Italy              0.51      —0,38          9.31    —7.45               37.59     39.96
                  (1.49)     (0.66)       (13.49)   (6.60)             (32.19)    (8.72)

Japan           —1.20        —0.07        —13.27    —1.42              —52.55    —11.44
                  (0.41)      (0   34)     (4.60)   (3.29)             (24.63)    (8.82)

Netherlands        0.49        0.71        12.52    10.90               73.14     20.54
                  (1.31)      (0.56)      (10.61)   (3.12)             (26.33)   (10.41)

Sweden             0.35        0.73        16.44     5.73               60.97     22.62
                  (1.04)      (0.44)      (11.60)   (4.30)             (38.08)    (7.96)

Switzerland        2.98        0.28        28.72     3.30               70.65     16.26
                  (1,75)      (0.41)      (10.70)   (3.59)             (26.14)    (8.51)

United             2.59        0.46        42.28     2.37               91.67     18.48
Kingdom           (1.71)      (0.51)      (11,93)   (2.85)             (21.14)    (5.40)

United          —0.10          0.56        6.39        3.54             11.18      0.67
States            (1.05)      (0.37)      (9.05)    (2.62)             (23.31)    (4.18)
Average            0.84        0.43       15.94        1.98             51.58     12.87
                  (0.41)      (0.24)      (5.26)    (1.49)             (11.00)    (3.69)
United States      1.19      —0.27        22.86     —4.48               76.18    —2.37
(1926—1988)       (0.83)      (0.25)      (6.94)    (3.28)             (14.92)    (6.98)
Each entry reports estimates of the coefficients              and 7k   from the regression:
            Rtk   — ak +   k*t_Pt)       7k*(Volt) +   tt,k
where   zis the logarithm of the real dividend for the market and volatility is the sum
of squared monthly returns for the past twelve months. The sample period is 1960—1988;
see Appendix Table Al for specifics. The coefficients are bias—adjusted. Standard
errors, in parentheses, are calculated using the Newey—West procedure with 11 or 47
lags for 12 and 48 month returns, respectively.
                               Table Al: Sample Period

                                         Beginning Date
Country                       Equities                    Bonds


Australia                      1969:7                     1969:7

Austria                        1964:11                    1971:   1

Eel gturn                      1968:2                     1963:10

Canada                         1968:2                     1960:1

France                         1962:8                     1960:1

Germany                        1960:1                     1960:1

                               1964:1                     1964:1
Italy

Japan                          1960:1                     1966:12

Narherlands                    1966:8                     19 64:12

Sweden                         1963:10                    1963:

Switzerland                    1964:1                     1964:1

United Kingdom                 1964:1                     1964:1

United States                  1960:1                     1960:1




United States                  1926:1                     1926:1

The table shows the starting period for the equity and bond market regreasiuns.   The
,a for Swedish bond returns indicates that the sample period ends in 1988:1.
                                       Figure          1


                     Power of Regression Test
0.08


0.07


0.06


0.05


0,04


0.03


0.02


0.01


   0


                                         t—statistic


       Note:   Figure shows empirical distribution of the t—statistic
               for e 48—month regression. The distributions are based on
               25, 000 replications. The parameters are: rho—gB, delta—.75. and
               lambda—tO.    Each point is an interval of .20n  the distribution.
