                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    SHORT RATES AND EXPECTED ASSET RETURNS




                               Kenneth   A. Froot




                            Working Paper No. 3247




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 January 1990




I thank David Cutler and Larry Summers for helpful discussions and am grateful
to the Ford Foundation and the Division of Research at Harvard Business School
for generous research support. This paper is part of NBER's research program
in International Studies and Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #3247
                                                January 1990


                      SHORT RATES AND EXPECTED ASSET RETURNS


                                          ABSTRACT

We present evidence that short-term        excess returns
                                      interest
                                  forecast          rates on many al-
ternative assets: foreign exchange, stocks, bonds, and commodities. On average, a one-
percentage-point increase in short rates is associated with three percent lower annualized
excess returns. To test whether this predictability is attributable to time-varying risk, in-
dependent measures of excess returns are formed using survey data on expected returns.
We find similar predictability in these measures, too. Since the surveys don't include
risk premia, the predictable components cannot be attributed to risk. We suggest that
when short rates are high (low) investors are excessively optimistic (pessimistic) about
alternative-asset returns.




                                                 Kenneth A.    Froot
                                                 Graduate School of Business
                                                 Harvard   University
                                                 Soldiers    Field Road
                                                 Boston,   MA 02163
1. Introduction
       It is by now well established that excess returns on many financial assets are partially
predictable. Variables useful for explaining returns have been found in each of a growing
list of asset markets. It is well known that one type of variable in particular seems to
forecast returns across many markets: deviations of asset prices from their fundamental
values. Specifically, prices revert toward measures of their own fundamental values more
rapidly than would be predicted by models with constant risk premia.1
      In this paper we focus on another variable that seems to have substantial, but less-
well_known predictive power for excess returns: the short-term interest rate.2 When the
U.S. short rate is high, excess returns on foreign exchange, stocks, bonds, and commodities
all appear simultaneously to be low. This apparent systematic correlation of the short rate
with excess returns across assets is very different from the tendency for individual asset
prices to revert toward their own fundamentals. Whereas mean reversion might be sug-
gestive of idiosyncratic predictable components in prices, the forecastability of alternative-
asset returns using interest rates is evidence of a predictable component that is common
across markets. This common component implies that higher short-term interest rates
are associated either with relatively lower risk of holding other assets, or with excessively
optimistic expectations that these alternative assets will match the high promised return
   'Cutler, Poterba, and Summer, (1989) present result. on mean reversion for four different mazks: stock. bond, foreiin
.xcbane and commodities. Flood Ilodrick and Kaplan (1988), K.im and Stambaugh (1986), Campbell and Shiller (1986),
Pokrba and Summer, (1988), and Fame and Fr.nth (1988,., b) document lb. tendency for mean rsver,*on In th. stock market.
HuisInga (1986) investigate, mean reversion in real .xthane rat...
  2S.veraI papers hays explored the interest rates predictive power for c.rtarn asset return,. S.., for example, Feraon (1989).


                                                               1
on short-term deposits.
      This paper first documents the ability of short rates to forecast returns on a number
of assets. We present evidence in the foreign exchange, stock, bond, and commodity
markets that excess returns are low when short rates are high. The magnitude of the effect
appears both substantial and very similar across markets: a one-percentage-point increase
in the (annualized) short rate is associated on average with about a three-percentage-point
reduction in (annualized) excess returns over the same horizon.3
      We then go on to report positive cross-market evidence that consistently suggests this
forecastability is not generated by risk. Specifically, we use a variety of survey measures of
unexpected holding returns in the foreign exchange and bond markets as a complement to
the usual approach of studying total holding returns. The survey measures — unlike total
excess returns — do not include a risk premium, and therefore can provide independent
information on the importance of risk as an explanation for the predictability we document.
      The results from these data are striking. First, in almost every case in which surveys
are available, we find that the survey expected returns are informative, in that, ceteris
paribus, they are highly positively correlated with short-term interest rates (as would be
suggested by simple models of relative asset pricing). The implication is that when short
rates are high, expected nominal returns on alternative assets also tend to be high. Second,
for explaining predictable excess returns it makes no difference whether the survey unex-
pected returns or total excess holding returns are used: the predictable component in the
two measures is the same. Thus, unless the surveys happen to mismeasure systematically
the market's expectation in such a way that the measurement error is perfectly correlated
with the risk premium, time-variation in risk cannot explain our results.
      Taken together, these findings may suggest that waves of optimism and pessimism
can strike numerons speculative markets at one time, rather than merely affecting isolated


  *Our r..Wta us strsnthensct by the meny studiss     in diff.rt mszk.t. thet d.n,onast. bu, of similar magnitud in the
forecast. Implied by forward rste.. The .jmilarie, betwes, those result, and our. are di,ct.ed in sub.squ.nt section..

                                                             2
assets in an independent way. While with respect to a single asset the short rate might rea-
sonably be thought of as exogenous, in equilibrium short rates are likely to be endogenously
determined together with expected returns on all other assets. In this sense, movements
in the interest rate, regardless of their ultimate source, may serve as partial indicators of
the markets' overall outlook. This view suggests that when short rates are high, investors
appear willing to go on holding alternative assets because of high expected returns, and
not because the perceived risks of holding those assets are relatively low. Unfortunately,
unusual optimism (or pessimism) in investor expected returns has systematically not been
validated across markets during our samples.
    Naturally, these systematic in-sample expectational errors need not be interpreted
as evidence of market irrationality. Results like ours could in principle be explained by
peso problems or learning on the part of purely rational investors, If the samples are
small and/or otherwise unrepresentative of' the ergodic behavior of asset returns, standard
inference procedures will be invalid. Such arguments seem increasingly difficult to make,
however, as economists are rapidly uncovering more of the same predictability in returns
on new instruments, over new time periods, and for new forecast horizons, effectively
increasing the size of the statistical sample.
    Thus in short, expected returns across assets — as reflected in the short rate — appear
excessively volatile. Investors would do better to reduce their expected returns on alter-
native assets when short rates are high and raise their expected returns when short rates
are low.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 investigates the ability of the short rate
to forecast excess returns on foreign exchange and shows how this predictability can be
interpreted as excessive volatility in expected returns on foreign exchange. Sections 3, 4,
and 5 follow similar procedures for the stock, bond, and commodity markets, respectively.
Section 6 offers interpretations and conclusions.



                                                 3
2. Excess forecast volatility In expected returns on foreign exchange
       This section presents evidence that expected returns on foreign exchange are exces-
sively volatile, in that they appear to move too much with current short rates to be rational
in the sense of Muth. We will see this implies that interest rates can forecast excess returns
on foreign exchange.
      The first step is to develop a framework for evaluating whether expected returns are
excessively or insufficiently volatile. The expected return on foreign exchange is equal to
the expected percentage depreciation of the dollar plus the foreign (f-period) interest rate,
or alternatively, the U.S. short (f-period) rate minus a residual, which we term the risk
premium on dollar assets:4
                                                        +1        i — rpt,                                               (1)

where              is the expected log percentage change in the spot rate (expressed in dollars
per unit of foreign currency) between times t and t + 5, conditional on all information
available at time t. Equation (1) implies that expected depreciation can be written as the
interest differential less the risk premium,                        =I—1           —
                                                                                       rpt.
      Consider a regression of the expectational error made by investors in predicting the
future spot exchange rate on their expected rate of currency depreciation:

                                    A        —   Ae —
                                                    —a   aAe                                                              2
                                                       + P'.5g3 7t+j'
                                                                               1

                                                 1St+j

where             is the realized log percentage change in the spot rate between times t and t+j.
To fix ideas, let us for now suppose that the market's expected rate of depreciation is ac-

tually observable. In testing (1), we obviously would not impose the rational-expectations
restriction that               is equivalent to the mathematical expectation of Aae3 conditional
on all information at time t. Under that restriction, which is the null hypothesis in (1),
a = = 0 and the residual,                       is purely random.
   41n this papr we work with nominil suet-market returns to avoid using poorer-quality Index., of goods-market pric.
This 1mph.. that the rlsk premium, rp, is d.fin.d so as to include a term which aria.. entirely from the correlation between
returns (e.g. on forsgn exchange) and the unexpected change in the pric, of good.. S.. the appendix for a complete d.rivation
of this risk premium.

                                                             4
       The alternative hypotheses are that expected depreciation displays excessive (3 <0)
or insufficient (8 > 0) forecast volatility.5 To understand this, suppose that /3 <0. This
would imply that when expected depreciation is above (below) its mean, excess returns
are systematically lower (higher) than expected. An investor would do better — in that the
variance of his forecast error, óst+1 —
                                                       As, would be lower — if he systematically reduced
his current expectation of depreciation fractionally toward its mean. This just formalizes
the notion that when investors are relatively optimistic, they tend to be too optimistic.
Similarly if /3 > 0, an investor could improve his forecast by scaling up multiplicatively the
deviation between his current expected depreciation and its mean.
       In order to distinguish the U.S. rate's role in generating predictable returns a specifica-
tion similar to (1) can be used, in which the prediction error is regressed on the components
of expected deprecation:

                                       —            = a + + 1321 + fl3rp + '7j,                                                 (3)

where, once again, the null hypothesis is that /i = /32 =                                fl        0 and the residual is

purely random. Equation (3) yields several distinct alternative hypotheses. They are that
expected depreciation is excessively volatile with respect to the U.S. short rate,                                          < 0,
the foreign short rate, /32 > 0, and perceptions of risk, fl > 0. Opposite inequalities are
associated with insufficient forecast volatility.
       While the market's expectation of future depreciation,                                     is unobservable, infer-
ences about its behavior can nevertheless be drawn by using two proxies. The first and
most common measure of expected depreciation is the forward discount, fdt =                                             f   —
                                                                                                                                st,
where f is the log f-period forward rate. By arbitrage, the forward discount is equal to
the interest differential, fdt = it — 1:6
  'S.. ?root (1989i) for broader sppIicatior of exCess forsca.t volatility. Bison (1911) baa termed lbs same alternative
hypothesis < 0 in (1) .xce.sive sp.culation.
     Wh.n using the forward discount or interest differential to measure expected d.preciaticn, th. speciflcation In (3)11 closely
related to standard test, of forward-rat. unbiasednese in which the forward-rate prediction error is regressed on the interest
differential alone. Hodrick (19U) gives a thorough summary of the literature testing unbiasedns.s In addition to estimating
(3), we perform standard unbias.dnsee test, below, with re.ul similar to those found elsewhere.

                                                                5
       This measure's obvious advantage is that it is readily observable. Its disadvantage is
that by definition it includes any time-varying risk premium that might separate expected
depreciation from the interest differential. From (1), fdt = i — 1                              = s7÷ + rpt. Thus,
under this measure the prediction error on the left-hand side of (3) is just the total excess
return on foreign exchange,                      —
                                                     fdt = LSt+j —                 —         As this measure includes
—rpt, the null hypothesis in (3) becomes /i = = 0 and /33 = —1.
       Our second proxy for the market's expectation of depreciation comes from time-t
survey measures of exchange rate expectations. This measure, denoted by                                             is useful
because it is not contaminated by a risk premium. Although the median survey response
is likely to report the market's expectation with error, random measurement errors do not
pose a problem for the estimation because s2 is on the left-hand side of our regressions.
Under this measure of expected depreciation, the dependent variable in (3) is the realized
survey prediction error, st —
       Since   one of our expectations measures contains a risk premium while the other does
not, we will be interested in seeing if the two measures yield similar coefficient estimates
when used on the right-hand side of (3). If they don't, then the risk premium remains a
potential explanation for the predictability of excess returns. If they do, however, then
risk is unlikely to be responsible for our findings.
       On the right-hand side of (3), only rpt is unobservable. Once again, there are two
possible measures. The first assumes that the forward discount is equal to expected de-
preciation, so that the risk premium is zero (or a constant). This implies that consistent
estimates of 13i and /32 can be obtained without including the premium in the regressions.
The second is the survey measure of the risk premium, given by rp = fdt —
       Note that this latter risk measure provides another way of determining whether


   7    Frnk.1 &nd Froot (1987) or Froot snd Frenk.l (1989) for e more g.nwiJ dlacus.icm of th. use of survey data to meuure
exchsng. rat. expectations. Not. that it is not valid to object to the ties of survey. on the growids that they may appear to be
in.mcl., fozscu of the future spot rate. We wish to test whth any forecasting ln.mclenci.. that may exist are consistent
with either exe or insufflcheit forecast volatility. If ws were ix sa,ts to disqualify measure, of expectation, because they
turned out ix post to be ineMcient, our test, would obviously be biaesd          i.d1On.
                                                               6
changes in risk are responsible for the predictable component of                  —
                                                                                      fd.   If risk
is in fact the culprit, then by including rp on the right-hand side the interest-rate coeffi-
cients should fall to zero. Alternatively, if adding rp has no effect on the estimates of $
and $, then risk is unlikely to be responsible for the results.
    Before proceeding, several econometric issues should be mentioned. First equation
(3) and the other equations that follow can be estimated using OLS with with standard
errors calculated using Hansen's (1982) Generalized Method-of-Moments (GMM) using a
Newey and West (1987) correction. Where appropriate, the covariance matrix estimators
allow for serial as well as contemporaneous correlation. Estimators were computed twice
for each regression: once under the assumption of honioskedasticity and again allowing
for unknown conditional heteroekedasticity. Due to the downward finite-sample bias of
the heteroskedasticity-consistent GMM covariance estimates, we try to be conservative by
reporting the larger of two sets of standard errors of the coefficients. While this estimation
procedure may be inefficient, the conclusions are unlikely to change using more efficient
techniques.
     Another potential difficulty in estimating (3) stems from the possibility that interest
rates contain a unit root. Although many tests do not reject the unit root hypothesis, the
low power of these tests against sensible alternatives suggests that there is little positive
evidence for such a unit root. Nevertheless, in order to avoid these issues, an additional
version of (3) is estimated with (3 = —/32, so that the regressors are the interest differential
and measures of the risk premium.5

2.1. Results
     Table 1 presents estimated versions of (3). In the top panel, we report estimates of (3)
in its unrestricted form; in the middle panel we impose the restriction /3i           —/3, so that
the first regressor is the interest differential; in the bottom panel we impose the restriction
/32 =0 to eliminate the foreign interest rate, 1, as a regror.. The data are monthly over
   S.s BaWl. and BoU.rsl.v (1Q19) for svld.nc. that th.       1-' (. fopwa&w) 1. *ttI97
                                                          7
the floating rate period, 1973-1986. Since there are no surveys available over this time
period, the forward discount is the only available proxy for expected depreciation. The
estimates of i are statistically negative, on average equal to minus three. The estimates
of /2 are generally positive (which implies that foreign residents tend to earn low returns
on dollar investments when their own interest rates are high), although less statistically
significant.
      Tables 2a through 2c present estimates of (3), for the sample over which there are
survey data, 1981-88. The estimates stack 5 currencies against the dollar (the pound,
French franc, Deutsche mark, Swiss franc and yen) in order to save space.9 The first line
of each panel reports the specification in (3), omitting the risk premium on the right-hand
side. The second line then adds the survey measure of the premium as an additional inde-
pendent variable. The third and fourth lines follow the same pattern except, to guarantee
stationarity, the interest differential is used as a regressor in place the individual interest
rates. The fifth and sixth lines omit the foreign interest rate altogether. Tables 2a, 2b,
and 2c report different forecast horizons of 3, 6, and 12 months, respectively.
      The top panels of Tables 2a-2c also use the forward discount to prcy for expected
depreciation. A quick comparison with Table 1 makes it clear that the specific sample
period, forecast horizon, and selection of currencies is of little qualitative importance, as
the findings are very similar. Across these tables almost all of the estimates of                                    and the
majority of the estimates of/32, are statistically different from zero, with the expected signs.
Indeed, given the size of the estimated standard errors, the point estimates are surprisingly
close, clustering around 3•1O Since the forward discount contains a risk premium, the
results in the lines one, three, and five of the top panels of Tables 2a-2c would usually be
ascribed to time-variation in that premium.

   'Thi, procedure dose not obscur. much infonnetjon: the estimat.. for four of the five individual curr.n.e are not impor-
tantly diff.r.M from either the aggregate rneasuree w• report in Table.  2.2c or the individual.currsncy estimate, reported in
TabI. 1. The estimate. for the yen are the only outIir. For that currcy no statistically signiflcant effect of Interest rates on
expectatlonal error, (measured using either th. forward rate or survey expectation) was found.
  10The Durbin.Wat,on statitics are much lower in Table. 2a2c because of the usual ov.rlspping-cbe.rvatiozi problem. Our
standard error, correct for this.

                                                               8
      Note, however, that when the survey risk premium is included as a regressor (lines two,
four, and six of the top panels in Tables 2a-2c) there is no change in the either the point
estimates or the standard errors of 8i or fig, and that the estimate of j3 is insignificantly
different from zero.1' if risk were responsible for the findings in odd-numbered lines, then
the estimates of flu and fl2 in even-numbered lines should be indistinguishable from zero
and the estimate of fl should be minus one. However, random measurement errors in rp
could also bias the estimates in this direction.
      The bottom panel of Tables 2a through 2c duplicates the regressions run in the top
panel, only this time using the survey measure of expected depreciation on the left-hand
side. Here, even if the surveys do contain random measurement error, the estimates remain
unbiased. The results in Tables 2a-2c show without exception that (Ji <0 and usually
that /2 > 0. The similarity of the signs and magnitudes of the coefficients in the top
and bottom panels of each table is striking. This again suggests that any risk premium
contained in the forward-rate prediction errors is not responsible for the predictability of
excess returns. Indeed, even if the surveys were pure noise, they still do not contain a risk
premium, and therefore risk cannot explain the similarity between the top and bottom
panels.12
      Neither the point estimates nor the estimated standard errors are importantly affected
by the restriction that /3 = —fl in the third and fourth lines of each panel.'3 This
indicates that our results in the top two lines are not a direct consequence of any potential
nonstationarity in interest rate levels. The estimates of flu in the fifth and sixth lines remain
negative, but tend to be smaller in magnitude and somewhat less statistically significant.
      The similarity of all the reported estimates of fl and fl supports the view that

   11The survey data used to form rp corns from the Economist Financial Report. Surveys were undtaksn seth 6 weeks from
june 1981 to August 1988 on expectations of the dollar against the earns ftve foreii currmci.s.
   12Note that the estImates of Pa in even-numbered lines Increase by on. when moving from the top to the bottom panel,
whereas the corresponding estimat, of Pi and $2 remain exactly the same. We expect this to happen because the difference
between the top- end bottom.p.nsl dependent variables ii just rp,.
   '3Froot and Frankel (1989) estimate r.gressioni similar to thoes In the third in, of sad, panel, and then us, the survey, to
argue, as we do here, that the interest differential', ability to forecast r.turv. does not constitute evidence of a time-varying
risk premium.

                                                               9
expected depreciation is excessively volatile, and that                            is excessively sensitive to
changes in short rates. When the return on short deposits is high, investors' appear to
have overly optimistic expectations about the returns on competing assets like foreign
exchange. Investors would do better if they reduced their expectations of depreciation
when the short rate is above its mean value (and conversely when the short rate is below).
      Even though the surveys don't contain a risk premium, one might ask whether they
do contain any information at all, i.e., whether they are informative about expected depre-
ciation. If ex ante rates of return on short bills in different currencies are approximately
equalized, one would expect an increase in the interest differential to be associated with
a one-for-one increase in expected depreciation. Froot and Frankel (1989) regress the sur-
vey measure of expected depreciation on the interest differential and find the coefficient is
indeed close to one, while statistically much greater than zero.


3. Excess forecast volatility in expected stock-market returns
      This section develops analogous regression tests for expected stock-market returns.
To do this, first write the expected return on the market as equal to the short rate plus
an "equity premium:"4

                                              pe    •-P+Dt =
                                    r1 —                     1 + l't,                                            (5)
                                                      P
where P is the market's expected stock price at time t+j conditional on all information
available at time t, P is the time-t stock price, D is the current dividend payment, and 'g
is the equity premium. Equation (5) implies that the expected rate of price appreciation

is given by the short rate less the dividend yield plus the equity premium,

                                        pe      -Pt = — D
                                                                     +   .                                       (6)

             we work with nominal retur,, , includes a term attributabl, to the correlabon betwu unexpected inflation
and the excess stock return. See the appendix for more detaila.

                                                         10
      Consider then a regression of the excess (risk-adjusted) return on the components of
expected appreciation,


                                     rg3 —   r1 = a + 811t — 132V +                                                       (7)


where the dependent variable is equivalent the unexpected percentage change in prices,
rt+j — rt+,    =                 .   We   do not have any independent measure of the equity premium,
so we assume it to be included in the constant term. The hypothesis that expectations are
rational thus implies that 13i = 132 = 0 and the residual is purely random. The alternative
hypothesis is that 13i is less or greater than zero: that expected stock-market returns are
excessively or insufficiently volatile, respectively, with respect to the short rate.
      From (5), the expected total stock return is equal to the interest rate plus an equity
premium. This suggests an alternative regression to (7), in which the excess return is
regressed on the short rate alone. We try this specification in addition to (7) below.

3.1. Results
      We use the monthly value-weighted index from the Center for Research in Securities
Prices (CRSP) for the stock return data. The series runs from 1926 to 1985. Monthly
interest rates on U.S. government securities with approximately one month to maturity
come from Ibbotson Associates (1986).15 In order to take advantage of high frequency
stock returns we also used two measures of seven-day interest rates: the rate on eurodollar
deposits and repurchase agreements.
      Table 3a presents estimates of (7). The results are similar to those in the previous
tables, although the coefficients appear different during early portions of the sample. Over
most of the post-war sample, however, increases in short rates reliably result in negative
excess stock market returns.16
  "This standard data set is used by Marsh and M.rton (1987), Fama and French (1987), Campbell and ShiU.r (1988), and
Poterba and Summers (1987), among others.
  '5ff short rate, contain a unit root, then the standard error. in Table Sa may be biased. Tb. next version of this paper will
include probability value. from Mont. Carlo .irnul.tio, to address this potential problem.

                                                              11
       Table 3b presents similar estimates deleting the dividend yield regressor.17 Without
dividends, estimates from higher-frequency data can be obtained. The first row reports the
results from weekly data over the period 1973-84, using the seven-day eurodollar interest
rate. The second row of Table 3b uses a seven-day interest rate on repurchase agreements
collateralized by U.S. government securities, available from DRI beginning in 1980. Both
estimates of fi are statistically negative at the one-percent level. In rows 3 through 10 of
Table 3b we report estimates for longer horizons (one year and one month) over the full
Ibbotson sample and over a number of subsamples. All but one of the estimates of flu are
less than zero, though none is as large or statistically significant as in the weekly data.
       Unfortunately, there is no second measure of expected stock returns to appeal to for
further evidence on whether the above results are generated by time-varying risk. However,
note that the point estimates in Tables 3a and 3b are similar to those in the foregoing
tables.18


4. Excess forecast volatility in expected bond returns
       Our third set of tests covers expected returns in the bond market. Under the linearized
model of the term structure of interest rates, the excess (risk-adjusted) holding period-
return is proportional to the market's expectational error in predicting the future interest
rate:
                                                            dk
                               h"t+j(h(3,k)tc —
                                              —
                                                          dk— dj
                                                                   (1(k—3) —              /

where             is the realized excess holding-period yield obtained from purchasing a k-period
bond at time t, holding it for j periods, and then selling it at time t + j,                            (h)e is the
corresponding market expected excess holding-period yield at time t, i7) is the realized

  l7gj sxp.ctsd returns are given simply by I, + $,, Lb. dividsod yisld       doss not have to be included on Lb. right-hand
sid, to test for excass volatility of exp.ct.d returns.
  'A   number of autho,, have found .vid.nc. of negative correlation between short-term nomihel interest rates and subsequent
stock market returns, both in Lb. U.S. and in other industrialised couMri.s (I.., for example, Ferns and Schwert, 1T7 and
So1nk, 1953). This correlation is usually Interpreted as evidence that expected stock returns respond negsvdy to expected
inSetlon. Of course, under this int.rpration higher inflation (end higher nominal short rates) must be associated with lower
equity premia on stocks.

                                                             12
rate at time i+j on a k—f-period bond (k >                    j), (i'          is the market's time-t expectation
of           dm is Macaulay's (1938) definition of duration for an m period bond when priced
at par, dm =                        and i is the coupon rate. For pure-discount bonds, such as U.S.
Treasury bills, duration is just the time to maturity.19 Also under the linearized model,
the expected future interest rate above the "short" f-period rate can be written as a linear
combination of the "long" k-period rate, the short rate, and a term premium:20

                                            —   (j) — dk           (1(k) — ()\ — 9(j,k)
                              (j(k—3))e
                                t+j                                              It                                        (9)


      As in the previous sections, consider a regression of the excess holding return for a

bill or bond on the components of the expected interest rate change:

                                —   (h24l)e = a +                 +           + 838' + t+2.                              (10)


The null hypothesis in (10) is that 13i = /32 = = 0 and the residual is purely random1
whereas the alternative hypotheses are that expected interest rate changes are excessively
volatile with respect to short rates (/3i <0), long rates (/32 > 0), and term premia (/33 > 0).
Insufficient volatility is associated with the opposite inequalities.
      As in section 2, there are two available measures of the expected future interest rate,
(j3))e, which from (8) appears implicitly on the left-hand side of (10). First is the
standard one — the time-t forward interest rate on a k —f-period instrument to be acquired

in j periods:      (i) ) / =        dh—dj
                                            ((k) —            + i. To see that this measure contains the
term premium, use (9) to get (i)f = (i' +                                               Of course, when using the
forward rate to measure the expected future interest rate, the time-t expected excess
holding return is zero, so the dependent variable in (10) is simply the total excess holding
return, h) 21
  ' For an exposition of the lineari.d model of the term structure and for evidenc, on the size of the linesrisation error, see
Shillsr, Campbell and Schoenholts (1Q53).
 2O the append for a general de&tlon of this premium.
  21Ragres,ions of total .xcs holSng returns on the right-hand sid. variables in (10) are closely relat.d to those used to test
the expectations hypothesis. S.. ShiIlsr (1953) and Campbell and Shiller (1989) for empirical overview, of such tests.

                                                             13
      Our second measure of the expected future interest rate, given by ())3,                                       comes

from time-t surveys of interest rate expectations of the k —j-period rate at time t +j. The
surveys allow us to compute the realized excess holding return in (8) a second way, which
we denote as h) — (h")'. Because this measure of excess holding returns is computed
directly from expectations, without reference to forward rates, it does not include a term
premium. Thus, any predictable component found in this measure of excess returns cannot
be attributed to risk.
      On the right-hand side of (10) is the term premium,                             which can also be measured
two ways. The first comes from the constant-term-premium hypothesis, which implies that
we can get consistent estimates of i and fl2 without bothering to include the premium at
all in our regressions. The second comes from the survey measure of the term premium,
                 .                                          .                               .    .                        e
(°(j,k) )
         $
             , which can be computed from (9) using the survey expectation in place of ('÷, )
If including (93.S)3 has no effect on the coefficients flu and /2, then risk is unlikely to be
the explanation for any predictability based on short and long rates.

4.1. Results
      Estimates of equation (10) are reported in Tables 4a through 4f for a number of
different instruments and forecast horizons. As in section 2, each table contains two panels;
the top uses the total excess holding return, h4), as the dependent variable, while the
bottom uses survey unexpected holding return,                                  —
                                                                                   (h").         In order to permit
comparison between panels, both samples are constructed on the survey dates (the last
Friday of each quarter from 1969 to 1986) 22
      The first line in each panel includes only short and long rates as independent variables;
the second line then adds the survey term premium. The third and fourth lines are similar,
except that the spread,              —        is   used in place of individual short and long rates. If long
and short rates are nonstationary but contain a common unit root, then the spread will
  22Az with th. .xch,ing. rste th.r. do.. not .pp.azso b. .nrthing unuaua about thai p&rticulsr ,.mpl.. For m&ny initrurn.nt.
and forsca.t horizon., rsgr.uicnz othf, on the dif.r.nce b.tw..n th. u.ociat.d long and abort r*tee yi.Id co.Slcisnt. similar
to tho.. reported below.

                                                             14
be stationary.23 Finally, in the fifth and sixth lines the long rate is omitted altogether.
      The interest-rate survey data come from surveys conducted by the Goldsmith-Nagan
Bond and Money Market Letter, now published in the investor newsletter, Reporting on
Governments. Expectations are of future interest rates on the Bond Buyer Index, the
30-year mortgage rate, and 12-month Treasury bills.24 Forecast horizons are three and six
months.25
      Tables 4a and 4b cover the Bond Buyer index at forecast horizons of 3 and 6 months,
respectively. Tables 4c and 4d do the same for 30-year mortgages, while Tables 4e and 4f
cover 12-month Treasury bills. In each of these six tables, all of the estimates of flj, are
negative. In addition, most are statistically significant and have magnitudes which roughly
correspond to those in prior tables. Most estimates of 132 are statistically positive. Also,
the inclusion of               in lines two, four, and six of each panel has no effect on the interest
rate coefficients. Finally, the estimates in the top and bottom panels are very similar,
suggesting that the term premium is not responsible for the predictability of standard
measures of excess holding returns.26
      The results in Tables 4a through 4f suggest that excess returns on longer-term bills and
bonds exhibit excess forecast volatility. In particular, expected returns respond excessively
positively to increases in the short rate. When the short rate is high (holding constant the
long rate and term premium), future rates expected by investors are low, and therefore
investors' expected returns are high. Since on average in such circumstances realized future
rates do not turn out to be so low, the realized holding returns on bonds systematically
do not turn out to be as high as expected.2728
  The      reiressions In the third lin, of each panel are equivalent to those us.d in Froot (1989b) to test the expectations
hypothesis. S.. Campbell and ShIller (1987) for evidence that the spread is stationary.
  24The Bond Buyer indexes 20 general obligation issues with 20.year maturities. The index i. designed to reflect the current
yield-to-maturity on new issues.
  255, Froot (198gb) for more detail on the.. data,
  reAl in sectIon 2, when the survey risk premium is included as a regressor, there 1* no change between top and bottom panels
in estimates of P and $, and the estimate of a Increases by on. from the top to th. bottom panel.
  The weakest evidence for this hypothesis is found in Tables 4. and 4f, which use 12-month Treasury bills. Although the
sign, of the coeMclents are as expected, their estimated magnitudes do appear to shift between top and bottom panels.
  31Many authors, such s Mankiw and Summers (1984), find that the long rate is insu5!ciwtb' volatile with respect to
changes in the short rate. The description above should help clarify how their result, are consistent with our finding of
exceuiva vanatility of expected r,turn,. If when the short rate rises, the long rate tens to rise as well (Instead of remaining

                                                              15
       As in section 2, it is consoling to have some positive evidence that the survey measures
are indeed informative about expected interest rate changes. Froot (1989b) shows that the
survey expected interest rate changes are highly positively correlated with the difference
between long and short rates. Holding risk constant, of course, expected future interest
rates should increase whenever the long rate rises relative to the short rate.29


5. Commodity Markets
      Our final application is to commodity markets. As in the earlier examples, we wish
to regress the market's expectational error in predicting the future return on commodities
on the market's expected rate of return. The market's expected return from time t to t +j
can be expressed as the rate of price appreciation less storage costs:


                                                 c+j —           = lt+'Yg,                                                (U)

where           is the time-t expected percentage price appreciation from t to t + j,                                   is the
storage cost over j periods at time t expressed as a percentage of the commodity price C,
and       is a commodity risk premium.30
      Thus our regression equation becomes:


                                   C3 —              = a + /3iit + P2 +                                                   (12)


where we have left off the risk premium, -ye, from the right-hand side, as we have no survey
data with which to measure it directly. As above, the null hypothesis is that 13i = /2 = 0
and the residual is purely random; the alternatives that expected appreciation is excessively
volatile imply that fl <0 and/or /32 <0.
constant), future rates expected by investors are not so low, ,.nd theralor. expected r.turig are not so high. Thus, if the long
rate were to rise suMciently when the short rat. increas.s (again holding risk constant), the predictability of retun based on
the spread would be eliminated.
  ' One might intirpret these result. as suggesting that the survey respondent. m.rely report the forward rate instead of their
actual apectaon. Froot (159b) shows that the responses differed subetantially from forward rates, and that the implied term
prernia appear sensible (as. especially Figure 4 in that paper).
  "Not, that we hay, dropped thej superscript for the short rate, as it is no longar nec.aary. See the appendix for more
detail on,.
                                                              16
      Storage costs can be measured by noting the forward discount on commodities — the
difference between log forward and spot rates, which we denote by cdt — is equal to the
interest rate plus the storage fees: cd = i +

5.1. Results
      Table 5 presents our estimates of (11). As above, we estimate (11) both with and
without the constraint that f3 = $2. That is, we first regress the excess return on the
interest rate and storage cost, and then regress it on their sum cdg = i +                                      The data
are for 3 major metals: lead, nickel, and silver. Spot and 3-month forward prices for these
are recorded each month. Unfortunately, the time series are rather short. Although the
samples run almost nine years, with a 3-month forecast horizon there are fewer than 36
nonoverlapping observations.
      All the estimates of /3i and 132 are negative, and a few are statistically significant.
This suggests that an increase in the short rate — holding storage costs fixed — is associated
on average with lower excess returns. The estimates are also similar in magnitude to what
we found in the foreign exchange market, stock, and bond markets above. Although there
are no survey data on commodity prices for us to appeal to, the presence of a similar
correlation between excess returns and short rates in all of these markets, and the fact
that whenever surveys are used these correlations persist, suggest that commodity returns
also display excess forecast volatility with respect to the short rate.




  31With the conaaint $ = $ imposed, the regressions si•e similar to thoee reported by Fama and Frenth (1986). Although
their selection of commodities differ, from our,, their findings are not importantly diffeent for nonseesonal commodities.
Seasonal commodities have large predictable components thaI ar. tlearly associated with movements in storage costs; they tend
to yield estimates of 02 that are near zero.

                                                             17
6. Conclusions
      This paper develops simple regression tests capable of distinguishing excessive volatil-
ity in expected returns. In doing so we find a striking regularity in excess returns across
different asset markets, subsamples and forecast horizons: returns are negatively correlated
with short-term interest rates. The size and statistical significance of our estimates of this
relation are also comparable across different assets.
      In a certain sense, this paper is not the first to document the interest rate's ability to
predict excess returns for these markets. Giovannini and Jorion (1987) find direct evidence
in the foreign exchange market, while Fama and Schwert (1977) and Keim and Stambaugh
(1986), among others, report similar evidence for the stock and bond markets. In addition,
there are many studies which find forward discounts to be statistically negatively correlated
with excess returns in the foreign exchange, bond, and commodity markets. In the foreign
exchange market, the forward discount is equal to the difference between the domestic and
foreign interest rates; in the stock market it is equal to the short rate less the dividend
yield; in the bond market it is proportional to the difference between the short and long
rates; and in commodity markets it is equal to the short rate plus storage costs. Thus,
all these results might be interpreted as evidence of the empirical regularity the present
paper focuses on.32
      As always, our results using forward rates alone could in principle be explained by
time-varying risk premia. However, we take the additional step of employing survey data
on asset return expectations as an independent test of whether the time-varying-risk expla-
nation has merit. Surveys are useful as an alternative measure of expected future returns,
one that is free from interference by a risk premium. In virtually every case in which
the survey excess returns are used alongside of the actual excess returns, the sign and
magnitude of the predictable component of the data remain unchanged. Since the survey
excess returns do not include a risk premium, these results suggest that expected returns
  82Th. Iit.rstut. in spelt mrkst documenting the forward discount. ebility to for.c. return. is far too large to mention
her.. Rsprs..rgative citatious for each market are given in the appropriate ,ictioz above.

                                                           18
are excessively volatile with respect to short rate changes.
    While it appears that the predictability we document is evidence of systematic in-
sample forecast errors, it is important to remember that these errors are not themselves
evidence of gross misjudgment by investors. To see that the magnitude of the errors
is small, take as an example a $1000 one-month investment in British pounds (the first
regression in Table 1). If the U.S. short rate falls by one percentage point, the results
suggest that excess returns rise by 2.488 percent, which implies a one-month unpriced gain
of $lOOO(O2488 = $2.07    (neglecting compounding). The monthly standard error of the
regression, however, is 3.1 percent. Thus, the standard deviation of these extra one-month
returns is $31.00! This is similar to the high risk-return tradeoff implicit in other studies
that report predictability of short-horizon excess returns. It may be that there is not
a sufficient number of fully-informed, low-transaction-cost traders to fully eliminate the
regularity we have identified above.




                                             19
7. Appendix
    The "risk premia" for the assets discussed above are defined as the total required excess
returns above the riskiess nominal interest rate. As is well-known, as long as unexpected
changes in goods prices are correlated with unexpected changes in the asset's price, not all
of the required excess return will be attributable to investors' risk aversion. For example,
in a world of risk-neutral investors, it is possible for the nominal expected return on an
asset to be less than the nominal interest rate. This will occur if those states in which the
asset happens to pay off large dollar amounts also turn out to be those in which a dollar
purchases more goods.
    To see this more formally, consider the following derivation. A necessary condition
for the representative investor's intertemporal optimization is the Euler equation:

                                        E(mt+1tPt(l +r+i)) = 1,                         (Al)
                                           Pt+i
where Et() is the expectation operator, applied conditional on all available information
at time t, mt+1 =
                     6.i) is the discounted ratio of marginal utilities of consumption
between time t + 1 and time t, P is the time-t dollar price of consumption, and r1 is
the nominal return on the ith asset between time t + 1 and time t. When applied to the
riskiess rate, r(, condition (Al) for the riskiess nominal rate implies that E (,+Pt)       1.

Using this fact, expression (Al), and some simple algebra, we can write the total excess
required return on the ith asset as:
       •
                 —
                     covg
                               (mt÷1,   (r÷1 — r()) + Et (mgi) Et (-j-(r+i — to)
    t(rt+l) — rt —                                                                      (A2)
                                    COVt (mt+i,     + Et (mi) E (Fj)
where covt() is the time-t conditional covariance operator.
    We can then split up expression (A2) into two terms: the first due to the correlation
between innovations in inflation and asset prices, and the second to risk aversion alone:

                                            ,_.g,-,-——r   ,—r/—rai
                      5•   (       — rf —                            ,     $
                                                                     —,-- rat,
                                                    E (JT)
                                                   20
where the term ra is zero if investors are risk neutral. The first term on the right-hand
side of (A3) is derived from (A2) under the assumption that investors are risk neutral.
     Let investors' unexpected holding return on the ith asset be given by:


                                  rt+l —
                                           L'($   $— ct+1.                              (A4)

Then using equations (A3) and (A4) we can express the total realized excess return on
asset i as:
                          —
                               = (r;+1 — E(r+1)) + (Et(r+i) — r()                       (A5)

                                  Et(p&_(r+i_r(_ra))
                                         / ,,        +rat,
                                           Et(1f—
                                              V t+1
In the text the latter two terms are referred to as the risk premium. Note however, that
the survey unexpected return is a measure of (A4), and therefore, that it contains neither
of these latter two terms. In our regressions we find the correlation of (A4) with different
regressors to be the same as the correlation of (A5) with those same regressors. Thus,
neither of the latter two terms in (A5) is likely to be responsible for the predictability of
realized excess returns we document.




                                             21
8. References

   Baillie, R. T., and T. Bollerslev, "Common Stochastic Trends in a System of Exchange
        Rates," Journal of Finance, 44 (March 1989), 167-82.
   Bilson, J., "The Speculative Efficiency Hypothesis," Journal of Business, 54 (1981),
        433-451.
    Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller, "Cointegration and Tests of Present Value Models,"
       Journal of Political Economy, 95 (October 1987), 1062-88.
    Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller, "The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of
       Future Dividends and Discount Factors," Review of Financial Studies, 1 (Fall
        1988), 195-228.
    Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller, "Yield Spreads and Interest Rate Movements: A
       Bird's Eye View," Princeton University, 1989.
    Cutler, D., J. M. Poterba, and L. H. Summers, "Speculative Dynamics," NBER,
        November 1989.
    Fama, E.F., and K.R. French, "Detecting Spot Price Forecasts in Futures Prices,"
        Journal of Business 59 (1986), 39-54.
    Fama, E.F., and K.R. French, "Permanent and Temporary Components of Stock
        Prices," Journal of Political Economy, 96 (April 1988), 246-73. (a)
    Fama, E.F., and K.R. French, "Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns," Journal
       of Financial Economics, 22 (October 1988), 3-27. (b)
    Fama, E.F. and G.W. Schwert, "Asset Returns and Inflation," Journal of Financial
        Economics, 5 (March 1977), 319-38.
    Ferson, Wayne E., "Changes in Expected Security Returns, Risk, and the Level of
        Interest Rates," Journal of Finance, 44 (December 1989), 1191-1218.
    Flood, R.P., R.J. Hodrick, and P. Kaplan, "An Evaluation of Recent Evidence on
        Stock Market Bubbles," NBER Working Paper No. 1971, July 1986.
    Frankel, J.A., and K.A. Froot, "Using Survey Data to Test Standard Propositions
        Regarding Exchange Rate Expectations," American Economic Review, 77 (March
        1987), 133-153.
    Froot, K.A., "Excess Forecast Volatility in Asset Prices and Expected Returns," Har-
        vard University, 1989. (a)
    Froot, K.A., "New Hope for the Expectations Hypothesis of the Term Structure of
        Interest Rates," Journal of Finance, 44 (June 1989), 283-305. (b)
    Froot, K.A., and J.A. Frankel, "Forward Discount Bias: Is it an Exchange Risk Pre-
        mium?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 416 (February 1989) 139-161.
    Giovannini, A. and P. Jorion, "Interest Rates and Risk Premia in the Stock Market and
        in the Foreign Exchange Market," Journal of International Money and Finance,
        6 (March 1987), 107-24.
                                           22
Hansen, L.P., "Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estima-
   tors," Econornetrica, Vol. 50, pp. 1029-1054, 1982.
Hodrick, R.J., The Empirical Evidence on the Efficiency of Forward and Futures For-
   eign Exchange Markets, in Fundamentals of Pure and Applied Economics, (Cur,
   Switzerland: Harwood Academic Publishers), 1988.
Huizinga, J., "An Empirical Investigation of the Long Run Behavior of Real Exchange
    Rates," University of Chicago, 1986.
Ibbotson Associates, Stocks, Bonds, Bills and Inflation: 1986 Yearbook, Ibbotson
    Associates, Chicago, 1986.
Keim D.B., and R.F. Stanibaugh, "Predicting Returns in the Stock and Bond Mar-
   kets," Journal of Financial Economics, 17 (1986), 357-90.
Macaulay, FR., Some Theoretical Problema Suggested by Movements of Interest Rates,
   Bond Yields and Stock Prices in the United States Since 1856, New York, NBER
   (1938).
Mankiw, N.G. and L.H. Summers, "Do Long-Term Interest Rates Overreact to Short-
   Term Interest Rates?," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1984), 223-242.
Marsh, T.; and R. Merton, "Dividend Variability and Variance Bounds Tests for the
    Rationality of Stock Market Prices," American Economic Review, 76 (1986), 483-
    498.
Newey, W., and K. West, "A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Heteroskedasticity and
   Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix," Econometrica, 55 (May 1987),
    703-8.
Poterba, J.M. and L.H. Summers, "The Persistence of Volatility and Stock Market
    Fluctuations," American Economic Review, 76 (1986), 1142-1151.
Poterba, J.M. and L.H. Summers, "Mean Reversion in Stock Prices: Evidence and
     Implications," Journal of Financial Economics, 22 (October 1988) 27-60.
Shiller, R.J., "The Term Structure of Interest Rates," forthcoming in the Handbook
     of Monetary Economics, North-Holland (1988).
Shiller, R.J., LY. Campbell, and K.L. Schoenholtz, "Forward Rates and Future Pol-
     icy: Interpreting the Term Structure of Interest Rates," Brookings Papers on
    Economic Activity (1983), 223-242.
Solnik, B., "The Relation Between Stock Prices and Inflationary Expectations," Jour-
    nal of Finance, 38 (March 1983), 35-48.




                                      23
</ref_section>
                                          Table 1
                                     Regres8 ions of:
                                 —
                                     fd = + fluit +        + 'lt+,
                                 1-month forecast horizon


      Currency          flu            fl       F-prob       DW            DF
                                                     =0

                      —2.488'         3.464c     0.00        2.04    .08   159
      pound
                      (0.990)        (1.021)
      French franc                    1.517a     0.00        2.26    .06   159
                      (1.124)        (0.765)
      mark                            1.924a     0.00        2.26    .05   159
                      (1.266)         (1.210)
      yen             —2.941           0.175        0.00      1.93   .04   159
                      (1.036)         (0.499)



      pound                           2.933c        0.00      2.05   .08   160
                      (0.789)         (0.789)
      French franc    —1.775'          1.775'       0.00      2.18   .04   160
                      (0.738)         (0.738)
      mark                            2.925c        0.00      2.18   .04   160
                      (1.070)         (1.070)
      yen             —0.670           0.670        0.00      1.85   .01   160
                       (0.596)        (0.596)



       pound           —1.564                       0.06      1.93   .01   160
                      (1.090)
       French franc   —2.400'                       0.00      2.19   .03   160
                       (1.094)
       mark                                         0.00      2.27   .04   160
                       (1.107)
       yen                                          0.00      1.93   .05   160
                       (1.039)


Notes are on following page.
     Notes: Data are sampled monthly from April 1973 to December 1986, with forecast horizons
of 1 month. The middle panel of estimates use i — 1 as the independent variable, thus imposing
the restriction      = —ni. Interest rates are the average of the bid and ask on 1-month eurode-
posits. Standard errors are calculated using GMM allowing for arbitrary serial correlation and
heteroskedasticity where appropriate. Intercept terms were included but are not reported. Super-
scripts a, b, and c, represent statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels, respectively.
                                         Table 2a
                                      Regreaslona of:
                              As7.,.5 = + 11t + fl2i + 31)g ?t+j
                            —                              +
                                3-month forecast horizon


 Dependent
  Variable
                   j                                 Fprob
                                                     flj = 0
                                                               DW      R2     DF



      — fd       —3.318'       2.222'                 0.00     1.01    .07    308
                 (1.321)       (1.292)
                 —3.255'        2.130'     0.194      0.00     1.15    .07    292
                 (1.286)       (1.298)    (0.536)
                                2.916c                 0.00    1.01    .07    309
                 (1.036)       (1.036)
                                2.835c     0.274       0.00    1.17    .07     293

                 (1.016)       (1.016)     (0.525)
                 —2.100'                               0.00    0.95    .05     294

                 (1.281)
                 —2.104'                   0.155       0.00    1.08    .05     293
                  (1.248)                  (0.560)



      — As1                      1.953                 0.00    0.91    .08        293

                 (1.417)        (1.360)
                 —3.255'        2.130'     1.194'      0.00    1.15    .15        292
                  (1.286)       (1.298)    (0.536)
                                2.992c                 0.00    0.89    .06        294

                  (1.095)       (1.095)
                                 2.835c     1.274k     0.00    1.17    .14        293

                 (1.016)        (1.016)    (0.525)                            .



                 —2.521'                               0.00    0.85     .06       294

                 (1.344)
                 —2.104'                    1.155'     0.00     1.08    .12       293
  .
                  (1.248)                  (0.560)


Notes follow Table 2c.
                                         Table 2b
                                      Regresaion8 of:
                            —         = a + $i + 21t + 3rpt + ??t+j
                                 6-month forecast horizon


 Dependent          /9            2           3       F-prob    DW     .R2   DF
  Variable                                               =0

        — fd                    2.137a                 0.00     0.56   .20   303
                  (1.124)       (1.078)
                   3739C        2.124       0.898'     0.00     0.83   .23   287
                  (1.034)       (1.058)     (0.403)
                   35C          35C                    0.00     0.48   .14   289
                  (1.083)       (1.083)
                    3334C       3334C        1.124     0.00     0.85   .19   288
                  (0.959)       (0.959)     (0.586)
                  —2.72&                               0.00     0.51   .17   304
                  (1.046)
                                             0.834     0.00     0.76   .19   288
                  (0.997)                   (0.580)


      —           4.100c        l.905                  0.00     0.50   .21   288
                  (1.236)       (1.150)
                                2.124'       1.898c    0.00     0.83   .31   287

                  (1.034)       (1.058)     (0.403)
                                3•549C                 0.00     0.54   .15   304
                  (1.010)       (1.010)
                                3•334C       2.124c    0.00     0.85   .28   288
                  (0.959)       (0.959)     (0.586)
                                                       0.00     0.47   .18   289
                  (1.102)
                                             1.834c    0.00     0.76   .28   288
                  (0.997)                   (0.580)



Notes follow Table 2c.
                                      Table 2c
                                   Regreaslona of:
                   Aa+1 —          = + thlt + 2I + fl3rp + flt+j
                               12-month forecast horizon


                                 fl2        83        F-prob   DW     R2    DF
 Dependent         flu
  Variable                                              =0

       — fd      —3.160        0.702                   0.00    0.30   .27   283
                 (0.944)       (0.765)
                 3.179°         0.664     —0.296       0.00    0.28   .28   272

                 (0.929)       (0.799)    (0.638)
                               3.080c                  0.00    0.25   .14   284

                 (0.948)       (0.948)
                               3.078c      0.316       0.00    0.37   .14   273
                  (0.974)      (0.974)    (0.741)
          .
                 2.727c                                0.00    0.29   .27   284

                  (0.890)
                                          —0.356       0.00    0.35   .27   272
                  (0.976)                 (0.726)


      —           3.215c        0.406                  0.00    0.32   .30   273

                  (0.939)      (0.770)
                                0.664      0.704       0.00    0.28   .32   272
                  (0.929)      (0.799)    (0.638)
                               3.129c                  0.00    0.29   .13   274
                  (0.944)      (0.944)
                                3.078      1.316°      0.00    0.37   .19   273
                  (0.974)      (0.974)     (0.74 1)
                                                       0.00    0.32   .30   274
                  (0.878)
                  —2.785°                  0.644       0.00    0.35   .31   272
                  (0.976)                  (0.726)


Notes are on following page.
     Notes to Tables 2a-2c: The top and bottom panels use, respectively, forward-rate prediction
errors and exchange-rate survey prediction errors as dependent variables. Within each panel, the
                                              i
third and fourth sets of estimates use lg — as the first independent variable, thus imposing
the restriction that 8  = I2        Interest rates are the average of the bid and ask on 12-month
eurodeposits. Data are sampled each 6 weeks from June 1981 to August 1988, Data for 5 currencies
(pound, Fench franc, mark, Swiss franc, and yen) are stacked. Each currency is given its own
intercept term (not reported). Standard errors are calculated using GMM allowing for arbitrary
serial and cross-sectional correlation, and for heteroskedasticity where appropriate. Superscripts a
b and C represent statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels, respectively.
                                           Table 3a
                                        Regressions of:
                                  —      = a + fllg +         + 17t+j


         Data set                           fi       F-prob       DW      2       DF
                                                        =0

         yearly, 1936-85      —1.185      5.188'      0.01        1.84    .10      57
                             (0.809)      (2.352)
         monthly, 1936-85    —1.364'      4.124'      0.00        2.00    .02     597
                             (0.710)      (2.007)
         monthly, 1956-85    —4.909'      17.111'     0.00        1.87    .06     357
                              (1.064)     (4.190)
         monthly, 1976-85    5.28P        24.474c     0.00        1.99    .08      118
                              (1.710)     (8.708)
         monthly, 1966-75                 25.372'     0.00         1.96   .12      118
                              (3.878)     (12.401)
         monthly, 1956-65     —8.306        1.493     0.15         1.81   .01      118
                              (5.061)     (7.654)
         monthly, 1946-55      0.838       5.822      0.08         1.96   .00      118
                              (7.784)     (4.091)
         monthly, 1936-45     76.357       2.628      0.08         2.13    .02     118
                             (36.141)     (4.999)


     Notes: Stock return data are from CRSP; interest rates are 1-month rates from Ibbotson. Divi-
dend yields are constructed by averaging dividend payments over the previous 12 months. Standard
errors are calculated using GMM allowing for arbitrary serial correlation and heteroskedasticity
where appropriate. Intercept terms were included but are not reported. Superscripts a b and
represent statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels, respectively.
                                            Table 3b
                                         Regressions of:
                                   rt+, — r÷1 = a +      + tt.,,

                Data set               flj      F-prob      DW        k2      DF
                                                   =0

                weekly, 1973-84                  0.00       1.99      .01     602
                                     (1.287)
                weekly, 1980-86                  0.00       1.98      .03     310
                                     (2.027)
                yearly, 1936-85     —1.556"      0.03       1.91      .04      57
                                    (0.818)
                monthly, 1936-85    —1.631'      0.00       2.01      .01     598
                                    (0.709)
                monthly, 1956-85    —1.995'      0.01       1.88      .01     358
                                     (0.870)
                monthly, 1976-85                 0.00       1.96      .12     119
                                     (3.878)
                monthly, 1966-75                 0.15       1.92      .06     119
                                    (3.488)
                monthly, 1956-65    —8.720       0.03       1,22      .02     119
                                     (4.577)
                monthly, 1946-55      3.370      0.82       1.97      .00     119
                                     (8.117)
                monthly, 1936-45     74.856c     0.02       2.15      .02     119
                                    (45.5 12)



    Notes: Stock return data are from CRSP. Interest rates for line 1 are weekly eurodollar deposit
rates; those for line 2 are seven-day repurchase agreements. Monthly and annual estimates use
1-month interest rates from Ibbotson. Standard errors are calculated using GMM allowing for
arbitrary serial correlation and heteroskedasticity where appropriate. Intercept terms were included
but are not reported. Superscripts a b and c, represent statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1
percent levels, respectively.
                                      Table 4a
                                   Regressions of:
                     —
                          (b')    =a+         +        +          + n+,
               Excess    returns on bond buyer index held for 3 months
                              (k=240 months, j=3 months)

Dependent                                              F-prob
 Variable                                                  =0

                 —5.141'        7.293°                  0.00       2.35    .12    67

                  (2.284)      (2.335)
                                7.844'      0.282       0.01       2.35    .12    66

                  (2.361)       (2.280)    (0.311)
                 —5252'          5.252'                 0.06       2.42    .10    68

                  (2.704)       (2.704)
                                5.224'      0.070       0.01       2.42    .09    67

                  (2.735)       (2.735)     (0.277)
                  —1.132                                0.45       2.00    .00    68

                  (1.860)
                  —1.082                    0.031          0.75    2.00    .00    67

                  (2.041)                   (0.313)


                                                                    2.18   .09    67
    — (h')'                      5.344                     0.02
                  (2.826)        (2.863)
                                  7.844'     1.282'        0.00     2.35   .27    66
                  (2.361)        (2.280)    (0.311)
                                  5.651'                   0.05     2.17    .10    68
                  —5.651'
                  (2.858)        (2.858)
                                  5.224'     1.070'        0.00     2.72    .25    67
                  —5.224'
                   (2.735)       (2.735)    (0.277)
                                                           0.02     1.99    .06    68
                   —2.731
                   (2.068)
                                             1.031'        0.00     2.00    .16    67
                   —1.082
                   (2.041)                   (0.313)



Notes follow Table 4f.
                                         Table 4b
                                     Regreuions of:
                         —
                             (h3.)e = a + 48i1' + 48214 + fi39)   +
                 Excess    returns on bond buyer index held for 6 months
                                (k=240 months, j=6 months)

  Dependent          481           482         483     F-prob     DW       R2    DF
   Variable                                            48, = 0


                                  7.906c                0.00      1.40     .29   66
                   (1.674)       (1.325)
                                  8.017c     0.204      0.00      1.39     .28   65
                   (1.701)       (1.357)    (0.363)
                                  6.093e                0.00      1.46     .26   67
                   (1.435)       (1.435)
         .
                                  6.169c    —0.101      0.00      1.46     .25   66
                   (1.549)       (1.549)    (0.361)
                   —1.195                               0.29      0.90     .01   67
                   (1.391)
                   —1.216                   —0.018      0.57      2.00     .00   66
                   (1.438)                  (0.45.4)



     — (h*))1                     7.360c                0.00      1.36     .27
                   (1.888)       (1.495)
                                  8.017c     1.204c     0.00      1.39     .38   65
                   (1.701)       (1.357)    (0.363)
                                  6.850c                0.00      1.39     .28   67
                   (1.530)       (1.530)
                   —6.169         6.1696     O.8g8      0.00      1.46     .35
                   (1.549)       (1.549)    (0.361)
                   —2.380'                              0.05      0.92     .07   67
                   (1.458)
                   —1.216                    0.982k     0.02      2.00     .13   66
                   (1.438)                  (0.454)


Notes follow Table 4f.
                                         Table 4c
                                     Regressions of:
                         —
                             (h")   = a + flu1' + j9I +           + ,,
                Excess    returns on 30 year mortgages held for 3 months
                               (k=360 monthi, j3       months)


    Dependent        81             2          83        F-prob    DW      R2        DF
     Variable                                               =0                   .



      h!          —6.588'
                  (2.253)
                                 8.104'
                                (2.569)
                                                           0.01    2.79    .08       67


                  —7.215'       10.021c      0.518         0.01    2.78    .10       66
                  (2.825)        (3.132)    (0.383)
                  —7.335          7.335                    0.13    2.88    .08       68
                  (4.795)        (4.795)
        .           77C          7.807c      0.194         0.01    2.91    .08       67
                  (2.831)        (2.831)     (0.327)
                   0.329                                   0.95    2.49    .00       68
                   (2.281)
                    0.258                    —0.036        0.99    2.49    .00       67
                   (2.737)                   (0.499)



       — (h)s      —5.378        4.403'                    0.20    2.52    .02       67
                  (2.974)        (2.991)
                  —7.215'        10.021'     1,518e        0.00    2.78    .19       66
                   (2.825)       (3.132)     (C.383)
                   —4.897         4.897                    0.09    2.47    .03       68
                   (2.953)       (2.953)
                                 77C         1.194'        0.00    2.91    .17       67
                   (2.831)       (2.831)     (0.327)
                   —1.620                                  0.37    2.43    .00       67
                   (2.203)
                    0.258                    0.964'        0.01    2.49    .08       67
-
                   (2.737)              .
                                             (0.499)


Notes follow Table 4f.
                                            Table 4d
                                         Regressions of:
                             —
                                 (h2)e = + fl1i' +         +        +
                     Excess returns on 30 year mortgages held for 6 months
                                   (k=360 months, j6 months)

      Dependent          fit           fi:        $        F-prob   DW       R     DF
       Variable                                                0

                       —6.652'       7.382'                0.00     1.43     .20   66
                       (2.973)       (2.893)
                       —6.639'        8.122'    0.407      0.00     1.42     .21   65
                       (1.972)       (2.041)    (0.351)
                       —7.147'        7.147'                0.00    1.50     .20   67
                       (2.321)       (2.321)
                       —7.138'        7.137'    0.140      0.00     1.51     .20   66
                       (2.260)       (2.260)    (0.302)
                       0.ii9                               0.98     1.03     .00   67
                       (1.282)
                       —0.027                   —0.086     0.99     1.03     .00   66
                       (1.312)                  (0.441)



         — (h')        —6.682'       5.563'                0.02     1.33     .12   66
                       (2.320)       (2.225)
                       —6.639'       8.122c     1.407'     0.00     1.42     .31   65
                       (1.972)       (2.041)    (0.351)
                       —5.924'        5.924'               0.02     1.21     .12   67
                       (2.425)       (2.425)
                       —7.138'        7.137'    1.140'     0,00     1.51     .29   66
                       (2.260)       (2.260)    (0.302)
                       —1.580                               0.02    0.19     .02   67
                       (1.211)
                       —0.027                   0.914'      0.04    1.03     .10   66
.
                       (1.312)                  (0.441)


    Notes follow Table 4f.
                                         Table 4e
                                      Regressions of:
                         —
                             (h))1   = a + fli + fl2i   +          + +,
             Excess   returns on 12 month Treasury bills held for 3 months
                               (k=15 months, j=3 months)

 Dependent            th             fl2      3         F-prob     DW        R2    DF
  Variable                                                  =0

                  —1.924'        2.870c                  0.00       2.24     .27   67
                  (0.827)       (0.822)
                  —1.447         2.131      —0.346       0.00       2.32     .26   66
                  (0.989)       (1.173)     (0.392)
                  —2.481         2.481                   0.01       2.33     .08   68
                  (1.780)       (1.780)
                  —0.788         0.788                   0.00       2.51     .24   67
                  (0.940)        (0.940)     (0.239)
                   0.861'                                0.02       1.85     .15   68
                   (0.359)
                    0.271                   —0.853'      0.00       2.25     .24   67

                   (0.493)                   (0.442)



     — (h')'       —0.545        0.736                   0.56       2.37     .00   67
                   (0.834)       (0.840)
                   —1.447        2.131a      0.654a      0.25       2.32     .02   66

                   (0.989)       (1.173)     (0.392)
                   —0.658         0.658                  0.53       2.49     .00   68

                   (0.828)       (0.828)
                   —0.788         0.788      0.071          0.78    2.51     .00   67

                   (0.940)       (0.940)     (0.239)
                    0.170                                   0.56    2.29     .00   68
                   (0.329)
                    0.271                     0.147         0.73    2.25     .00   67

                   (0.493)                   (0.442)


Notes follow Table 4f.
                                       Table 41
                                    Regressions of:
                       —
                            (h")   = a+      + p2jk) +         + ÷,
              Excess returns on 12 month Treasury bills held for 6 months
                               (k=18 months, j=6 months)

  Dependent          fl                     fl,      F.prob     DW          R2    DF
   Variable                                              =0

                                2.642c                0.00      1.46        .35   66
                   (0.733)     (0.699)
                   —1.305       1.461                 0.00      1.59        .37   65
                   (0.841)     (0.977)    (0.478)
                                2.828c                0.00      1.70        .21   67
                   (0.969)     (0.969)
                   —1.164       1.164                 0.00      1.65        .38   66
                   (0.706)     (0.706)    (0.251)
                   0.624c                             0.00      1.04        .17   67
                   (0.195)
                   —0.107                             0.00      1.50        .36   66
                   (0.218)                (0.320)


     — (b")'      .i.177        1.263'                0.10      1.60        .05   66
                   (0.655)     (0.625)
                   —1.305       1.461      0.143      0.22      1.59        .04   65
                  (0.841)      (0.977)    (0.478)
                  —1.291'       1.291'                0.09      1.69        .06   67
                   (0.581)     (0.581)
                   —1.164       1.164     —0.083      0.09      1.65        .05   66
                   (0.706)     (0.706)    (0.251)
                    0.111                             0.56      1.34        .00   67
                   (0.162)
                   —0.107                 —0.426      0.32      1.50        .00   66
                   (0.218)                (0.320)


Notes are on following page.
     Notes to Tables 4a-4f: The top and bottom panels use, respectively, forward-rate prediction
errors and interest-rate survey prediction errors as dependent variables. Within each panel, the
third and fourth sets of estimates use      —     as the first independent variable, thus imposing the
restriction that th  = —82.   Data  are sampled each  quarter from 1969 to 1986. Intercept terms were
included but are not reported. Standard errors are calculated using GMM allowing for arbitrary
serial correlation and for heteroskedasticity where appropriate. Superscripts a, 6, and c, represent
statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels, respectively.
                                               Table 5
                                           Regressions of:
                                       —
                                         c7. = a + fiI, +      + t7Hj
                                        3-month forecast horizon


            Commodity                                F-prob        DW     .R2    DF
                                                        =0

            lead            —3.164         —0.246      0.04        0.65   .04    100
                            (2.008)        (0.395)
            nickel          —6.174         —0.885      0.02        0.37   .04    100
                            (4.861)        (0.650)
            silver                        478.3        0.05        0.74   .03    95
                            (3.477)        (2.912)



            lead           —0.484                      0.09        0.67   .01    101
                            (0.37 1)
            nickel         —1.035                      0.02        0.37   .03    101
                           (0.644)
            silver                                    0.01         0.75   .04    96
                           (2.702)


     Notes: Spot and 3-month forward commodity prices are monthly from DRI, 1981 to 1989.
Interest rates are the average of the bid and ask on 3-month dollar eurodeposits. Standard errors
are calculated using GMM allowing for serial correlation and heteroskedasticity where appropriate.
Intercept terms were included but are not reported. Superscripts a b and C represent statistical
significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels, respectively.
