NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACT OF THE 1986 TAX REFORM ACT OH PERSONAL SAVING

Jonathan

Skinner

Daniel Feenberg

Working Paper No, 3257

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February

1990

Act of
Prepared for the Conference on the Economic Impact of the Tax Reform
1986, Ann Arbor, MI, November 1989. We are grateful to Don Fullerton, Kevin
Hasaett, Pat Hendershott, Joel Slearod, Conferenceparticipants, and the Public
Richard
Finance seminar at Columbia University for helpful suggestions.
McCrath provided excellent research assistance, and we especially thank John
Karl Schols for allowing us to use his taxpayer survey. This paper is part of
NBER'm research program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research,

MEER Working Paper e3257
February 1990
THE IMPACT OF THE 1986 TAX REFORM ACT ON PERSONAL SAVING
ABSTRACT
would
Many critics believed that the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA86)
Yet personal saving rates have rebounded since 1987. This
discourage saving.
rebound might have been caused by a general decline in marginal tax rates on
And we estimate, at least for the 1980s, a positive
household saving.
of return.
But the tax
elasticity of saving with respect to the after-tax rate
in saving rates.
changes alone cannot account for the recent upswing
Furthermore, the positive saving elasticity during the 1980s is fleeting and
between the after-tax
fragile; during the entire postwar period the correlation
rate of return and personal saving is at most zero.
We also consider three alternative ways by which the Tax Reform Act could
have affected personal saving.
First, the cutbacks in IRA eligibility were
viewed by some as discouraging saving. But conventionallymeasured personal
We show that this
saving increased after IRA enrollment plummeted in 1987.
anomalous finding may be an artifact of how personal saving is measured, since
- .
wealth
the real change in household
grew strongly
a different measure
Second, the phasing out
during the mid-l98Os, before leveling off after 1987.
have
discouraged
of personal credit interest deductions in TRA86 could
We find that wealthier
borrowing and thereby stimulated national saving.
loans
into
tax-deductible
taxpayers simply shuffled their personal credit
Finally, saving
housing mortgages with little net effect on aggregate saving.
could have been reduced in 1986 if taxpayers, rushing to realize capital gains
also
before TRA86, spent their proceeds on bit-ticket consumption goods. We
find little evidence in favor of this view, although we do find much of the
accounts.
In sum, TRAB6 had more
capital gains ended up in interest-bearing
level of saving.
impact on the composition than on the overall

Jonathan Skinner
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
Charlottesville,VA 22901
(804)924-6749

Daniel Feenberg
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
(617)868-3900

The 1986 Tax Reform Act was viewed by some critics as discouraging
saving.t

While marginal rates were reduced,

the preferential treatment

of capital gains was erased and IRAs were largely shut down.
the pessimistic view

At

first,

of tax reform seemed to be borne out by the

statistics; personal saving rates plunged from an already low 4 percent
in 1986 to 1.8 percent in the second quarter of 1987.
time,

But since that

the saving rate has rebounded; by the second quarter of 1989 the

personal saving rate stood at 5.4 percent.
One of the most difficult tasks in economics is to establish a
causal relationship, and in the case of a structural change as recent as
the 1986 tax reform, the task is particularly difficult. The first
question that must be addressed is, were there large changes in the
incentives to saving under the 1986 tax reform?

We find that the

changes in marginal household saving incentives were substantial.2 For
example.

27 percent of taxpayers, weighted by dividend income received,

experienced a decline in marginal tax rates on dividend income of more
than 20 percentage points.

We also find that the decline in marginal

rates and the increase in the tax on capital gains largely offset one
another,

leaving the effective household tax rate on investments largely

unchanged or even lowered.

Furthermore, investments held for a long

period of time were moat favored under the 1986 tax reform, even when

For example, in late 1986 Murray Weidenbaum stated that under tax
"Investment incentives are clobbered... . [The tax billj
depresses
saving and investment, and that reduces economic growth." (quoted in the
atipnsl Journal [October 11, 1986, page 2457]).
reform,

This paper focuses only on household saving incentives, although
the 1986 Tax Reform Act had a major effect on corporate tax incentives.
For reviews see Auerbach (1987) and Bovenberg (l989)
2

-2-

accrued capital gains comprised a substantial fraction of the total
return.

The second question is, how do these merginel incentives to aave -aa aummarized by the after-tax rete of return

-

- affect

saving rates?

The evidence that the after-tax rate of return affects saving is weak,
although for the most pert the evidence excludes the latter part of the

We reevaluate the

l980s.3

evidence,

and first find that simple seving

regressions imply a negative interest elasticity of saving during the
postwar period.

Second,

the Euler equation approach to consumption

implies essentielly no effect of
(Hall,

1988).

the reel after-tax return on saving

But when the sample is restricted to the l980s, both the

saving and consumption regressions show a positive and significant
effect of the after-tax return on saving.

These results either suggest

a fundamental shift in saving behavior during the l980s, or a simple
statistical artifact,

If the after-tax rate of return has had little historical impact on
aggregate

personal saving, then why should the 1986 Tax Reform Act

(TRA86) be expected to affect saving?

There are three reasons.

First,

TR&86 sharply restricted IRA eligibility to higher income taxpayers, and
IRA contributions fell by 62 percent between 1986 and 1987.

Generally,

microeconozsic studies have been supportive of the view that IRAs

represent new saving, so TRAB6 could have reduced household saving by
restricting IRAs.'

But the evidence from aggregate personal saving

See Hall (1988), Boskin (1978), Howrey and Hymens (1978), Summers
(1982) and Friend end Hssbrouck (1983).
See, for example, Venti and Wise (1986, 198?, 1989); FeenberE and
Skinner (1989); Hubbard (1984); for criticisms of these studies see

-3-

suggests

that IRAs,

if

anything,

reduced saving.

Between 1982 when IRAs

became generally available, and 1986 when they were curtailed, personal
saving declined from 6,8 percent to 4 percent; since 1986 the saving
rate has rebounded by 2 percentage points,

One explanation for the sharply different results between the
microeconomic studies suggesting that IRAs increase saving, and the
aggregate data suggesting that they do not, is the measurement of
saving.

Saving can be measured in two ways; either as the difference

between the flow of income and the flow of consumption -- which is how
personal saving is usually measured

-

- or

as the change in net wealth,

Theoretically, the two measures are identical.

But in practice,

they

are quite different.6 And saving rates calculated as the difference in
net wealth tell a different story of asset accumulation during the
period when IRAs were available;
during 1982-86,

this measure of saving remained high

and dropped off slightly after 1987,

factors accounted for this increase

Obviously, many

in net wealth, such as the stock

market boom, but the point remains that household asset accumulation was
strong during the mid 1980s.

Hence it is difficult to make any

conclusions about the effect of IRAs on saving based only on an
examination of aggregate saving rates, since alternative measures of
saving tell such different stories.
The second way that TRA86 affected saving behavior was by phasing
out the deduction for personal interest payments and thereby increasing

Gravelle (1989) and preliminary work by Gale and Scholz (1989).
For recent discussions of this issue, see Auerbach (1985); Boskin
(1988); Bradford (1989); and Hendershott and Peek (1989).

-4-

the net cost of borrowing.

As a result of TRA86, total consumer credit

(excludinghouse mortgages) and revolving credit both fell sharply
between the letter half of 1986 and the first quarter of 1987.
other fectors conetent,

Holding

this would imply thet TRA86 stimulated saving,

since a dollar not borrowed is a doller saved.

But taxpeyers did not

Using e panel of taxpeyers

hold their home mortgages constent.

for the

years 1985 to 1987, we found thet taxpeyers shuffled their reduced
personal credit into home equity lines of credit or increased home
mortgages. Our estimetes suggest that of every dollar reduction in
personal interest payments,

between 67 end 86 cents went back into

increasedhome mortgage payments.

Perhaps this is one reeson why the

ratio of home mortgages to housing value reached 48 percent in 1988, a
sharp rise from the 40.4 peroent retio in 1984 (Federal Reserve Boerd,
1989).

At least for the weelthy taxpayers

n our sample,

the reduction

in personal oredit deductibility had little effect on overall saving.
The third effeot of TRA86 on the level end composition of household
saving wes the controversial decision to ease the distinction between
long term capital gains end ordinary income.

The top marginal rate on

capital gains rose from 20 percent to 33 percent, while the statutory
rates on ordinary income declined.

Once it became clear that the new

law would raise cepital gains tames in 1987, taxpayers rushed to realize
long-term

gains in 1986.

While a lively debate still continues on

whether increased capital gains taxes raises revenue (Lindsey, 1987,
Cook and O'Hera, 1987, end Auerbech,

1988), a different,

and neglected,

question is how announced changes in the capital gains tax effected
household saving.

The primary impect of TRA86 on saving could have been

-5-

to encourage taxpayers to unlocked their long-term gains and spend them
(Summers,

1989).

Results from the panel survey of taxpayers provide

little support for the view that the capital gains realization in 1986
reduced saving, although we do find evidence that taxpayers shifted
thefr capir,l gains into interest-bearing assets.

In summary, then, the

Tax Reform Act of 1986 had a stronger impact on the composition of
saving and credit than on

he

actual level of aggregate household

saving.

II.

The Effect of TRA86 on the Marginal Return to Saving

The objective of TRA86 was to broaden the tax base and lower
marginal rates.

These lower rates were phased in during 1987, and by

1988 taxpayers faced top marginal rates of 33 percent,

with the

wealthiest individuals paying a marginal tax of 28 percent.
taxpaers,

the changes in marginal rates were quite small.

For many
For example,

in a 1987 study Rausman and Poterba evaluated the overall impact of
TRA86 on marginal rates:

Our calculations suggest that in 1988, over 40 percent of the
taxpaying population will face marginal tax rates equal to or higher
than the rates they would face under current law. Only 11 percent of
taxpayers receive marginal tax rate reductions of ten percentage points
or more. In part, these findings account for our conclusion that the
tax reform will have relatively small aggregate effects (pp. 101.102).

Our calculations focus less on the absolute number of taxpayers,
and more on those taxpayers who are actually receiving a large fraction
of interest,

dividend or capital gains income.

Our measure of marginal

tax rate changes weights each taxpayer by the amount of relevant income

that they received in 1986.

Since a large fraction of saving is done by

those whose tax rates are affected most by TRA86, we find substantial
shifts in the marginal tax rates on a "representativ&' or average dollar

of capital income.
The distribution of these changes may be seen in Figures 1 and 2
(and in Table 1) as calculated by NBER's TAXSIM program.
model uses a stratified random sample of 75,400

US,

The TAXSIM

individual income

tax returns from 1984 weighted to replicate the universe of tax returns.6
Figure 1 shows the distribution of changes in the marginal tax rate on
dividends and capital gains between 1986 and 1988, weighted by dividend
and capital gains income, respectively.

For example, taxpayers who in

total account for 27 cents of every dollar received in dividend income
experienced a decline in their marginal tax rate of more than 20
percentage points.

This number largely reflects those taxpayers

formerly in the 50 percent bracket now subject to the 28 percent
bracket.

But almost every taxpayer experienced a sharp rise in their

capital gains tax; the rate jumped by at least 10 percentage points for
taxpayers receiving 74 cents of every dollar in capital gains.

The corresponding figures are shown for the marginal tax rates on
interest income and personal credit in Figure 2.

In the first case, the

The TAXSIM data includes all information (except taxpayer
identification) from the 1040 form and a few items from important
supporting schedules. The very rich are oversampled to provide more
accurate estimates of tax liabilities, with sampling rates of up to one
in three for the highest income levels. To the extent feasible,
complexities of the tax code, including income averaging, the minimum
tax, etc. , are accounted for in the calculation of tax liabilities and
marginal tax rates. The tax return data is as rich in income
information as it is poor in demographic information, Race, sex, and
exact age are pointedly not available.

-7-

percentage of taxpayers experiencing a shift in their marginal tax rates
are weighted by interest income received, while in the second case, we
weight by AGI (since total personal credit is unavailable).

There is an

overall decline in the marginal tax on interest, but it is less in
magnitude than that for dividend income because a smaller fraction of
interest income is held by the wealthiest taxpayers.

Only 6.2 percent

of interest income was taxed at the 50 percent marginal rate in 1986,
compared with 25 percent of dividend income in the same year.

Finally,

the reduction in deductions allowed on personal credit, from 100 percent
to 40 percent in 1988, coupled with the lower marginal tax rates in
1988, sharply increased the after-tax cost of personal borrowing.
Taxpayers who together accounted for 61 percent of AGI experienced at
least a 11 percentage point decline in the marginal deduction for
personal interest.
While marginal dividend tax rates went down and capital gains taxes
went up, what was the overall impact of TRA86 on investments which pay a
combination of dividends and realized capital gains?

The popular view

was that assets which appreciated in value, especially over the
long-term, would suffer under TRA86 because of the higher capital gains
tax rate.

A simple calculation suggests otherwise.

investment which retains
in net business profits.

Consider an

and pays in dividends (1-sb) of every dollar

In the calculations that follow, we assume

that the fixed after-corporate-tax nominal return is r, the holding
period n years, and dividends paid in each year are reinvested in the
same investment,
Consider a two-year investment purchased for $1; in the first year,

the accumulated value of the investment (after the first-year dividend
has been reinvested) is

I

+

'r + z, where z — (l-Or(l-r)

is the

after-tax dividend rate and r is tha income tax assessed on the
J

dividend.

At the end of the second year, the investment is sold, the

capital gains tax is paid, and net of the principal of $1, the investor
is left with

((l+r+z)(l+Yr)-l](l-r)+ (l+Ør+z)z.
The two terms are (i) the accumulated after-tax capital gains, and (ii)
In general, the realized return n

the after-tax second-year dividend,

years in the future, (net of the principal) on en investment of one
dollar is written

—
R(TcTy)

E(i+*+z) 1(l+t)l](lY)

+

z(l÷t+z)n

To measure the effect on incentives of TRA8G, we first celculete
the after-tax return K for a representative taxpayer under prior law.
For example, the after tax rate of return

R

on a $1 investment held for

5 years, paying 12 percent, and with a retained earning percentage of 50
percent is $0.44 at a marginal income tax rate
capital gains tax

of 20 percent.

Ty

of 50 percent end a

The next step is to consider the

effect on the rate of return K of a tax reform which taxes cepitel gains

In
*
we calculate the value of r such that the return R(r ,r

end dividends at the single rate

particular,
R(•4TyTy)

so that the investor is

along the lines of TRA8G,

jjg

between paying

* *
under

the new regime without preferential treatment of capital gains end
under the old regime with preferential treatment of ceptel gains.

*

Returning to

our example above, a tax rate r

— .32 on both dividends

end capital gains would yield the same after-tax return $0.44.

)

—

-9-

Taxpayers always prefer to pay lower taxes: if the taxpayer's true
marginal rate under TRAB6 is below
above, they are worse off.

r

they are better off; if it is

In the example above,

every taxpayer with a

marginal rate below 32 percent is better off under TRA86.

Note that we

need not specify the inflation rate or the internal rate of return on
the investment to make this comparison.
The calculations are presented in Table 2 for a variety of

In the first row and first column of results, the reported

parameters.

*
value of r

,

0.35

is the marginal tax rate that would leave the

investor indifferent to the original 50 percent tax bracket with 60
percent exclusion of capital gain; nearly every investor under TRA86
will be subject to marginal rates below 35 percent, and therefore will
be better off.

For longer holding periods, the marginal rate

first

falls to 32 percent, and then .j.g.g.g as the holding period increases
beyond 5 years.

That

is,

even when half of all profits are retained,

and hence subject to capital gains tax, nearly every taxpayer previously

in the 50 percent tax bracket will benefit under TRA86 for long-term
investments.7
The intuition is that as the holding period increases, reinvested
dividends account for a larger fraction of the overall return.

Under

TRA86, those after-tax dividends are larger, and hence augment the
overall rate of return5

For a wide range of interest rates and holding

The calculations presented in the text refer only to new
investments made after 1987.
Old investments which pay ordinary income
tax on capital gains will obviously be disadvantaged by TRA86.
The timing of the tax collection differs as well; under TRA86 a
larger portion of the tax is collected at realization in year n.

-10-

periods, TRA86 benefits household investors previously in marginal tax
brackets of 40 or 50 percent.
percent dividend payout rate

We have also calculated
—

.7);

for a 30

in this case the calculated

1s

are lower, but even the wealthy taxpayer formerly in the 50 percent
bracket and now in the 28 percentSbracket will be almost uniformly
better off under TR.A86.
While these calculations suggest that conventional saving vehicles
were relatively unharmed at the household level by TRA86, there were a
number of investment categories which experienced sharp increases in tax
liability, auch as real estate and investments generating passive
losses.

It is not surprising that partnership and S corporation net

losses fell by 40 percent and rental property by 23 percent between 1986

and 1987 (Hostetter and Bates, 1989). This evidence suggests that TRA86
was successful in discouraging household saving in these formerly
tax-favored investments,

Nevertheless, for orthodox financial

investments, and particularly those with low levels of retained
earnings, TRA86 generally reduced marginal tax rates on household
saving.

Whether these lower tax rates translated into higher household

saving rates is the topic of the next section.

III.

The After-tax Rate of Return. Savina. and Conumotion

The impact of a change in the interest rate on saving is ambiguous.
The substitution effect induces investors to save more in response to a
higher return, but a higher return provides the investor with more
future income for a given level of saving; this income effect may lead
to a reduction in overall saving.

On theoretical grounds, however, the

-11-

lower marginal rates under TRA86 might be expected to increase saving.
First, the tax reform was designed to be revenue neutral, so that the
overall income effect will be nearly zero.

Second, as Summers (1981)

has demonstrated in a life cycle model, the endowment effect --

that

an

increased interest rate will reduce the present value of future earnings
and thus depress current consumption

elasticity

-

-

tends

to imply a positive saving

Yet the empirical evidence for any positive correlation

between the after-tax rate of return and the saving rate is very weak.
Some studies have found positive effects of the interest rate on saving
(Boskiri, 1978; Summers, 1982), but they are not robust to alternative

empirical specifications (Howrey and Hymans, 1978; Hall, 1988; also see
Friend and Hasbrouck, 1983).

As a first step, it is useful to reexamine

the evidence in light of new data from the 1980s.

We adopt
(NIPA)

as our measure

of personal saving the Commerce Department

saving measure plus contributions to government pension plans,'°

divided by disposable personal income plus the government pension
contributions.

We include government pensions for consistency with the

convention of including private pensions in saving (Hendershott and
Peek, 1989).

There are alternative measures of saving (discussed

below), but we adopt this measure of saving because it addresses a
well-defined question: Are U.S. households generating sufficient saving

Defined benefit pension plans are a perfect example of "target'
saving, since a higher interest rate will reduce the contributions
necessary to meet future benefit payments. Hence the importance ofT
pension funds in personal saving would tend to reduce the interest
elasticity of saving (Bernheim and Shoven, 1985; Nakin and Couch, 1989).
10
Line 6 in the sector statements of saving and investment from the
Flow of Funds Accounts of the Federal Reserve (various issues).

-12-

to finance domestic investment?

If personal (along with corporate

business plus government) NIPA saving are low, then foreign inflows are
nacessary to finance domestic investment.

While the economic effect of

large foreign capital inflows are not necessarily harmful, future U.S.
national income will be reduced as a larger fraction of the return on
U.S. capital flows overseas.

and a
Figure 3 shows personal saving rates, both quarterly
three-quarter moving average, for the NIPA measure of saving with the
adjustment for government pension contributions.

The adjustment

increases the overall saving rate by one or two points, but has no
was
atrong effect on the general trend, which at least until 198?
downward.

Since 198?, saving rates have increased, but they still

remain below rates during the 1970s.
Although our primary interest is in personal saving rates, we
include the three-quarter moving average of private saving (which also
includes the government pension contributions) because, in both theory
and practice, it is often difficult to distinguish between business and
private saving.

First, on theoretical grounds, buainess saving could

substitute for personal saving, since the ultra-rational consumer would
care little whether the corporation in which she owned stock was saving
household
directly or issuing dividends so that she could save at the
level.

Second, and more practically, the personal saving rate is a

it includes profits from
hybrid of business and household saving because
and Peek, 1989).
unincorporated businesses (Hendershott

But private

of personal saving; both rates decline,
saving follows the broad pattern
and both rebound at roughly the same time.

-13-

Figure 3 may suggest that TRA86 encouraged personal and private
saving, since saving rates rebounded during 1987,
implementation.
recent years.

the first year of its

But there were many factors that affected saving in

To list only three; (i) farm support payments were large

(and not seasonally adjusted) in 1988, and could account for roughly

half of the increase in the saving rate (Koretz, 1989); (ii) strong
automobile sales fell in 1988, leading to a decline in consumer durable
sales and hence a 'rebound" in saving (Koretz, 1989); and (iii) tax
collections were high during 1987 (perhaps as a result of TRA8G

or

payments on capital gains made during 1986) which temporarily depressed
disposable personal income.

In short, one cannot make inferences about

the success or failure of TRA86 by looking at short-term quarterly
changes in personal saving rates.

Nevertheless, the evidence is clear

that while personal saving may have stemmed its downward slide, it still
remains below its level of the 1970s.
Another approach to measure the impact of TRA86 on saving is to
statistically estimate the impact of the after-tax rate of return on
saving during the postwar period, and then use this structural estimate
to evaluate tax reform.

As a first step, then, we define the after-tax

return to be the return on a 3-month treasury bill less the average
marginal tax rate on interest income, less expected inflation.11 The
expected inflation measure is taken from Hamilton (1985), who used a

"
We are grateful to Joe Peek for providing the tax rate series.
He used the Statistics of Income in various years to calculate an
average marginal tax rate weighted by interest income received for
married taxpayers filing jointly. The rates for 1987 and 1988 were
projected using 1986 weights.

-14-

Kalman filtering technique to estimate the implied expectations by
financial markets of next-period inflation,

Thete are two advantages of

this method for measuring expected inflation over the commonly used
Livingston inflation survey.

The first is that the Hamilton measure of

expected nflstion is generated every three months, unlike the
Livingston survey which applies over a

6

month period.

The second is

thmt Livingstone surveys do not use all the financial information
available in making inflation forecssts,'2 We extend the Hamilton measure
through the 1980s using data on treasury bills end the CNP implicit
price deflator, 15
Three-quarter moving averages of the personal saving rate and the
reel efter-tex rate of return are shown in Figure 4.

The most striking

relationship between the two is the long-term negative correlation
between the saving rate and the interest rate; interest rates were low
in the 1970s end high in the 1980s, while saving rates were high in the
1970s end low in the l980s.

But within the 1980s, saving rates appear

to be positively correlated with the after-tax reel return.
Table 3 provides a few simple stmtstical tests of the correlation

Brown and Meital (1981) suggest that adding additional
information, such as money supply changes, would result in inflation
forecasts more accurate then the Livingstone preditions. For s
discussion of the Livingstone stock market forecasts, see Dokko end
gdelstein (1989).
'
Most of the updated financial variables end aggregate data come
from Citibese through the third quarter of 1988; more recent figures
come from the
ngntB3aggga. (August 1989) end fl.gL1
Reserve BuSjn (May 1989), Interest rates were measured in February,
May, July, end October. There wee some difference between Hamilton's
(1985) interest rate figures from Salomon Brothers end the overlapping
Oitibeee rates during the volatile eerly 1980e, due to differences in
how the monthly rate was calculated from deity rates,

-15-

between saving and the after-tax return.

We also include two other

factors to explain saving; the fear of nuclear war as proxied by
'Minutes to Midnight,' a measure that Slemrod (1986) found to be
significant in explaining the postwar saving rate,1' and the quarterly
change in log disposable income to reflect transitory income shifts
absorbed by variation in saving.

Regression (I) shows that a reduction

in the risk of nuclear war has a strong positive effect on saving rates,
but as is suggested by the graph, there is a negative (and significant)
correlation between interest rates and saving rates.
The same regression using data after 1982, shown in Row (3), yields
different results.

The regression implies that every one percentage

point increase in the after-tax return will increase saving by 0.66
percentage points; this result is somewhat stronger when the other
explanatory variables are excluded.

A transitory income shift is

predicted to have a strong positive impact on the saving rate, while
lower fear of nuclear war leads to less, rather than more, saving.

It

is not clear whether these estimates imply a fundamental shift in saving
behavior during the 1980g.

For example, the growth of money market

funds and interest bearing accounts during the late 1970s could have
forged a stronger link between saving and interest rates, but the
possibility remains that it is simply a statistical anomaly.

But even

for this saving elasticity, large by empirical standards, the implied

14
We used the unadjusted personal saving rate for the regression
analysis. The "minutes to midnight" measure is an 11 quarter moving
average of the actual count to reflect the relative infrequency of its
shifts. Note that high values of the index are associated with lower
fear of nuclear war. We are grateful to Joel Slemrod for providing the
measure.

impact of TRA8G on saving iS

vary

small.

rataa on interest incoma betveen 1986

The shift in marginal tax
1988 was 7.8 percentage

an-d

pointa; at the average interest rates during this period of 6.2, the
regression equation predicts an increase in saving of only 0.3
percentage points

Most macroeconomiste have eschewed saving regressions in favor of
the Euler equation approach to estimating the interest sensitivity of
The Euler equation approach. as pioneered by Hell (1978)

consumption.

relies upon the notion that consumption at time t, end planned

at

time

individuals at

time

consumption

t+l, will reflect all information known to
t. Any divergence in period tel between actual

planned consumption must be the result of a random surprise
income, for exsmple --

that

occurred in tel.

-

-

and

in

Furthermore, the interest

rate affects the time-path of planned consumption.

A higher rate of

interest, for example, increases the incentive to defer consumption
until next year.

In sum, the Euler approach implies that consumption in

year t+l is a function of consumption in the previous period and of the
interest rate.

The implied coefficient on the interest rate is the

intertemporal elasticity of substitution.m
Hall (1988) has used Euler equation regressions to chow that the
after-tax real rate of return has little or no impact on the time-path

of consumption, or equivalently, the intertemporel interest elasticity
of consumption is essentially
results.

zero.

Row

(3)

in Table 3 confirms his

Consumption is defined to be the log change in reel nondurable

One can also interpret the coefficient es the inverse of the
relative risk aversion measure (Hall, 1988).
15

-17-

(nonservice) consumption, and the estimated intertemporal elasticity is
only 0.04, with a t-statistic of 0.76.

Fear of nuclear war also has

little effect on consumption, and the adjusted R2 is negative.

One

problem with using quarterly data is time aggregation bias; even if
monthly consumption follows a random walk, quarterly consumption will
not.

Hall suggests a simple correction from Hayashl. and Sims (1983);

the regression using this correction is shown in Row (4), in which the
coefficients are not noticeably different from the previous row.
Finally, to correct for potential endogeneity of the interest rate, Row
(5)

instruments the ax post after tax return with lagged values of the

interest rate and two-quarter lagged consumption changes; results are
unchanged.
Surprisingly, Euler consumption regressions in the sub-period
1979-1988 shows a strong positive effect of the real after-tax interest
rate on consumption.

Row

(6) presents the regression result without the

nuclear war variable; the estimated elasticity of substitution is 0.26

with a t-statistic of 4.0.

In Row

(7) the elasticity estimate drops to

0.16 after including the nuclear war variable, but the coefficient
remains significant at conventional levels.

The full instrumental

variable procedure in this subperiod led to an insignificant (and
negative) coefficient on the after-tax real return.
The general consensus in the literature is that positive interest
elasticity estimates, either of consumption or saving, are fragile and
fleeting.

The evidence from the later 1970s, when interest rates were

strongly negative yet saving rates relatively high, lends support to
this view.

Nevertheless, regressions restricted to the 1980s show a

-18-

significant correlation betwaen consumption and saving and the after-tax
rata of raturn.

andtheeasuramencof5avin
The 1986 Tax Reform Act should be judged on more than how it
affacted the after-tax rate of return,

In this and the sections that

follow, we will examine how T8A86 affected other policies towards
saving
The tax reform placed restrictions on Iddividual Retirement
Accounts (IRAa) for single taxpayers with income over $25,000 and
married taxpayers with income over $40,000.

Some critics viewed these

cutbacks on IRA eligibility as a major blow to saving.

For example, a

recent report by the Joint Committee on Taxation suggested that the drop
in the saving rate between 1986 and 1987 was caused by the restrictions

on IPAs (New York Times, 1989).
There is no question that TRA86 cut back sharply on ThA enrollment,
even for those who remained eligible to contribute (Summers, 1989;
Gravelle, 1989).

There was at least a 35 percent decline in

contributions between 1986 and 1987 for taxpayers at all income levels.'0
Summers (1989) attributes this decline to the fall in aggressive
marketing of IRAs by financial institutions following the eligibility
restrictions in TRA86.T

Some part of this reduction may have been caused by the reduction
in marginal rates. The tax subsidy is lower when marginal rates ere
lower, and one advantage of an IRA -- deducting the contribution at a
high marginal rate while working, and paying the tax at a low marginal
rate while retired -- was sharply diminished
by TRA86.
'
The tax reform also restricted maximum contributions to 401(k)
15

-19-

While there is no question that IRAs contributions fell, there is

That

still some question whether the lost IRAs reduced personal saving.
is,

if taxpayers simply shuffle assets from taxable accounts into IRAs,

then restricting the use of IRAs

will have no

impact on saving --

if

anything, the restrictions will increase national saving by easing the
budget deficit.

But the evidence from microeconomic studies of IRAs and

saving are consistent with the view that IRAs increase saving.
Estimates from Venti and Wise (1986, 1987, 1989) and Hubbard (1984)
imply that a large fraction of IRA saving comes from consumption rather
than other (taxable) forms of saving.

Feenberg and Skinner (1989)

compare the taxable interest and dividend income of taxpayers before and
after the introduction of IRAs, and find no evidence of simple
shuffling.

While some recent studies have criticized the econometric

specification used by Venti and Wise (Gravelle, 1989, and Gale and
Scholz, 1989), and the results of Feenberg and Skinner are consistent

with a more sophisticated form of shuffling, there has been no
aicroeconomic study which supports widespread shuffling of existing
saving into IRA accounts.

The macroeconomic evidence seems to contradict the view that IRAs
are new saving.

As is shown in Figure

3, the personal saving rate

slid

downward during 1982-86, precisely the period during which IRA
contributions averaged roughly $30 billion per year.

Once IRAs were

restricted in 1987, the saving rate recovered to its current rate of 5.4

plans, although few enrollees were affected by the restrictions.
Salisbury (1989) suggested that 401(k)s substituted for IRAs after
TRA8G.

-20-

percent.

u

Can the nicroaconomic data be reconciled with the aggregate

data?

One potential reconciliation of this paradox is

to

ask whether

alternative measures of houaehold acrumulation cast a different light on
aaving behavior during the years that IP.As were available. The Federal
Reserve Board compiles

yearly measures of household wealth.

Haig-Stmona definition of saving

The

is aimply the real change in household

wealth over the year, a meaaure which is eaaly calculated from the
Federal Reserve data.

In practice, this mesaure of saving is much

different from NIPA saving, primarily because capital gains are included

in the household balance sheet (ace Bradford, 1989; Hendarahott and
Peek, 1989).

Which saving series one uses depends on what question is

being asked.

As we noted above, our primary concern is whether TRA86

has stimulated the supply of funds for domestic investment, and for this
type of question, the orthodox saving measure (with the government
pension adjustment) is adequate.

But in looking at household purchases

of IRAs, a measure of saving which emphasizes total household wealth may
be more appropriate.

Figure

B

shows annual household saving rates as

calculated for households and nonprofit institutions (Federal Reserve
Board, 1989).

Because there is a great deal of fluctuation in

15
Kevin Hassett suggested an alternative test of whether IRAs
affected saving and consumption; include an IRA dummy in the Euler
equation consumption model during 1982-86, Using postwar data, the
regression is

c — .0622 +
(3.24)

O.1B4xIRA
(1.07)

-

0,001>06
(0.01)

+

.Ol2xNuke
(0.49)

where the t-statistics are in parentheses and the adjusted R2 iS - .01.
The coefficient on the IRA variable is poaitve but not significant.

-21-

year-to-year saving rates (caused by shifts both in the value of the
stock market and in the implicit price deflator), we have constructed
three-year averages of saving rates which excludes durables.

Haig-Simon

income is constructed by adding capital gains calculated from the
Federal Reserve balance sheets to disposable personal income.19

The

saving rates calculated in this way differ sharply from the traditional
measures; household wealth declined during the late l970s and early
1980s (in large part because of the laggard stock market), before
recovering in the l980s.

But by 1988, saving rates had stagnated.2°

While it is difficult to pick turning points in saving patterns from
three-year averages, these results are not inconsistent with the view
that IRAs were positively associated with household saving.

Note that

we do not regard these aggregate results as proving in any sense that
IRAs stimulated saving during 1982-86.

Instead, we question whether

aggregate saving statistics can be used to test whether IRAs are a

Household capital gains were calculated as the difference between
the change in real household net worth minus net investment by
households.
19

20
It is difficult to use the Federal Reserve saving data in
regressions since it fluctuates so wildly, but it is interesting to note
the following pattern in the three-year saving rate and the three-year
average real after-tax rate of return:
Real After-tax Return
Saving Kate

1974-76
1977-79
1980-82
1983-85
1986-88 (3rd quart.)

.068
.216
.058

.166
.147

-2.23
-1.92
-0.43
1.42
0.83

A pattern similar to that found with the Commerce Department saving
rate can be seen; a negative correlation between saving and the
after-tax real return in the l970a and a slight positive correlation in
the l980s.

-22success or failure in encouraging saving, since the answer depends so
crucially on how one decides to measure saving.

onal C radit

t

a

t

Horn

Mort

aa

Interest

Phasing out deductions for personal interest payments to reduce
borrowing is one approach to scimulate net saving.

The transition from

the pre-1986 tax law allowing full deductibility was gradual, wich 65
percent deductible in 1987, dropping gradually to 10 percent deduccible

in

1990,

and corlately phased out thareafter.

The combination of the

partially phased out personal intarast deduction and the much lower
marginal tax rates lad in 1987 to a substantial daclina in the tax
advantage of borrowing.

For example, a taxpayer in the 50 percent

bracket in 1986 would pay only half the gross borrowing rate after
taxes; the same taxpayer in a 28 pertant brackat during 1987 would pay
82 percent of the gross rate after taxes.

In this section we present

evidence from both aggregate and panel data that taxpayers sharply
reduced their outstandfng personal cradit.

Hanca TRA86 was successful

at reducing taxpayers' relianca on personal borrowing,

But TPA86 was

unauccassful at reducing overall borrowing; wa show that for wealthier
taxpayers, much of the reduction in personal credit was simply shuffled
into home mortgage loans, leaving total credit nearly unaffected.2'
First, consider the aggregate impact of TRA8G on total consumer
credit (excluding home mortgages), revolving credit, and mortgages on

21

Manchester and Poterba (1989) suggest that home equity loans were

used to finance consumption expenditures as well as reducing other types
of non-tax-deductible credit.

-23-

1-4 family dwellings (Federal Reserve Board Bulletin).

Figure 6 shows

the four-quarter change in outstanding credit for each of these measures
during 1982-88, with a vertical line in the first quarter of 1987 to
show the transition to the new tax regime.

There is considerable

fluctuation from year-to-year depending on interest rates and other
factors, but the sharp decline in personal credit between the latter

half of 1986 and the first quarter of 1987 is substantial.

By contrast,

home mortgage credit expanded during the period immediately following
TRA86, and thereafter returned to its previous growth rate.22
It is difficult to make strong inferences based on the aggregate
time-series data, since there are so many factors that affect consumer
credit.

A clearer picture of how TRA86 affected the composition of

consumer debt comes from a panel survey of taxpayers during the years
1984-87.

While there is no public use sample of 1987 tax returns as of

this writing, John Karl Scholz has kindly made available to us a
nonrandom sample of approximately 20,000 largely well-off taxpayers
collected for a different study.

The sample is nonrandom because the

choice of the sample was based on their residence.

The information

available for each taxpayer is essentially the same as for the ordinary
public use tapes.

Our sample of 7165 excludes nonitemizers, individuals

with AGI Lass than $10,000, and ACI in excess of $1 million.

The

average income of the sample was $63,760 in 1985.

22

The ratio of consumer credit to mortgage credit has fallen from
41 in December 1985 to .36 in December 1988. But it is not clear
whether this change is a temporary fluctuation or permanent trend. In
1975, the ratio was .44, but by 1981 it had dipped to .36 (Federal
Reserve Bank, 1989).

-24-

One advantage of a panel data set is that we observe individual
for
taxpayers before and after the tax reform, so we can correct
individual differences across taxpayers.

Column I of Table 4 shows a

least squares regression of the change in personal credit interest as a
function of the tax price (i.e.,

one minus the effective marginal rate),

the real change in Act, and marital status.

The tax price exterts a

positive and significant impact on personal credit; a 5 percentage point
increase in the tax price is predicted to reduce personal interest
payments by $570.

For example, a taxpayer previously facing a marginal

rate of 50 percent who after TRA86 faces a 28 percent rate would be

in 1987.
predicted to reduce personal credit incerest payments by $2507
All regressions report heteroscedastic—consiacent standard errors as
adjusted by the White (1980)

technique; in some cases this adjustment

reduced t-statistics by a factor of 10.23
The next question is whether the reduction in personal debt was
shifted into home mortgage debt.

Table 4 also includea OLS regreaaion

results for the change in home mortgage interest payments.

Column (2)

tests whether the change in personal credit interest had an impact on
changes in home mortgage interest payments.

The coefficient implies

that a reduction in personal interest payments of $1 is associated with
a 67 cent increase in mortgage payments.2' That is, only 33 cents of
reflects a cutback in
every dollar reduction in interest payments

The senaitivty of the standard error to the White correction
Pa examine this further below
suggests mispecification of the equation.
when we weight by the inverse of the square root of Act.
23

2

If home equity interest rates were lower than personal credit
interest rates, the shuffling affect would ha even larger.

-25-

spending.
There is a potential simultsneity bias when the chsnge in personal
credit is used as an exogenous explanatory variable for the change in

be affected by
mortgage interest payments, since both variables will
individual-specific unobservable factors.

To correct for this, we

estimate a two-stsge least squares regression in which the change in
personal interest payments is identified oy the shift its own tax price.
Results are shown in Column

3

of Table 4; they imply an even larger (and

each dollar reduction in
significant) shuffling effect of 86 cents for
personal credit payments.
These results may not be stable with respect to the model
specification.

If the variance of the error term is proportional to

income, then a correction for heteroscedssticity is to weight each
observation by the inverse of the square root of

Ad.

Regressions using

this correction resulted in similar results for the least squares
for the 2SLS
regression, but resulted in insignificant results
regressions.
In sum, the evidence suggests that itemizing taxpayers who owned a
house circumvented the restrictions on personal interest payments by
shuffling their consumer debt into home mortgages.

This may be one

reason why the ratio of home mortgages to home market value has risen in
1988 to 48 percent, 10 percentage points higher than the average ratio
during the 1970s (Fedsrsl Reserve Board, 1989).

VI.

Csoitsl Gains end Saving

There is 5 some evidence on how cspital gains tax rates affect

-26-

revenue, although there may be little agreement over how to interpret
it.25

But there is little evidente on how oapital gains taxation affects

saving.

One view ia that lower capital gains taxation encourages

saving, and in particular seving in high-risk enterprises such as
venture capital (see Poterbe, 1989). Another view is that temporarily
low capital gains tax retes will reduce saving rates as investors who
realize long-term capital gains are tempted to spend the cash on
big-ticket consumption items rather than reinvest it (Summers, 1989).

In this view, the 1986 Tax Reform had its primary impact on saving rates
before it became effective as investors realized gains just prior to the
1987 capital gains tax increase.26

We use the Scholz panel of taxpayers to gain some indirect evidence
on what individuals did with their capital gains realized in 1986; did
they spend or reinvest them?

To do this, we compare interest and

dividend inoome before and after TRA86 to see whether large capital
gains are assooiated with a decline in asset income.

This finding would

suggest that the money was spent rather than reinvested.

The test is

not perfect since we are using information only from a subset of the
taxpayer's total assets.

An additional question is whether investors

who realized capital gains in 1986 reinvested them in interest-bearing
assets which, relative to capital gains, are favored under the new tax
25
See Cook and O'Hara (1987), and in particular Auerbsch (1988) for
reviews of recent literature.

26

Note that this story of taxpayers spending their capital gains
because the cash is at hand is not entirely consistent with a model of
rational investor behavior. A rational investor separates investment
transactions to msximize wealth from consumption decisions to maximize
utility; strictly speaking, the decision to realize expected capital
gains should have little effect on conaumption choices.

-27-

law.
Table 5 presents regression results which casts some doubt on the
hypothesis that those taking capital gains spent thea.

The first

of imputed
regression (Row 1) uses as the dependent variable a measure
wealth, defined to be interest income divided by the average interest
rate in that year plus dividend income divided by the average dividend
yield.

The null hypothesis that all capital gains are reinvested is

that the 1986 capital gains coefficient should be zero; capital gains
should have no impact on future asset income.

Should the capital gains

tax be paid out of the realizations in the same year, then the
coefficient should be negative.

Alternatively, if the capital gains are

taken on assets which pay neither interest or dividend income, but the
proceeds are shifted into taxable accounts, then the coefficient on
capital gains would be positive.

For example, if private investors

dissolved a real estate partnership and invested the proceeds in bonds,
imputed taxable wealth would rise.
The regression coefficients in Table S are consistent with this
latter story.

The effect of an increase in capital gains of $1 during

1986 is to increase 1987 imputed wealth by 38 cents.

Thus the evidence

who took capital
provides little support for the view that investors
gains in 1986 spent them.

Instead, it appears that investors shifted

their assets which previously yielded little taxable income into
interest-bearing accounts or stocks.
One possible explanation for this result iS that investors park
their capital gains in relatively liquid (and taxable) instruments for a
hence the coefficient of
year or so before choosing a new investment;

-28-

.38

on 1986 capital gains is simply a short-run
adjustment effect.

In

this view the coefficient on 1985 capital gains should be less than the
coefficient on 1986; in fact it is substantially more.

Phile the 1985

capitel gains coefficient is not significant in the regression in Row 1,
it is in Row 2 when the regression is
weighted by the inverse of the
square root of ACT to correct for potential heteroscedasticity of the
error term.

Row 3 which uses as the dependent variable the sum of

interest and dividend income yields similar results.

Rows 4 and 5 in Table 5 enter interest And dividend income
separately as dependent variables.

These regressions suggest that TRA86

had a stronger impact on the composition of saving than on the overall
level of saving.

The interest regression shows that for every dollar of

1986 capital gains, interest income rose by 3.8 cents,

With average

returns on interest-bearing assets roughly double this value, the
coefficient implies that almost half the realized capital gsins were
shifted into interest bearing accounts.

By contrast, capital gains

taken in 1985 had little or no effect on interest income in 1987.
The regressions explaining dividend income in 1987 (Row 5)
suggest

a much different pattern.

Capital gains in 1986 had no effect on

dividends although past capital gains from 1985 affected 1987 dividends.

That is, recent realizations of capital gains do not appear to have been
heavily reinvested in stocks, but instead are placed largely in accounts
paying interest income.

An alternative explanation for this pattern is that capital gains
are parked in short-ten
interest-bearing accounts, so the correlation
between 1986 capital gains and 1987 interest income simply reflects

-29-

To test for this, we regress 1986 interest income

short-run adjustment.

on 1985 capital gains to get a measure, untinged by tax code changes, of
the normal propensity to place capital gems in temporary
interest-bearing accounts (Row 6).

The coefficient is 0.014, implying

that nearly two thirds of the capital gains shift into investments
shift
psying interest income (l-(l,4/3.8J) represented a permsnent
sssocieted with TRA86.

In conclusion, we find more evidence supporting the view that
tsxpsyers shifted cspitel

gems

tnto assets favored under TRA8G.

While

our test for the hypothesIs thst investors spent some fraction of their
1986 capital gains on consunption is not strong, there is little
evidence to support it.

Further, the tests are likely contaminated by

other fsctors occurring during this volatile period
markets, but at least one ---

the

n financial

stock market rise during most of 1987

would have discouraged investments in interest-bearing assets.27

nclus
Stimulating the saving rate was never the primary objective of the
1986 Tax Reform Act.

Instead, TRA86 was designed to close down abusive

tax shelters, equalize the tax treatment of different assets, and lower
marginal rates.
objectives?

Were policies to encourage saving consistent with these

We have argued in this paper that TRA86 was successful at

the household level in reducing the marginal tax rates on household
saving, even for long-term investments with much of its return paid in

The stock market crash occured sufficiently late in the year so
that it would have had little impact on annual interest income.
27

-30-

accrued capital gains.
Whether one csn detect the effect of these improved incentives on
measured aggregate saving rates is another matter.
defined as income less consumption.

Saving is usually

Small percentage changes in either

income or consumption can lead to large fluctuations in saving rates, so
that attrihuting the 2 percentage point rise in aggregate personal

at best.
saving since 1987 to TRA86 is speculative

Furthermore, the

historical record seems quite clear in indicating little effect on
the 1980s
saving of the after-tax real interest rate, although during
the real after-tax interest rate was correlated with both saving and
consumption.

Nevertheless, it is difficult to conclude from aggregate

time-series data that TRA86 had any impact

-

negative or positive

-

on

aggregate personal saving.

If the link between the after-tax rate of return and personal
in other ways?
saving is weak, than has TRA86 affected saving behavior
TRA86 favored some forms of saving over others, and the evidence is
clear that TRA86 did affect the composition of saving.

For example, the

eligibility rules were tightened for IRAs, which lead to a 62 percent
decline in tax deductible contributions between 1986 and 1987.

If IRAs

then TRA86 would be
represented mew saving, rather than shuffled saving,

viewed as discouraging retirement saving. Yet standard measures of
were
saving show low levels of saving during 1982-86 when IRAs
personal

since 1987.
widely available, and an increase in saving

Onca again, we

suggest that one cannot infer a great deal from aggregate saving rates,
since an alternative measure of saving from household wealth data tells

an entirely different story in which saving rates were quite strong

-31-

during the golden age of IRAs.
The 1986 Tax Reform also gradually phased out the deductibility of
Personal credit declined sharply after

interest on personal credit.
1986,

which might by itself be expected to increase net national saving.

But we found strong evidence that wealthier taxpeyers successfully
shifted a large fraction of their personal losn reductions into home
mortgage loans.

This type of shuffling from consumer credit into

housing credit had little mpsct on saving.
The Tax Reform Act of 1986 also increased the tax on capital gains
in 1981, and by doing so set off a stampede to cash in gains under the
prior law (Auerbach, 1988).

There is little evidence that our sample of

taxpayers spent their realized capital gains; instesd they appear to
have largely reinvested them.

But they did shift e larger fraction of

the 1986 capital gains into interest-bearing accounts to take advantage

of their relatively more favorable tax treatment.
We have ignored one very important factor, the change in tax rules
for business investment, in evaluating the effect of TRA86 on saving.
Some observers during the mid-1980s predicted declines of up to 200
basis points in after-corporate-tax rate of return owing to the
lengthening of asset lives for depreciation end the repeal of the
investment tax credit (Heusmen and Poterbe, 1987), and this lower rate

of pre-tax return could affect household saving. Yet the after-tax real
return should reflect changes in corporate as well as personal income
taxes, end there is little evidence that the rate of return available to
households has fallen dramatically since TRA86.
Recent developments in Congress suggest that the tacit agreement to

-32-

resist tinkering with the 1986 Tax Reform may have now been broken.

If

there is a lesson, then, from just a few years experience with the 1986
Tax Reform, it is that the tax code has a stronger and more immediate
impact on the financial composition rather than the absolute level of
personal saving.

-33-

Bibliography
Auerbach, Alan J. 1985. Saving in rhe U.S. : Some conceptual iasuea.
in The level and compoairion of household saving, ad. Parric
Hendershott. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger. 15-38.
Auerbach, Alan J. 1987. The Tax Reform Act and the coat of
capital. Journal of Economic Perspectives 1 (Summer): 73-86.
Auerbach, Alan J. 1988. Capital gains taxation in the United
States -- Realizations, revenue, and rhetoric. k2gkings Papers on
Economic Activity 2: 595-631.
Auerbach, Alan J. and Kevin Hassett. 1989. Corporate aavings and
shareholder tonaumption. NBER Working Paper No. 2994 (June).
Bernheim, Douglas, and John Shoven. 1985. Pension funding and
saving. N8ER Working Paper No. 1622.
Boskin, Michael 1978. Taxation, saving, and the rate of interest.
Journal of Political Ecunomy 86: S3-S27.
Boskin, Michael, 1988. Issues in the measurement and
interpretation of saving and wealth. NBER Working Paper No. 2633
(June).

Bovenberg, A. Lana. 1989. Tax policy and national saving in the
United States: A survey. N&t.Lonal. px Journal 42 (June): 123-138.
Bradford, David F. 1989. Market value vs. financial accounting
measures of national saving. NBER Working Paper No. 2906 (March).
Brown, Bryan W. end Shiomo Maital, 1981. What do economist know: an
empirical test of experts' expectations. Econometrics 49 (March):
491- 504.
Carroll, Chris, and Lawrence H. Summers. 1987. Why have private
saving rates in the U.S. and Canada diverged? Journal of Monetary
Economics 20 (September): 249-80.
Cook, Eric W., and John F. O'Hare. Issues relating to the taxation
of capital gains. National Tax Journal 40 (September): 473-488.

Dokko, Yoon, and Robert H. Edeistein. 1989. How well do economiste
forecast stock prices? A study of the Livingatone surveys. American
Economic Review 79 (September): 865-871,
Faenberg, Daniel, and Jonathan Skinner. 1989. Sources of IRA
In Tax ooJ.jty and the economy 3, ad. Lawrence Summers.
Cambridge: MIT Press and NBER.

saving.

-34Federal Reserve Board. 1989. Balance sheets for the U.S. economy
1949-88. Publication C-9 (April).
Follain, James R., Hendershott, Patric H., and David C. Ling, 1987.
Understanding the real estate provisions of tax reform: motivation and
impact. National Tax Journal 4D (September): 363-372.
Friend, Irwin, and Joel Hasbrouck. 1983. Saving and after-tax rates
of return. Review of Economics and Statistics 65 (November): 537-543.
Fullerton, Don, Shoven, John B., and John Whalley. 1983. Replacing
the U.S. income tax with a progressive consumption tax. Journal of
Public Economics 2D (February): 3-23.
Gale, William C., and John Karl Scholz. 1989. Effects of IRAs on
household saving. mimeo (August).
Crevella, Jane C. 1989. Capital gains, IRAs, and savings.
Congressional Research Service Report 89-543.
Hall, Robert E. 1978. Stochastic implications of the life cycle
of
Political
income
and
evidence.
Journal
permanent
hypothesis: theory
Economy 86 (December): 971-987.

Hall, Robert K. 1988. Intertamporal substitution in consumption.
Journal of Political Economy 96 (April): 339-357.
Hamilton, James D. 1985. Uncovering financial market expectations
Journal of Political Economy 93 (December): 1224-41.

of inflation.

Hauaman, Jerry A., and James M. Poterba. 1987. Nouaahold behavicc
and the Tax Reform Act of 1986. Journal of Economic Perspectives 1
(Summer): lDl-119.
Hayaahi, Fumio, and Christopher Sims. Nearly efficient estimation
of time series models with predetermined, but not exogenous,
instrumanca. Econometrica 51 (May): 783-798.
Hendershott, Patric H., and Joe Peek. 1989. Aggregate U.S. private
saving: Conceptual measures and empirical tests, in The measurement of
savina. investment, and wealth, ed. Robert E. Lipaey and Helen Stone
Tice.
Hostetter, Susan, and Jeffrey Bates. 1989. Individual income tax
returns, preliminary data, 1987. SOl Bulletin (Spring): 5-18.
The measurement and
Howrey, E. Philip, and Saul H. Hymans. 1978.
determination of loanable funds saving. Brookings Paoera on Economic
Activity 2: 655-85.
Hubbard, R. Glenn. 1984. Do IRAa and KEOCHa
National Tax Journal 37: 43-54.

increase

saving?

-35-

Koretz, Gene. 1989. Are fatter piggy banks merely an illusion?
Business Week (May 15): 24.
Lindsey, Lawrence B. 1987. Capital gaina taxes under the tax reform
act of 1986: Revenue estimates under various assumptions. National Tax
Journal 40 (September): 489-504).
Makin, John H. and Kenneth A. Couch.
contributions, and the real interest rate.
Statistics 71: 401-407.

1989. Saving, pension
Review of Economics and

Manchester, Joyce, and James Poterba. 1989. Second mortgages and
household saving. Regional Science and Urban Economics 19 (May): 325-46.

New York Times. 1989. IRAs effect on savings. (September

18):

D2.

Poterba, James. 1989. Venture capital and capital gains taxation.
In
3, ad. Lawrence Summers. Cambridge: MIT
Press and NBER,

Salisbury, Dallas L. 1989. Testimony before Senate Finance
Committee (September 29).
Slemrod, Joel. 1986. Saving and the fear of nuclear war. Journal of
Conflict Resolution 30: 403-419.
Summers, Lawrence H. 1981. Capital taxation and accumulation in a
life-cycle growth model.
R4ew 71 (September):
533-44.
Summers, Lawrence H, 1982. Tax Policy, The Rate of Return, and
Savings. NBER Working Paper No. 995 (September).
How best to give tax incentives for
Summers, Lawrence H. 1989.
saving and investment? Testimony before Senate FInance Committee
(September 29).
Tax-deferred accounts,
Venti, Steven F. and David Wise. 1986
constrained choice, and estimation of individual saving. Review of
Economic Studjea 53: 579-601.
Venti, Steven F. and David Wise 1987. Have IRAs increased U.S.
saving? Evidence from consumer expenditure surveys. NBER Working Paper
No. 2217 (April).
Venti, Steven F., and David Wise. 1989. The saving effect of
tax-deferred retirement accounts: Evidence from SIP?. Mimeo.
White, Halbert. 1980 .Aheteroskedasticity-consistent
matrix and a direct test for heteroskedasticity,
721-46.

covariance
48:

9mgj.g

-36-

Table 1: Distribution of Changes in Marginal Tax Rates on Interest,
Dividend, and Capital Gains Income, and Personal Credit Interest

Percentage Point
Change in Marginal
Tax Rates:

Personal
Credit

Interest
Income

Dividend
Income

Capital
Gains

Decline greater
than 20

8.2

26.8

0.0

0.0

Decline between
11 and 20

7.8

6.4

0.1

0.3

Decline between
3 and 10

30.5

18.0

0.0

0.3

Change between
-2 and 2

31.1

11.8

1.8

30.3

Increase between
3 and 10

15.2

28.0

33.7

8.3

Increase between
11 and 20

3.7

3.9

32.6

25.2

Increase greater
than 20

5.1

3.5

31,8

35.6

Notes: Calculated using NEER TAXSIM. Interest, dividend and capital
gains changes weighted by their respective sources of income, with
negative AGI taxpayers excluded. Personal interest tax rate changes
weighted by AGI.

-37-

Table 2: The Hypotheticel Tax Rate
Under TRA8G That Provides
After-Tax Returns Equal to Those under the Prior Law

Retained Earnings & —

0.50

Holding Period
Interest

Rater

Prior Law
Tax Rater

y

1

5

10

25

.12

.5

.35

.32

.33

.36

.12

.4

.28

.26

.26

.29

.08

.5

.35

.31

.32

.34

.08

.4

.28

.25

.26

.28

.04

.5

.35

.31

.31

.32

.04

.4

.28

.25

.25

.26

Retained Earnings b —

0.70

.12

.5

.29

.28

.29

.32

.12

.4

.23

.22

.23

.26

.08

.5

.29

.27

.28

.30

.08

.4

.23

.22

.23

.25

.04

.5

.29

.27

.27

.28

.04

.4

.23

.22

.22

.23

Notes: The first column is the gross return on the investment, while
the second is the initial income tax rate r under pre-TRA86 tax law.
y
The third through sixth columns are the marginal tax rates
which
under TRA86 (with full taxation of capital gains) leave the taxpayer
with an equal after-tax return.

-38-

Table 3:

Consumption and Saving Regressions

Dependent
Variable

Coefficients
Interest

Rate
1.

Saving

Rate
2.

Saving

Rate

Cons

Mm.

to
Midnight

C

Log Income

-0.437
<5.88)

0.127

0.183

<4.28)

(1.71)

0.663
(2.71)

-0.385
(2.22)

Sample
Period

Change in

0658
(3.47)

5.602
<25.10)

.33

51(2)-88(3)

4.262
(5.87)

.60

83(1)-88(3)

0.040

0.007

5l(2)88(3)

(0.34)

0.587
(4.20)

-.01

(0.76)
4. LCons
(Adjusted)

0.040
(0.66)

0.007
(0.31)

0.704
(4.00)

-.01

51(2)-83(3)

Cons

0.038
(0.52)

0.006
(0.22)

0.730
(3.99)

-.01

51(2)88(3)

0.389
(3.87)

.29

79(l)-88(3)

0.997
(2.54)

.31

79(1)-88(3)

3.

5.

(adjusted)

6.

.Cons

(adjusted)
Cons
7.
(adjusted)

0.255
(4.02)
0.163
(1.92)

-0.120
(1.60)

Notes: Equation (5) which is starred was estimated using 2SLS. The saving
rate is defined as personal saving divided by disposable personal income
(uncorrected for government pension contributions), and t-statiatics are in
parentheses. Consumption (LCons) is the log change in real quarterly
nondurable nonservice consumption. While the 'true' period of consumption is
- .
arbitrary, we adopt the time-aggregation adjustment of
+

.07LCons+2

from

Hall (1988).

Cons

27Cons0÷i

-39-

Table 4:

Personal Credit and Mortgage Interest
Regressions: 1985-87

LPersonal
Interest
OLS

Dependent
Variable

LPrice of
Mort.

Pers

mt

Income

(1.4)

-7105
(1.4)

(3.4)

-0.010

APersonal
Interest

C

AMortgage
Interest
2SLS

-11394

(1.4)

Marital
Status

Interest
OLS

-6581

mt

Price of

Mortgage

0.015
(1.2)

-0.673
(2.7)

-0.864
(2.54)

(5.0)

(1.3)

129
(0.4)

1702

16

144

.02

.18

.17

-860

335

0.014
(1.0)

Notes: N — 7165. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. All OLS
regressions report heteroscedacticity-consistent t-statistics.

-40-

Table 5: Capital Gains and Wealth Regressions

Dep.
Var,

1.

2.

*
Wealth
in 1987

Wealth
in 1987

3.

Int+Div
in 1987

4.

Interest
in 1987

5.

Dividend
in 1987

6.

Interest
in 1986

LEarn

Capital
Gains 85

Dep. Var
in 1985

1.056
(1.62)

1.245
(23.92)

1.559
(5.25)

4270

.63

1.182
(10.29)

1.225
(21.02)

1.667
(5.72)

11295

.59

(8.62)

0.037
(12.18)

0.046
(5.75)

0.752
(14.00)

0.102
(5.02)

2615

.51

0.014
(1.83)

0.640
(10.97)

0.075
(3.74)

0.033
(12.25)

0.995
(24.71)

0.014
(14.15)

0.840
(49.78)

Capital
Gains 86

0385
(8.50)

037$

0.038
(12.54)

0.0002
(0.23)

2412

.40

0.026
(3.73)

76

.55

0.001
(0.40)

772

.26

Notes: The sample size is 9368. The sample excludes long term capital loss
returns, and t-statistics are reported in parentheses. The sample is weighted
by 1/(square root of 1985 AGI) unless noted by a *.

Gains

<2%shpft

tncceie Dividend

2

Change

2drop
3—1O%drop

Capital and Dividend for Rates Tax in

31O%rise

11-2Orse

Rates Tax Marginal in Change Point Percentage

tnccee Gains Capital

>20%rise

Incne

2Odrop

11

I Figure

TAXSINI, BER

U)

UI

Ui
0

0

>

0:

NPER TAXCIM

30

35

40

>20%rise

eronl Crrfl1 Tntetest Payments

11 —20%rise

Point thange in Marginal Tax Rates

<270shft

Interest icae

Percentage

3—10%drop
11 —20%drop

>20%drop

aJk
3—10rise

Figure 2 Change ia Tax Pates for interest incüme and Pereonal Credit interest Payments

1989

1987

1986

1985
1983

1982
1981

Year

CITIBASE.and issues),

1984

1977

1975

1975

1974

1973

a)

a)

a

a

0

C

a)

CI

averages moving 3-quarter are rates saving Adjusted
Business, Current of

1978

ZJ(varlous Reserve Federal

1979

Personal Saving, Private 3: Figure

1980

Rates, Saving Personal Adjusted and Saving,

1988

1973-89

u

irc

(0

C"

0)

I-)
0)

C
0)
U

0

0

0)

0)

C

0)

1974

1975
1975

1977
1978

1979

Year

19)

1981
1982

1983

1984

1985

1988

Savings Rate and the After-Tax Real Return

1987

1988

of Current Business, Federol Reserve Board Bulletin(variou issues, CITIBASE, and Resilton(1985

1973

Figure 4 Adjusted Personal

1987

1983

1981

1979

1977

Year

1975

1973

1969

'ersonal

1971

5:

1965

Figure

1967

1963

1989) C.9(April Pub. Board Reserve Federal and issues) Business(various Current of

1985

Measures Wealth Household and NIPA Saving:

C

0)
Ia

rce:

Federal Reserve

a)

Ia

U

a)

1983

1984

Year

1985

Roard Bul1dn Tables 1.54 and 1,55(May l99

1982

issues) and CITIBASE,

1987

Revolving Credit, and Mortgage Credit

various

iggs

Credit,

and

Figure 6 Four Qtiarer Chaog in Total Consiiner

