                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        DESIGNING POLICIES TO OPEN TRADE




                               Robert C. Feenstra

                                 Tracy R. Lewis

                                 John McMillan




                             Working Paper No. 3258




                     NATIONAl. BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 February 1990




This manuscript draws on papers presented at a conference under
                                                                 same tit1 held
at the Institute for Governmental Affairs, University of California, Davis,
November 18 and 19, 1988. Financial support from the Ford
                                                           Foundation is
gratefully acknowledged. The authors also acknowledge
                                                       financial support from
the National Science Foundation. We thank Kimberly Ann Elliot and
                                                                    Wendy E.
Takacs for comments. This paper is part of NBER's
                                                   research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed
                                               are those of the authors not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                            NBER Working Paper #3258
                                            February 1990


                          DESIGNING POLICIES FOR OPEN TRADE


                                       ABSTRACT


       In this paper we consider recent proposals to auction U.S. import quotas.
using the funds so obtained to encourage relocation out of the protected
industries.  We argue that the information available to the government, or lack
thereof, is a critical factor in understanding these policies. In a world or full
information, it makes little sense to use auction quotas rather than tariffs.
Similarly, it is unclear why an elaborate program of temporary protection is
needed, rather than immediately opening trade and compensating people with an
income transfer.   When the government has Limited information, however, these
policies become quite sensible and may even be optimal.




 Robert C. Feenscra          Tracy R. Lewis               John McMillan
 Department of Economics     Department of Economics      Department of Economics
 University of California    University of California     University of California
 Davis, CA 95616             Davis, CA 95616              La Jolla, CA 92037
 1.      Introduction

          The Increased use of voluntar1   export restraints (VERs) on international trade.
rather than tariffs, has allowed suppIing nations to capture the quota rents through higher
prices for their exports. Recent poIic proposals have called for the auction of U.S. import

quotas, allowing the U.S. treasurU to obtain the revenues instead. The fundS so obtained

could be used to encourage relocation of workers out of protected industries, with the goal
of reducing and eventualig eliminating the protection.    This type of poltc was tnitiall
analUsed bU Feenstra and Bhagwati (1982). and brought into the U.S. policU arena bU Hufbuaer

and Rosen (1986). Lawrence and Litan (1 966) and Bergsten •t a! (1 987).1     The latter authors
estimate that rents from existing U.S. quotas on steel, machine tools, sugar and dairW as

$5.15 billion, while lower estimates of $3.7-4.7 billion are provided bu Parker (1987).       At
a time of high budget deficits in the U.S.. this potential source of revenue has attracted
Congressional and media attention.2    Elsewhere, quotas have been auctioned in the last few
uears bU the governments of New Zealand. Australia. Taiwan. Brazil. Pakistan. Singapore and
India.

         These policies are in part a polItical compromise between the government, firms      and

workers, which mag account for their popular appeal, but can theg be given a solid economic
justification?   In this paper we shall argue that the information available to the
government, or lack thereof,   Is a critical factor in understanding these policies.   In a
world of full information, it makes little sense to use quota auctions rather than tariffs.
Similarly. It is unclear why an elaborate program of temporary protection is needed, rather
than Immediately opening trade, and compensating individuals with income transfers.       When

the government has limited information, however, these policies become quite sensible and

    See also Bhagwatl (1988, pp. 118 and following).
2
    Media examples are Newsweek, January 12. 1967, p. 40; The Wall Street JournaL, Februarg
6. 1987. p. 40; and Business Week. March 9. 1987. p. 27, Congrssional discussion of quota
auctions Is summarized in Bergsten •t a! (1967. chap. 1).
                                                                                                  2




may even be optimal.

       In the first part of our paper, we discuss quota auctions. Mathematical economists
have in the Last decade developed techniques for analysing auctions In general.3 But there

seems to have been little communication between the mathematical and trade economists.

There exists an unexploited gain from trade.    We shall show In section 2 and 3 that the

theoretical analysis can be used, at a quite practical level, to supplement the

recommendations of Bergsten at al (1987).      We examine how well quota auctions serve as

Information-revelation devices, and we of fer some suggestions on how quota auctions should

be designed.

       In the second part of our paper, we discuss that optimal design of trade and domestic
policies, under incomplete (asymmetric) information.    When agents In the economy have

information that Is private to themselves. the can have an Incentive to misrepresent this
Information so as to shift policies in their favor. For example. the exact losses due to
trade Liberalization are best viewed as the private information of workers and firms, and
are not directly observed by the government.     If the government asked individuals what their

losses are it would certainly get exaggerated responses. Under such circumstances, we
know from the Revelation Principle that the government can safely restrict its attention to
incentive compatible policies, whIch induce workers and firms to truthfully reveal their
Information.4   In sections 4 and 5, w• shall see that optimal policies which take into
account the informational constraints resembl• the actual proposals discussed above, and

differ from those obtained with complete information.      Conclusions and directions for

further research are discussed In sectIon 0.



3   This work is surveyed by McAfee and licHillan (1987). Milgrom (1985. 1987. 1989). and
Wilson (1987).
4 According to the Revelation Principle, any allocation resulting from policies which induce
lying can be replicated by a truth telling policy. See Mgerson (1979).
                                                                                                   3




2.    Auctions as Information Revealing Devices

           Why auction import quotas: why, for that matter, are auctions used at all?   Why does

Sotheby's auction a Van Gogh. rather than simply putting a price tag on It? The obvious

answer is that Sotheby's does not have enough information about the potential buyers'

willingness to pay for the painting to be able to price It satisfactorily; the auction yields
a higher return for Sothebg's than fixing a price. An auction, in other words, is
fundamentally a device for revealing and aggregating information.     Thus an analysis of
auctions must recognize that information is dispersed and incomplete.
           Empirical trade economists find it difficult to estimate the protective effect of any
given import quota.      The government setting the quota faces a similar informational
handicap.     In elementary trade theory, tariffs and quotas are equivalent; but if information
Is incomplete It is Impossible for the government to compute the exact tariff equivalent of
any given quota.

       Bidders in quota auctions likewise have informational problems.      At the time of
bidding. they can only make informed guesses about the future market demand and cost

conditions that will determine how much profit they can earn from having an import
license.     Let us model the bidders as each having different, partial bits of information
about the true value of a quota license; a bidders estimate is on average correct, but in any
particular case it could be too high or too low.

     More precisely, the analysis being developed here assumes that the common-value model
applies to quota auctions. That Is. there is some true but, at the time of bidding, unknown
value of a quota licinca, V. if the bidders' estimates of this true value are denoted v1, v2.
    then the assumption is that the vs are independent draws from some commonlg known
distribution H(v,IV) (Wilson 1977). In practice, bidders might differ not only in their
information but also in their ability to extract profit from an Import ltcence the bidders'
valuations might be if flUe ted (Milgrom mid Weber, I 982). Most of the results to be
discussed in section 3 apply to thIs more general case. Note, however, one sense In which
the models do not precisely fit the quota auctions. In the models, either an indivisible
item is auctioned, or several units are auctioned but each bidder wants only ,one unit (as in
Milgrom 1985). Bidders in quota auctions bid quantities as well as prices.
       The bidders decide their bids using what they know about the value of winning.       A

phenomenon melodramatically named the winners curse now arises. Suppose all bidders bid

amounts that, based on their own value estimates, would yield reasonable profits if they

won the bidding., Then the winner will typically make a loss.    The highest bidder is the one

whose estimate is the most optimistic.      WinnLng conveys bad news; it tells the winner that

his rivals' value estimates are lower than his. The winner is the bidder who most
overestimates the value of winning.

       A rational bidder anticipates the winner's curse when choosing his bid. He does this
by basing his bid not only on his value estimate, but also on the presumption that his value
estimate is higher than anyone else's. When this presumption is false, It is costless, for

he will not win the bidding in that case.    When the presumption Is correct, It prevents

unpleasant surprises after winning.   Thus rational bidding in the face of the winners curse
involves bidding cautiously, well below what one's own information Indicates Is the value
of winning.   The idea of the winner's curse, and of bidding conservatively so as to escape it,
underlie most of the results to follow.
       Any auction, then, is a device for revealing information, for the bids reflect the
bidders' estimates of the value of winning. Quota auctions are often discussed as a method
for revealing the size of the protective effect of a quota (Takacs. 1988).   How accurate is

the informatIon provided by the auction?    Because of the winner's curse, bid revenue

underestimates the quota's protective effect.    But a remarkable and subtle theorem (due to

Wilson, 1977. and generalized by Milgrom. 1979) says that th. extent of underestimation
becomes smaller as the number of bidders rises:     if there is enough bidding competition, the
Information revealed is almost perfect. More precisely, if a single item Is being auctioned
and information about its true value is sufficiently dispersed among the bidders, then the
selling price converges to the true value as the number of bIdders becomes arbitrarily large.
Thus, with a large number of bidders, the sellIng price is equal to the true value even
though no individual In the economy knows what thIs true value Is and no communication
                                                                                                 5




among the bidders occurs.    The bidding process serves to aggregate the bidders' separate

pieces of information.
      However. If the number of bidders is small enough that the bidding is imperfectly
competitive, the bids Incorporate some profit for the bidders; the winning bid is
sUsteqnaticailM below the true value of the quota. Two conclusions follow.      First. in
assessing the protective effect of he quota, some correction factor must be added to the

bids to compensate for the small number of bidders, or else the protective effect will be

underestimated.   Second. in designing the auctions. It mag be possible for the government to
use tricks to stimulate the bidding competition and drive up the bids; some such tricks will

be discussed In the next section.

       How small Is a small number of bidders? Converselg. how mang bidders must there
be before the bidding is effectivelg perfectlg competitive? This Is an empirical question;
some evidence comes from the analogous case of U.S. Treuurg bill auctions. The relults of
Cammack (1965) indicate that the number of bidders for 1-bills Is small enough for the
cautious bidding induced bg the winner's curse to show up in the data.     In particular.
Cammack finds that the average auction price was significantlg less than the next dag's
secondarg-market price, and that the profit from bidding in the auction Increased with the
dispersion of opinion among the bidders.    The number of bidders Is not stated, but theg
consist of government-authorized dealers, as well as commercial banks, large corporations.
and Investment funds.    Since there are tgpicallg about 40 dealers (Stigurn. 1 983). there

must be mare than 40 bidders.       Evldentlg. 40 Is a small number of bidders In terms of the

previous discussion.

       How mang bidders would there be if the U.S. government auctioned import quotas?

For same, but not all. items one might expect bidders to number in the hundreds, so that

winner's curse effects might be relativelg small.6     But since most of the policies to be

   Under the current quota sgstem. the number of licensed importers is about 500 for
cheese. 160 for steel. 400 for footwear, and 40 for raw sugar (Bergsten at a!. 1987. p. 43).
discussed in the next section are easy to implement, they are justified even if the potential
gains are small.    In addition, even It the winner's curse does not arise, some form of
auction is preferable to the administrative aLlocation of quota licences.    As emphasized by

Anderson (1 988),   a quota auction (like a tariff) achieves an arbitrage efficiency by
equalizing the rents earned on each unit Imported.    He finds that the actual allocation of

quotas In the U.S. datr industry does not satisfy this condition, leading to a substantial
deadweight loss relative to an auction with the same level of imports.


3.   Design of Auction Quotas

       Suppose now that th. number of bidders in a quota auction Is small enough that their

expected profits from participating In the auction are positive.7 Then the design of the
auction matters, for it Is possible for the government to regain some of these profits.
This section summarizes some theorems that Identify ways of extracting some profits that
would otherwise be left to the bidders.

A uniform-price auction yields more revenue than a discriminating auction (Milgrorn and

Weber. 1982; Mtlgrom, 1985).


       In the New Zealand quota auctions, for example, each successful bidder pays the

price; the auction Is a discriminating auction.    In the Australian quota auctions, by

contrast, all successful bidders pay an amount equal to the lowest accepted bid; the auction

is a uniform-price auction.    Theory says that the latter raises more revenue. This is

because, as noted, bidders discount their own information when they bid, so as to avoid the

winner's curse.     In the discriminating auction, the price a successful bidder pays depends

7  We will assume, however, that production of the good in question takes place under
perfect competition. As discussed by Krishna (1988a.b), oligopolistlc pricing of a good can
substantially affect the quota rents, and therefore, the amount available from a quota
auction.
                                                                                                     7




OnlU on his own bid.     In a uniform-price auction, the price depends in addition on others'
bids.     Thus, the price he p'us reflects others' information as well as his owns he can afford
to discount his own information less when choosing his bid. Each bidder is rationally less
cautious in the uniform-price auction than in the discriminating auction, so the bids are
higher.

          The U.S. government uses both dlscriminator and uniform-price auctions to sell
Trsasurg bills, though usuallU the former.     SOme Treasurg studies have compared the

performance of the two auction forms.       The results, summarized bg Baker (1976), are

consistent with the above theorem:      the uniform-pric, auctions seemed to generate the

higher revenue.


An open auction yields more revenue than either a discriminating or a uniform-price auction

(tiligrom and Weber; 1982. Mulgrom. 1985).                                               -



          An open auction is the auction form tUpicaliW used in the sale of antiques and art:
bids are called openlg, and bidders can raise their bids If they want to staV in the running.
The argument Is essenttallU the same as above.       tiore information is conveged bU the open

auction than the uniform-price auction, so the winner's-curse discounting factor is still
smaller and bids are higher.     It is, perhaps, corroborative of this theorem that private-

sector sellers usuallU choose opn auctions rather than sealed-bid auctions (Cassad, 1967.

p. 66).    It is usuallg the public sector that uses sealed bidding.
          An open auction need not be so undignified as to have people shoutIng out their bids:

it could be run on linked computers, for example. TM essential feature is that all bidders
know the current best bid and can raise their bids whenever thej want.
          The open auction does have one disadvantage, however.    Our maintained assumption is

that the bIdders are not able to coordinate their bids.     The dispersion of Information makes

collusion more difficult than in simple oligopolU models (McAfee and McMillan. 1 988).         But
if the bidders can somehow overcome the hindrances to coordination, they are more likeig to
succeed In colluding In an open auction than to a sealed-bid auction, as Bergsten eta! (1987)

pointed out.    This Is because a cartel must give its members an incentive not to seek short-

run gains bU deviating from the prescribed bidding behavior.       The sanction against deviation

Is the threat of retaliation, in the form of high bids.       With sealed-bid auctions, retaliation

can come onlU in subsequent auctions, for the deviation is not observed bU the other bidders

until after the auction.     In open auctions, In contrast, retaliation can occur immediately, so

the threat of retaliation is more persuasive (Mllgrom. 1987).
          Mead (1987) gives some evidence that collusion Is more frequent in timber-rights
auctions when the government uses open auctions than when It uses sealed-bid auctions.             Is

collusion likely in import-quota auctions?        Further evidence from timber auctions suggests

not.     Mead. Schniepp. and Watson (1983) found that, in those auctions in which only local

firms bid, prices did not go much above the reserve price.        But when there was competition

from firms from outside the region, prices were typically two or three times the reserve
price.    Collusion, apparently, was not possible with outsiders bidding. it is presumably at

least as difficult to organize collusion in quota auctions, involving nation-wide
competition, as in the timber auctions with nonlocal bidders.


Tb. gov.rrw'nent would increase Its revenue from the quota auctions by Imposing reserve

prices (Myerson, 198h Riley and Samuelson. 1981; Mllgrom and Weber, 1982).


          There is a trade—off.   The advantage    of a reserve (I.e.. minimum) price is that in
some cases it forces bidders to bid higher than they would In the absence of the reserve

price.    The disadvantage Is that on some occasions bidders' estimates of the value of

winning are so low as to leave a part of the quota unsold at the reserve price. The reserve
price is optlmallg set at the level that balances these two effects.        The foregoing result

sags that maximizing expected revenue requires that the reserve price be set high enough
                                                                                                 g




that, with positive probability, not all the licences will be sold.   A conflict exists.
however. betwsen raising revenue and opening trade.     In the event that the reserve price is
a binding constraint, trade Is restricted more than under the original quota.


The government should require royalty payments based on the returns from selling the items
subsequently Imported under the quota     (McAfee and McMlllan. 1986).

                                                                             S

       Suppose it Is feasible for the government to monitor the uses to which the awarded
quotas are put, so that It can implement a royalty scheme based on the realized
profitability of the import ltcences.8    Then the total payments to the government will be
higher than under a simple payment-equals-bid scheme.     This is because more aggressive

bidding is induced; the difference among the bidders at the time of bidding become less

important in determining their bids.     But royalties introduce another consideration. How
profitable a quota turns out to be depends in part on the winning bidder's efforts after he
receives the import licence.   This incentive effect limits the extent of royalties.       The

higher the royalty rate, the smaller the share of his profits the licence-holder will retain.
and so the less effort he will make to generateprofits from the licence.     Thus the optimal
royalty rate is computed as a trade-off between the first effect — generating high bids -
and the second - creating perverse incentives for the licence-holder.


The government should routinely publicize any information it has about the likely
profitabilIty of holding a quota licence (Milgrom and Weber. 1982. Milgrom.      1 985).


       As we have seen, the winner's curse induces cautious bidding.      By publicizing

information, the government reduces the uncertainty and therefore causes the bidders to
discount their own information less.     Government information could include research on

8   There are obvious practical difficulties in this which is may or may not be possible for
the government to overcome.
                                                                                                  10




trends in world prices or domestiC demand, or plans about the government's own future
                                                                    bidders' predictions of
trade policies. Sometimes the revealed information will lower the
the value of a quota licence, and so induce lower bids. On other occasions, it will make

bidders more optimistic.   Because at the winner's curse, the latter effect outweighs the
                                                                                 Econometric
former on average the policy of releasing information generates higher bids.9
analysis of oil-rights bidding data by Hendricks and Porter (1 988) shows that bidders with
superior information do indeed bid higher on average than uninformed bidders.    For art
                                                                                           made
auctions. Ashenfelter (1 989) finds that auctioneer's pre-auctlofl estimates, which are

public, are good predictors of actual auction prices.
       Finally, notice that all of these methods of generating Increased revenue for the
government tram the quota auctions also generate better information about the size of the

quota's protective effect, because the total value of the quota to the bidders Is an upper

bound on the expected total bid revenue, given rational bidding.



4.    Sources of Asymmetric Information

        Raising quota revenue Is only the first step of the liberalization packages proposed
                                                                                           The
by Hufbuaer and Rosen (1986). Lawrence and Litan (1988) and Bergsten •t 11(1987).

revenue raised in quota auctions can be used to encourage relocation out of protected

 industries, after which the protection itself can be lowered. We now consider how the
 information which Is available to agents (or lack thereof) affects the design of adjustment

 policies.
        It is important to distinguish two types of asymmetric Information which can arise.
                                                                                      lead
 Th. first is asymmetric information between private agents in the economy. which can
 to failure in the market between them.    For example, in the presence of Implicit labor

 9   The government cannot, of course, have a policy of releasing information only when it is
 good news, for then not releasing the Information is tantamount to revealing It.
contracts, It might be thought that any unemployment resulting from opening trade would
justify some protection.   Whether or not this occurs, however, depends on whether the
original equilibrium is constrained Pareto optimal.1° Fernandez (1988) finds this to be
true In a model of implicit contracts with terms of trade uncertainty. leading to rio role
for trade policy, whereas Riordan and Staiger (1988) reach the opposite conclusion with

adverse selection In the labor market.    Conflicting conclusions on the scope for government

intervention have also been reached in models of Infant industry protection.1 1

       We win focus here on another source of asymmetric Information:         that which arises

between the ov•rnment and other agents. Our strategy is to suppose that the economy
begins with acme trade restrictions, given historically.    It now wants to dismantle the
restrictions, but to do so in a way that Is voluntarily acceptable to a fraction of the
population.   If this action benefits all Individuals, then Pareto gains are obtained.   More

generally. political constraints will dictate that some portion of individuals gain. The
difficulty arises In Identifying the gains or losses to individuals, which can be expected to
be private information to themselves and not observed by the government.       Conversely.

agents at home or abroad may not be able to identify the true preferences (or typei of the
government, so that the government can hold some private information.        We shall begin with

a case where the asymmetry in information may be most acute:         across national

boundaries.12



10    DixIt c1987..b.19e9) examines whether the competitive equilibrium Is constrained
Pareto optimal In a two sector model with adverse selection, or moral hazard. He argues
that In models where some Insurance markets are missing, it is essential that the reasons
for this be made .ndog.nous.
11    Contrast th. results of Grossman and Horn (1988) and Bagwell and Staiger (1989).
12    One of the best examples of an International asymmetry in information is the transfer
prlcing problem, in which a government attempts to tax a multinational based on Its
profits earned in a local facility, but the multinational has better knowledge of intra-firm
Input prices. Prusa (forthcoming) determines the Incentive compatible taxation scheme for
this problem.
                                                                                                   12




5.    Optimal Design of Trade; and Domestic Policies


5.1   Asymmetric Information Between Countries


          Why do the VERs exist in the first place?   The political economy and trade literature
                                                                   answer.1 3     one reason
has debated this question for some time, and there is not a single

for their use arises when the political pressure for protection is private information to

the home government.      For example, in the U.S. an industry seeking import relief can apply

to the international Trade Commission (ITC). which makes a recommendation to the

President.    The ITC operates under various guidelines In making Its decisions, such as

whether or not the domestic industry is injured by imports, and the reasoning is made

public.    The executive branch, however, bases Its decision on an interagency committee

chatted by the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, and the deliberations are not made

public.    Baldwin (1985. p.195) states: As a consequence of this procedure. both those
favoring and those opposing import relief in a particular case tend to believe that
unjustifiable political factors rather than sound economic reasoning determined the outcome

of the case.
          in this setting, trading partners may question the validity of an importing country's

need for protection.     This is especially true if the importing country is large enough to
 affect world prices and obtain a terms of trade gain through Its policy actions.     Then that

 government would have an incentive to seek high trade barriers, claiming that the domestic
 Industry is suffering, when in fact the barriers serve only to promote home Interests at
 the expens. of foreigners.    To resolve problem. it is possible to determine incentive

 ccrnpattbi. trade policies, in which the domestic government has no Incentive to overstate
 (or understate) the need for protection. We find that:


 13 Badwtn (1986) begIns his survey with this precisely this question. For two answers
 see DeIrdorff (1987) and Htllman and Ursprung (1986).
                                                                                                 13



For a large country. transferring a portion of the rents from trade restrictions back to
foreigners Is Incentive compatible (Feenstra and Lewis,     1 g87)


          The intuition behind this result Is quite straightforward. 8 transferring some of
the tariff revenues or quota rents back to foreigners, the domestic country Is effectivet
pajing for the right to restrict trade. This will be worthwhile onI if it faces genuine
pressur. from some 1ndustr. so that the political benefit from shifting income towards
this industr exceeds the cost, including the deadweight loss plus the transfer of rents

abroad.    For a large countrU. the transfer of quota rents eliminates the incentive to obtain

a terms of trade gain through the trade restriction.
          The magnitude of rents to be transferred depends on the Initial situation.   If we
start at free trade and one countrV then restricts imports, a transfer of rents which keeps
the trading partner at the free trade level of welfare will be incentive compatible. _OnlU
bg coincidence would this transfer .xactig equal the rents generated from the restriction.
in which case trade restriction takes the form of a VER with foreign firms reaping the
bnefits. For smaller levels of protection, the transfer to foreigners would be less than
the total rents generated.    In this case the transfer could take place through the use of
•tarif f-rate quotas, which spectf a certain quota level to which goods are imported dutU
free, after which a tariff is applied.
           Returning to our theme of quota auctions, their use in the U.S. would veru likely
violate incentive compatibilitg. since the U.S. is a large enough buger to affect prices in
mang of its import markets. Put differentlU, the availabilltg of thIs source of revenue
could be attractive enough that there would be little incentive to proceed with
liberalization in the affected industrIes.   Lawrence and Litan (1 968, chap. 5) propose that

one-half of the revenues from U.S. quota auctions should be returned to exporting countries,

particuIarl the least developed.     Feenstra (1989) calculates that a larger amount would
have to be returned to foreigners to maintain incentive compatibilitU, leavin $0.67-i .55
                                                                                                   14



                                This amount is much less than the total available through
billion available to the U.S.
auction quotas (th. estimates in sectIon    1
                                                range from $3.7-5.15 billion), but could still
                                                                          In the next section we
finance a significant program of worker adjustment within the U.S.
examine the specific features of domestic adjustment programs.



5.2   AsymmetriC Information Within a Country


        Industries facing a reduction in their tariffs, or elimination of quota protection,
                                                                        For example. section 203
will typically have this action phased in over a number of years.
                                                                     Import relief provided
of the Trade Act of 1974 speclf lea that To the extent feasible. any
pursuant to this section for a period of more than three years shall be phased down during

the period of such relief.'1    This commitment to decrease the Import protection Is not

entirely credible. however, since the next sentence of the Trade Act allows for extensions:
                                                                              President. at a
 Ang Import relief provided pursuant to this sectlon...may be extended by the
level of relief no greater than the level in effect immediately before such extension, for
one 3-year period If the President determln.s...that such extension Is In the national

 lnterest.1     In some cases the continuation of protection Is made contingent on specific

 actions of reinvestment and modernization by domestic producers. as occurred with U.S.
 steel Industry under the Trade and Tariff Act of 1984. sectIon 806.
        Beyond a simple desire to smooth the income streams of firms and workers. Is there
                                                                                   the case
 any rationale for phasing out protection slowly? To provide a benchmark, consider

 of a small country facing fixed international prices.      The government wishes to maximize a

 social welfare function, and has full Information on the utility functions and prices faced

 by individuals.   Policy Instruments available Include taxes or subsidies on all goods and

 factors, but not necssarlly lump-sum transfers of Income.         In this case we find that

 14    Trade Act of 1974, section 203(3)(h)(2). Public Law 93-618. Jan. 3. 1975.
 15    Trade Act of 1974, section 203(3)(h)(3). Public Law 93-618. Jan. 3, 1975.
                                                                                                   15



tariffs are not part of the optimal policy mix:

For a small country, social welfare is maximized by a system of commodity taxes which

leaves producer prices at their free trade level    (Dixtt, 1 985)


       Income redistribution in the open economy is achieved with commodity taxation, but

productive efficiency still holds, as in Diamond and tlirrlees (1971).   This result is in line
with the literature on trade and distortions, which would argue that tariffs are a second or

third best way to redistribute income (Bhagwatt. 1968. p. 32). To find an argument for
eliminating tariffs only gradually, we need to drop some of the assumptions of the

benchmark case.

       Let us first suppose that some trade protection is Initially in place, say in the form

of tariffs. Since we are then starting in a distorted situation. we know that a deviation
from first best policies (i.e. productive efficiency) might be desirable in futur. periods.
However, at first glance there does not seem to be any reason to continue tariffs in the
industrU, since that would only serve to expand output and aggravate the distortion which

already exists.     An immediate elimination of tariffs would appear to be desirable on

efficiency grounds.     Surprisingly, this intuition Is Incorrect when we incorporate the career

decisions of foresighted workers:


if an industry initially faces a positive tariff, and workers have mobility costs, the
optimal second-period tariff can be positive (Leamer, 1 98O


        To understand this result, consider a two-period model with an exogenous tariff in

the first period.     Workers must choose their industry of employment in the first period,

and after this, face mobility costs to moving. The government wishes to maximize the
two-period GNP evaluated at world prices.1 6       Suppose that tariffs are eliminated In the

 16   Learner considers an alternative objective function which Incorporates income
                                                                                                   16




second period.    This action would cause workers to shift out of the (formerly) protected

Industry to the unprotected Industry, and therefore reduce wages in that sector.
Anticipating this, foresighted workers who are making career decisions about which

Industry to enter in the first period would tend to choose the protected sector, where
                   higher. That is. the second period elimination of the
                                                                          tariff can lead to
wages are Initially

an expansion     of first period output, through workers capturing the temporarIly high wages.
                                                                It follows that the optimal
This expansion of output aggravates the existing distortion.
second-period tariff can be positive, though it is always less than the
                                                                         first period tariff.
                                                                        cannot credibly
      A related argument for gradualism arises when the government
                                                            trade laws lack this commitment,
commit to eliminate protection. As discussed above. U.S.
                                                                       Congress and changing
 and industries can also attempt to continue protection by lobbying to
            The uncertainty surrounding the path of liberalization can be modelled as
                                                                                        an
 the law.
                                                                                 The possibilIty
 endogencus probability that future tariffs will be used, say in period two.
                                                                      excessive consumption
 of future protection creates an IntertemporaL distortion. leading to
                                                                                     With
 in period one. The excessive consumption is offset by imposing a tariff initially.
                                                                        shown that the
 many periods and learning about the tgpe of government. it can also be

 tariff would eventually be eliminatedi

                                                                               a gradual reduction
 If Individuals are uncertain about the credibility of government reforms,
                                                                      1988)
 of tariffs is optimal (Caivo 1906* Engel and Kletzer 1987 Froot

        The above arguments for gradualism relies on individuals having incomplete

 information about government actiOns.1 7      Let us turn our attention to the converse case

 where the government cannot observe some characteristics of agents affected by the

  distribution, and this strengthens his argument for staged reduction in tariffs.
                                                                                   complete
  17    Along other lines, Matsuyama (forthcoming) examines an infinite horizon,
  information game of timing, in which the   government  uses the  threat of future
  liberalization to Induce the domestic firm to invest. He finds that optimal temporary
  protection may occur in an equilibrium, though this equilibrium is not renegotiation-Proof.
                                                                                                  17



liberalization.   In recent gears tht has been much discussion about the possibility of
eliminating agricultural trade barriers and dismantling domestic agricultural price support
programs (see Economic Report of the President. 1987. chap. 5).     In this context, is It
possible and desirable to 'decouple aid to farmers from price supports, which distort

relative prices and encourage excessive participation in agricultural sectors? The answer

seems to be that complete decoupling is not advisable:


With informational constraints, efficient reorganization (complete decoupling) may be

possible but It is generally undesirable (Lewis. Ware and Feenstra, 1989)

This pessimistic finding arises when workers possess private information about their skill
levels, and their ability to find work In other non—agricultural sectors.   To be politically
viable any program to eliminate price supports must adequately compensate the workers for

their losses and relocation costs.   But workers command rents from their private
information, which renders a complete decoupling of price supports too expensive for the

government to fund.    instead, the use of (nonlinear) production subsidies In conjunction with
income transfers becomes optimal, meaning that productive efficiency is not obtained due to

the Informational constraints.


5.3 Pareto Gains From Trade


       Our final example of how incomplete information can affect optimal trade policy
goes to the heart of economists acceptanc, of free trade: the idea that gains for all
individuals (Pareto gains) can be achieved.   it has been known for some time that under the

standard Arrow-Debreu assumptions, Pareto gains can be achieved by using lump-sum

transfers within a country.18    it can be expected, however, that governments would not

     See the brief surveys by Chipman (1987. section 3) and Kemp (1987).
                                                                                                  18



                                                           transfers.1 9 Dlxit and Norman
have the information needed to calculate these iurnp-sUfll
                                              achieved with just a system of taxes on goods
have recently argued that Pareto gains can be
and factors, designed so that consumers face autarky prices while producers face free trade

price3

it producers are faced with tree trade prices. whil• consumers face autarky prices for
goods and factors, then the government raises non-negative revnu        (Dixit and Norman.

1980. p. 79 1986)

This result is analogous to our benchmark case in the Last section. In that productive

efficiency is maintained.   Indeed, the objective of Pareto gains can just be considered an
                                                                              increase In
extreme form of the social welfare function in the last section. where now an
 social welfare requires an Increase in •ach individual's utility over autarky.
         This striking result by Dixit and Norman seems to make Pareto gains informationatly

 feasible, at least if the autarky and free trade prices for goods and factors can be observed.
 so that the requisite tax rates can be computed. We would like to suggest. however, that
 the implementation of Pareto gains Is not as watertight as it seems, but that there are
 substantial informational difficulties still hidden in the Dixit-Norman scheme.20 ro see
 this, suppose that all individuals have some mobility costs in moving factors of production

 19   The needed Information is the sutarky and free trade vectors of prices for goods and
 factors (denoted by p0 and p. respectively), and the autarky consumption and factor supply
 vector for •ach Individual (denoted by xoh, where negative components of x are factor
 supplies and hsl ,...,H). The autarky choices satisfy the budget constraint pOxOh 0.
                                                                                             Then

 consider opening the economy to free trade with the lump-sum transfers
                                                                               1h • (p -   pO)'xoh.

 The free trade budget constraint for an individual becomes     p'x' c (p - pO)'xOh. from which It
                                                                 1h over individuals, we can use
 is Immediate that x0h is still feasible. Moreover, summing
 the technique of Dixit and Norman (1980, p.   79) to show   that the aggregate transfer is non-
 positive, and therefore feasible for the government.    This  argument     shows that it is not
 necessary to know the utility function of individuals.
 20 Our discussion of mobility costs i closely related to the critique by Kemp and Wan
 (1986) the Dixit-Norman scheme of commodity taxes will not raise posltlvr revenue unless
 the resulting production point differs from autarky.
                                                                                                 19



between industrtes    these may be individual skill differences across industnes; actual or
psychic moving costs; time lost In unemployment or retraining. etc.     The mobility costs can
be modelled as Individual transformation functions, which have.as Inputs the individual
supply of each factor, and as outputs the effective supply to each industry.21    The natural

advantages from supplying all of one factor to a single industry could be captured by

assuming that the transformation function Is convex in outputs, but to stay In an Arrow-
Debreu framework we shall suppose that it is concave.

       TO achieve Pareto gains in this economy It Is necessary to apply the Dixit-Norman

scheme of commodity taxes to these transformation functions, treating them Just like the
production function of a firm. This means that the outputs (factor supplies to each
industry) must receive the prevailing free trade wages, while the Inputs (raw labor or
capital from an individual) should be taxed or subsidised to receive their autarky return.
However, the prices of inputs are th. shadow value of factors supplied by an individual, and
these would not observed by the government.      In particular, the government could not treat
the actual wage earned by an individual as an estimate of their shadow price of labor, since
this would create an incentive to choose a low paying Job (e.g. unemployment) and be

subsidized for the difference between this wage and earnings in autarky.     Put simply, when

we recognize that wages net of mobility costs for a given occupation differ across
individuals, it may not be possible to calculate the subsidy needed to provide each person

their autarky earnings without creating adverse Incentives.


8.   Conclusions


       We have argued that the information available to governments is a critical factor In

the design of international trade policies.   This is seen most clearly in recent proposals to

21   This transformation function could itself be the result of past Investments in human
capital, as analysed by Grossman and Shapiro (1982).
                                                                                                    20



auction U.S. import, quotas, where the auctions serve as a devise to reveaL the value of the

quota licenses.   Theoretical results in this area serve as a practical guid. on designing an

auction to obtain the highest revenue.   These funds, like tariff revenues, can be earmarked

to encourage relocation out of protected industries.     The features of an adjustment plan

win depend on the asymmetries of information. We have seen that a staged reduction in
tariffs may be optimal; that productive efficiency may not be desired (in contrast to the

case of complete information) and that the possibility of Pareto gains from trade may be
compromised by incomplete information.
       The research we have drawn from is recent, and much work remains to be done.           We


will mention two general areas of research. First, our discussion of trade and domestic
policies dealt with those that were socially optimal, either from a global or domestic

viewpoint.    But it is equally important to understand how Incomplete information affects
the conduct of firms and governments in non-cooperative settings. For example, could the
widespread use of VER5 be explained as the outcome of a non-cooperative game between

governments, perhaps because giving the quota rents to foreigners acts as a signal that the

import restriction is really needed? Bagwell and Staiger (198e) do find a role for the
sharing of quota rents across countries in a non-cooperativ, model, similar in spirit to the
result with asymmetric Information (section 5.1). Along other lines. Jensen and Thursby
(1989) examine whether one country would want to mislead the other about its desire to
impos. trade barriers, and establish a reputation which could be useful in the future.
        Second. our suggestion that Pareto gains from trade cannot be achieved deserves

 further attention.   One approach is to examine more specific situations to see if gains are

possible.    Bnecher and Choudhrt (1989) consider a model where people rather than goods

cross borders, but constrain the commodity taxes to not discriminate between people of
 dIfferent nationality located in the same country. Under this non-discrimination rule, they
 argue that no commodity taxation scheme can make every home national better of f.        Another

 approach is to expand the list of policy instruments.     Since our discussion in section 5.3
                                                                                                 21



suggested that mobility costs are a hindrance to acheving Pareto gains. it is natural to
introduce Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) policies.     The equity and efficiency properties
of various TAA programs are examined by Diamond (1 982). Brander and Spencer (1989) and

Feenstra and Lewis (1989). though none of these authors find a plan which generates gains

for all individuals.   The empirical relevance of mobility costs is highlighted by Richardson

(1982) and Bednarzik and Orr (1984). who report that TAA recipients often return to their

former jobs after being unemployed, rather than switching industries.     Determining whether

it is possible to implement Pareto gains when workers have private mobility costs is an

open, and important, area for research.
                                                                                                  22


•   R.t.r.ncss
    &n4erscn. James E.. Th.   Rlative inefficiency of Quotas.   Cambridge: MIT Press. 1988.

    Ashenfelter. Ofieg. HOW Auctions Work for Wine and Art. Journal of Economic
        Perspectives. Summer 1989, 3. 23-36.

    Bagwell. Kyle and Robert W. Staiger, A Theory of Managed Trade. NBER Working Paper
        '2756. November 1988.

    Bagwefl. Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. ihe Role of Export Subsidies When Product Quality Is
         Unknown. Journal of International Economics. August 1989. 27:1/2. 69-90.

    Baker. Charles C.. Aucttofling Coupon-Bearing Securities: A Review of Treasury Experience.
           In Amthud, Y.. ed.. Bidding and Auctioning for Procurement and Allocation. New York:
           New York Univ. Press. 1976.

    Baldwin. Robert E.. The Political Economy of U.S. Import Policy.   Cambridge: MIT Press.
           1965.

    Baldwin. Robert E.. ih. Political Economy of Trade PoItcy. 1989. mimec.

    Bednarztk. Robert W. and James A. Orr.   Th. Effectiveness of Trade-Related Worker
           Adjustment Policies in the United States. U.S. Dept. of Labor. Economic Discussion
           Paper 15. February 1984.

    Bergsten. C. Fred. Kimberly Arm Elliot. J.ffreg J. Schott and Wendy E. Takacs. Auction
        Quotas and United states Trad Policy. Washington: Institute for International
         Economics. Sept   1987.

    Bhagwati. Jagdish N.. The Theory and Practice of Commercial Policy: Departures from
         Unified Exchang Rates. Special Papers In International Economics No. 8. PrInceton:
         princeton University Press. 1968. Reprinted in Essays in International Economic
          Th.ory. vol 1. Cambridge: MIT press. 1983. 3-72.

    Bhagwatt. Jagdish N.. Protectionism. Cambridge: MIT Press. 1988.

    Brander. James A. and Barbara J. Sperc.r. Trads Adjustment Assistance: Welfare and
          Incentive Effects of Payments to Displaced Workers. NBER Working Paper '3071.
          August 1969.

    Brscher, Richard A. and Ehsan U. Choudhrl. OaIns from International Factor Movements
          without Lump-Sum Compensation: Taxation by Location Versus Nattonality. Canadian
           Journal of Economics. 1989.

    Calvo. Guillermo A.. 0n the Costs of Temporary Llberaltzation/StabiliZatiOfl Experiments.
                                                                                                23


       In ConnolIg. H. and C. Gonzalez-Vega. eds.. Economic Reform and Stabilization in Latin
       America. New York: Praeger. 1986.

Cammack.  Elizabeth B., tvidence on Bidding Strategies and the Information Contained in
       Treasurg Bill Auctlons. Unlversttg of Chicago. 1985.

Cassadg. Ralph Jr.. Auctions and Auctioneering.   Berkeleg: Univ. of California Press. 1987.

Chipman. John S.. Compensation Principle.   In Eatwell. J.. H. Mtlgate and P. Newman, eds.,
       The New Palgrav: A Dictionary of Economics. New York: Stockton. 1987, vol. I. 524-
       531.

Deardorff. Alan V.. Safeguards Policg and the Conservative Social Wslf are Function. In
    Kierzkowski. H.. ad.. Protection and Competition in International Trade. Oxford: Basil
    Blackwell. 1987.

Diamond. Peter A. and James A. Mlrrlees. OpttmaI Taxation and Public Production I:
     Production Efftctencg. American Economic Review. 1971. 61. 8-27.

Diamond. Peter A.. Protection. Trade Adjustment Assistance, and Income Dtstrtbutlon.    In
      Bhagwatt. J. N.. ad., Import Competition and Response. Chlcsgo Univ. of Chicago and
      NBER. 1982, 123-145.

Dixtt, Avinash, lrade Policy in Open Economics. In Auerbach. A.J. and H. Feldstetn,
        Handbook of Public Econcvnlcs. vol 1. Amsterdam North-Holland. 1985, 31 3-374.

Dixit. Avinash, lrade and Insurance with Moral Hazard. Journal of International Economics.
        November 1 987a, 23:3/4, 201-220.

D1xtt Avinash, Trade and Insurance with Adverse Selectlon, Working Paper. Princeton
       Universitg. 1987b.

Dixit, Avinash. lrede and Insurance with imperfectlg Observed Outccmes.      Quarterly
        Journal of Economics. Februarg 1989. 104:1. 195-203.

Dixit. Avtnesh and Victor Norman. Theory of International Trade. Welwgn. U.K.: James
        Nisbet. 1980.

Dixit. Avinash and Victor Norman, Galns from Trade Without Lump-Sum Compensation.
        Journal of International Economics. 1986. 21, 111-122.

Economic Report of the President.   Washington. D.C.1 Government Printing office. 1987.

Engel. Charles and Kenneth Kletzer. lrade Poltcg Under Endogenous CredtbtlitU. NBER
       Working Paper p2449. November 1987.
                                                                                               24


Feenstra. Robert C.. Aucttoning U.S. Import Quotas, and Foreign Response, and Alternative
    poitctes. The International Trade Journal, Spring 198g. 3:3, 239-2G0

Feenstra, Robert C. and Jagdlsh N. Bhagwsti. Tarif I Seeking and the Efficient Tariff.   In
      Bhagwati. J. N.. ed., Import Ccmp.titlon and Response.  Chicago: Univ. of Chicago and
       NBER. 1982. 245-258.

Feenstra. Robert C. end Tracy R. Lewis. Negotlated Trade Restrictions with Private
    political Pressure. NBER Working Paper '2374, September 1987.

Feenstra. Robert C. and Tracy R. Lewis. •Trade Adjustment Assistance and Pareto Gains from
      Trade. Working Paper '343. University of California. Davis. March 1989.

Fernandez. Raquel. lath Is in an Economy with Incomplete Markets and Unsrnployment.
      Boston University. May 1988.

Froot. Kenneth. Credibilttg. Real Interest Rates, and the Optimal Speed of Trade
        LiberaltzattOn, Journal of International EconomIcs. August 1988. 25:1/2. 71-94.

Grossman. Gene M. and Henrik Horn, infant Industry Protection Reconsidered: The Case of
      Informational Barriers to Entrg. Quarterly Journal of EconomIcs. November 1988.
      103:4, 787-787.

Grossman. Gene M. and Carl Shapiro. A Theory of Factor Mobility.    Journal of Political
      Economy. October 1982. 90:5. 1054-1069.

Hendricks. Kenneth and Robert H. Porter. An Empirical Study of an Auction With
    Asymmetric Informatton. American Economic Review. December 1988. 78:5. 885-883.

Hiflman. Arye L. and Heinrich W. Ursprung. Domestic Politics. Foreign Interests, and
     International Trade Policg. American Economic Review. September 1988, 78:4, 729
      745.

 Hufbuaer, Gary Clyde and Howard F. Rosen. Trade Policy for Troubled Industries. Washington:
       Institute for International Economics. March 1986.

 Jensen. Richard and Marie Thursbg. laritfa With Private Information and Reputatton.
     University of Kentucky and Purdue University, April 1989.

 Kemp, Murray C., oains From Trade. In Eatwell, 1., H. Milgate and P. Nwman, eds., The
       New Paigrave: A Dictionary of Economics. New York: Stockton, 1987. vol. II. 453-
       454.

 Kemp. Murray C. and W. Henry Wan, Oains From Trade With and without Lump-Sum
       Compensation, Journal of International Economics. 1986. 21, 99-110.
                                                                                              25


Krishna Kala. •The Case of the Vanishing Revenues: Auction Quotas with Monopolg,    Harvard
       Unlverslt and NBER, 1 988a.

Krishna Kale. Ths Cas. of the Vanishing Revenues: Auction Quotas with OlIgopol. NBER
       Working Paper #2723. 1988b.

Lawrence. Robert Z. and Robert E. Litan, Saving Free Trade: A Pragmatic Approach.
      Washington. D.C.: The Brookings InstitutIon, 1986.

Learner, Edward E. Welfare Computations and the Optimal Staging of Tariff Reductions In
      Models with Adjustment Costs, Journal of International Economics. 1960. 10. 21-36.

Lewis. Tracg R.. Roger Ware and Robert C. Feenstra, Eltrnlnating Price Supports:    A
     Political Economg Perspective. Journal of Public Economics. 1989.

MatsuVama, Kiminori. 'Perfect Equilibria In a Trade Liberalization Game.' American
     Economic Review, forthcoming.

McAfee. R. Preston and John McMlllan, 'Bidding for Contracts: A Principal-Agent Anals1s.'
    RAND Journal of Economics. 1986. 1 7. 326-338.

McAfee. R. Preston and John McMlllan. 'Auctions and Bidding.' Journal of Economic
    Literature. 1987. 25. 699-738.

McAfee. R. Preston and John McMillan.   Biddtng Rings. University of California. San Diego.
     1988.

Mead, W. J., Natural Resource Disposal PolicU: Oral Auction Versus sealed Bids.' Natural
    Resources Journal. 1967. 7. 194-224.

Mead. W. J.. M. Schniepp and R. Watson. The Effectiveness of Competition: An Appraisal in
    the Auction Markets of the National Frontier Timber In the Pacific Northwest.' U.S.
    Forest service. 1983.

Mllgrom. Paul R.. A Convergence Theorem for Competitive Bidding with Differential
      Information,' Econom.trIca, Ma 1979. 47. 679-688.

Mligrom. Paul R.. Ths Economics of Competitiv. Bidding: A Selective Surveg.' In Hurwtcz.
     L. et at. .4*. Social Goals and Social Organization. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press,
     1985.

Milgrom, Paul R., 'Auction Theory.' In Bewl.g, 1.. ed., Advances In Economic Theory: The
     Fifth World Congress. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. press, 1967.

Mtlgrom. Paul R.. 'Auctions and Bidding: A Primer,' Journal of Economic Perspectives.
     Summer 1989, 5:3, 3-22.
                                                                                             28




Mllgrom. Paul R. and Robert J. Weber. A Theory of Auctions and Competitive Btddlng.
     Econolfletrica. 1982. 50, 1089-1122.
                                                                         Eccnometricaa
Myer$Ofl. Roger B.. incentive Compatibility and the Bargaining Problein.
     January 1979. 47:7. 61-74.

Myersofl. Roger B..Optimal Auction D.sign. Mathematics of Operations Research. February
     1981, 6. 619-632.
                                                     Existing Import Ouotas. Congressional
parker. Stephen. •Reveflue Estimate for Auctioning
     Budget Office. February 27. 1987.
                                            Approach to the Transfer Pricing Probiem.
prusa. Thomas J.. An incentive Compatible
     Journal of international Economics, forthcoming.
                                                           the United States Trade  Act of
 Richardson. J. David. irade Adjustment Assistance Under
                                                               in Bhagwatl. Jagdtsh N.. ed..
        1974: An Analytical Examination and Worker surveg.
                                                   Univ. of Chicago and NBER. 1Q82. 321-357.
        Import Competition and Response. Chtcago
                                                                  Economic Review. 1Q81.
 Riley. John 3. and William Samuelson. Opttmal Auctions. American
        71. 381 -392.
                                                                          Un.fnplOilmeflt.
 Riordan. Michael H. and Robert W. Staigsr. Sctoral Shocks and Structural
        Boston and Stanford Universities. August 1Q88.

 Takacs, Wendy E..    Econcmic Aspects of Quota License Auctions. Journal of World Trade.
        December 1988. 22. 39-51.

 Wilson. Robert. A Bidding Model of perfect Comp.ttticfl. Review of Economic Studies.
        1Q77. 44. 511-518.
                                                                                    Paigrave:
 Wilson. Robert. Bidding.  In Eatwell. J.. P1. Plilgat. and P. Newman. eds.. Th New
                                                            1987. vol. 1. 238-242.
        A Dictionary of Economics. New York: Stockton.
