NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADE A1D UNEVEN CROtflH

Robert Feenstra

Working Paper No. 3276

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1990

The research for this paper was completed while the author was visiting at the
Institute for Advanced Studies, Hebrew University of Jerusalem. He thanks Gene
Grossman, Elhanan Helpman and Joaquim Silvestre for very helpful discussions.
This paper is part of NEERs research program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3276
March 1990

TRADE AND UNEVEN GROWTH

ABSTRACT

We consider trade between two countries of unequal size, where the

creation of new intermediate inputs occurs in both. We assume that the
knowledge gained from R&D in one country does not spillover to the other.
Under autarky. the larger country would have a higher rate of product creation.
When trade occurs in the final goods, we find that the smalLer country has its
rate

of product creation stowed, even in the long run. In contrast, the larger

êountry enjogs a temporary increase in its rate of R&D. We also examine the
welfare

consequences of trade in the final goods,

intermediate

which depend on whether the

inputs are traded or not.

Robert

Feenstra

Department of Economics
University of California
Davis, CA 95616
(916)752-7022

1. Introduction
There has recently been a resurgence of interest in models of economic

growth, prompted by the development of models In where the growth rate
depends endogenously on the accumulation of human capital (Lucas, 1986) or

product creation bg firms (Romer. 1990). These models can be used to address
a number of issues long discussed in the trade and development literature,

including: conditions under which industrialization will occur in a country
(Murphy. Shleifer and Vlshny. 1969); formal analysis of the product Cycle' in
trade (Grossman and Helpman. I 989c: Segerstrom. Anant and Dinopoulos. 1 969);

the effects of tariffs and quotas on growth (Dinopoulos, Oehmke and Segerstrom. 1989; Grossman and Helpman, 1 gegd): and other issues. In this paper we
shalt

be concerned with the effect of international trade on the rate of product

development in a country, using a model which is closely related to that of

Grossman and Helpman (1989b) and Rivera-Datiz and Romer (1969).1
The basic outline of our model is as follows. Each country produces a
final

a

good which is traded internationally. The final

goods are assembled from

range of intermediate inputs, whose number wilt grow endogenously over

time.

As in Ethier (1982). an increase in the range of intermediate inputs

allows for more efficient production of the final goods. In the initial version
of our model we shall suppose that the intermediate goods are not traded

between countries, but as we later show, this assumption is easily relaxed.
The intermediate inputs themselves are produced using labor and the stock
of knowledge within each country. Like Grossman and Helpman (1989b) and

Rivera-Batiz and Romer (1989). we shall assume that this knowledge increases

with
1

the range of intermediate inputs developed; as the number of products

At times we shalt loosely refer to the rate of product development as the
rate of growth. and it is related to the growth in GNP. See footnote 6.

2

grows the fixed costs or creating new ones falls, which will allow continuous
growth to occur. However. unlike these authors, we shalt assume that the
knowledge does not cr033 borders, but is only available to the firms within each

country. This assumption wilt be the driving force behind our results.
Our assumption that knowledge of production techniques does not cross

borders can be justified on several grounds. First, the same assumption is used
in the Alcardian model of international trade, where production functions difrer
internationally. This assumption was dropped

where

in the Heckscher-ohlin model.

we instead assume identical technologies in all countries. But since

Mlnhas (1962). the empirical evidence has often rejected this assumption. The
most recent, comprehensive test of the Heckscher—Ohlin model Is by Bowen.

Leamer and Sveikauskts (1987). who rind that the predictions of this model fail
sadly, with evidence that technological differences across countries account for
part

of the failure.2

Second.

at

our model generates the realistic result that countries will grow

different rates. This observation is actually one

or

the stylized facts put

rorth by Kaldor (1951), and is supported by more recent evidence.3 Even on
purely methodological grounds, we would argue that the analysis of a model

with

uneven growth rates across countries in of interest. Much of the existing

literature on endogenous growth has focused on the case where a steady state or

'balanced growth' solution exists, with both countries growing at the same
2 See also the supporting evidence of Dollar, Wolff and Baumol (1988). It is
stilt possible that technical knowledge does cross borders, but it used too
slowly to give rise to identical production functions. We discuss the stow
transmission of knowledge in section 6.
3
Baumol (1986) has suggested that there is

a convergence or growth rates
among industrial countries, but this evidence is questioned on sample selection
grounds by Romer (1989). from whom the reference to Kaldor (1961) is drawn.

3

exponential rate. This case naturally simplifies the analysts, but is not
necessarily the most realistic. In our model, no such balanced growth solution

will exist (unless the countries are identical).
To describe our most important resuts. let us measure labor force of
each country in terms of efficiency units in the R&D activity, i.e. the number
of new intermediate inputs which could be developed by the population in a

given year. Then when trade is opened between countries of different size, we

shall find that the smaller country has its growth rate of new products
permanently slowed: even in the long run, this growth rate does not approach

its autarky value.

In contrast, the larger country enjoys a higher rate of

product creation, while approaching its autarky rate in the long run. From a
welfare perspective, the effect or these results depends on whether the

intermediate inputs are traded or not.
Several other papers are related to the issues addressed here. Boldrtn
and Scheinkman (1988). Krugman (1988). Lucas (1988) and Young (1989) all

analyse models where trade may be detrimental to growth in a country. These
papers rely on some form of learning by doing, where the technology in each

industry is affected by past production in that, and possibly other, industries.
While our model of endogenous product development is quite different in detail.
the results are remarkably similar to those of Young (1989). A numerical
analysis

of

trade and product development is provided by Markusen (1989). and

the analysis of this paper was in fact prompted by the desire to obtain
analytical solutions to the questions he posed.4

In the next section we describe our model and determine the equilibrium
conditions.

in section 3

we show how these conditions can be reduced to

tlarkusen was primarily concerned with determining whether trade would
eliminate R&D in one country, as we discuss briefly in section 4.
4

4

certain second-order differential equations. We argue that there is a stable
solution,

rates

which describes the equilibrium of the

economies. In

section 4, the

of product development are characterized, with special attention to their

limiting values.

In section 5 we provide the welfare analysis. Section 6

discusses generalizations of the model and gives conclusions.

2. The Model

The model we shall use is a simplified version of Grossman and I4elpman

(1989b). so our presentation wilt be brief. There are two countries, labelled
by L:1,2, with labor as the

only resource. Let nl

denote the number (measure)

or intermediate inputs available in country i at time t, where we suppress t as
an explicit argument. We shall initially suppose that the intermediate inputs
are not traded, so each country uses only its own varieties: this assumption

will be relaxed in section 6. Denote the quantity of each intermediate input by

xi(0), where u is an index or varieties. By symmetry of our model. x(o) will
be constant across all varieties in each country, so that xi(Co) • Xi. Letting j
denote the output or the final good in each country, the production function for
the final goods are given by:

rJ
0

where

e
X1

'1/s

d(oI

1/at
n1

x4,

O<&<1.

(1)

)

the elasticity of substitution among the intermediate inputs is 11(1—01).
Let

Pyi denote the price of the final good produced in country i. and Pxi

denote the price of each intermediate input available there. An important
variable in our analysis will be the share of world expenditure spent on the

products of country i. We wilt let i denote the share of world expenditure on

S

fina' products from country i. si • PyIul/(Pyiwi + Py2U2)• Because each final

product is produced with only the intermediate inputs of that country, the value
where Xj • njxj denotes the

of output pyy equals the cost of inputs

aggregate quantity of intermediate inputs in country i. It follows that the
share of world expenditure on final products is equal to the share on interme-

diate inputs. s = xXt/(pxX . px2X2). We will use this result frequently.
The final goods y enter the utility functions of consumers, while the
number of intermediate inputs created each period is determined by the R&D

activities of firms. We specify next the problems solved by consumers (section

2.1) and firms (section 2.2). from which the equilibrium conditions for the
economies can be determined.

2.1. Consumers

Consumers in both countries have the identical utility function,

e(tU log(u(y1(t),y2(v))] dt

J

(2)

where y(t) is the chosen consumption of the final good from country i at time

t. irl.2. We

shall suppose that the

instantaneous

utility function u(y1.g2)

takes on a CES form,

u(y1.y2)

(y1 .

y1

.

where the elasticity of substitution is 11(14).
obtained

0 c

Results

1.

for

(3)

I can be

as a limiting case of our analysis. We ignore s 0. however, since in

that case zero consumption of either final good would give utility of -oo in (2).
so that neither country could survive in autarky.

6

Since u(y1.y,)

is homogeneous or degree one, the corresponding expenditure

fl(py,.Py2)u. where it can be thought of as a cost

runction can be written as E

or living index (it is formally the unit—cost function for (3)). It follows that
utility can be expressed as u

E/lt(pyi.py2). or expenditure deflated by the cost

of living index. Substituting this into (2). we can write utility as.
- p( v - t)

Ut

Je

(4)

(logE(t) — logit(py1,py2)3 dt .

Consumers maximize (4) subject to a budget constraint stating that the
present discounted value of expenditure cannot exceed the present discounted

value of labor income plus initial assets. We shall suppose that consumers race
an integrated world capital market, so there is a single. endogeflous interest

rate at which citizens of either country can borrow or lend. We will let RU)
denote the cumulative interest factor from time 0 to t (R(0)

1). so that A(t)

is the instantaneous interest rate at time t. Then the first order condition for
maximizing (4) is,

E/E: A-p.
Thus,

(5)

the path of expenditure will be rising (falling) as the interest rate is

greater (less) than the consumers' discount rate. Savings takes the form of

riskless equities issued by firms to rinance their R&D activities, as we
describe

next.

2.2. Firms
Grossman and l4elpman (1989b)

that

the technical knowledge

and Rivera-Batiz and Romer (1969) assume

available in the world is directly related to the

7

product development which has occurred in both countries. In contrast, we
shall assume that this knowledge does not cross borders.

Letting technical

knowledge be denoted by Kj. kl .2. we shall assume that this knowledge
increases in proportion to the number of products already developed in each

country, so that Kj u n. This formulation presumes that there are no diminishing returns in the accumulation of knowledge, and will allow continuous

growth to occur.
The labor cost of developing a new product in each country is given by

ani/Ki • ani/ni.

It will be convenient to measure labor in each country in

terms of efficiency units in R&D, so that ant • 1. 1:1 .2. The cost of creating a
new intermediate

diture by

input is then simply 1 /nj.

Firms finance this R&D expen-

issuing equities, which provide a share of the future stream of

profits as a return.

Let the cost or producing each unit or the intermediate input be wiaxi,

where w denotes the wage in country 1:1 .2. The demand

inputs

for intermediate

is derived from the CES production function in (1). The producers of the

intermediates in each

country engage in monopolistic competition, so the prices

Pxi will be a constant markup over marginal costs:
Pxi = wiaxi/oc

.

1:1,2.

-

(6)

It follows that the instantaneous profits from producing the intermediate input are (pxl—wtaxl)x( : ((1 -s)/odwiaxixi/ni. where we earlier let X •
nixI denote the aggregate supply of intermediates in each country. At each

instant of time, the development or new intermediate inputs will occur until
the present discounted value of profits is zero, that S:

6

J
where

B

-(R(t)-R(t)] (1 -cC\ wiatXj

the right side of (7)

Differentiating

dy: Wj/flj .

(7)

is the cost or developing a new input.

(7) with respect to t, and dividing b w/fl. we obtain

one equilibrium condition for the economies;

(1-cO

I—IaiXt

Wi
ft : R
•——r
wj ft

.

(8)

As discussed by Grossman and Helpman (198gb). (8) can be interpreted as a no-

arbitrage condition, which equates the rate of Anterest with the return an

assets of an input producing firm. The First term on the left is the instantaneous profits relative to the costs or R&D (dividends); white the remaining

terms on the left are the rate of change in present discounted profits in (7)
(capital gains).
The second equilibrium condition for the economies equates total demand

with the supply of labor. Let the endowment of labor in each economy be
denoted by Lj. i:1.2. Since the labor required to produce one new intermediate

input is 1/ni. the total labor devoted to R&D is nj/nt. The labor devoted to the

actual production of existing intermediate inputs is aiX,. so equilibrium in the
labor market requires that.

ni/ni • axixi L .
In the next section we show how (6) and (9) can be sirhplified to obtain
differential equations governing the rate of product deve!opment in each
country.

g

3. Ecuations or Motion

To simplify the equilibrium conditions. let p • nj/nj denote the rate of
product development In each country. We can solve For X1

(Li - pi)/axl from

(9). and substitute into (6) obtaining a single equation for each country:

(1—oOLj + c(j/wj) -

(10)

.

Equation (10) is particularly useful in understanding the Factors governing
long-run growth. Suppose that each country is in aLatarky. and set wj • 1 by

choice of numeraire so that wj

0. Consider a steady-state growth path where

expenditure is constant, so From (5). the instantaneous interest rate A equals

the discount rate p. Then it follows Irom (10) that the long-run growth rate
in each country is:

m g • (1-cOLt — sp >0,

(11)

where we assume that this expression is positive. We shall refer to (11) as
the autarky growth rates of the countries, denoted by 9i5 The larger country.
as measured by the effective labor force L. then grows faster in autarky.6

This reflects the tact the the larger country will have a greater variety of
intermediate inputs, more knowledge, and thus lower costs of R&D.

We shalt assume that the two countries are of different size, and let

country 1 be larger in terms of the effective labor force. In autarky, then,

In fact, it
the

can

be argued that the autarky economy must jump immediately to

growth rate 9i• For a single country, the term /5j is zero in (14), and by

inspection the only stable solution is pi g for all t. As discussed below (14).
the unstable solutions with jat-.L or ji-.O are not equilibria.

6 Using (1) and (g), ftnal output yj can be written as
in autarky, Final output grows at the rate (1—cOgj/d.

(1-cOld
(Lt—pt)/at.
n1

Then

10

country 1 wilL be growing faster than the country 2. In order to solve for the
dynamics after opening trade, it wiLl not be appropriate to locus on a steadystate solution where A

p. since this solution will not exist. Instead, we need

to express the instantaneous interest factor A which appears in (a) in terms of
underlying variables in the system.

Recall from our discussion in section 2 that sj denotes the share of world
expenditure on either final or intermediate goods. Choosing the latter measure
piX/E. and so expenditure can be written as E

Pxl X1/s1

PX2XZ/52.

Since ($Ipxj) (4i/wi) from (6). the interest rate is.

A = E/E + p: [!1.+ jJ + .

for I

1.2.

(12)

where we have used (5). It is convenient to eliminate Xj from (12). To do so.

differentiate (9) to obtain:
- p1) .

(13)

Substituting (13) into (12). we can express the interest rate in terms of
underlying variables.

We are now in a position to summarize the dynamics of the system.

Substituting (12) and (13) into (10) it turns out that the wage terms vanish.
and we obtain two differential equations governing the rate of product
development in each country:
—

/(L - MI)

g • o((Sj/Sj)

.

(14)

The change in market shares which appears on the right of (14) is
endogenous, depending on the prices and variety of goods available from each

11

country. To think about the nature of solutions to (14). however, it is
convenient to think or the market shares as exogenous functions of time (taking

on their solution values, for example), Then (14)

first-order

differential equations in pj

is

a system of

rig/nj. or second-order differential

equations in ni. This means that we are free to specify

products ni(O) in each country, but also
development

nonautonomous

the initial number or

have the initial rates of product

pt(O) as free parameters.

Why does this system not determine the initial rates of product develop-

ment? It turns out that for many initial values JJi(O) the solutions to (14) are

unstable, implying that either jii-.Li as t-.°°, or that piO in finite time. The
former solution means that nearly all the resources in country i are absorbed in
R&D, with expenditure on final goods approaching zero, Residents of that

country would be accumulating increasing amounts of assets from firms, which

would violate their transversality condition. We therefore rule out solutions

in which Pt Li as equilibria.
The other solution we shall rule out is where pj—0 in both countries in
finite time. Adapting an argument from Grossman and Helpman (1989a), we can

argue that this path would violate the optimality conditions of firms. Note
that if R&D ceased in both countries, then expenditure would be constant

(setting either wage as numeraire). so R:p from (5). Instantaneous profits for
input producing firms are ((1 -cO/odaxiX i/ni

((1 -d)/odLjfnj, since j=O in (9).

Since we have assumed that gj:U1 —s)Li—op]>O. it follows that profits exceed

p/nj. Then the present discounted value of profits (using A:p) exceeds 1/ni.

which is the fixed cost of creating a new input. so this is not anequilibrium.
In the next section we solve the differential equations (14). while ignoring

solutions where either jsLj as t-.oo. or P1.0 in both countries.

12

4. Growth Paths
To analyse the erfects or trade on product development, we proceed in

several steps. First, we shalt solve the differential equations (14). treating
the market shares as exogenous functions or time. Second, we shall determine

the equilibrium path of the market shares. Third, we shall then characterize
the rates or product development in each country.

Recalling that p flj/flj. we can multiply (14) by 1 /oi and directly
integrate to obtain,
1

/cd

(gI/od)t

n1 (L - pi) cdk s

e

.

(15)

where the k > 0 are arbitrary constants of integration. i:1 .2. Multiply both
sides of (15) by the factor —(1 /cOe

1/cd

This allows us to again integrate

both sides rrom 0 to t, obtaining,

1 , -Lit/d
e

ni(Q)

1 lcd

—(Li .p)z

— kj Jsj e

(15)

0
Using
solutions

equation (18) we can calculate P1 = r/n. We

want to rule out

in which Pl-Li as t-.oo, or where p1—0 in finite time. This is done by

choosing ki as,

n(0)

/ct

—(Lj .p)t

/;s e

(17)

0

By differentiating (16), and substituting (17). the resulting rates of product

development are:

Calculating MI from (16). it is not difficult to show other values of K1> 0
imply that t approaches Li or zero.

13

JJi

0(510

-

(18)

-(L.p)r dr

5s0

t

Note that in this expression for the rates of product development, the
market shares are endogenous. In order to determine the evolution of the
market shares along the equilbrium path we need to consider the demand side of

the model, which we do next.

The prices of the two final goods in each country will equal their

marginal cost, given the production function in (1). All varieties of the intermediate inputs have the same price in each country, as shown in (6). Using the

unit-costs corresponding to the CES production function, the price of each final
good is then.
—o —o)/d

Pyi

(axjwi/cdn1

(19)

.

Given that the utility function u(g1,y2) is CES. the relative market shares for

the two final goods are determined by i'2 (Py1/Py2)"0' .

However, the

expenditure on each final good equals the value of intermediate tnputs used in

its production, and so i'2 pxlXI/Px2X2 aX1WIXI/ax2w2X2. In this
expression we can substitute Xi

(Lj - J.xj)/axj from (9). combining these

various results with (19), we can express the relative market shares as

ii.

(n1'
s (w
(1i -J (axiwi'1-a)
—
:111
1:1

2

I

Lw2)l,L21i2)

lax2w2)

Ln2)

(1 -°$ .
(1-$)o

(20)

To fully determine the path of markets shares, solve for the relative

14

wage w1/w2 from

the tatter equality in (20). and substitute this expression

back into (20). Making use of (15)-(18), we can obtain the following equation
depending solely on the market shares:

Si

(1
n1 (0)

-

tkxi)

e

(i —o(L1 —L2)t

(n2(o))
(1-od)

(l-)

Je

L2.pXt-t 2 dt

t

—

p

(L1 + p)(t-t)

equation

E C0,oo).

(21) depends only on the function s1(t) for

Two features of this equation should be noted. First, we shall be

assuming that there exists a path of the market share

(21).

As an example, consider the special case o:

verified

(21)

S; dt)

t
[—

Noting that 2

(1 -E
I
I

/( 1

s1(t) which satisfies
Then it can be

that (21) is satisfied by:
sl(0)elIt

s(t) =

si(0)e

L1t

L2t

,

ir 1,2,

(22a)

•s2(0)e

with.
51(0)152(0)

(ax2Iaxi)[ni(0)fn2(o)),

(22b)

We believe that solutions to (21) occur more generally, but do not prove this
here.6

Note that from (20) we can solve ror s as a function of ni. p, and various
parameters. Substituting this into (18), we obtain two differential equations
in ni and ni. where iij > 0 should be imposed. For any values of k in a certain
compact set these equations can be solved, and Rj defined by (1 7) are in the

same set. The equilibrium we are interested in corresponds to the fixed point

15

Second, in our derivation of (21) we have been assuming that

>o in

both countries. This means that when the market shares s satisfying (21) are

substituted into (16), we must have pj>0. i:1.2. If instead R&D stops in one
country, then the equations determining the equilibrium are different than what
we have presented.

if P2:0. for example, then this is substituted into (20).

and only the formula for Mi is taken from (18). As a result, equation (21)
takes on a somewhat different Form. We will discuss the conditions under

which R&D will stop in one country, after first solving the case where R&D
continues in both.
The general properties of the path of i can be deduced from the fact
that

Li11)t appears as fcrcing term in (21). tending to increase the

e1

market

share of country 1, This rising market share allows us to determine a

number of results about the long run rates of product development:
Proposition 1

Suppose that j.Si>O. (:1.2. Then there exists T>O (depending on the parameters

of (21)) such that:

(a) i > 0

llm
for t

T. and

: 1:

5i

lim
(b)

Mi >

(c)

92 > P2 >

g1

for t

g2

1. and
-

[(1 -o02/o)](L1 - L2) for t

wtthA:

lini

ki

Mi

.

T. and

L

(1oc)2f'(1-fi)

1_i

+1]

: j. WhiLe it appears that such a fixed point will exist, it is difficult to

determine

whether ri1

>0

or not.

satisfies (21) b.y construction.

If so. then the corresponding path s1(t)

16

Referring back to the differential equations (14). we see that the growth
rate jt of an economy is positively related to the change in its market share

i1i

Thus,

i1 > 0 will tend to quicken product development in country 1.

Since s-.1 then i/si—O. so the positive impact of the rising market share on
growth in country I must be transitory, as indicated in (b). Country 1 wiLl

approach its autarky rate or product development from above. This result is
illustrated in Figure 1, along the path labelled p1(t).

In country 2, which is smaller in terms of the effective labor force, its

falling market share s

it turns
rate

will slow the rate of product development. Since

out that 2/s2 approaches a strictly

in country 2 is permanently less

negative value. Then the growth

than in autarky, by an amount which

depends on the difference in the labor force of the two countries, as indicated
in Cc). We are not able to determine in general whether J2 approaches its long

run value from above or below. However, notice that when $ r 1 then the lower
bound

in Cc) equals the limiting value of P2• In this case P2 must approach its

long run value from above, as illustrated along the path p2(t) in Figure 1.
Note that in drawing Figure 1 we have assumed that the lower bound (or
J2• g2

-

[(1 -o2/s)](L1 - L2), is positive. This condition guarantees that growth

will continue in both countries after the opening of trade. As either A grows
or the two country become more different in size, then it becomes less likely
that R&D wilt continue in country 2. Suppose, (or example, that g2 - A(L1 - L2)
< 0. If it also happened that ji2(,O) > 0, then R&D would occur in country 2 for
some finite period of time, and then cease. On the other hand, since we know

from Proposition 1 that p3(O) falls below g2. it is possible that R&D in
country 2 would cease upon the opening of trade.

While the results of Proposition 1 characterize the path of market shares

for large t, we are also interested in determining properties of i for all time.

It turns out that s will be monotonically increasing if. either the initial
number of products in country 2 relative to country 1 is sufficiently small.

ifs lies in the range $/(1+fl sss 0.5. Then we have:
Proposition 2

Suppose that Pi>0. i:1.2, and either:
(I) n2(0)/n1(0) s N (where N>0 depends on the parameters of (21: or,

(ii) $/(1 $) s ss 0.5.
> 0 for all t0, and the results of Proposition 1 hold for T:O.

Then

Thus, under either conditions Ci) or (ii) we can simply replace T by zer

in Figure 1. and obtain the paths of product development for all t>0. The pr
of Ci) relies an interesting feature of our model. Suppose that instead or

opening trade at time 0. we wait until time T: in the interval (0,T1 we let t
countries grow at their autark rates. Then it turns out that the values of
and Pi for t > T are identical to what they would have been if the countries h

traded during 10.T]. That is. detaing the opening of trade has not effect at
on the rates of R&D or market shares after trade is opened. This means that

for any initial values n(0). irl.2. N can be computed as the ratio n2(T)/n1(T)
the countries grew in autarky over [CT).

Condition (U) was iLlustrated by (22). which is the equilibrium market

shares when 5: $/(1 •$). By inspection, i is increasing for all t in (22). ant

the other results in Proposition 1 then apply for 1:0. The line s:f(1.$)
shown in Figure 2. and the region $/(1.$)<sc0.5 is Labelled as A. When
deriving

the welfare implications in the next section, we will be supposing

that either (s,$) falls in A, or n2(0)1n1(0) s N. so that Proposition 2 applies

18

Welf are

Could the slower rate or product development in the small country, as

npared to autarky. ever lead to welfare losses due to trade? To address this

stion.

observe that for the utility function in (4)

there are two sources of

ns (or loss) from trade: intertemporal gains, by choosing a path or expenure

Ej which

:raternporal

differs from autarky due to the global capital market: and

or statiC gains, by having prices for final goods which differ

m autarky. In this paper we will not attempt to quantify the magnitude of
tertemporal gains.9 instead, we will focus on the intratemporal gains or
sses. by simply comparing the prices faced by each country under free trade

th

their values if the economies had continued in autarky. We shall assume

at the results
Prices

of Proposition

1 apply with T:0.

for final goods affect utility through the price index J'C(pyi .Py2)•

reduction in the price of each final good indicates a fall in the price index Yr.
'4 a rise in instantaneous utility. We need to determine whether the opening

trade leads to such a fail in final goods prices for each country, or not.
First consider country 1. Choosing w1

1 as the numeraire. the prices of

nal goods are given by (1 g). From Proposition 1 we know that this country
periences a higher rate of product development with trade than in autarky.

It

'Ilows immediately that Pyi with trade is less than in autarky. and so the
)untry experiences gains even in the consumption of its own final good. In
Idition,

country 1 has available the final good from country 2. and so we

)nclude that the price index Tt(pyi 'Py2) must be lower under free trade than in

White we normally think or countries as gaining from intertemporal trade.
e do not assert that this result holds here. The difficulty is that the
iterest rate R with trade differs from autarky. so that consumers with
sitive assets may not be able to earn the same interest as in autarky.

autarky.

Turning to country 2. we now choose w2 • 1 as the numeraire. Since

rate of product development with trade is less than in autarky, it rotlows

(19) that the price or its own final good
other hand,

y2 is

higher

under

rree trade. On

country 2 has available the final good from country 1.

So wheth

the overall price index Tt(py1,py2) is greater or less than in autarky depends
if the availability of y,

more than offsets the higher price or U In order

we shall use the result:

make this comparison,

(1

lt(Py,.Py2)

Py2

2

-)/

(2

'

is proved in Feenstra (1990). Thus, the price index it with trade will

which

Lower the smaller is

indicating that imports from country 1 make up a

greater portion of country 2 expenditure, or the lower is , indicating
two

that

final goods are less perfect substitutes.
Let the price or y2 under autarky be denoted by Py2. with the number o

products denoted 112.

The relationship between these is shown by (19), where

we set w2 a 1. We are then interested in comparing
Making

autarky

use of (23). we see

that

TUpyi.py3) with

the price index with trade will be less than

if and only if,

— (1-o)/o

C (n2/n2)

.

(2'

Taking logs of (24). we can express this inequality in the equivalent form:

(1-fl

(1—o[lo9(n2/'2fl
s [ 10952 j'

(2

Consider taking the limit of (25) as t.. Applying L'Hospitals Rule,

20

ression in square brackets on the right becomes .. (.' - g2)(2's2) : 6.
ig (14) and the tact that P2 • 0. Thus, as t.". the inequaLity (25) becomes
5)/$J1-cO. which is certainly violated for some values of
dude

:e

that for these values of 6

and 5. We

and , there will exist I such for t>T, the

index (pyi.Pyz) with trade exceeds the price Py2 raced in autarky.

These

gram

results are illustrated in

Figure 2. In the upper portion of this

we show the region (1 -5)15 <(1 -oO, labelled as B. in which (25) is

Lated and the price index for country 2 exceeds its autarky value for

ficiently high t. As an extreme example, consider 5: 1. so that the final
ds of each country are perrect substitutes. Then the slower rate or product
'elopment

offset

not

wide
de

in country 2 with trade will lead to a higher price for Y2. and this
by the availability of Ui (since this perfect substitute does not

extra utility).

In this extreme case the price index 7t(pyi .Py2) with

exceeds the autarky price 'y2 for all t after trade is opened. For lower

ues of 5. the price index for country 2 will be higher than in autarky only
a restricted range or , and for t sufficiently high.
Next, consider the complementary region in Figure 2. in which (1 -5)15

ct). Can
:arky.

we conclude that the prices index for country 2 will be less than in

so that the country experiences gains from trade in this sense?

It

ns out that this assertion is true so long as a condition on the initial value
s2

is satisfied. Our welfare results are summarized by:

position

3

pose Proposition 1 applies with T :0. Then:
With

w1 • 1. the price index of country 1 under free trade is less than it

uld have been in autarky;

(b) With w2 1. and < 1-Ri —$)/fl, there wilt exist T such that for t>r t
price index for country 2 under trade exceeds its autarky value;
(c) With w2 • 1. and

1 -[(1 -fl/$1. the price index for country 2 will be 1€

than in autarky provided that,
52(0)

.p

(2!

+ p • ((1 -)/]2(L1 -L2)J '

It is difficult to check whether (25) is satisfied in general, since the
initial market shares are determined by (21). However, lower values of the
initial products n2(0)/n1(O) in (21) tend to correspond to lower values or th
initial shares 52(0)151(0), as shown by the example in (22). So condition (2

is consistent with condition (i) or Proposition 2 that n2(0)/n1(0) SN, and tl
is one of the conditions that allows us to apply Proposition 1 with T :0.
We conclude this section by briefly examining the behavior of relative

wages in the countries. From (20) we obtain,
(axjwi'1

(i.s'l

ax2w2) 52)

-$)i (flL'f1°'°

(V

,

Ln2)

Differentiating this expression and making use of earlier results, we can shc

that if i, > 0 for t T. then (w2/w,) will be declining for t T.1

This

behaviour of the relative wage is in constrast to the relative product price:
when s1 > 0 then the terms of trade (Py2Py1) must be increasing, leading to

the toss of market share for country 2. Thus, our model generates opposite
movements in the relative wage and terms of trade across countries.

10 We use (A3) and (A6) from the Appendix.

22

)eneralizatiOfl and Conclusions

We have been assuming throughout the paper that the intermediate inputs

not traded internationally, but can now relax this. When these products are

ad the final goods in (1) will use the inputs From both countries, so that y
g2 will have identical prices and sell in identical quantity.1 1 It follows
the market shares For the final goods are Fixed at 1/2. Since y1 Y2 the

antaneous utility function in (3) can be written as.

$1,1

$
uCy1,y2)

(y1 + y21
2

1/s l ci

n2

5 x1 dC.) • 5 x2 dco

0

1/c(
,

(3')

0

•re the second line follows from ui Y2 in (1), wtth the intermediate inputs
nd x2 from both countries used in the production of each final good. Corn-

rig (31 with (3). we see that the utility function with intermediate inputs
led is identical to our earlier case with ci:

imposed there. Working

)ugh the rest of our earlier analysis, we find that it continues to hold, with
nterpreted as the share of world expenditure on intermediate inputs oF

itry i. We conclude that the model with free trade in the intermediate

its is formally equivalent to the case of no trade with c$ imposed.
Thus, the qualitative results on growth rates reported in Propositions 1

2 carry over to the case of free trade in the intermediate inputs. The
rare results in Proposition 3 also carry over, but now the condition that
$ makes a dIfference.

In Figure 2. the restriction cn$ corresponds to the

This result depends on having the final goods costlessly assembled from the
trmediate inputs, so that that wage tn each country does not affect the final
d's price,

diagonal line, which lies outside the region B where country 2 couLd face a
possible

welfare loss. Thus, when intermediates are traded, and condition (2

is satisfied, we conclude that country 2 wilt face lower prices with trade a
experience gains in this sense. The reason is that the slower rate or produci

development there is offset by the availability or imported intermediates, s
that the final goods price Py2 is less than in autarky.

Our result that the possibility of a welfare loss for country 2 occurs
mainly in the absence or trade in the intermediate inputs is consistent with

the literature on trade and distortions (Bhagwati. 1983). in this case, openi
trade in the final goods can worsen the distortion caused by no trade in the

intermediates, leading to the possibility of a higher price index in country 2

with trade. From a policy perspective, our results indicate the importance r
free trade in intermediate products.
Two other generalizations can be readily discussed. First, suppose tha

the knowledge in one country does spiltover to the other, but at a slow rate.
Grossman and Helpman (lgegb) examine the case where knowledge disseminat

within and across countries with exponential lags. In order for a balanced

growth solution with both countries growing at the same rate to exist, they
argue that the lags within and across countries should be similar. We have
considered the extreme case or instantaneous dissemination within a country

but zero spiltover across countries, so that the nations grow at uneven rates

Their discussion suggests that a similar result might be obtained with limi
but small. spilLover of knowledge across countries.
Second. suppose that a country can either create new products, or imit

the technology of the other country (at some fixed cost). This approach is
taken by Grossman and Helpman (1 989c). Significantly, they assume that th
technical knowledge in the smaller country (the South) depends only on the

24

ovation and imitation which has occurred there, so that there is no direct

hover of knowledge from the Larger country (the North). While this is the
ie assumption we have made, they obtain the quite different result that both

ntries can grow at a quicker rate with trade than in autarky. However, this
utt depends on the South being not too small: it must have enough resources

imitate at the same rate as Northern innovation.1 2 For smaller Southern
intries, the balanced growth equilibrium they have described does not occur.

would conjecture that in this case the countries will grow at uneven rates.
we have analysed here.

In their Figure 1. SS cannot lie below NN.

ADDendix

Proof of Proposition 1

We first solve for the limiting values of s and J.lj, and then determine thei
values for large t in part Cd).
I.!1

For any 0<0<1. we need to show that there exists I such that s1(t)>

for t >1. Suppose not. Then for some Ocaci, we must have either s1(t) <a
t>T,, or s1(tØ:o
In

for an increasing, unbounded sequence of times tj:t1,t2,t3,..

the former case we can take the limit of (21) as t.. and find that the

side is less than 01(1-0) but the right side approaches infinity, which is a
contradiction. So consider the latter case.
Evaluating (21) at the times t1. •we see that the left side is constant

s1(tj)/s2(tj) : o/(1 -0). The term et(1_ t)2 iLOti on the right approaches
infinity as t-.oo. so the bracketed expression on the far right of (21) must
approach zero.

It follows that,

lim

p)(t1—t)

7

dt

0.

(A

Since s2(tj) :0 in the numerator of (18). it follows that p2(tj) must becom

negative for large t. This contradicts our assumption that pj>0. i:1.2.

II

follows that no such sequence exists, which proves that s-.1.

I Using L'Hospitals flute,
Urn

For i1 .

tim

: gj

tim
•

the limit of (16) to obtain

take

s (Sfl .
lAm

.

: 1 implies that t— i : 0, so that

For i:2, we need to evaluate

tim

: g1.

urn(—')
2 and then apply (A2). Differen-

26

ting the tog of (21) and making use or (18). we can show that,

l2 12

(L1-L2) - (c1)1-2 .

(A3)

trig our results in (a) and (b), it follows that,

r (i-#r)(i - .t $2) - aLI-L2)
mbining (A4) with (A2) for i:2, the Limiting value of $2 can be computed.
Substituting the limit of j.22 back into (A4). we obtain,

: () - (.i±)2 [!.L±. lf'L1-L2) C 0 .

(As)

ice (As) is less than zero, it follows that there exists T (depending on the

rarneters or (21)). such that 2<° and >0 ror t>T. To derive the

)perties of i for tT, integrating b parts to obtain the formula,

JSj e +P)?dt

(Lj.p11 [sieL1t ile_a1ttdt]

bstituting this into the numerator or (18). we can write the rates or product
velopmeflt as.

.i(:
en

-

(

-(L.p)z

iClisle

-(Ljtp)r

dt/jsje
t

'\

dtl.

(A6)

)

>0 for all t>T implies that p > g, and $2 < g2. To compute the lower

und on $2. use s>O in (AS) to obtain:

P2 > Mi - (1)L1 -L2) >

- (Li -1.2)

g2 -

(1
(L; —1.2)

Proof of ProDosition 2
Once we establish that

>0 for t>0. it is immediate from our discussion

just above in (d) that Proposition 1 applies for T0.

(fl

For any value of n2(O)/n1(0). and other parameters of (21). let s1(t)

denote the market shares and T denote the time at which i > C for t > T.

Then define N . (n2(O)/ni(O)l 24I)T Consider the new starting values
n2(O)/n1C0)

N. and let the resulting market shares be denoted by j(t). Then

>0 for

by inspection we see that (t) • s(t.T) will satisfy (21). Since

> T. it follows - 11>0 for t0. By the same logic, this result will hold fot
all initial values n2(0)/n1(0) I N.

Ufl We will assume that fl/I] .$) < ot S 0.5. and deal with

$10 $) in th

text. Note that these inequalities on ot imply.
1-ac 2 1(1-fl)

(ci)

-I-i > $(1-2u)
sci-a
1i

(Al)

0

Urn i
Suppose that s1(t0):0. From (A5). .. (n) (—;—) [ cifi • i] (L1-L2). so
1-O( 2 (1-fl)

using (Al) there must exist t1

-1

t0 such that,
(A8)

(42) $('c (L1L2) at t1.
Then substituting this into (A3). we obtain (p -p2)

differential

(L1 —L2) at t1. The

equations (14) can then be written as.

(L-p)

-

(L2-p2)

(P1-i2) - (g1-g2)

-

cl/S152)

26

(L1-L2)

(s(i.$)-$1

-e the second tine follows using (p1-ja2)
Since (L1-p1)

>

(Ag)

.

(L1-l.2). (AS) and s> $I(l 4).

(L2-ji2) at t1, it is evident from (A9) that (A1—ü2) > 0

Taking the derivative of (A3). it follows that for t slightly greater
t1 we must have (1/$12) less than ($(l -2s)/s(l -$))(L1-L2). However.

implies that (1/l2) can never exceed ($(l -2s)Is(l-$)](Li-L2), since
never it reaches this value (from below) it then becomes less. But this

:radicts that fact that

(Isi s2) > ($(l -25)104(1 -$)J(L1 -L2) from (Al).

allows that s1(t0):O cannot occur, and since s.1. then

>0 ror all t.0.

DI of ProDositton 3

and (b) These are proved in the text.

Note that s . 1 —Ui 4)/$I implies

s 1 Is. since

r (1 -cO$I(1 -$)s.

n (n2I2) > (n2/A)1 "° . We wilt show that.

(n2I)1 > (s21s2(0)J (L2 + . ((i-;)/od2(L,
-L2))
using (26) this implies (n2/R2)

(Ala)

(fl22)1 " > 2. which proves (24).

To establish CAb), use (15) and (17) to write.

Is

C(L2_J12)Js2eO2dtiIss2 .

(All)

ce s1 >0 for alt t. then P2 > g — UI -s)21s)1(Li —L2) from Proposition 1(c).
I

it follows that (L2—j.a2) < s(L2.p) . ((1 —o02/s)](L1—L2). Substitute this

a (All), and use 52(0) > s to replace 2 in the integral. Then evaluating the
egral. we obtain (Ala).

References

Bhagwati. Jagdish N. (1983) 'The Generalized Theory of Distortions and
Welfare,' in Essaus in International Economic Theoru, vol. 1. Cambridgc
MIT Press. 73-94.

Baurnol. William J. (1986) 'Productivity Growth. Convergence, and Welfare
What the Long-Run Data Show,' American Economic Review 76, 1072-1 at

Boldrin. Michele and Jose A. Scheinkman (1989) 'Learning-By-Doing. Interna
tional Trade and Growth; A Note,' in Philip W. Anderson, Kenneth J. Ar
and David Pines, eds. The Economu as an Evolving ComDlex Sustern. New
York; Addison-Wesley. 265-300.
Bowen, Harry P.. Edward E. Learner and Leo Svetkauskas (1967) Multicountr
Multifactor Tests of the Factor Abundance Theory.' American Economic
Review 77. 791 -809.
Dinopoulos. Elias. James F. Oehmke and Paul S. Segerstrorn (1989) 'HighTechnology-industry Trade and Commercial Policy.' Michigan State Univ
•
mirneo.

Dollar, David. Edward N. Wolff and William J. Baumol (1968) 'The Factor_E
Equalization Model and Industry Labor Productivity: An Empirical Test P
Countries.' in Robert C, Feenstra, ed. EmDirical Methods for Interriatlo
Trade. Cambridge: MIT Press, 23-47.

Ethier. Wilfred (1962) 'National and International Returns to Scale in the
Modern Theory of International Trade.' American Economic Review 72, 3
405.
Feenstra, Robert C. (1990) 'New Goods and Index Numbers: Explaining the C

in U.S. Imports.' Univ. of California. Davis. in process.
Grossman. Gene H. and Elhanan Helpman (1 989a) 'Product Development and

International Trade,' Journal of Political Economu 91. 1261-1283.
Grossman. Gene H. and Elhanan Helpman (1 989b) 'Comparative Advantage an
Long-Run Growth.' HOER Working Paper no. 2809. American Economic Re

forthcoming.
Grossman. Gene M. and Ethanan Helpman (1969c) 'Endogenous Product Cycte

30

3ER Working Paper no. 2913.

;man. Gene H. and Elhanan Helpman (1989d) Growth and Welfare in a Small
en Economy.' NBER Working Paper no. 2970. in Elhanari Helpman and Assaf

izin. eds. International Trade and Trade Policu, MIT Press, forthcoming.

r. N. (1960 Tapital Accumulation and Long Run Growth,' in F.A. Lutz and
C. Hague. eds.. The TheQru of Capital. New York; St. Martins Press, 17722.

nan. Paul (1988) 'The Narrow Moving Band, the Dutch Disease, and the
nsequences of Mrs. Thatcher,' Journal of Development Economics 8. 149—
31.

;. Robert E. (1988) 'On the Mechanics or Economic Development.' Journal or
onetaru Economics 22. 3-42.
.isen, James A. (1989) 'First Mover Advantage, Blockaded Entry, and the
:onomics of Uneven Development,' in Elhanan Helpman and Assal Razin, eds.
'ternational Trade and Trade Policu, MIT Press, forthcoming.
is, B.S. (1962) 'The Homohypallagic Production Function. Factor—Intensity
versals and the Heckscher-Qhlin Theorem.' Journal of Political Economu
3, 138-156.

.1g. Kevin M.. Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (1989) 'Industrialization
d the Big Push,' Journal of Political Economu 97, 1003-1026.

-a-Batiz, Luis A. and Paul H. Romer (1989) 'International Trade With
idogenous Technical Change,' University or Chicago. mimeo.

'r, Paul H. (1989) 'Capital Accumulation in the Theory of Long Run Growth.'
I Robert J. Barro, ed. Modern Business Cucle Theoru. Cambridge; Harvard
niversity Press, 51—127.
,r, Paul N. (1990) Endogenous Technical Change,' Journal of Political
;onomu, forthcoming.
rstrom, Paul S., r.C.A. Anant and Elias Dinopoulos (1989) 'A Schumpeterian
odel or the Product Life Cycle.' American Economic Review, forthcoming.
g. Alwyn (1 989) 'Learning By Doing and the Dynamic Gains from Trade,'
Lumbia University, mtmeo.

P1.J2

g2-ML1 -L2)

lower bnd

______ __________

I
Figure 1

o(:1 -[(1 -16)/fl

o/(1 .+)

Figure 2

