NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DISTRIBUTING THE GAINS FROM TRADE WITH INCOMPLETE INFORMATION

Robert Feenstra

Working Paper No. 3277

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1990

Prepared for the conference "Political Economy and International Economics,"
Financial support from the National
Columbia University, February 16-17, 1990.
Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. This paper is part of NBER's
research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3277
March 1990

DISTRIEUTINC THE GAINS FROM TRADE WITH INCOMPLETE INFORMATION

ABSTRACT

We argue that the incomplete information which the government has about

domestic agents means that tariffs become an optimal instrument to protect
them from import competition.

We solve for the optimal government policies.

subject to the political constraint of ensuring Pareto gains from trade, the
incentive compatibility constraint, and the government's budget constraint.

We

find that the optimal policies take the form of nonlinear tariffs, so that both
buyers and sellers of the import face an effective price which exceeds its
world level.

We find that the tariffs are never complete, in the sense of

bringing prices (or all individuals back to their initial level.

Rather,

it will

always be possible to make some individuals strictly better off than at the
initial prices, while ensuring that no persons are worse off.

Robert Feenstra

Department of Economics

University of California
Davis,

CA 95616
(916)752-7022

1.

IntroductIon
When faced with lower prices because of import competition, industries

often lobby for, and receive, protection.

In the last decade, a formal analysis

of lobbying pressure and the resulting protection has been the topic of much

research in the political economy and trade literature.

Early analyses often

assumed that the method of protection was simply tariffs.' while later papers
have explicitly compared tariffs, quotas, or other policy instruments.2

In the

context of a median voter model, Mayer and Riezman (1987) have argued that

tariffs are inferior to a production tax/subsidy in that sense that all voters
-

would prefer the latter.

Thus, the question arises as to why tariffs or other

forms of trade protection would be used at all. While there are a number of
answers to this question. in this paper we propose an explanation which we
believe is new.

Specifically, we argue that the incomplete information which the
government has about domestic agents means that tariffs become an optimal

instrument to protect them from import competition. To see this argument.
suppose that some-individual is initially selling the amount x0 of a product at
the price p0. and then the price drops to p'.

It is clear that if the govern-

ment provided an income transfer or (p0-p1 )x°. then the individual could not be

worse oil from the price fall: even if she decided to sell the same amount x0.
then she would still receive total income of p1x0 • (pQ-p')x°
the same as InItially.

p0x0, which is

More generally, If the Individual changed her behavior in

response to price change, while receiving this income transfer, then she Would

be better oil. Thus, by providing income transfers of this type, the government
can ensure that all individuals (whether they are buyers or sellers of the

product) gain from the price fall.4

2

However, if the government does riot actually observe the amount sold,

then the income transfer (p0-p')x° cannot be calculated:

situation of incomplete information.

we refer to this as a

In practise, we could expect that it

would be very difficult for the government to know the sales level of each firm

in an industry, or the factor supply of each worker to that industry, so that
compensating these individuals through income transfers becomes infeasible.
This problem was recognized by Hufbauer and Rosen (1986. p. 77) in their

proposal to compensate firms and workers for reductions in U.S. tariffs and
quotas.

They suggested that a complete list of workers, capital and farmland

engaged in an industry could be made on an inventory date,

therefore determine who is eligible for compensation.

which would

In practise, we could

imagine that such a scheme could be subject to various misrepresentation of the
actual inputs employed at the

inventory date.

When the government does not observe the quantities x0 sold or purchased.

it is intuitive that a tariff becomes an informationally efficient form of
compensating the sellers.

For example, the tariff of (p0-p') would fully

compensate sellers for the price drop, and would also be financed by the same

tariff applied to buyers of the import. The problem, of course, is that this
tariff would lead to the same initial consumption and sales decisions, and

therefore would not generate gains from trade (except for the possible tariff
revenue, which could be redistributed).

In deriving an optimal policy in the

presence of incomplete information, the question is whether at least some

individuals can strictly gain from the drop in the import prices, with no one
being worse off.

We find that such Pareto gains are indeed possible, and the

optimal policy instrument is a (nonlinear) tariff.
In section 2 we outline our model.

For simplicity, we ignore production

and consider a pure exchange economy where individuals differ in their endow-

3

ment of the importable good.

Depending on their endowment, and the price, each

person Is then a buyer or seller of the importable. With a drop in the import
price, we assume the government faces the political constraint of bringing each

person back to their initial level or welfare. i.e. achieving Pareto gains from
the Increased trade.

While we do not model the rational for this constraint.

we could imagine that the government faces political pressure which would
prevent trade from being increased unless most individuals gain.
In sectIon 2 we also describe the type of policies the government can use.

which we assume are a quite general combination of taxes and quantity of the

import, both of which can differ across individuals.

These policy options

certainly include tariffs and simple income transfers as a special case, and

more generally, allow for nonlinear tariffs which vary with the amount bought
or sold.

We also introduce the idea of incentive compatibte policies;

these

policies make it optimal for agents to truthfully reveal their endowments of
the importable good, but at the same time, constrain the actions of the
government.

Thus, the lack of information faced by the government is remedied

by ensuring the individuals will voluntarily report their true sales or purchases
of the import, but this behavior comes at the cost of adding an

incentive

compatibility constraint on the available policies.

In section 3 we solve for the optimal government policies, subject to the
political constraint of ensuring Pareto gains from trade, the incentive compatibility constraint, and the government's budget constraint. We find that the

optimal policies take the form of nonlinear tariffs, so that both buyers and

sellers of the import face an effective price which exceeds its world level p'.
Thus, there is an implied tax on buyers and subsidy to sellers.

various properties of the tariff schedule.

We discuss

In section 4 we argue that the

tartffs are never complete. in the sense of bringing prices for all individuals

4.

back to their initial level p°. Rather, it will always be possible to make some
individuals strictly better off than at the initial prices, while ensuring that no
In this sense, strict gains from trade are obtained.

persons are worse oil'.

Conclusions are given in section 5.

2.
2.1

The Model
AssumDtions and Notation
There are two goods in the economy

numeraire good.

.

denoted by x and y, with y being the

There is a continuum of individuals in the economy who are

distinguished by the initial endowment of good x that they possess.
duals have the same initial endowment

y0 or the good y.

All indivi-

We shall let $ be the

initial endowment of x, and assume that e ranges in the interval

F(e)

represents the number or individuals with x-endowments less than or equal to
e.

The density of individuals with endowment e is given by 1(8) = F(8). and we

assume for simplicity that ff(8)de

1.

In what follows we will also assume

that a standard hazard rate property is satisfied. d/de (F(e)/r(e)1 >

All individuals share the same quasi-linear utility function U(y.x.$) given
by:

U(x.y.e)

y0 •

y

* •(x • 8).

(1)

where y and x represent the net purchases of the two goods.

We assume that

> 0 and • < 0.
For simplicity there is no domestic production.

Initially the economy

laces the price p0 for good x. which may be either the autarky equilibrium
price, or given exogenously by world markets.
max U(x,y.e)

subject to

p0x •

Each individual solves:
0.

(2)

5

Let (y°.x°) be the unique solution to (2).

Expressing x0 as a function a, it is

easy to show that:
i(p°) — 8.

x°(e)

(3)

where ji is the Inverse function of •', and x°'(G)

-1.

Note that the choice of

x0 varies inversely with the initial endowment 8. When x < 0 Cx

>'

0) we say

that the individual is a seller (buyer) of x. We will be supposing that x is the
import good, with a zero or positive amount imported at the price p0.
The

utility for a type a person in the initial equilibrium is given by:
U°(e)

=

U(x°.y°.e).

Employing the Envelope Theorem, it is immediate that U°'(e) = •(x°(8) • el = p°.

The utility schedule ii°(e) corresponding to the initial equilibrium is shown• in
Figure 1.

SInce x°'(G) < 0, there exists some

such that all individuals

with initial endowments of x greater than è will be sellers in equilibrium, and
all individuals with endowments less than Ô will be buyers or x in equilibrium.
The boundary

type is also shown in Figure 1.

Now suppose that the price or imports x falls from PC to p1 < p0.

For

the moment assume that there are no import restrictions or tariffs, and that
individuals still retain the same initial endowments of y and x.

Then in the

new free trade equilibrium. x and y will be chosen to:
max U(x,y.e)

subject to

p'x. y.

Let (x',y') be the unique solution to (4), and denote by U'(e)

corresponding utility as a function of a.

show that U''(e) :'(x1(e).8]

p1.

(4)

U(x'.y1.e) the

As before it is straightforward to

6

Looking at Figure

1

where

tJt(G)

is compared with U°(e). one can see that

all buyers and some marginal sellers of x would benefit from the chance to
However the larger sellers, whose

purchase less expensive imported goods.
income would depend heavily

on the sales revenues from

harmed by the less expensive imports.

x. would obviously

be

If the domestic government were

informed as to the type of each individual (as characterized by their initial
endowments) it could trnpose a suitable lump tax on those benefitting from
imports, and distribute these revenues to those who were harmed, so as to make

all individuals better off under free trade.
such transfers are not possible.

However, without this information

In this case the government may need to

resort to second best policies, which are constrained by the private information
that individuals possess about their initial endowments.

2.2

Informational lu Constrained Policies

To examine inforrnationally constrained policies, we make the following
assumptions about the governments available policy options.

First, we assume

that while the initial endowments of a given individual are private knowledge,
the government does have aggregate data on initial endowments in that the

distribution of types 1(e) is known.
Second, we assume that the government is able to offer a menu of options

which consist of pairs (T.x), where I is a fee which is paid by the individual in

return for tbs right to buy or sell a specified quantity x at the going world
price p'.

Notice, that T may be negative, in which case the individual receives

a subsidy from the government.

I•

• p'x = 0.

The individual's budget constraint becomes:

7

Substituting for

y

in terms of T and x from the budget constraint, we can

rewrite utility in terms of T. x. and 8 as:
U(T.x.e)

•(x • e) • y - p1x -

T.

Specifying a schedule of T's and x's allows the government to try to
compensate the losers from import competition with funds that have been
raised from the buyers of the imports.

When the government announces a menu

(T(e),x(e)}. it realizes that each individual will select the combination of

taxes and imports which are optimal for them.

In particular, an individual

must find it in their interest to report a false value of 9. The government can
limit this behavior, however, by choosing the schedule (T(e).x(8)} which makes

it in the best interest of each person to truthfully report their type.

We

model this requirement as the incentive compatibility constraint, which is

formally written as:
u(e le) . U(T(e),x(e).e)

Define U(e) • U(e 8).

UCT(e'),x(e').el • U(e je) for all e.e'.

(IC]

Then a useful characterization of policies which satisfy

the incentive compatibility constraint is given by:

Lemma

1

A policy {x(G),T(e)} satisfies (IC] if and only if:

a) U'(e) = •'(x(e) •

9];

b) x(8) is nonincreasing.
The proof follows standard arguments presented in Guesnerie and Laffont (1984)

and so Is omitted.

8

Our third requirement On the government policies is that it must be
polttically acceptable.

A strong form of political acceptability which we shall

impose here is that no individual can be made worse off from the import

The political acceptability

competition.

(PA] constraint is written as:

for all 0.

U(e) U°(e)

(PM

Weaker forms of the (PA) constraint could be used by requiring that only a

fraction (perhaps a majority) of individuals gain from the increase in trade, on
the argument that if enough people gain than the action would be politically
feasible.7

Finally, the government operates under a budget constraint, meaning that

it has limited funds to implement the import policy.

We model this budget

constraint (BC] by requiring:

I

where

T(z)dF(z) * W 0.

(Bc]

is some fixed budget (possibly zero) which the government has to work

with.

3.

Analysts
We can now state the government's problem (GP] in trying to formulate

an optimal import policy.

We envision that government chooses a policy

{x(e),T(efl to maximize the expected utility of all individuals in the economy
plus the government budget surplus subject to the (IC]. (PA). and [BC]
constraints.

Formally,

we can represent the government's problem as:

g

max

Ix(e).T(e)}

-p'x(e) - 1(e) * T(e) +

{$(x(8)*e) +

H

x[T(e) *
*

(GP]

j.L(e)(U(e) - u°(e)]

• p(e)($(x(e).G) +
•

- p1x(e) — 1(e) — uCe)]

(e)$'(x(e),e)} dF(e).

The first line of the Hamiltonian H represents total expected surplus, inclusive
of the budget surplus.

The second line captures the (BC] constraint.

The third

line captures the (PA] constraint, where we are treating U(e) as a state
variable.

Line four defines the state variable, and the final line represents the

equation of motion for the state variable, which comes from part (a) of Lemma

1. We will verify that part (b) of Lemma

1

is satisfied once the characteri-

zation of the solution to (GP] is complete.
Maximizing H pointwise with respect to x(e) and 1(e) we obtain the
following conditions:
aH/ax(e)

($'-p1](1.p) •

ÔH/ÔT(e)

x-p

aH/ou(e)

(5a)

0,

(Sb)

0.

(j.i-p)f(e)

- U°(.)] =

=

(5c)

- a('(e)f(e))/e.

()(U() - U°()] =

(transversality conditions)

0.

(5d)

10

In what follows we assume that the [PA] constraint only binds at 0

meaning that all other individuals obtain utility strictly greater than U°(e).
As we discuss below, this is the case when the government's budget constrarnt

is not too stringent (see section 4).

the multiplier ji(e) =

0.

When (PA] in not binding this implies that

Also by assumption. U(.) - U°(.) > 0 which implies

Substituting for p from (5b) and using

= 0. from (5d).

(5c) we can

express (e) as:

(e) =

XF(e)/f(e).

Combining this with (5a) implies:
—

(X/(1 .X)] [F(0)/f(0)).

(6)

The solution to COP] is distinguished by whether the government budget

constraint is binding or not binding. We now turn to these two cases.

3.1

Nonbinding overnment Budoet Constraint

According to (6), x(G) = x'(e)

and there is free trade

in

the imported

good x. whenever the government's budget constraint is not binding so that X =
0.

Otherwise if (BC] is binding so that X > 0. (6) implies that consumption of

the imported good will be inefficiently small. Therefore it is of interest to
know when (BC] is

binding.

Arguing intuitively. (BC] will bind when the

government must offer more compensation to individuals to insure the free

trade policy is politically acceptable than the budget allows.
Figure

1

illustrates the utility obtained initially (1)0(0)1 and after the

fall in the import price (U'(e)] by the various agents. Without government
transfers, buyers of x (low a types) tend to gain under free trade while sellers

11

of x (high e types) lose.

If [BC] is not binding then the government must be

compensating these individuals with lump sum transfers. However the identity

of the sellers in not known to the government, so that alt individuals can apply
for this subsidy. As a consequence. all individuals receive the lump sum subsidy
which is shown as L in Figure : enou9h to ensure that the highest 0 type is no

worse off from the import competition, while everyone else gains. Since we
have assumed that the total number of individuals in the economy is unity, it

follows that the total transfer paid by the government (the negative of taxes)
also equals L. which we presume is positive as illustrated.'

Thus, if W: 0 in (BC]. then it is immediate that the government budget
constraint is not met, so that free trade cannot be achieved.

However, even if

B> 0. meaning that the government has some funds available to distribute, we

can argue that (BC] will be violated if the dispersion of types is sufficiently
of e.
large. To make this argument. consider a mean preserving variation
where we define a new variable (X.e) which is given by:
(7)

e * oi(e-ö),
where

> 0 and

Proposition

is the mean 01' 9. Then we have:

1

[BC] is binding in the solution to (GP] if

is sufficiently large.

-

The proof of Proposition 1 proceeds by simply calculating how the

transfer L depends on . From Figure
applying the mean preserving spread, L

and (7) we calculate that:

1

we have L

u°() - U'(). or after

u°() - u1(').

Then using Lemma 1

12

(U°'()

dL/do
=

(p0

3.2

ê')

- p1)(i- ö) >0.

Thus, for sufficiently high
revenue

- U '()]t -

we must have that payments L exceed the available

so that (BC] is binding.

We turn to an analysis of this case next.

Binding Government Budget Constraint

As we have shown, the budget constraint will be binding ii there is

sufficient heterogeneity among individuals in terms of their initial endowments

of x (or if W is small). In this instance the solution to (GP] is characterized
by the following:

proposition

2

Assume (BCI is binding, and •"' 0.

Then the solution to [GPI satisfies:

a)

•'

b)

x°(G) x(e) x1(e)

c)

x'(G) < 0;

d)

(x) 0 (with strict inequality for x <

pt •

(with strict inequality for Q, < e < 8):

< 0;
e)

U(e)

U()

a

-

f •(z • z(8)]dz.

e

Proposition 2 is proved in the Appendix. As the reader might have expected.
when the

budget constraint is binding then it is not possible to achieve the

efficient free trade solution.

What results is a compromise policy which

allows for some partial movement towards the free trade solution, as indicated
by part (b).

13

Parts (a) and Cc) imply that buyers of the good x are taxed on the margin

at the rate (x). On the other hand, sellers of x receive a marginal subsidy
equal to z(x).

We can think of (x) as a nonlinear tariff, which varies with

The result of this tariff is to lower consumption, raise

the quantity imported.

domestic sales, and restrict imports into the economy.
The tariff is introduced because of the binding budget constraint.

To

balance the budget, the government must limit the rents which individuals earn

from their private information.

Figure 2 shows the utilities UCe) of different

e types under the solution to (GPI, in comparison to the initial level of utility
U°(e).

The gap between U(e) and U°(e) represents the information rent earned

by each individual.

This rent is increasing as we move down the 0 scale at the

rate of p0 - •'(x(e).e].

This rate can be reduced by inducing smaller levels of

x(8) since • is strictly concave.

This is accomplished by introducing the

noninear tariff (x).
According to part Cc), t(x) is decreasing with x.

Thus, the tariff is

decreasing in the amount sold, and the sales subsidies (for x < 0) exceed the

consumption taxes (for x > 0).

As we explained above, the tariff t(x) is levied

to encourage a reduction in x.

This decreases the rate at which individuals earn

higher rents from the private information about their endowments.

Looking at

Figure 2, we see that it is particularly important to limit the rents for the
high 8 types, since this also reduces the rents for all 8 types below them.
Consequently, the distortions become less for smaller 8 types since it is not as

important to limit their information rents.

Thus, the tariff distortions are

largest for the high 8 types (sellers of x) and smallest for the low 0 types
(buyers of x).

To complete our characterization of the solution to (GP] let us analyze

the tax function T.

Recall that we can represent utility as

- p'x - I

u(T.x.e) = tV(x.8) *

Solving for T in terms of U. and using part (a) of Lemma 1 and (6). we can
represent the tax function as:
8

1(e)

—u°() •

(8)

•'(x(z) .zldz * • -p1x +

8

From part Cc) of Proposition 2 we know that x(e) is invertible, so we can

Differentiating 1 with respect to x

represent 8 as a function of x, say 8(x).
we obtain:
T'(x)

•'(x * 8(x)] -

r(x)

t'(x) < 0,

by part (d) of Proposition 2.

p1

t(x) > 0.

This implies that the schedule (T,x} appears as in

Figure 3 where I is an increasing, concave function of x.
When presented with this schedule individuals choose the point on the 1(x)

curve which maximizes their utility.

Note that the marginal rate of transfor-

mation of I for x for individual 8 is given by:
•'[x(G) •

dT/dX

- p'

=

U

so that different e types locate at a tangency point along the T(x) schedule, as
indicated in Figure 3.

Since 1(x) is strictly concave, it can be supported by a

series or linear schedules (L(e),t(8)}, where L is a lump sum subsidy or tax.
and

is a per unit tax or subsidy placed on the consumption or sale of x.

such linear schedules for e and 82 are illustrated in Figure 3.

Two

In theory then.

the schedule (T,x} could be administered in a decentralized fashion by allowing

IS

rndividuals to choose from a series of two part tariffs {L(8).t(e)} according to
This observation is formally stated tfl:

their type.

Proposition

3

The solution to [GP] can be implemented in a decentralized means by allowing

individuals to choose from a schedule of two part tariffs {L(e).t(e)}.
Under this policy, an individual faces the tax (subsidy) or t($) on all units
consumed (sold), where this tax rate does not vary with quantity.

The tax rate

differs across tndivtduals. however, with each person choosing their preferred

combination of the marginal tax t(8) and lump sum subsidy L(e).

4.

Gains

from Trade are Always Possible

In our discussion above we were assuming that the [PA) constraint was

binding only at 8

e, while individuals with lower endowments of good x

obtained strictly higher utility than initially.

This situation was illustrated

by the utility schedule U(e) lying strictly above U°(e) in Figure 2 (except at .
However, if the government budget constraint is too stringent (W is very low),
it may not be possible to ensure these gains to alt individuals.
In terms of our earlier analysis, suppose that X — the multiplier on the
budget constraint - rises.

Then from (6) we see that • would rise for any

given value of $ < 0. Using Lemma 1, this means that utility declines at a

faster rate for lower 8. However, in Figure 2 if utility declines too rapidly
around e then the utility schedule U(e) wul fall below the schedule U°(8).
which violates the (PA] constraint.

Instead, the solution to (GM would involve

a utility level lice) just equal to U°(e) over some interval (e',i), with utility
rising above its initial level for tower values of 8.

This schedule is shown as

16

The results of Proposition 2 would still apply, except that x(8)

AB in Figure 2.

(e'..

= x°(e) for $ e

The question then arises as to whether some individuals can always gain

from the lower import price, as along the utility schedule AB in Figure 2.
That is. can we be sure that starting with non-negative government revenue, and
zero or positive trade at the prices p0. the government will be able to devise a
policy whtch leaves some individuals strictly better off and none worse? The
following result shows that this is indeed the case: gains from trade are
always possible.

Proposition

4

Suppose that W 0. with zero or positive imports at the price p°. Then with
p1

< p°. there exists a schedule (1'(o).i'(e)} satisfying (IC] and (BC] such that

U(T..e)U°(e) for all 8. with strict inequality for some e.
In Figure 2 the range of individuals who gain from the government policy

is shown by AB', while all other persons obtain U(s) = u°(e). The idea behind
the proof of Proposition 4 is that is is always possible to allow a small set of
individuals to purchase the imports x'(8) rather than x°(e). but then apply
higher taxes 1(8) on them reflecting their higher utility. For the person just
indifferent between obtaining the greater imports at the higher taxes (that is.

the individual at B'). the extra taxes which the government collects is exactly
equal to their rise in utility from the extra imports. Since this extra utility
is non-negligible, the government obtains higher revenue that if just applied a

complete tariff of (p°-p1) and forced everyone to their initial consumption and

utility level. Thus, allowing the set of individuals along AB' to consume x1(6)
imports yields higher utility for them, and greater revenue for the government.

17

5.

Conclusions

In this paper we have argued that (nonlinear) tariffs can arise as the

optimal instrument for protecting a domestic group from import competition.
In this

when the government is constrained by incompLete information.

setting, the Lump sum transfers which would be needed to compensate each

seller for the price drop cannot be computed, since they depend on the initial
quantity sold.9

The (nonlinear) tariff becomes a method for compensating those

who lose from the price drop, while raising the revenue for those who gain, and

still securing strictly positive gains for some individuals.
It might be useful to contrast the role of information in our model with
an alternative model presented by Magee, Brock and Young (1989).

They have

delightfully suggested that tariffs can arise under the heading of Optimal
obfuscation and the theory of the second worst.

The idea is the government

may rationally choose tariffs when voters are imperfectly informed, since the
voters do not recognize this instrument as a consumption tax.

Thus, in their

model the government has more information about actual policies than voters.

In contrast, we have argued that the government wilt likely have less information than voters. since it may not observe the exact losses faced by individuals
due to import competition.

In this case tariffs arise as an optimal policy.

subject to the informational constraints.

16

Appendix
PropositiOnS

1

and 3 are proved in the main text.

Proof of propositiOn

2

Equation (6) in the text implicitly defines x(e).
have:

with respect to Ce) we

x(e) -

where

Totally differentiating (6)

* (d/de(F/f)]

•

• (F/f)"

-

<0

(Al)

.

expression foUowS from • < 0.
X/(l•X). The sign of the above
This proves part Cc) of the Proposition and verifies

d/de(F/f) > 0. and •'" 0.
that part (b) of Lemma

I

is also satisfied.

!unctiOfl of x, 8(x).
Since x is monotone me, we can represent 8 as a

Define t . •.

-

p1

- X$F(G(X))If(G(X)). using (6).

Clearly

0. with strict

with respect to 8 we obtain '(x) =
inspection of (Al). we see that -1 c e'(x) < 0.

inequality for 8 > .. Differentiating

• e). Since x'(8) < -1 by

and so '(x) < 0. This proves parts (a) and Cd) of the Proposition.
This means that U(e) > U°(e) in
W
By assumption (PA) binds only at 8
- p0 . 0.
d/de (U(O)U0(efl
a neighborhood of . Hence

".

•'(x( •

But since x(8) c -l in (Al) and • < 0 we obtain
implying that x(e) > x0(e) for all e <
•'(x(e) • 8] — p° < 0 for all 8 <
obtain •'tx(8) * e) Finally, since t 0 with strict inequality for 8 > , we

implying that x() x°().

p0

0 and x(8)

proof of part (b).

the
x'(G) with strict inequality for 8 > . This completes
Part Ce) follows from the transversatity conditiOn U()

U°(). and part (a) of Lemma 1

Proof or

Proposition

4

At price p° the country is either in autarky or there are some imports of x.
First consider the case where x is imported.
?'(e)

Let T(e) r (p0-p1)x(9).

Then given

it is easy to verify that an individual of type 8 will prefer r(e). x°(e) to

any other choice Y($'), x°(e). and that UE1'(e).x°(e),e] = U°(e).

In this case the

governments budget j5:

T(e)dFe • B

(p0-p1)

j x°(e)dF(e) • W > 0.

e

since j x°(e)dF(8) > 0 and W 0.

(BC]

But this implies that the government could

make each person strictly better off than they were under the original price p°
by giving a small poll subsidy, without violating [BC].
Now consider the case where the country is in autarky with price p0 so
e

that

j

x°(O)dF(e)

Consider a program which induces individuals to choose

0.

'(e) according to:

= x°(e)

[&.

e

x'(e)

.

(A2)

e

where x1 satisfies •'(x1(9) •

e]

p1.

In order to induce 'Ce) we must satisfy

(IC] which requires that: (a) U(e) is continuous; (b) U(e)

•'('(e)

•

8]: and (c)

'(e) is nonincreasing.

Assume for the moment that types e e (ê, are induced

to choose (Y(e),xO(e)}.

Then to satisfy (a) and ensure the continuity of U(e) at

8

ó. we require that {T(Ô).x'()} satisfy:

20

$(X1()

u(ê)

- p11(Ô) - T(ö)

+

-

= •(x°(Ô) +

p'x°(ô) -

so that.

1(ê) = •(x'(Ô) •

—

•(x°() •

§1 * (6) — p1(X1() —

Using (A2), condition (b) implies that for e e

•'(di'/de • 1) - p1dx/de - T'(e) = •' = p1,

U'(e)

which implies T'(e)

0, so that 1(e)

1(ê).

Finally notice that condition Cc)

is automatically satisfied by x(e).
Thus, the choices (A2) are induced by the tax function:
ICe) = 1(ê) , e e
T(e)

,

[j,ê).
(A3)

(ê, ]•

e

We need to check that [8C1 is satisfied by (A3).

ç

T(e)dFe •

x°(e)dF(e) •

(p°-p')

8

since W 0 and

I x°(e)dF(e)

- '(e)]dF(e)

Now we know that:

=

0.

It follows that (BC is satisfied if:

0

B

j •(x'(ê) • ê] — •(xO(ê) •

êl

— p'(x'(ê)—x°(ê)]

• (pO_p1)xO() — (p°—p1)x°(e)} dF(e) 0, using (A3).

21

The first three terms in the integrand represent the additional consumer
surplus generated by allowing worker type ö to expand his consumption of x

Call this increase in consumer surplus (ö).

from x0 to x1 at price p1.

Rewriting the expression above we have:

t(e)F(e) +

e

[x°(Ô) - x°(e)]dF(e) 0.
Q

Now x0(e) • e is constant for e e [e,), since •[x°(e) •

• (-e).

p0. so that x°(e)

Substituting this into the expression above we have:
e

* (p°-1)j (ê-edF(e) 0

a(ê)F(ê) + (p°-p')(ê

-

Ee)F(ô) 0.

F(ê)[A(ô) * (p°-p'Xê - Ee)] 0,
where ce is the mean of 8 conditioned on 8
e

[e.ö).
—

Notice that

- E8
e

approaches zero as ê approaches . However, the consumer surplus term Mô)

approaches () > 0 as 8 close to

0.

It follows that there exits a ê sufficiently

such that the above inequality is satisfied, so that the induced

allocation satisfies (BCI.
FinaliM it remains for us to show that under this allocation some persons

are strictlU better off than they were in the original equilibrium.
to verify that UET(e),x(e).8]

1J0(e) for 8 e (ô,1. For 0

It is easy

(j.ö) we have:

22

e

U(e)

U0(Ô)

-

j U(z)dz

9

e

U°(e)

—

j •(x'(z) • z]dz

e

e

u°(e) e

= u°(e).

thus completing our proof.

• z]dz

23

Footnotes

For example, tariffs are assumed in the models of Brock and Magee (1 978).
Feenstra and Bhagwati (1982). Ftndlay and Weltisz (1982).

Mayer (1984) and

Wilson and WeLlisz (1982).
2

See Dinopoulos (1 983). Cassing and Hillman (1985) and Hillman and Ursprung

(1988) who compare tariris and quotas, and Feenstra and Lewis (1988) who

allow for tariff—rate quotas.
Mayer and Riezman (1989) consider a model where voters differ in multiple

dimensions, in which case tariffs can arise as a Pareto-optimal outcome of a
voting process.
4

It can be argued that transfers of this type are also feasible for the

government. i.e. the revenue collected from the buyers of imports by imposing a
lump-sum tax of (p°-p1 )x° exceeds the lump-sum transfer providing to sellers.

5 This property is invoked to eliminate the possibility of pooling equilibria
from arising, which would unduly complicate our analysis.
6

That is. it could give the lump sum transfers (p°-p1)x°(e) > 0 to sellers,

and

(p°-pt)x°(e) < 0 to buyers of the import good x.
This form of the (PA] constraint is considered in our earlier paper, Lewis.
Feenstra and Ware (1989). which examines the compensation to firms from a

drop in the import price.
•

If the price drop is very large, then it is possible that all sellers of x will

become consumers, and everyone can gain from the lower import price.

case there is no need for any government intervention
See footnote 6.

(L

0).

In this

24

References
The economics of special

Brock. William A. and Stephen P. Magee. 1978.

interest polttiCS The case of a tariff. American Economic Review 68 (May)
246-250.
Cassing, J.H. and Arye L. Hillman.

Political influence motives and the

1985.

Journal of International Economics 19.

choice between tariffs and quotas.
279-290.
DinopoulOs. Elias.

Import competition, international factor mobility

1963.

and lobbying responses:

The Schumpeterian industry case. Journal of

International Economics 14 (3/4) 395-410.
1982.

Feenstra. Robert C. and Jagdish N. Bhagwati.

Tariff seeking and the

efficient tariff, in J.N. Bhagwati, ed., Imoort comDetitton and resDonse
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press) 245-258.
Feenstra. Robert C. and Tracy R. Lewis.

with private political pressure.

1989.

Negotiated trade restrictions

University of California, Davis. mimeo.

Findlay. Ronald and Stanislaw Welltsz.

1982.

Endogenous tariffs, the political

economy of trade restrictions, and welfare, in J.N. Bhagwati. ed.. lmDort
comDetitlon and resDonse (Chicago: University of Chicago Press) 223-234.
Guesnerie and Laffont.

1984.

A complete solution to a class of principal-

agent problems with an application to the control of a self—managed firm.
Journal of Public Economics 25. 329-369.
Hillman. ArUe L. and Heinrich W. Ursprung.

1988.

Foreign interests, domestic

politics, and international trade policy. American Economic Review 78
(September) 729-745.
Hufbauer, Gary C. and Howard F. Rosen.

industries.

1 986.

Trade policy for troubled

Institute for International Economics, no. 15 (March).

25

1989.

Lewis. Tracy R.. Robert C. Feenstra and Roger Ware.
supports:

A poflticat economy perspective.

Eliminating price

Journal of Public Economics.

forthcoming.
Magee. Stephen. William A. Brock and Leslie Young.
and endoaenous ooticu theoru
Mayer, Wolfgang.

1984.

1989.

Black hole tariffs

(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

Endogenous tariff formation.

American Economic

Review 71 (December) 970-985.
Mayer. Wolfgang and Raymond Riezman.

policy instruments.

Endogerious choice of trade

Journal of International Economics 23 (3/4) 337-381.

Wilson. John 0. and Stanislaw Wellisz.
A deadweight loss consideration.

367-375.

1 987.

1986.

Lobbying and tariff formation:

Journal of International Economics 20,

U

u1(e)+L

u1(e)

u°(e)

e

8

Figure 1

8

U

u(e)
A

U°(e)
B
B

8

e

Figure 2

T
L1

slope V2

slope t1

1(x)

0

Figure 3

x

