  WORKING PAPER SERIES


             DOES IT MATTER WHAT
            WE   TRADE? TRADE AND
           INDUSTRIAL POLICIES WHEN
          LABOR MARKETS DON'T CLEAR

             William T. Dickens

           Working Paper No. 3285




NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH, INC.
                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DOES IT MATTER WHAT WE TRADE? TRADE AND INDUSTRIAL POLICIES WHEN
                          LABOR MARKETS DON'T CLEAR




                              William T. Dickens




                            Working Paper No. 3285




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  March 1990




I rhank Kevin Lang for a helpful conversation. The research assistance of
Brian Lincoln and the support of the Institute of Industrial Relations at
Berkeley are gratefully acknowledged. This paper is part of NEER's research
program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3285
                                        March 1990


                         DOES IT MATTER WHAT WE TRADE?
          TRADE AND INDUSTRIAL POLICIES WHEN LABOR MARKETS DON'T CLEAR


                                   ABSTRACT
     In efficiency wage models firms set employment so that the
value of the marginal revenue product of labor (VMRPL) equals the
wage. If the payment of efficiency wages results in inter-industry
wage differences for comparable workers there exist welfare
enhancing industrial and trade policies which shift employment from
low to high wage industries.          Previous attempts to measure the
potential impact of such policies have assumed that wages equal the
VMRPL, but not all explanations for inter-industry wage differences
have that property.
     This paper argues, from the evidence on inter—industry wage
differences that rent-sharing/extraction models should be preferred
to other explanations. However, such models do not all have the
property that wages equal the VMRPL. In the model presented VNRPL
is set equal to the opportunity cost of labor so policies to shift
employment to high wage industries would be of no value. Further,
the empirical work that has been done to assess the importance of
labor market distortions for trade and industrial policy is
inapplicable if such models are the correct explanation for inter-
industry wage differences.
     A rent—extraction model that takes into account workers'
limited information about the profitability of the company they
work for is developed.    In that model high wage industries have
high VPL so policies to shift employment to high wage industries
are appropriate and past empirical studies of the effects of trade
and industrial policy are approximately correct.




                                        William T. Dickens
                                        Department of Economics
                                        University of California
                                        Berkeley, CA 94720
                                        (415)642-4308
     The last decade has seen considerable interest in models of
labor markets that don't clear including efficiency wage, rent-

sharing or rent-extraction models. In efficiency wage models firms
set employment so that the value of the marginal revenue product

of labor (VMRPL) equals the wage.    If the payment of efficiency
wages results in inter-industry wage differences for comparable
workers there exist welfare enhancing industrial and trade policies

which shift employment from low to high wage industries.

     Two papers have attempted empirical assessments of the
importance of such considerations: Dickens and Lang (1988) and Katz
and Summers (1989).   In both papers the authors assume that firms

set employment so that the VMRPL equals the wage. However, not all

explanations for inter-industry wage differences have that
property.

     This paper begins by reviewing the evidence on inter-industry
wage differences and argues that we should prefer rent-
sharing/extraction models over other explanations. Second, it is
argued that in the most attractive rent-sharing/extraction models

the wage does not equal the VMRPL. In the model presented VMRPL
is set equal to the opportunity cost of labor so policies to shift

employment to high wage industries would be of no value. Further,
the empirical work that has been done to assess the importance of

labor market distortions for trade and industrial policy is
inapplicable if such models are the correct explanation for inter-

industry wage differences.

    Finally, a rent—extraction model that takes into account

                                1
workers' limited information about the profitability of the company

they work for is developed. In that model high wage industries
have high VMRPL so policies to shift employment to high wage
industries are appropriate.      Previous empirical studies can be
interpreted as yielding close approximations to the effects of
trade and industrial policies.

Inter-Industry Wage Differences and Models of Wage Determination:

        Five papers review the evidence on intr-industry wage
differences (Dickens and Katz l987a&b, Krueger and Summers l987&88
and Katz and Summers 1989). All conclude that models in which the

labor market does not clear allow a better explanation of the facts

than any model in which it clears.       Most of these papers also
conclude that rent—sharing/extraction models should be preferred
among the class of models where labor markets do not clear.
Lindbeck and Snower (1988b) also make this argument. The two most

important facts in this regard are the correlation of wages with
industry profitability and the high correlation of wages across
occupations within industries --       industries which pay their
production workers more than other industries pay all occupations
more.

        Both observations are difficult to reconcile with standard
theories of efficiency wages which explain differences in workers'

wages as due to differences in the costs of monitoring or replacing

workers, or to the extent of unobservable differences in
productivity.
        It is possible to explain the correlation with profitability


                                   2
in a shirking efficiency wage model with heterogeneous workers.
In such a model the efficiency wage depends not only on the
monitoring technology but also on the cost to the firm of shirking.

If shirking is more costly if each worker is working with more
capital, then profits per worker or profits as a percent of sales
may be correlated with wages since both those measures of profits
would be correlated with capital intensity.          The wages of
production workers could be determined in this manner and the
correlation of wages across occupations could result from norms of
fairness.

     This argument is unconvincing for two reasons. First, Dickens

and Katz (1987a) find that capital-per-worker has a more tenuous
relation to wages than profitability and that the correlation
between profits and wages persists when controlling for the
capital/labor ratio.     Second, it is difficult to reconcile
efficiency wages with the size of inter-industry wage differences.
The premium necessary to deter shirking is amortized over a workers

entire career. In high wage industries job durations are long so
that even if the probability of apprehension is low and the utility

value of shirking high, increases in wages would be small.
Finally, norms of fairness are a poor explanation for long—run
phenomena. Although difficult to manipulate in the short-run,
norms of fairness are subject to change over time. By changing
educational requirements, organizational structure, or even job
titles the jobs a worker compares his or her wage to can be
changed.


                                3
       Rent—sharing/extraction models provide an obvious explanation
for the correlation between industry wage premiums and industry

profitability.        As long as all occupations in an industry are
receiving some rent the surplus of their wages above the market
clearing wage will be proportional to profitability and therefore
correlated with the wage of other occupations in the industry.
Further, the bargained surplus should be proportional to the flow

of surplus and can, therefore, be large.
Policy Implications of Rent-Sharing/Extraction Models:

       In standard efficiency wage models the wage paid does not
depend on the level of employment. Although it is not exogenously

given to the firm, the wage is determined by parameters which are
unaffected by any individual firm's hiring decisions.              Thus for
the purposes of determining employment the wage is exogenous and
the firm hires workers up to the point where the VNRPL is equal to

the wage.         This is not true of most rent—sharing/extraction
models. Consider the simplest of them which is presented below.
In this model workers expect the firm to pay them at least their

reservation wage. -Since they contribute to the performance of the
firm they also expect to receive a share of the profits from the
firm. As in other normative wage models workers who do not
receive the wage they expect will withhold labor. The firm can not

profit by replacing such workers since new workers will behave the
same   way.   Thus the firm       pays the   normative wage which is written

       (1)      w =   r   + S (   R(L)/L -   r
where w is the wage, r the workers' reservation wage, s the share

                                         4
of profits workers expect to receive, and R(L)/L revenue net of
non-labor costs per worker. The term in parenthesis is the profits

per worker available after paying labor its opportunity cost.
Substituting (1) into the firms profit function rearranging terms
and differentiating yields the first order conditions for a maximwn

with respect to L

     (2) dpi/dL =    (1   —   s    )   ( R'(L)   —   r   )
                                                             =0
                              or

                      R'(L)            r.

     Thus while there may be unemployment in a world populated by
such firms in the sense that there are workers who would like to

work at the going wage who the firms won't employ, there is no

potential gain to efficiency from increasing employment (as there
is in the standard efficiency wage model). Further, as long as
the reservation wage is equal across industries the VMRPL will be

equal across industries and there will be no argument for policies

favoring employment in one industry as opposed to another or for

favoring high-wage industries in trade policy2.                   Finally, the
empirical analysis of the effects of trade and industrial policy
done in Dickens and Lang (1988) and Katz and Summers (1989) are
inappropriate since they assume that firms are setting their VNRPL

equal to the wage.
     This result is not unique to this model. Rather it is typical

of this class of models. If rent—sharing results from collective
bargaining most models of union behavior suggest that the VMRPL
should be equal to or less than the reservation wage.3              If rent is


                                            5
being extracted by workers by virtue of a threat of collective
action as in Dickens (1986) or Lindbeck and Snower (l986,1988b)
then again the VMRPL may not be set equal to the wage.4

     Expense preference models are a class of rent-sharing models
that may not be subject to this criticism. In these models utility

maximizing managers choose between spending firm profits on extra
salary and perks for themselves or on wages for workers to make the

managers' lives easier and more enjoyable (this assumes that higher

paid workers are easier to manage and more pleasant to work with).

Managers may dispose of firms' profits in this manner because they

are subject only to a minimum dividend constraint, or some other
weak agency constraint.   In such models the wage will equal the
VMRPL as long as firm size or employment don't also enter the
managers' utility functions.
     Such models are unattractive for several reasons.      First,
given the size of inter-industry wage differences it is hard to
believe that either stock-holders or take-overs wouldn't enforce
the discipline of the market place on such managers. It is easy
to believe that managers could spend quite lavishly on themselves
without sufficiently lowering the return on equity.       However,
paying wage bonuses of greater than 10% would cost an order of
magnitude more than Persian rugs and helicopters for managers and
would certainly invite take-overs if not disciplinary action by
stock-holders.

     Finally, it is likely that firm size does enter into the
calculation of managers utility —— expense preference was used to


                                 6
explain firms' interest in market share long before it was used to

explain inter-industry wage differences. In that case the VMRPL
would be set below the wage and might be only tenuously related.
        For these reasons the most attractive rent-sharing/extraction

models are the ones that have the property that wages are not a
good indicator of the VNRPL.          This is itself an unattractive
property. I have never heard a manager say, "In planning this lay-
off remember that the shadow price of labor is actually less than

the wage because by hiring more workers we lower profits per worker
and can get away with paying them less.'          If managers aren't
explicitly thinking this way its hard to imagine how their behavior
could lead to this result.

       Even if they did think this way it is hard to imagine that
workers would let them get away with it. In the absence of a union

most workers probably know very little about the profitability of
the firm. To get some idea of what their firm might be able to pay

them they look at what comparable firms are paying and adjust that

by what they know about the unique circumstances of their firm
(Ross 1948, Dunlop 1957). Thus their wage expectations are unlikely
to be affected much by the hiring decisions of their own firm.
Rent   Sharing With laperfect Information About Rents:
       Consider again the normative rent—sharing model introduced in
the    last section.   Now however, let's examine what happens if
workers have less than perfect information about net—revenue per
worker. In the absence of other information we might expect them

to substitute their best guess about net—revenue per worker for

                                  7
the real thing.       As long as their best guess is an unbiased
estimator this should not affect the expected value of the wage
nor any of the outcomes. However, workers might reasonably believe

that the wages paid by other similar firms contain information
about the state of the product market in which their firm
participates as well as the state of the economy.        Consequently
they may use them as additional signals of the profitability of
their firm. To the extent that own wages are a function of the
profitability of other firms they are exogenous to the particular
firm and will be treated accordingly in hiring.

        The model presented below has the property that workers
optimally use the information available in the wages of other
firms. This yields a very simple formula for the normal wage as
a function of the reservation wage, net—revenue per worker, and
the average wage of comparable firms. As the number of comparable

firms becomes large the VMRPL increases until it is equal to the
wage.
        Suppose that workers at firm 1 expect to be paid according to
(1) but do not know the true value of R1(L1)/L1 --   only   an unbiased
estimate. They also know the value of wages paid by N-i other
firms w for i=2 to N. Assume also that they know that wages at
those firms are set in the same manner as wages at their firm and

that the workers at those firms have a signal on R(L)/L1 which
they use in determining their wage demand.        It will be assumed
that R1(L1)/L1 is an independent signal of the value of R1(L1)/L1 and

that the ratio of the variance of the estimate of R1(L1)/L1 based on


                                   8
information from firm        i to   the one based on the signal from firm

1 is a. Then they will want to f on their wage demand as in (1)

substituting

       (3)(aER1+ER)/(a+N-l)
                       C:'
for   R1(L1)/L1 where ER1 is the best estimate of R1(L)/L1 given the
information available to the workers in fin i. The information

on ER1 is available in w1 ,          but   extracting it poses something of

a problem.
       If workers in f in 1 use the information in the wages of
workers at other fins in forming their wage demands then certainly
the workers at the other fins are looking at the wages in firm 1.

Workers in f in one must take this into account. However, if they
do that then other workers must behave in a similar fashion and we

find ourselves in an infinite regress.
       Luckily, the solution to the infinite regress is simple.
Sufficiently simple that it seems reasonable to believe that
workers' intuitive solutions to this problem might well provide a
close approximation to the optimal solution and thus allow the
'evolutionary" survival of such behavior.5



       To begin with suppose the solution takes the form

       (4)      w1 =   c1r+c2w1        +       c3ER1
where w.1 is the average wage paid by firms other than i and c1,

c2   and are constants to be determined below. Then ER1 is easily
           c3

determined as ( w1 - c1 r - c2 w1 ) / c3. Substituting this into

(3), (3) into (1) and rearranging terms yields
                                           9
        (5) w = {[(l—s)(a+N—l)—(sc1(n—1))/c3] r + sa ER1 +
                   [s(N—l) w — sc2 (w1 + [w—w1/(N—1)]) ]1c3}I(a+N—1).
                   N
Noting that             [w.-w1/(N-1)] =      (N-2) w1 rearranging terms, and
solving for w'rields a solution of the same form as equation (5).

Setting the coefficients of r, w and ER equal to c1, c2 and c3
respectively and solving yields

        c1       (l—s)((a+N—2]a—[N—l])/d,
        c2     (N—l)(a+N—l)/d,
and
        C3 =   s([a+N—2Ja-[N-l])/d
where
         d = (a+N—1)(a+N—2).

      Note that the numerators of c1 and c3 are of order N while the
numerator of c2 and the denominator d are of order N2.              Thus for
large N, c1 and c3 are essentially zero and c2 is equal to 1 and
each firm's wage is approximately exogenously given as the average
of the wage of other similar firms.

      What will that wage be? Substituting (4) into the definition
of w1, and then rearranging terms yields

        (6) w {c1(N—l+c2)r + c2(w1+(N—2)w1) + c3ER1}/(N—l)
where ER1 is the average value of ERj for j not equal to i.
Substituting (4) in for w1, solving for w1 and taking the limit as
N goes to infinity yields

        (7) w1     w1     (l—s) r + S ER1.
      What is a large N?            That depends on the size of a.        If
information on ones own          firm is    three times as informative about

                                           10
profitability as information on the average comparable firm then
with 9 comparison firms c2, the weight on w, will equal 5/6.
These are believable numbers and 5/6 is sufficiently close to one
that the analysis in Dickens and Lang (1988) and Katz and Summers

(1989) are reasonable approximations.     Such numbers would also
account for the lack of attention by managers to the potential for

lowering wages by expanding employment.




                                11
                                 REFERENCES



Ashenfelter,    0., and Brown,   J.N.,    'Testing the Efficiency of

     Employment Contracts,' Journal of Political Economy, 94,

     2, Special Issue, June, 1986.
Card ,   D.,   "Efficient Contracts and Costs of Adjustment: Short

     Run Employment Determination for Airline Mechanics,"

     American Economic Review, Dec., 1986.
Dickens, W.T., "Wages, Employment, and the Threat of Collective

     Action," NBER Working Paper #1856, March, 1986.

Dickens, W.T., and Katz, L.F,,            'Interindustry Wage Differences
     and Theories of Wage Determination," NBER Working Paper #227 1,

     June, 1987a.

Dickens, W.T., and Katz, L.F., 'Interindustry Wage Differences
     and Industry Characteristics," in Lang, K. andLeonard, J.,
     eds., Unemployment and the Structure of Labor Markets,

     1987b.

Dickens, W.T. and Lang, K., "Why it Matters What We Trade: A Case

     For Active Policy,' in Tyson,           L., Dickens, W.T., and
     Zysman, J., eds., The Dynamics         of Trade and Employment,
     Ballinger Publishing Co., Cambridge, Mass,,         1988.
Dunlop, J.T., "Wage Contours,' in Taylor, G.W., and Pierson,
     F.C., eds., New Concepts of Wage Determination, 1957.

Johnson, G., "Work Rules, Featherbedding, and Pareto-Optimal

     Union-Management Bargaining," NBER working paper #1820, Jan.
     1986.


                                     12
Kahneinan, D., Knetsch, J., and Thaler, R.,          Perceptions of
     Unfairness: Constraints on Wealth Seeking," American
     Economic Review, Sept. 1986.

Katz, L.F., and Summers, L.H., "Industry Rents: Evidence and
     Implications, '   Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
     1989.

Krueger, A., and Summers, L.H., "Reflections on the Interlndustry
     Wage Structure," in Lang, K., and Leonard, J., eds.,
     Unemployment and the Structure of Labor Markets, Oxford:

     Basil—Blackwell, 1987.

Kreuger, A., and Summers, L.H., "Efficiency Wages and the Inter-
     Industry Wage Structure," Econometrica, 1988.

LincLbeck, A., and Snower, D., "Wage Setting, Unemployment and
     Insider Outsider Relations, American Economic Review
     Proceedings, 76, May, 1986.
Lindbeck, A., and Snower, D., The Insider-Outsider Theory of
     Employment and Unemployment, MIT Press, 1988b.
Oswald, A.J., "Efficient Contracts are on the Labor Demand Q..e,"

     Princeton Miineo 1985.

Ross, A.M., Trade Union Wage Policy, Univ. of Cal. Press, 1948.




                                 13
                                 Notes


1. See Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler (1986) for evidence that
workers behave this way.

2. If R is not net of capital costs and s differs between
industries then there are welfare improving differential subsidies

to capital. Targeted trade or employment policies may be second
best alternatives. However, industry wage differences will only
be a guide to which industries to target to the extent that they
reflect differences in s as opposed to differences in R(L).
3. This is the efficient contracts literature. See Ashenfeiter
and Brown (1986) for a discussion and some empirical evidence.
See Oswald (1985) or Johnson (1986) for examples of models where
the VMPL   is   equal to the wage or an increasing function of both
the wage and the reservation wage.

4. This is true of all specifications of the union threat model
Dickens (1986) considers except for one and then only in one
regime.    It is also true of the more attractive of the models
considered by Lindbeck and Snower (1988b). Those that don't have
this property also fail to yield a correlation between profits and

wages.
5. The static nature of this model makes it seem less realistic

than it may actually be. The eq-uilibrium is the same as what would
be arrived at if wages react through a series of sequential or
simultaneous adjustments to new information.



                                  14
