                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 DEBT, DEFICITS AND INFLATION:   AN APPLICATION TO THE PUBLIC FINANCES OF INDIA




                                 Willem H. Buiter

                                 Urjit R. Patel




                            Working Paper No. 3287




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 1990




Thia paper is part of NBER's research programs in International Studies and
Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #3287
                                         March 1990




      DEBT, DEFICITS AND INFLATION: AN APPLICATION TO THE PUBLIC FINANCES
                                    OF INDIA


                                    ABSTRACT

     The paper studies the solvency of the Indian public sector and the

eventual monetization and inflation implied by stabilization of the debt—GNP

ratio without any changes in the primary deficit.

     The nonstationarity of the discounted public debt suggests that

indefinite continuation of the pattern of behavior reflected in the historical

discounted debt process is inconsistent with the maintenance of solvency.

This message is reinforced by the recent behavior of the debt—GNP ratio and

the ratio of primary surplus plus seigniorage to GNP.

     Our estimates of the base money demand function suggest that even maximal

use of seigniorage will not be sufficient to restore solvency.




     Willem H. Buiter                   Urjit R. Patel
     Department of Economics            Department of Economics
     Yale University                    Yale University
     P.O. Box 1972 Yale Station         P.O. Box 1972 Yale Station
     New Haven, CT 06520-1972           New Raven, CT 06520-1972
     (203)432-3580
1.    flFrRODVCTION

      The state of Indian public finances appears perilous. In recent years the

public sector financial deficit has been rising in real terms and as a proportion

of GNP. The same is true for the primary or noninterest deficit. The real values

of the public debt and the public debt—GNP ratio are rising sharply. Even the

discounted public debt, that is the present value of the public debt (discounted to

some common base year), is rising steadily. The question naturally arises as to

whether this pattern of debt and deficits is sustainable.

      There are four reasons why a rising public debt burden may be of concern. The

first of these is financial crowding out. If there is no debt neutrality, the

substitution of borrowing for current taxes (even lump—sum) on labor income will

tend to raise private consumption. In an economy with full utilization of

resources this will lead either to the displacement of private investment and

other interest—sensitive forms of private spending or to an increase in the

deficit on the current account of the balance of payments. This aspect of public

debt and deficits will not be addressed in what follows.

      The second reason relates to tax smoothing. Even if there is "first—order"

debt neutrality, the option of running budget deficits or surpluses may be

valuable   if there are no lump—sum, nondistortionary tax—transfer schemes
available. Temporary deficits and surpluses permit changes in the time profile of
the distortionary (dead weight) losses (or collection costs) associated with
nonlump—sum taxes and transfers.   Under rather restrictive separability and
2




homogeneity assumptions, a tax smoothing prescription emerges (see e.g. Barro

[1979]): the ratio of distortionary tax receipts to the tax base is expected to be

constant over time.         If there is no first—order debt neutrality, financial

crowding out concerns may prevent otherwise desirable tax smoothing. For reasons

of space this issue too is not considered further in what follows.

      The third concern, which is addressed in this paper, relates to the eventual

monetization of persistent deficits and thus to their potential inflationary

consequences. The last concern is the possibility of insolvency or bankruptcy of

the national Exchequer. This too will be dealt with in what follows.

      The question of how to evaluate the sustainability of a government's fiscal

financial strategy has been explored intensively in recent years (see e.g. Buiter

[1983a, b; 1985; 1989a, b] , Anand and van Wijnbergen [1989] ,   Hamilton   and Flavin

[1986] ,   Grilli [1989]   and Wilcox [1989]).

      After presenting a brief review of some of the key facts concerning recent

budgetary developments in Section 2, we turn in Section 3 to a systematic analysis

of whether the current and recent behavior of key budgetary and related time series

is sustainable. Since our conclusion is that a continuation of current patterns

would eventually lead to insolvency of the Exchequer, we turn in Section 4 to the

consideration of alternative policy options to avoid insolvency. These fall into

three categories: first policies aimed at ensuring larger primary surpluses or

smaller primary deficits; second policies to reduce the interest cost of

borrowing; and third increased recourse to seigniorage or the inflation tax. Our

main conclusions are summarized in Section 5.

2.    SOlE FACTS CONCEKNThC DEBT, DEFICITS AND SEIGNIORACE

       Our data   cover the period 1970/71 to 1986/87. The most striking fact is the

dramatic increase in the total (internal and external) public debt—GNP ratio since

1980/81, from 32.8 percent in that year to 52.4 percent in 1986/87—an average
                                                                                  3



annual    increase in the ratio of 3.3 percentage points. There is no reason to

believe that there has been a significant downturn in the ratio since then, or even

that the rate of increase has been reduced markedly. Figure 1 and Table 1 show this

striking pattern quite clearly.

      Our total public debt figure (NTD) covers both internal (or domestic) and

external (or foreign) debt, and subtracts official foreign exchange reserves. The

domestic subtotal includes domestic private sector holdings of central government

debt (CDD), state government debt (SDD) and public enterprise debt (PDD).

Intrapublic sector assets and liabilities are netted out. It is important that the

liabilities of public enterprises (and of the "holding companies" created in the

mid seventies) be included in the public debt total, since ultimately these

liabilities are de facto or de jure the responsibility of the state or central

Treasuries. The banking sector, other than the Reserve Bank, was excluded from our

definition of the public sector despite its being publicly owned.               The

decomposition of the domestic public debt is given in Table 2. Note that it is the

domestic debt that accounts for most of the increase in total government

indebtedness.

      The foreign debt (TFD) figures in Table 3 include public and publicly

guaranteed long—term debt (as defined and given in the World Bank's World Debt

Tables), use of lIP credit, and an estimate of public and publicly guaranteed

short—term   debt. Foreign exchange reserves 1 are   subtracted from TFD to get net

foreign   debt   (NTFD).

      Table 4 shows that the public sector deficit as a proportion of GNP has been

rising since 1973/4 with the exception of two dips in 1977/8 and 1981/2. The

primary (noninterest) deficit as a proportion of GNP shows a similar pattern, more

than doubling between 1973/4 and 1986/7 to 9.8 percent. Interest payments reached

4.1 percent of GNP in 1986/7. Use of seigniorage has been nonnegligible, averaging
4




2.4 percent of GNP over the last five years of our sample. Table 5 gives the tine

series for GNP growth, inflation, exchange rate depreciation and interest rates.

Figures for the discounted debt, discounted primary deficit and discounted

seigniorage—iihich are key ingredients in our solvency tests—are given in Table

6 and Figure 2.

3. IS THERE A THREAT TO THE SOLVENCY OF THE PtTBLIC SECTOR?

      A   key   question when evaluating the fiscal options open to the Indian

government is whether a continuation of past and present policies is consistent

with government solvency. To answer this question we start from the consolidated

public sector budget identity given in equation (3.1). It consolidates general

government (central, state and local) with the public enterprise sector and the

central bank.


3
(.)
                  — I_
                            +
                                B1 —     B11 + V1(B —   1I) — V1(F    —    F)
                                                                      Ft
                                     —            B11 *    V1
                                                                 .         *
                       C1
                            +
                                A1        + j11   _+ 11 P_       (B11 —') —p11111
I is the nominal stock of base money, B the         stock of   domestic currency denominated
                                                                                        *
public debt,    B the stock of foreign currency denominated public debt, F the stock

of foreign exchange reserves, A' the public sector capital stock valued at current

reproduction cost, C government consumption, A public sector gross domestic
                                                                                                     *
capital formation,    met current revenue, the domestic nominal interest rate,

the foreign nominal interest rate, V the foreign exchange rate, P the domestic

price level and p the cash rate of return on public sector capital.

      For simplicity our analysis is cast in ternis of one—period public debt, and

the interest rate on international reserves is assumed to be the same as that paid
                                                                               *   -*       *
on foreign debt, but these simplifications are unimportant. Let B B — F                         be net

official foreign debt.
                                                                                                                                  5




         It is sometimes helpful (but without behavioral significance) to rewrite

this identity in terms of the behavior over time of stocks and flows per unit of

GDP. This yields

                              *                        (1       +                          * (1       +
                                                                                                          i_1)(1    +
(3.2)                  +          S bJ        (1 +     r1+              n_1)
                                                                                      +
                                                                                          b_1 (1      +   r1)(I + flgj)
                                                             +

Lower—case stocks and flows are the corresponding upper—case quantities expressed
                                                   P —F                                   T —T i                V—V
as a proportion of GDP.                                                                     T
                                                       ,                                                                V
                                                            i                                   i—I                         i—I
       I —,
                              V denotes real output.
          F T
             ii
         We shall refer to                     +                                      a     as the primary public sector
                                                   a— rt — p_1k_1
deficit per unit of GDP. It is the conventionally measured consolidated public

sector deficit net of any interest payments or interest income. Total public debt

as a fraction of GDP will be denoted d a b +                              b*      .         , the     increase in the nominal

stock of base money as a fraction of GDP will be referred to as seign.iorage.

Equation (3.2) can be rewritten as (3.3). 7 is the proportional depreciation rate
                                                                                                            *
of the   real exchange rate, r the domestic real interest rate, r the foreign real

interest rate and r a r — n
                                                            *
                          -
                                                   +    b_J                           *
(3.3)    d2 s(1 +         r_1)d_1 +                     +               [(1
                                                                              +
                                                                                  r_1)(1 + lj_j) —(1            +
                                                                                                                    Tg_j)] _Ui
         Finally, defining                  the ang.ented           primary deficit
                  *
                      _
   a     +
             1                    [(1
                                        +
                                            r_)(1 + ljj) —(1              +
                                                                                  rjj)]         we get


                                                   —
(3.4) d a (1 +            ;1)d_1 +
         Solving (3.4) recursively forward in time and, letting E denote the
expectation operator conditional on information at time i we get:
6




                                   1                                                    1
(3.5) d2 if[

                                                       =1
         Let    5
                    [1(1
                               +
                                   r)1        ,
                                                                be the discount factor from period zero to

                    j=0
period Ui .    Equation            (3.5) can be rewritten as



(3.5')                         =
                                                       [t+i+i +               ÷ tim          t+1÷i


         The terminal condition we impose on (3.5') to obtain the government solvency

constraint or present value budget constraint is

                                                                   0
(3.6)
                          Z-r          i-i
         In what follows we shall in fact assume that (3.6) holds with strict equality

i.e. "supersolvency" is not considered. —-—
                                                                 qj_j
                                                                        q_1÷d÷1 is   the present discounted


value at time t of government debt in period Ui .                           Equation   (3.6) states that the

expectation, at t ,        of      the present value of future public debt goes to zero in the

limit. It makes no difference of course whether we express (3.6) interms of the

debt—GOP ratio and real interest rates net of real growth rates; in terms of real

debt and real interest rates; in terms of debt measured in home currency and

nominal interest rates in terms of home currency; or in terms of debt measured in

terms of foreign currency and nominal interest rates in terms of foreign currency.

         When (3.6) holds (with equality), equation (3.5') becomes the familiar

government solvency constraint or public sector present value budget constraint:
                                       Tp               —

                                                    —5
                                                         i+1+t.÷, i+1+t
                               —
(3.7)                     if   —


                                    s=0
                                             q_1   L



or


(3.7')                         =                            +
                                             [
                                                                                             1




where             q_1d , the present       value at time zero of public debt at time i ,


                     the present     value at time zero of the primary deficit at time t+1+i

and                              ,   the   present value at time zero of seigniorage at time



         The condition in (3.6) (holding with equality) can be rewritten as

(3.6')                    1imED = 0
                          2-IT

The original budget identity in (3.4) can be rewritten as

(3.4')                                +
                                           A —S
THE lEANING OF THE SOLVENCY CONSTRAINT

         In   a   finite horizon economy with a finite terminal date T , the solvency
constraint        is the requirement that public debt in the last period be nonpositive

i.e.

(3.8)                    b10.
         In an infinite horizon economy that is not dynamically inefficient, the

natural analogue of (3.8) is (3.6) or (3.6'). This ensures that in the infinite

horizon economy—as in the finite horizon economy—the existing debt ultimately

is serviced (note not paid off) by current and future primary surpluses or by

current and future seigniorage.

         If the economy is dynamically inefficient, which will be the case if the

interest rate is below the growth rate forever (rg <                   for   all ), there is no

convincing case for requiring (3.6) or (3.6') to hold. Ponzi games can be viable

indefinitely in a dynamically inefficient system: the government can, each

period, pay the interest on its existing debt by further borrowing. Ye assume in

what follows that while the interest rate can be below the growth rate for extended

finite periods of time, the Indian economy is not dynamically inefficient, and
8




that there are no social free lunches to be earned by increasing the public debt

(see also Abel et al. [1989]).

        Note that the terminal condition (3.6) or (3.6') can be rewritten as



(3.9)                    Hind
                         Z-'w    f
                                 5=0
                                       1 +
                                             -

                                             r15
                                                    dua+j
                                                      t+j
        With a positive initial stock of debt (d1 > 0) equation (3.9) is satisfied

only if ultimately the debt is expected to grow at a rate less than the interest



rate
          1

        1 +
              -
                     ÷j÷1 c     i •1 Since d1÷31
                                                       1
                                                           -   1 +          r1+5+     ,
                                                                                          it   is
                      1+5                        1+5 1 +             (1 +

clear that        solvency requires, eventually, positive values for —        , the       sum of

seigniorage and the augmented primary surplus.                 This is only a necessary

condition, of course. The flows of seigniorage and primary surpluses should

satisfy (3.7) or (3.7').

        To prevent the solvency requirement (3.6) or (3.7) from being satisfied

trivially we must purge market values and discount rates of the influences of

actual default and of the market's assessment of the risk of future default. The

discount rates used to obtain the discounted public debt series used in the

solvency tests should therefore be net of any risk premiums reflecting the

market's perception of the possibility of default. Similarly, the value of the

debt used in the solvency tests should be gross of any discount due to default risk.

When the market value of the debt is endogenous and potentially variable even

without any default risk (as will e.g. be the case with long—term fixed interest

debt), it may not be empirically simple to assess the influence of market

perceptions of default risk on the pricing of the debt. When the debt has a fixed

nominal market value in the absence of default risk there is of course no empirical
                                                                                  9




problem. We assume in what follows that in our sample the market does not give any

weight to the possibility of default on the Indian public debt.

      Note that solvency is a very weak criterion with which to evaluate the

sustainability of fiscal and financial policy. A government can be solvent even

though its real debt and even its debt relative to GDP or GNP grows without bound.

If the long—run growth rate of the debt—GOP ratio while positive is less than the

long—run value of r i.e. less than the excess of the interest rate over the growth

rate in the long run, then eventually unbounded debt—GDP ratios can still be

consistent with solvency.

      The reason why this remarkable fiscal high wire act may be possible is that

our approach to solvency thus far has ignored the growing excess burden associated

with ever higher distortionary taxes and the rising real resource cost of

extracting an ever rising tax burden from the private sector.

      Steady growth in the debt—GOP ratio and even an eventually unbounded

debt—GOP ratio may be consistent with continued debt service and solvency because

the government is (implicitly) assumed to be able to tax away in lump—sum fashion

(i.e. without distortions or collection and enforcement costs) any amount up to

the sum of GOP plus the interest it pays on the public debt.2 Since the "tax base"

is not GOP alone but GOP plus debt interest, there is nothing logically

inconsistent about debt service outstripping GOP, even by indefinitely increasing

amounts.

      While this point is logically correct, its practical relevance is likely to

be slight.   If dead weight losses, excess burdens or collection costs are an

increasing and strictly convex function of the real tax take or of the tax—GOP

ratio, then only finite debt—GOP ratios are feasible.

      While our weak solvency criterion only implies that discounted debt

cannot have a positive stochastic or deterministic trend, a stricter and very
10




plausible practical solvency criterion in addition states that the undiscounted

debt—GDP ratio d cannot have a positive stochastic or deterministic trend.

          Under neither solvency criterion is it necessary for the public sector ever

to run conventionally measured public sector financial surpluses even if the

initial debt is positive.

          Consider the three budget surplus measures given below.

The conventional financial surplus (CFS):

(3.lOa)
                       CFSaT+pK_[C+A]_[i+ip'B]
The operational financial surplus ((IFS):

(3.lOb)                hiSs T+pt— [c+ A]                 ()1J      n)
                                   + j)(j Eln)'jF'
                                   + r)
                                                1V *
                                                +
                                             (1 +

The primary financial surplus (PFS):
(3.lOc)                PiSsT+pK_[C+A]
          Neither under the weak solvency criterion nor under the practical solvency

criterion is it necessary for a government with a positive stock of public debt and

r >   n   ever to run conventional financial surpluses. It may choose to do so. It may

be desirable or even optimal to do so, permanently or temporarily, but it is not

required for solvency.                                                           -




          Ignoring   seigniorage our practical solvency criterion (but not the weak

solvency criterion) implies that at some point positive operational financial

surpluses are required. If seigniorage is allowed for, the practical solvency

criterion need not imply the eventual necessity of operational (or

asset—revaluation and real—growth—corrected) financial             surpluses.
          Vith positive debt and r — n   ,   the weak   solvency criterion and a foriiori the

practical      solvency criterion require, if seigniorage is ignored, that primary
                                                                                  11




surpluses be achieved at some point. Again, recourse to seigniorage could reverse

this conclusion.

TESTING FOR SOLVENCY

        The only testable implication of the weak solvency requirement is equation

(3.6) or (3.6'): the unconditional expectation of the discounted public debt

should be zero (or nonpositive).

        Since we do not have a structural model of the economic and political

processes governing the evolution of the Indian public debt, we are restricted to a

rather mechanical "data description" which aims to answer the following questions:

1. Is there a stable (reduced form) data generating process (DGP) that describes

the behavior of the discounted public debt?          2.   Is this DCP (covariance)

stationary? 3. If it is covariance stationary, is its unconditional mean equal to

zero?

        If the DGP is not covariance stationary, then its unconditional expectation

will be (almost surely) nonzero. Establishing nonstationarity would therefore

imply that the policies pursued during the sample period would, if they were

adhered to into the indefinite future, either imply supersolvency or ultimate

insolvency of the government. Ye can dispose easily of the supersolvency

possibility.       The initial debt is certainly positive, and the case of

characteristic roots less than —1 can be ruled out. Note that a finding of a

nonstationary DGP does not mean that there will be government insolvency; only

that in the absence of policy or other changes that render the DGP stationary,

bankruptcy of the Treasury will result. In Section 4 we consider some of the policy

options that would eliminate the specter of insolvency. Ex post the solvency

constraint will be satisfied either through changes in the paths of the augmented

primary   surplus and of seigniorage or by default i.e. write downs in the value of
the outstanding debt. Our analysis   also is silent on the important issue as to when
12




and how the threat of insolvency (given unchanged policies) will either compel

changes in the process governing primary surpluses and seigniorage or result in de

facto or de jure repudiation of (part of) the debt.

         If the DGP is covariance stationary, its unconditional mean will be zero if

the univariate representation of the stochastic process governing it is strictly

indeterministic. If the process has a deterministic component, its unconditional

mean may of course by nonzero even if the process is stationary.

         What are the testable implications of the solvency constraint for the sum of


the augmented primary surplus —Se and seigniorage t ? Let                          +    , and
            Since if tbe solvency constraint is satisfied we have


                             =
(3.11)


it follows that stationarity of I ,               the   present discounted value of seigniorage

plus augmented primary surplus, is necessary but not sufficient for solvency. The

infinite sum of stationary stochastic processes may be nonstationary. If that

were the case for {I} ,            then       would be nonstationary and solvency would fail.

Even if the expectation of the infinite sum of future                      is stationary, it need

not equal P and again solvency would fail. An example of such a process for                     is

given in Wilcox [1989] whose approach is followed closely in this section of our

paper.

         Let I =
                   alt_i +       with     at <I ,and , white noise. This implies


(3.12)
                                          =
                                              i   a't

         Can it be true that P =          ff alt?       If this were the case, we would have


                             a't
From (3.4') however we know that D2—D1 't
                                                                                                    13




Therefore the first—order stationary autoregressive process for the discounted

sum of seigniorage and the augmented primary surplus is inconsistent with

solvency.

         We could estimate the stochastic process governing I                          ,    calculate

               and test whether this equaled D .             An equivalent but slightly more


direct method is to estimate the stochastic process governing B and to test

whether IimEPf      =   0   .   Hamilton     and Flavin [1986] pioneered these tests of the


discounted debt. Wilcox [1989] and Grilli [1989] extended their approach. Our

analysis involves a statistical generalization of Wilcox's approach using

techniques developed by Phillips and Perron [1988].

         Wilcox assumes that           can be represented by the following potentially

multivariate 41114 process:

(3.13)                                               a] =
                     [1_p(L] [1 L)dZ                        [1_0L)]eg
p(L) is a pth order polynomial, 9(L) is a qth               order   polynomial, Z is a random

vector whose first element is 9g                is a vector of constants, and              is a vector

white noise process. (1— LZ4 is a covariance—stationary series i.e. the series

I is integrated of order d .      We   assume that (I—p(L)) and (I— 0(L)) have all their

roots outside the unit circle. Since p(L) and 0(L) are thus assumed to satisfy the

conditions for stationarity and invertibility, (3.13) has the autoregressive

representation

(3.14)
                     t,(L){(I_L)'Z_a0] =e
where


(3.15)               (L) =               =
                                             [(I- 0(L)][(I_p(L)].
14




       Note that the order of the autoregressive process in (3.14) and (3.15) is

potentially infinite.      This representation is operational only if it can be

approximated by a finite—order autoregressive process. a0 is the unconditional

expectation of (I_L)dZ
       The solvency tests of Wilcox's statistical model in (3.15) consist of two

parts, of which only the first may be necessary. First test whether Z is

                                             is stationary. So Z is stationary if the
stationary. By assumption (I —    iyZ2
order of integration d is less than      .    In a   univariate representation of (3.14)

with     as the only random variable, a finding that the process governing Pt has a

unit root (is integrated of order 1) would imply that the P process is

inconsistent with government solvency.          A finding that d <      i.e.   that Z is

stationary can still be consistent with insolvency provided the first element of

a0 is nonzero. If we permit supersolvency (timED+ < 0) as well as solvency (tim
                                                                                     ZT
         = 0)   then nonstationary processes involving negative values only of J1

would be permissible. A stationary process for             with the first element of a0

negative would also be consistent with (super)solvency. Neither of these two

supersolvency cases is a practical possibility for the Indian economy, and they

are indeed rejected by the data. If P is stationary, the second test therefore is

whether the first element of a0 is zero.

IS THE INDIAN DISCOUNTED PUBLIC DEBT STATIONARY?

      Our empirical tests of the stationarity of the Indian public debt are
complicated by two problems. First our annual time series is short indeed: 17

annual   observations from fiscal year 1970/71 to fiscal year 1986/87. Limited

degrees of freedom means low power for all our tests. Second, there are problems

about the choice of interest rate to use for discounting the debt. If expected

holding period rates of return (interest coupon payments plus capital gains per
                                                                                         15




Rupee invested) were the same for all debt instruments regardless of maturity,

currency denomination     or other characteristics, there would be no problems as the

holding period rate of return on      any debt   instrument could be used.

         This   assumption of "uncovered interest parity" for all debt instruments
fails heroically in tests involving industrial country financial claims. We
should    certainly not expect it to be valid for the case of India          where domestic
financial markets are characterized by frequent and prolonged nonprice rationing.

         To make our findings as robust as possible under the circumstances, we

perform four versions of the stationarity tests—two involving domestic Rupee

interest rates and two involving dollar interest rates.

         Our first domestic rate is a government borrowing rate (the Government Bond

Yield) while the second is a quasigovernment lending rate—the Advance

Rate—which relates to the State Bank of India's prime lending rate which

regulates all interest rates for the various categories and classes of advances

granted by the Bank. The tests involving the Advance Rate tilt the odds towards

rejecting      nonstationarity as it exceeds sometimes by a wide margin the rate
actually paid by the government on its outstanding liabilities (see Table 5).
         The two dollar interest rates are the "All Creditors" rate from the World

Bank World Debt Tables and the "Official Creditors" rate from the same source.

         With all four interest rates our conclusion is the same. Discounted public

debt is nonstationary: the process characterizing discounted public debt over our

sample   has    a unit root in each case. The pattern of behavior that produces the

public debt process is therefore not sustainable.

         In his empirical work Wilcox [1989] implements the univariate3 special case

of equation (3.14) given in (3.16).


(3.16)                    =           +            +
                                a1t
16




         The error term      is assumed to be i.i.d. Eventual insolvency will occur if

(at least) one of the following conditions holds: 1. The roots of 1 —              fl(L)      do not

all lie outside the unit circle; 2. a1         0   ,   that   is there is a deterministic trend

(one expects a positive coefficient i.e. no supersolvency); 3. a0 # 0 ,                      that   is

even though the D process is stationary, its unconditional expectation is nonzero

(again one expects a1 >     0 i.e.   no supersolvency).

         Following Perron and Phillips [1987] we generalize Wilcox's approach to

handle a wider class of stochastic processes for the error term (see also Phillips

[1988], and Phillips and Perron [1988]). Our D equation is:

(3.17)                  D=a0÷a1i+fiD1+u
         The error term      can belong to a very wide class of stochastic processes.


{tj}
         is a   weakly stationary sequence of random variables satisfying the following


                                                = 0               fin    for some fi >   2
conditions (see Phillips [1988]):                      ; R Iu                                ;




is strong mixing with mixing numbers a which satisfy                     a —      c w    . These

conditions allow for many weakly dependent time series and include a broad class of

data generating mechanisms such as finite order liii models under very general

conditions.

         The original Dickey—Fuller test for the presence of a unit root was

developed for autoregressive representations of known order and normal i.i.d.

errors (Dickey and Fuller [1979]). The augmented Dickey—Fuller test assumed an

autoregressive representation of known order plus a time trend and normal i.i.d.

errors (Dickey and Fuller [1981]).             Said and Dickey [1984] showed that the

Dickey—Puller i—test for a unit root can be applied to 41114 (p , 1                 ,    q) models
provided the lag length in the autoregression increases with the sample size T at a
                      1


 rate less than 7. The Phillips—Perron tests are nonparametric and can be applied

 to a wider class of processes than the three other tests.4

         Our null hypothesis for equation (3.17) is that fi                 =1   ,   and a1 = 0 within a
maintained   hypothesis that permits a nonzero drift             a0
                                                                       .    If we fail to reject the
null,   the discounted public debt is nonstationary which would imply insolvency if
the process persisted into the indefinite future. If the null is rejected but we
find a significantly positive value of a , that is a positive deterministic trend,
in the discounted debt series, eventual insolvency still looms. If the null is

rejected and we cannot reject a = 0 and fi < 1               ,   then finding a positive drift
(ao> 0) again would imply eventual insolvency.

        The following three test statistics given in Table 7 are derived in Phillips

and Perron [1988] for the null that fi             =I   and a1 =   0    .
                                                                             fl) makes      use of the

standardized and centered least squares estimates of fi .                            makes use of the
statistic on fi   ,       (for fi = 1), and   Z(+3) is the regression "F—test" of Dickey and

Fuller [1981] for the more general class of error processes in (3.17). These three

statistics have the same limiting distributions for a very wide class of error

processes as the statistics developed by Dickey and Fuller for the case of i.i.d.

errors. The critical values of the three statistics are therefore the same and can

be found in Fuller [1976], and Dickey           and Fuller [1981]. We also provide the point
estimates and standard errors for the three parameters a0, a and fi in Table 8.
        With the exception of the $) test            on D1 (debt in Rupees discounted at the

Government's Long Bond Yield), all the evidence points to nonstationarity of the

discounted debt series. The rejection of the (single) unit root hypothesis in the

case of the ($)           statistic for   the     series occurs because the discounted debt

appears to be more nonstationary than can be captured by a single unit root.
18




          Vhen we perform the Phillips—Perron tests for the first difference of D1 , we

obtain the results given in Table 9. The null of a unit root in the first

difference of B1 cannot be rejected. The hypothesis of nonstationarity for

therefore cannot be challenged.

ARE ThE INDIAN DEBT—CNP RATIO MU) TIE PRIIARY DFJ'ICIT—CNP RATIO STATIONARY?

          To complement the findings of nonstationarity of the discounted public debt,

Table 10 below presents unit root tests for the debt—GNP ratio NTD/GNP and for the

discounted value of the sum of the augmented primary surplus and seigniorage I.

The point estimates of a0 , a1 and are given in Table 11.

          The debt—GNP ratio is nonstationary. For the discounted sum of seigniorage

and augmented primary surplus, we also fail to reject the null that fi           = land a1   =   0.

4.   POLICY OPTIONS TO AVOID INSOLVENCY

          From equation (3.5) reproduced below, the options for restoring solvency are

clear:


                                              1
(4.1)
                          ds s=0zll1                   [t+1÷it+1+i] +nt
                                    j=0
where

                                                  1
(4.2)                     fi IE]J
                                          {             ]dtii
          The present value of the "solvency gap" (as a proportion of GDP) is given by

          For solvency we require fi              0 or, ruling out the case of supersolvency,

     =0   .   Vith or   without solvency, fi follows a martingale

(4.3)

          To get some sense of the magnitude of the solvency gap, it             is helpful      to

calculate the permanent flow equivalent to the stock fi .                  Let     be the long

interest rate net of the real growth rate i.e.
                                                                                                    19



                                                                 —1

(4.4)                     '
                                [±s {
;'7 is the yield on a consol or perpetuity which pays a constant coupon                  of one unit

of output each period when the single—period discount rates are                            , and   the
expectations theory of the term structure of interest rates holds.


                                      1
        a ;d — E JJ                                          +            is the   smallest constant
                   1=0      5=0
fraction of GD? that—U            t were to       be devoted this period and   every period   in the

future to eliminating the solvency gap—would succeed in closing the gap. It is

the   "permanent correction" i.e. suxtaine chge ii the augmented primary surplus
or seigniorage (as a proportiou of GDP that munt be made to the government's
fiscal, financial and monetary plans to avoid insolvency.
         Noting that
                                          *

(4.5)                          5t +   +_J           [(1 +   r_1)(1 +   i1) —(1 +

(4.6)                    5 =   c— +—
we see   that there are four broad typew of poiiq options for reducing the augmerted
primary deficit: 1) reductions in government consumption spunding; 2) increases
in net current revenues; 3) reducing public sector capital formation and/or
Iscreasing     government cash revenues from the stock of public sector capital; and
4) shifting the composition of the public debt between internal and external debt.
It is   important to     nate that the        different spending and   revenue items   that make up 5

cannot   be   expected to be    behaviorally independent of each other either in the short
run or in the long run.
PC




      The first tue options for reducing the primary deficit are              conceptually
simple and nolitirally difficult. Proposals for widening the current. revenue base

through     an expend ture tax, a broadly based value—added tax or a broadly based
inroac-   tax have beer made for decades with little to show for it. Vealth taxes such
as al and tar or tar on urban        real estate are also   administratively feasible but
unpopular       arong the politically influential classes. Replacing nonauctioied

imoert quots ItL auctioned quotas or tariffs is another relatively
stnightforward policy measure for raising correct revenues.

          net cas} return on the govenment't capital stock pk need bear no
          The

relatict whntsoe"e te the social returns to public sector capital. Cash returns

are releart t: 0: nnoser because nn natter hr 4esirable the project it will
     rr he financed., and the financial imul loot oue of the project vill infhuenec
itt' iiwerafl fhaecial position of the goeTment including its solvenct.
          For mr          -f   public sector capital ttt cash returns are persisteutly
                      °'erc.rises   with   secular onrrt mc- losses would be one exancle
ter IC :n.fir            t I or   infrastruetqr t!y     oee not    viel   revenuerd irectiy
(su tirouj.:. tnil*            neher user cbcrge brt abscrbs current resourc.ee ft':

mie"' ero'       me            Te the extent that irIrastrucinre boowts    real (3NP and thur
                               t; revennac for   :'::   Y   feiLrdules. its contribution to
                                           retFt: L, irc::4:: $           l priuciele erel

                             eu: (Lrc urriJ; It'; ulioue.d for (ser lur,te:
                         'uynhtttons

[CCr], ber: the oressary iaforit'tior. (iacludinç esiimatez of the sffrri Ot
                 rrtw capiai an the tax brru) i rot in practice rerilnbit
    ioiinz rhar        =—           where U C a < I is the depeerntiot' rate o

public sector capitals we can rewrite the budget identity as follovs
                                                                                                                   21




(4.7)           dg_kg= (1+;...1)(d_1_k_1) +Cg_T_Og
                      +
                           (1   +
                                    r1)(1 + i1)           — (1 +                      *
                                             1 +                                     b_1

                      +    (rj_j — (Pj_j — w)]
                                    I +fl_               Ic
                                                              i—I.
        The solvency constraint can in turn be            rewritten as:

(4.8)
                  —    =
                                    ti               —
                                                         cg÷1jJ
                                                                     +




                      +E            1.t!   [i + rt+ —(1       +   r)(1 + i±)]
                          -                     —w—                ________
                      + 2. E                                       1 +
                          i=O
        The debt total emphasized in (4.7) and (4.8) is public debt net of the value

of the public sector capital stock at current reproduction costs. The first term

on the r.h.s. of equation (4.8) is the present value of future seigniorage and the

primary current    account or       consumption account surplus of the public sector.

        If all public sector assets and liabilities earned the same expected cash

rate of return as that used in the present value calculations (i.e. rg+j), then the

last two terms on the r.h.s. of (4.8) vanish. If                         —   w   ,   the net     of depreciation

cash rate of return on public sector capital, exceeds                                 ,   the   marginal cost of

domestic borrowing, then smaller primary current surpluses and/or less

seigniorage are required to achieve solvency. A value of                                  in excess of            —
worsens the    solvency of the government.
        The second    term on the r.h.s. of equation (4.8) allows for differences

between internal and external borrowing rates. Clearly if the expected real rate

of return on domestic debt exceeds that on foreign debt (1 +                                    >   (1 +
                                                                                                           r5)   (1 +

        or   equivalently if I +              > (1   +
                                                         i)(1 +                           then      switching from
22




domestic debt to foreign debt (either through an open—market operation today or by

switching    the future internal—external financing mix towards external borrowing)
will strengthen the solvency of the govenunent. Of course such an operation may
not   be feasible say because the foreign interest rate does not represent the

marginal cost of increased external borrowing. This will e.g. be the case if there

is external credit rationing.

         The final option open to the government to restore its solvency without

repudiation is to increase the present value of future seigniorage. Seigniornge

     can be written in a number of equivalent ways:

                            Al Alt
(4.9)

                               1                              1
                             + (! + rj_j) (1 + st—i) —
                                                              'II'__________________
                                                                    +      (1 +

Here in denotes base money   per unit of     GOP.

         The first of the three expressions on the r.h.s. of (4.9) emphasizes the real

resources appropriated by the government in period 2 by running the printing

presses. The second breaks down total seigniorage revenue as the product of a

"seigniorage    tax rate"      a p and a "seigniorage tax base"           in   a   the   reciprocal
of the income velocity of circulation of base money. The third expresses the value
of   the resources extracted by the government as the sum           of the increase in the stock
of money per unit of output Am2 and the change in the money output ratio that would
have occurred with a constant nominal money stock because of inflation and real
output growth (approximately (T2.1 +             n2_1)m21).       Some authors reserve the term
"inflation tax" for r21m2.1 ,              but   we shall use the terms seigniorage and
inflation tax interchangeably.
         In steady state we assume that
(4.10)                i÷p=(i+n)(i+r)
                                                                                             23




         Ve wish to investigate the relationship between                   ,   the    amount of

seigniorage the government wishes to extract, and the rate of inflation. This

requires a model of the demand for base money. Base money is the sum of currency CII

and commercial bank reserves 115 i.e. 1= (5+ 115.

         For the purposes of this paper it is sufficient to work with an aggregate

demand for base money function which is not "built up" from its constituent

components CII and 115 .        Using   annual data from 1960/ 61 to 1986/87, we estimated a

base money demand equation in velocity form. V is the ratio of GNP to the monetary

base (the income velocity of circulation of base money). In our notation
    I                   m
    7
           =
               (1 +   n5'(1     +   T) .6 The     result is given in equation (4.11).

                                                             —
(4.11)          AV = 48.282— 0.151 V_ +              2.384       6.8501nT_1
                                                                               +   O.188t

                        (3.151) (—2.082)          (2.422)     (—3.075)         (2.545)

12 = 0.65 ; SI = 0.32 ; f(4,20) = 9.15 (0.0002) ; DV = 2.21                .
                                                                                 Conventionally
calculated t statistics are given in brackets below the coefficient estimates. SI

is the equation standard error. The probability value for the F test whose null is

that the population 12 is zero is 0.0002. The LI test for autocorrelated residuals

(from lags 1 to 3) gives Chi2(3) =           1.07.   The F—form suggested by Harvey [1981]

gives F(3, 17) =      0.25.   There is therefore no evidence of residual autocorrelation.

White's [1980] test for heteroskedasticity gives F(8, 11) =              0.83.     The Chi2 test

for normality of the residuals yields Chi2(2) =         9•94•7
         The estimated equation suggests that a higher rate of inflation raises

velocity (reduces the demand for base money): A possible interpretation of the

last two terms on the r.h.s. of equation (4.11) is that positive deviations of

output from trend are associated with reductions in velocity.

         Inferences about the long—run rate of inflation implied by the need for

seigniorage revenue are most easily made when the money demand or velocity
24




equation has a steady state. Equation (4.11) almost qualifies. In steady state

output grows at the constant proportional rate n. Over the sample period the mean

growth rate of real output is 0.054. The last two terms on the r.h.s. of equation

(4.11) can      in   steady state be written as: —6.850ln)' — 6.B5Oni +         O.188i    .   Vhile
the two opposing trends don't quite cancel each other out when n =                     0.054    ,   a

reasonable first approximation would permit us to evaluate long—run velocity by

ignoring the offsetting time trends. This yields the long—run velocity equation:

(4.12a)          V= 6.165+ 15.782T

Alternatively we can       evaluate both     mY and   i at   their sample means. This yields

(4.12b)          V= 6.512+ 15.782i

         In what follows we work with the numerical estimates given in equation

(4.12b).

         Steady—state seigniorage as a proportion of GNP is, from equation (4.9),

given by

(4.13)                   = [(I   +   )(1 + n) —1]     y1
         Unlike the long—run money demand functions that have
                                                                             (1 +   n(1   +   i) or
                             in        i   , the long—run    base money demand function we have
ln[(l +    n)(1 + f)] linear
estimated does not have a long—run seigniorage Laffer curve. Across steady states

seigniorage increases with the rate of inflation as long as 9.47n <                  6.512.     The

reason is (speaking somewhat loosely) that the elasticity of long—nm money demand

                       with respect to the inflation rate is less than unity in absolute
(1 +   n)(1 + r)
value for all inflation rates              A greater need for long—run seigniorage therefore

unambiguously implies a higher lofig—run rate of inflation:

 —          n   — 6.SlIq
     15.782q — (1 + n)
                                                                                                25




      To get a sense of the magnitude of the correction in x = —ö +             ,   the sum   of

the augmented primary surplus and seigniorage, we calculate what constant value of

z would stabilize the debt—GNP ratio at some given value d for given constant

values of the real interest rate net of the growth rate r — n   .   Since   z =      (r — n)d
the figures in Table 12 follow immediately.

      The actual value of     in 1985/6 was —5.5 percent of GNP      (see Table 4). It
reached —7.1 percent of GNP in 1986/7. Even in the optimistic case in which d is

stabilized at its 1986/87 value of just over 50 percent of GNP and the interest rate

exceeds the growth rate by only one percentage point, x1 would have to be raised by

between 6.0 and 7.6 percentage points of GNP permanently.

      If the debt—GNP ratio is not stabilized until it reaches some higher level or

if the long—run growth rate of GNP falls short of the long—run real interest rate

by more than one percentage point, the required permanent fiscal or seigniorage

correction can be considerably higher.

           the maximal steady—state seigniorage that can be extracted given our

estimate of the money demand function, is given by   =          = 15782     .       With   a four


percent long—run real growth rate,        0.066 that is 6.6 percent of GNP. This

amount of seigniorage will only be extracted in the limit as the rate of inflation

goes to infinity.      Without a reduction in the augmented primary deficit,

stabilizing the debt—GNP ratio at 50 percent through increased use of seigniorage

alone will not be possible even when the excess of the interest rate over the growth

rate is only one percentage point. In that case seigniorage would have to be raised

by between 6.0 and 7.6 percent of GM' to 8.70 or 10.30 percent of GM'. The

nonexistence of equilibrium in this case suggests the possibility of a

hyperinflation.
26




      The steady—state inflation rate implied by a continuation of the current

share of seigniorage in CNP (2.7 percent, and therefore a reduction in the primary

deficit of between 6.0 and 7.6 percent of GNP) would, with a four percent long—run

real growth rate of CNP, be 21.2 percent per year. Lowering the long—nm share of

seigniorage in GM' to one percent would, with a four percent long—run real growth

rate, reduce the long—run inflation rate to 2.6 percent per annum. Raising the

state—state share of seigniorage in GM' to four percent would, with a four percent

real growth rate, imply a long—nm rate of inflation of 52.0 percent per year.

These figures should of course be taken with a fairly substantial pinch of salt.

Our demand function for base money leaves much to be desired. We offer it as an

illustration of a methodology that we believe to be useful. Further empirical

refinement is necessary before confident statements can be made about the

trade—off s faced by India's policy makers.

      The seigniorage concept analyzed here can be referred to as one component of

the anticipated inflation tax. Anticipated inflation may also have effects on the

primary deficit. A tax system that incorporates nominal progression will, with

any positive rate of inflation, yield increased real tax rewenues if the tax

brackets are not fully index—linked. This "fiscal drag" has been argued to be

dominated at high rates of inflation by the negative effect on real tax collections

of delayed payment of taxes and inadequate interest penalties for late payment.

This Tanzi effect (Tanzi [1978]) is further complicated through the existence of

nominal specific taxes and tariffs, nominal cash limits on spending etc.

      If the government has long—dated fixed interest debt outstanding which is

denominated in domestic currency, then an unanticipated increase in the rate of

inflation will act as an unanticipated capital levy on such assets. This can be

viewed as a de facto repudiation of part of the public debt. Even with domestic

currency denominated short maturity debt or long—dated but variable interest
                                                                                 27




debt, an unexpected capital levy ca-n be imposed if an unexpected increase in the

general price level can be engineered. In a very open economy this can be achieved

through a devaluation of the nominal exchange rate, but in the case of India the

very limited openness of the economy prevents this f rot being a practical policy

option.

      Like formal repudiation, de facto repudiation through a deliberately

engineered unexpected reduction in the market value of the public debt is a serious

policy option that should be considered along with policy measures for reducing

the primary deficit and along with the increased use of seigniorage. Long—dated

public debt, even when index—linked (which is not the case in India), and to a

lesser extent short—dated debt is already "contingent debt", even in the absence

of repudiation risk:     its real value can change, both in anticipated and

unanticipated ways, because of a whole range of shocks that have not been

engineered deliberately or accidentally by the policy makers.

      One of the likely consequences of (partial) repudiation, (as of a capital

levy on bond holders or a decline in the market value of long—dated debt due to an

unexpected increase in the rate of inflation) is to add a risk premium to the

interest rate the government must pay on new debt issues. In extreme cases the

government might, for a while, not be able to issue any new debt at all. These

costs have to be balanced against the cost of reducing the primary deficit and of

making increased use of seigniorage. There is no general case, in equity or

efficiency, for exempting the owners of public debt from sharing the burden of

adjustment to unforeseen contingencies in preference to owners of human capital,

physical capital or land and in preference to the beneficiaries of public

spending.
28




5. CONCLUSION

      The statistical solvency tests and the estimated demand for base money
function suggest two conclusions.      First continuation of recent patterns of

behavior will eventually threaten the solvency of the government. Second the

option of using the inflation tax to close part of the budgetary gap appears to be a

limited option indeed. Small increases in the share of seigniorage in GNP will

have a high cost in terms of additional long—run inflation and even maximal use of

the inflation tax will not be sufficient to close the solvency gap.

      The first of these conclusions does not stand or fall with our formal tests

for solvency. Visual inspection of Figures 1 and 2, and Tables 1 and 4 make it

abundantly clear that the fiscal situation is perilous. It is primarily the rapid

increase in the internal public debt that signals the crisis to come.

      Unless measures to reduce the primary deficit are taken, a fiscal crisis is

bound to come. Where and when it will strike cannot be predicted with certainty.

Often a fiscal crisis first manifests itself in the foreign exchanges. Actual or

imminent international reserve exhaustion is a common trigger for emergency

measures including recourse to Ill standby financing and the conditionality this

implies. Such foreign exchange crises can happen even if, as in the case of India,

the external debt burden of the country is quite modest.

       The fiscal retrenchment that appears to be required is large and will be

painful. The political and economic challenge is to implement the required

combination of spending cuts, and of tax and other revenue increases in a way that

does least damage to the economy's growth prospects, and that protects the weakest

and poorest citizens.
                                                                                                           29




              'Thir ond1 ur cs Qi
                       -
                                             'ra b€ stated in several
                                                                 t
                                                                      equivalent ways such as
                 -                                                  .C        B       'F
                                                       tt_',_                               ci+r Us
B
    t+;
          +                                            '.,t—         t+5 t+j' i+j+1
              21n   ai-        econoin tt. statesent implies                the assumption of a "source
based"        systek a: taxat.ox untc:-               axe- al income streams originating within the
national            eeonor. thtt           reiuence—üasec view of taxation we instead tax                 all
income accrti!ig             rc domest;:    residents ;        .e   GNP and   the   simple story we tell here

vonid not           vor
              °Strt su'ak:n t-knk tune ts a purely deterministic process, our
model is            b:'.-: at. ierncr            eauatio (34; with a zero variance innovation in
the sec-one ecutv;
                     tatr -e ertni --                   pogra yr tten oy Lw Lorezan in CAUSI.
                    w'rte°     rc eai             i.ern-er ao tie pnratized at a flice exceeding
the rce                       nv-'          -v              ar flo't v ttieS eucerp:iSeS on the
                      w.v                        --          -v-& -±ro . g1w priv.tizatiOa can
                                       r                $;rH.
strenflher the            ntYrr-n,Pn

              brneetjgtr           -
              iote tha' .- x- lH&-    ct-.                          ;:he   of rJ2r0r1
              Cj, tora cwti-- c-O77.;. -
30



                                            REFERENCES

Andrew B. Abel,       Gregory Mankiw,   Lawrence H. Suiiunersandkichardi. Zeckhauser
        [1989]   ,   "Assessing Dynamic Efficiency: Theory and Evidence," Review of
        Economic Studies      56 January   1—19.

Ritu   Anand and Sweder van Vijnbergen [1989], "nflation and, the Financing, of
        Government Expenditure: An. introductory Analysis. with an Application to
        Turkey," The Vorid Bank Economic Review 3 17—38.
Robert J. Barro [1979}, "On the Determination of the Public Debt," Jon_rnJ of
        Political Econo.y 87(5), Part 1, October, 940—971.
Villem H.   Buiter [1983a], "Measurement of the Public Sector Deficit and           Its
        Implications for      Policy Evaluation and     Design," International   lonetary Fund

        Staff Papers 30 June, 306—349.
        [1983b], "The Theory of Optimum Deficits and Debt" in. Federal Reserve Bank
        of Boston Conference Series No. 27, The Sconoics of Large Government
        Deficits, October,      4—69.

        [1985],      "A Guide to Public Sector Debt and   Deficits," Economic    Policy 1

        November, 14—61.

        [1989a],     "The Arithmetic of Solvency," in V.0. Buiter, Principles of
        Budgetary and Financial Policy, 149—159, London: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
        [198gb],     "Some Thoughts on the Role of Fiscal Policy in Stabilization and
        Structural.      Adjustment in Developing Countries," n in               V.11. Buiter,
        Princjules.      of Budgetary and          Financial   Policy, Londee:       Harvester

        Wheatsheaf..

       [1989c], "Can Public: Spending Cuts be Inflationary?" in V.11. Buiter,
       Principles of.., Budgetary ad .. Financial Policy, London:                    Harvester
       Wheatsheaf.
D.A. Dickey and V.A. Fuller [1979], "Distribution of the Estimators for

        Autoregressive Time Series with a Unit Root," Journal of the American

        Statistical Association 74 427—31.

        [1981], "Likelihood Ratio Statistics for Autoregressive Time Series with a

        Unit Root," Econo.etrica49 1057—72.

V.A. Fuller [1976], Introduction to Statistical Time Series, New York: Wiley.

Vittorio Grilli [1989], "Seigniorage in Europe," in I. de Cecco and A. Giovannini

         (eds.), A European Central Bank?, Cambridge University Press, 53—79.

James D. Hamilton and arjorie A. Flavin [1986], "On the Limitations of

        Government Borrowing: A Framework for Empirical Testing," American

        Econo.ic Review 76 September, 808—819.

Andrew C. Harvey [1981], The Econometric Analysis of Time Series, Oxford: Philip

        Allan.

Pierre Perron    and Peter C.B. Phillips [1987], "Does GNP have a Unit Root? A

        Reevaluation," Econo.ics Letters 23 139—145.

Peter C.B.   Phillips [1988], "Regression Theory for Near—Integrated Time Series,"
        Econo.etrica 56(5),     September, 1021—1043.

        and Pierre   Perron   [1988], "Testing for a Unit Root in Time Series

        Regression," Bio.etrica 75(2), 335—46

S.E.   Said and D.A. Dickey    [1984], "Testing for Unit Roots in Autoregressive—loving

        Average of   Unknown Order," Biometrica 71 599—607.
Vito Tanzi [1978], "Inflation, Real Tax Revenue andthe Case of Inflationary
        Finance: Theory with an Application to Argentina," International Nonetary
        Fund Staff Papers 25 September.

H. Vhite [1980], "A Heteroskedasticity—Consistent Covariance Estimator andA
        Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity," Econometrica48(4), 817—838.
32




David V. Vilcox [1989], "The Sustainability of Government Deficits: Implications

      of the Present Value Borrowing Constraint," Journal   of   loney, Credit and

      Banking 21   August, 291—306.
                      (0
                      co
                      0)


                      co
                      0)

                      NJ
                      cc
                      0)


                      0
                      cc



                      cc
                      N
                      0)

                      (0
                      0)


                      N
                      0)


                      NJ
                      N
                      0)



tO OO 9i?O i7O 2O iO OO
                                    (0
                                    cc
                                    0'


                                    cc
                                    0)
U)


U                                   cc
                                    a.)
N

C.'
—4
                                    0
                                    cc
                                    0.)
0
N
C.'
-4
                                    r
                                    cc
                                    0.)


                                    (0
E4
z
                                    N
                                    0)
0
0
U)
H
0
                                    N
                                    0)
C.'l




                                    c"J
 H                                  N
                                    0)




               fr Ofr G O' SZ O GL OJ
       .OL X
                                                                              35




                                 TABLE 1: X GNP


                                 NTD           NTDD        NTFD


              1970/71           37.9           23.9        14.0
              1971/72           39.3           24.7        14.6
              1972/73           40.7           25.7        15.0
              1973/74           34.8           21.4        13.4
              1974/75           34.0           20.8        13.2
              1975/76           34.6           21.1        13.5
              1976/77           35.8           23.4        12.4
              1977/78           33.3           23.5         9.8
              1978/79           32.9           24.7         8.2
              1979/80           33.6           25.7         7.9
              1980/81           32.8           24.7         8.1
              1981/82           36.1           25.5        10.6
              1982/83           41.2           28.9        12.3
              1983/84           41.4           29.3        12.1
              1984/85           44.8           31.3        13.7
              1985/86           48.6           33.6        15.0
              1986/87           52.4           35.9        16.5

SOURCES:

1.   Report of the Committee to Review the Working of the lonetary System,
     April 1985, B.BI, Bombay.
2.   India, Bureau of Public Enterprises, Public Enterprises Survey: Annual
     Report on the Working of Industrial and Commercial Undertakings of the
     Central Government, Volumes for 1970/1 to 1986/7.
3.   Report on Currency and Finance, IWI, Volumes for 1977/8—1987/8.
4.   Economic Survey, Government of India, 1988/9.
5.   World Debt Tables: External Debt of Developing Countries, 1988/9,
     Volumes II and III, Country Tables, Washington, DC.

DEFINITIONS OF VARIABLES:

NTD a NTDD + NTFD   (see notes to Tables 2 and 3)
36



       TABLE 2:     DOIESTIC PRIVATE HOLDINGS OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT, STATE AND

               PuBLIC ENTERPRISE LIABILITIES, 1970/1—1986/7 (X OF CNP)


                              CDD        SDD           PEDD          NTDD


           1970/71            18.5       5.1           0.3           23.9
           1971/72            19.1       5.3           0.3           24.7
           1972/73            19.9       5.4           0.4           25.7
           1973/74            16.4       4.8           0.2           21.4
           1974/75            15.5       4.7           0.6           20.8
           1975/76            15.1       5.2           0.8           21.1
           1976/77            16.8       5.4           1.2           23.4
           1977/78            17.2       5.2           1.1           23.5
           1978/79            17.9       5.4           1.4           24.7
           1979/80            18.4       5.5           1.8           25.7
           1980/81            17.7       5.2           1.8           24.7
           1981/82            18.6       5.1           1.8           25.5
           1982/83            21.3       5.4           2.2           28.9
           1983/84            21.4       5.5           2.4           29.3
           1984/85            22.6       5.9           2.6           31.1
           1985/86            24.7       6.1           2.8           33.6
           1986/87            26.5       6.3           3.1           35.9

SOURCES:

1.     Report of the Committee to Review the Working of the Monetary System,
       April 1985, RBI, Bombay.
2.     India, Bureau of Public Enterprises, Public Enterprises Survey Annual
       Report on the Working of Industrial and Commercial Undertakings of the
       Central Government, Volumes for 1970/1—1986/7.
3.     Report on Currency and Finance, RBI, Volumes for 1977/8—1987/8.
4.     Economic Survey, Government of India, 1988/9.

DEFINITIONS OF VARIABLES:

NTDD     CDD   +   SDD   + PEDD.

CDD:     Internal debt of Central Government except special securities issued to
         the Reserve Bank of India, Treasury bills issued to the Reserve Bank of
         India and to State Governments; plus Small Savings Scheme; plus
         Five—Year Time Deposits; plus Provident Funds etc; minus loans and
         debentures to Public Enterprises.

SDD:     Internal debt of State Governments less Ways and Means Advances from
         the Reserve Bank of India; plus Provident Funds; less loans to Public
         Enterprises.

PEDD: Rupee denominated debt of Public Enterprises not held by Central
       Government or States.
                                                                                37




                 TABLE 3: FOREIGN LIABILITIES AND ASSETS OF THE

                      PuBLIC SECTOR, 1970/1—1986/7 (Z OF GNP)

                                  170            R              NTFD



                1970/71          15.4           1.4             14.0
                1971/72          16.2           1.6             14.6
                1972/73          16.5           1.5             15.0
                1973/74          14.8           1.4             13.4
                1974/75          14.4           1.2             13.2
                1975/76          15.9           2.4             13.5
                1976/77          16.4           4.0             12.4
                1977/78          15.2           5.4              9.8
                1978/79          14.2           6.0              8.2
                1979/80          13.5           5.6              7.9
                1980/81          12.4           4.3              8.1
                1981/82          13.2           2.6             10.6
                1982/83          15.2           2.9             12.3
                1983/84          15.2           3.1             12.1
                1984/85          17.1           3.4             13.7
                1985/86          18.2           3.2             15.0
                1986/87          19.5           3.0             16.5


SOURCES:

1.     World Debt Tables: External Debt of Developing Countries, 1988/9,
       Volumes II and III, Country Tables, Washington, DC.
2.     Economic Survey, Government of India, 1988/9.

DEFINITIONS OF VARIABLES:

NTFD a TFD — R.

TFD:     Public and Publicly Guaranteed Long—Term debt plus use of hf Credit
         plus imputed Short—Term Public Debt
R:        Official foreign exchange reserves plus SDRs.
*
We assumed that the Public Sector's share of total short—term external debt
was the same as its share of total long—term debt.
Note: External debt data in World Debt Tables is on a calendar year basis.
The figures in Tables 1 and 3 "apportion" the calendar year figures to
financial years (April 1 to larch 31) e.g. the figure for financial year
1986/7    is three—quarters of the calendar year 1986 figure   plus one—quarter of
the    calendar year 1987 figure.
38



               TABLE 4: THE PUBLIC SECTOR DEFICIT, ITS COIPONENTS

                    Aim SEIGNIORAGE, 1970/1—1986/7 (7 OF GNP)

                               PRIIARY        INTEREST
                DEFICIT        DEFICIT        PAYMENTS          SEIGNIOLAGE


     1970/71      5.8            3.9            1.9                 1.1


     1971/72      7.3            5.3            2.0                 1.1

     1972/73      6.9             5.0           1.9                 1.0
     1973/74      5.6             3.9           1.7                 2.2
     1974/75      5.9            4.2            1.7                 0.7
     1975/76      6.7             4.7           2.0                 0.3
     1976/77      7.1             4.8           2.3                 1.4
     1977/78      6.9             4.9           2.0                 1.9
     1978/79      7.9             5.6           2.3                 2.2
     1979/80      8.3             5.7           2.6                 2.8
     1980/81      10.0            7.6           2.4                 1.7

     1981/82      9.6             6.9           2.7                 1.7
     1982/83      10.7            7.8           2.9                 2.2

     1983/84      10.7            7.7           3.0                 3.1
     1984/85      12.4            9.1           3.3                 1.3
     1985/86      11.6            8.2           3.4                 2.7

     1986/87      13.9            9.8           4.1                 2.7


SURCES:

1.     Economic Survey, Government of India, Volumes 1972/3—1988/9.
2.     Report on Currency and Finance, 821, Volumes 1980/1—1987/8.
3.     Statistical Appendix: Supplement to the 1(21 Occasional Papers, Volume
       3(1), June 1982, Monetary Policy in India: Issues and Evidence.
                                                                   39




                TABLE 5: SELECTED ECONOUC INDICATORS



               (1)         (2)            (3)           (4)
                         %A in                      Deprec.
          Growth GNP X GDP Deflator   %A in CPI    Ex. late    7
1970/71       6.15         2.99          4.19           0.0

1971/72       2.14         5.43          5.36           0.32

1972/73      —0.54        11.00          11.44          2.74

1973/74       3.74        18.89          27.00          1.72

1974/75       0.20        17.97          16.77          1.44

1975/76       9.67        —2.87        —10.77           8.49

1976/77       1.61         6.59          8.91           3.29

1977/78       8.37         3.41          2.90          —4.20

1978/79       6.71         2.06          3.59          —4.17

1979/80      —4.51        15.56          12.13         —1.58

1980/81       6.48        18.71          12.58         —2.27

1981/82       6.48        10.01          8.82          13.13

1982/83       3.47         7.23          9.91           7.88
1983/84       7.61         8.36          11.15          7.05
1984/85       3.20         7.14          5.01          15.27
1985/86       6.11         7.53          8.85           2.90
1986/87       6.07         5.60          7.61           4.42
40



                             TABLE 5,    continued


                   (5)        (6)               (7)        (8
                Yield on                     Official     Al
                L.T. Cov't   Advance        Creditors   Creditors
                Securities   Rate   7.        lateX     lateX
                 (Rupee)     (Rupee)


     1970/71       5.15       7.75            2.18        2.40

     1971/72       5.64       8.50             1.93       2.03

     1972/73       5.37       8.50             1.48       1.83

     1973/74       5.37       8.75             1.80       1.98

     1974/ 75      6.16      11.25             2.15       2.28

     1975/76       6.28      14.00             2.68       2.85

     1976/77       6.25      14.00             3.48       3.70

     1977/78       6.25      13.50             2.33       2.80

     1978/79       6.43      13.00             2.05       2.45

     1979/80       6.59      14.75             2.65       4.28

     1980/81       6.97      16.50             2.60       4.78

     1981/82       7.23      16.50             4.35       5.35
     1982/83       7.73      16.50             5.70       7.15
     1983/84       8.24      16.50             5.13       6.70
     1984/85       9.22      16.50             5.83       6.48

     1985/86       9.94      16.50             5.03       5.73

     1986/87      10.19      16.50             5.18       5.55
                               TABLE 5,   continued


SOIJRC.ES:

1.    Columns (1) and (2):   IMF, International Financial Statistics, Yearbook,
      1989, Washington, DC.
2.    Column (3): Economic Survey, Government of India, Volumes
      1969/70—1987/8.
3.    Column (4): IKF, International Financial Statistics (IFS), Ionthly,
      1970—1988, Washington, DC.
4.    Column (5): Report on Currency and Finance, RBI, Volumes for
      1970/1—1987/8.
5.    Column (6): Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, Ionthly, Volumes for
      1970/1—1987/8.
6.    Columns (7) and (8): World Debt Tables: External Debt of Developin
      Countries, 1988/9, Volumes II and III, Country Tables, Washington, D
42



    TABLE 6: DISCOUNTED DEBT, PRIIARY DEFICIT ANI) SEIGNIURACE, 1970/1—1986/7

                       (current Rupees discounted to 1970/1)

                                        (CR.RS)
                                 NTD       PRIIAIY DEFICIT   SEICNIOLLCE

                                             •



                1970/71         14887             1542          426

                1971/72         15660             2118          451

                1972/73         16966             2083          433

                1973/74         17162             1924          1063

                 1974/75        18668             2283          3788

                 1975/76        18909             2580           185

                 1976/77        19644             2652           793

                 1977/78        19542             2893          1114

                 1978/79        19698             3314          1338

                 1979/80        20672             3532          1701

                 1980/81        22529             5231          1160

                 1981/82        27065             5167          1257

                 1982/83        31955             6022          1695

                 1983/84        34834             6500          2594

                 1984/85        38820             7923          1115

                 1985/86        47045             7980          2655

                 1986/87        51427             9618          2636


*
 Discounted using the Long—Term Government Bond Yield.


SOURCES:

Same as    for Tables 1—5.
                                                                               43




                        TABLE 7: UNIT ROOT TEST FOR DISCOUNTED DEBT


         Discounted
              Series                 fi)           tp)
                   B1
                                     1.62           1.20         12.26

                                    —3.37          —1.10              1.08
                   B2

                                    —3.74          —1.39          2.46


                                    —2.17          —1.00          4.31
                   B;

     Critical (957.)                —17.9          —3.60              7.24

              **
     Values        (997.)           —22.5          —4.38         10.61

**
  These critical values are for sample size 25. Our sample size is 17. Using
the critical values appropriate to the larger sample biases the test towards
rejection of the null.




     is the debt measured in Rupees discounted at the Long—Term Government
B1
     Bond yield.

B2 is the debt measured in Rupees discounted at the average advance rate.


     is the debt measured in U.S. dollars discounted at the foreign all
     creditors dollar interest rate.

     is the debt measured in U.S. dollars discounted at the foreign official
     creditors dollar interest rate.
44




     TABLE 8:       POINT ESTIIATES OF 00     a MID fi FOR THE DISCOVNTED DEBTS




                                     00


                D1
                                   —133.9           200.3          1.10
                                     (73.4)        (184.6)        (0.083)
                                   1462.8            52.6          0.92
                D
                                   (3651.5)         (43.0)        (0.073)

                D                  9691.9           667.4          0.78

                                   (7124.2)        (414.7)        (0.158)

                                   6952.0           566.8          0.87
                D;
                                   (8435.1)         (376.3)        (0.131)



*Stdard   errors are given in brackets below coefficient estimates.
                                                                           45



                              TABLE 9: uNIT ROOT TESTS FOR
                                                             AD1


                             fi)            gp)                    XIs)


                          —11.69           —3.28                   4.03

    Critical     (957.)   —17.9            —3.60                   7.24
             *
    Values       (997.)   —22.5            —4.38                   10.61

*
These critical values are for sample size 25, (see Table 7).
46




                   TABLE 10:         UNIT ROUT TESTS FOR NTD/CNP AND I


                                         fl)           ')            +,)
             NTD/GNP                    0.04          0.02          5.08
               *
              X                       —12.89         —3.16          4.39

              Critical      (957.)    —17.9          —3.60          7.24
                       **
              Values        (997.)    —22.5          —4.38          10.61


 tThe discount rate used is the yield on long—term government securities.

**These critical values are for sample size 25 (see Table 7).
                                                                            47




      TABLE 11: POINT ESTII4TES OF a0                     FOR NTD/CNP AND
                                            ,
                                                a1 AND fi


                                  00                 01             fi


               NTD/GNP             0.014             0.0034       0.9883
                                  (0.039)           (0.0015)     (0.552)


               x               —2681.56          —298.68          0.18
                               (9246.76)          (101.84)       (0.26)

Standard   errors are given in brackets below coefficient estimates.
48




     TABLE 12: DEBT—GKP RATIO STABILIZING TALlIES OF SEIGNIOUGE

                     PLUS AUGIENTED PUlLEY SURPLUS




                 d         507.          757.          100%
          7.—n

          17.              0.57,         0.757.        1.07.


          2                1.0           1.5           2.0

          3                1.5           2.25          3.0
