NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SPECIFIC CAPITAL, MOBILITY, AND WAGES:
WAGES RISE WITH JOB SENIORITY

Robert Topel

Working Paper Nb. 3294

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1990

Financial support from the NSF and the William Ladany Research Fund at the
University of Chicago is gratefully acknowledged. I have benefited from the
comments of Kevin M. Murphy, Joe Altonji, George Borjas, Charles Brown, David
Card, Henry Farber, Richard Freeman, Larry Katz, Sherwin Rosen. Machum
Sicherman, and an anonymous referee. I also thank workshop participants at
Arizona State, Chicago, Columbia, Harvard, Ohio State, Princeton, Santa
Barbara, Stony Brook, Texas A&M, and the Center for Naval Analyses. Will
Carrington provided able assistance. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3294
March 1990

SPECIFIC CAPITAL, MOBILITY. AND WAGES: WAGES RISE WITH JOB SENIORITY

ABSTRACT

The idea that wages rise relative to
foundation

alternatives

of the theory of specific human capital,

as

as

job seniority accumulates is the

well as other widely accepted theories of

compensation. The fact that persons with longer job tenures typically earn higher wages tends to
support these views, yet this çvidence ignores the decisions that have brought individuals to the

combination of wages, job tenure, and experience that are observed in survey data. Allowing for
sources of bias generated by these decisions, this paper uses longitudinal data to estimate a lower

bound on the avenge return to job seniority among adult men. I find that 10 years of current job
seniority raises the wage of the typical male worker in the U.S. by over 25 percent. This is an
estimate of what the typical worker would lose if his job were to end exogenously. Overall, the
evidence implies that accumulation of specific capital is an important ingredient of the typical

employment relationship, and of life-cycle earnings and productivity as well. Continuation of
these relationships has substantial specific value for workers.

Robert Topel
University of

Chicago
Graduate School of Business
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637

2

1. tntrodntloi
The idea that wages rise relative to alternatives Over the duration of a job is the

foundation for several important theories of productivity and compensation. Most prominently, a
key prediction of Becker's (1964) model of investment in specific human capital is that wages rise

with job tenure (seniority), leaving workers with a stake in the specific value of the employment
relationship. Related theories of agency in durable employment relations (Becker and Stigler,
1974; Lazear, 1981) also generate deferred compensation that encourages workers' effort and

improves performance.t Deferred compensation in the form of rising wages can also induce
profitable self-selection of heterogeneous workers that enhances productivity (Salop and Salop,

1976). Other contracting models (Harris and Holmstrom, 1982; Freeman, 1977) produce

qualitatively similar predictions for the shape of job—specific wage profiles. These ideas are
sufficiently established that the assumption of rising wage profiles has become an accepted point
of departure for subsequent work (e.g., Shleifer and Summers, 1988).

In all of these models, a major component of earning capacity is both unique to a
particular employment relationship and increasing in importance as the relationship ages. Senior

workers would suffer substantial wage losses if their jobs were to end. Thus a common theme is

specialization and, from a worker's perspective, the accumulation of job-specific capital. The

credibility of this view is enhanced by the common finding from survey data that workers with
longer job tenures typically earn more, which has been interpreted to mean that seniority raises

earnings for the typical worker, and by related evidence thAt turnover rates (quits and layoffs) are
strongly and negatively related to job tenure.2 These relationships are the empirical foundation

for the view that specific capital is an important ingredient of life-cycle earnings and
productivity in modern labor markets.
This interpretation of the evidence is open to criticism because it ignores the jobchanging decisions that have brought workers to the combinations of wages, job tenure, and

'See also Latest and Rosen (1981) and Rosen (1986).

2Mincer and jovanovic (1981) provide evidence on both points. Others include Borjas and
Rosen (1980), Bartel and Borjas (1981), Parsons (1977), and Mincer (1986, 1988).

3

market experience that are observed in survey data. These decisions can affect the relationship of
job tenure to wages in two ways. First, recent evidence indicates that many job-changing
decisions are the outcome of a career process by which workers are sorted into more durable and
productive jobs (Hall, 198Z Topel and Ward, 1988). High-wage jobs tend to survive, which can
mean that persons with long job tenures earn higher wages. The second possibility is that more
productive or able persons change jobs less often, for which there is also empirical support.
Again, persons with long job tenures will earn high wages. In either case, the wage earned by the

representative worker need not rise as tenure accumulates, yet in a cross section of workers those
with greater tenure earn more because tenure is correlated with unobserved characteristics of

workers or their jobs. Recent empirical research tends to support this view: adjusting for
unobserved factors in various ways, at least four recent studies have concluded that the true

returns to job-specific experience are minor.3 This reinterpretation of the evidence has found
widespread acceptance in subsequent literature (Mortensen, 1987, 1988; Rosen, 1987).

This conclusion has important implications for the way that economists view labor

markets. Using Becker's (1964) terminology, it means that human capital investments are mainly

general rather than firm-specific, so that the main component of workers' embodied skills is
portable among firms. Thus investment in human capital does not account for the prevalence of
"lifetime jobs" in the U.S. and other labor markets (Hall, 1982), or for the sharply lower turnover

rates of more senior workers. Further, in the absence of specific capital the costs of worker
displacement and unemployment are likely to be smalL even for relatively senior workers these
events should not have important effects on workers' wealth because previously accumulated skills

are portable. Finally, the independence of wages and job tenure undermines the entire
compensation literature that treats the timing of wages as a strategic device for affecting worker
productivity. Either the problems of moral hazard and asymmetric information that underlie this
literature are unimportant, or they are solved by other means.

3Altonji and Shakotko (1987), Abraham and Farber (1987), Marshall and Zarkin (1987), and
Topel (1986). Brown (1983) and Mincer (1988) provide direct evidence that job training enhances
wage growth.

4

As the title suggests, this paper provides strong evidence that wages do rise with job

seniority. I analyze longitudinal data on earnings and job histories for 1540 men drawn from the
first 16 waves (1968—83) of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). The main finding is that

the avenge returns to seniority are substantial. The estimates imply that 10 years ofjob seniority
raise the wage of the typical mate worker in the U.S. by over 25 percent relative to what he could
earn elsewhere. Both theory and related evidence imply that this estimate is a lower bound; the
true returns are probably larger. This estimate does not vary across broad occupational
categories—professionals and nonunion blue collar workers receive roughly similar returns, though

the presumed rationing of union jobs alters this conclusion for workers covered by collective

bargaining. For them, a job displacement that forces a move to the nonunion sector would reduce
earnings of a worker with 10 years of seniority by nearly 40 percent. This effect is much larger
than traditional estimates of union wage premiums (Lewis, 1986) because it reflects the full cost

of leaving the union sector, including forgone specific capital, and may account for the much

greater avenge durations of union jobs.
All of this evidence is based on a two-stage estimation procedure. The basic idea is that
within-job wage growth combines the returns to general and job—specific experience. Thus the

first stage estimates the determinants of wage growth, but is unable to distinguish separate returns
to general market experience and job-specific seniority. The second stage is a cross-sectional

comparison of the wages of workers who started new jobs at different points in their careen.
This stage yields an upper bound on the returns to general experience alone. In combination with
estimates from the first stage, this translates to a lower bound on the returns to seniority in the
typical employment relationship. In all cases that I have examined, the estimated returns to
seniority are substantial. Along the way, additional sources of bias are examined and are found to
have very minor effects on the results.
The paper is organized as follows. The next section provides preliminary evidence of
important effects of job seniority on wages, based on the observed wage changes of workers who

were displaced from their former jobs. Workers with longer prior job tenures suffer substantially
greater losses from displacement, as would occur if wages rise with the duration of employment.

S

The basic econometric framework is then developed and potential sources of bias in estimating

the returns to job seniority and experience are explicitly modeled. Section III describes the Panel
Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) data and methods of selecting the sample. The main empirical
results follow.

Because these results and conclusions are substantially different than those reported in

important recent studies, section V of the paper compares my procedures and findings to those of
Altonji and Shakotko (1987) and Abraham and Farber (1987), who also analyzed the PSID data. I

find that earlier efforts understate within-job wage growth, due both to significant problems of
measurement error and to methodological biases. Section VI concludes the paper.

II. Modelln the Returns to Experience and Job Tenure
A. Some Preliminary Evidence
Do wages depend on job seniority? The methods I develop below rely on panel data that
follow the evolution of wages within jobs, but suggestive evidence is provided by tabulating the
wage changes of workers whose jobs end exogenously. If job tenure raises wages relative to
alternatives, then more senior workers will suffer larger wage reductions when employment is

terminated. The estimates in Table 1 are based on the Displaced Workers Survey that was
administered with the January CPS in 1984 and 1986. The sample consists of 4,367 men who
report that they have been displaced From a job for economic reasons (layoffs or plant closings) in

the past five years, and who are currently employed. The table reports the mean change in log
weekly earnings for these workers, as weil as the avenge number of weeks unemployed since

displacement and the reason for termination. There is little doubt that displacement is costly the
average worker who has found new employment suffers a 14 percent reduction in earnings. More

importantly for present purposes, this reduction in avenge earning capacity is strongly related to
prior job tenure: those with longer jobs lose more, and they experience more unemployment after

displacement. Thus the "costs" of displacement are strongly related to prior job tenure.
There are two possible explanations for this rmding. One is that wages rise with
seniority, so workers with longer job tenures are truly more specialized than their junior

TABLE 1
WAGE CHANGES OF DISPLACED WORKERS

BY YEARS OF PRIOR JOB SENIORITY
JANUARY CPS 1984 AND 1986

Years of Seniority on Prior Jot,

Avenge change in
log

weekly wage

0-5

6-10

11-20

21+

-.095

—.223

—.282

-.439

—.135

(.010)

(.02!)

(.026)

(.07!)

(.009)

.352

.463
(.021)

.528

.750

.390

(.026)

(.043)

(.007)

24.54
(1.202)

26.66
(1.536)

31.79
(3.288)

20.4!
(.385)

Total

Percent displaced

by plant closing

(.008)
Weeks unemployed
since
displacement

18.69

(.413)

Noms.—Estiinates refer to male respondents between the ages of 20 and 60. Sample size is

4,367. Nominal data are deflated by the OMP price deflator for consumption expenditure.
Figures in parentheses are standard errors.

6
counterparts. The other is that long jobs paid higher wages throughout, and so tenure acts as a

proxy for the relative "quality" of the terminated job. Distinguishing these hypotheses requires
long
panel data on individuals' job histories, as below. A third hypothesis, that workers with

former jobs are more able, is not supported by these estimates. This finding is consistent with

evidence developed below, which shows that biases due to unobserved personal characteristics are
a minor concern.

B. A Prototype Model
A prototype model of wage determination is
(1)
where y denotes the (log) wage for individual i on job j at time s, I, is total labor market

experience, and 7', is current job tenure (seniority). Parameters $ and fi2 represent average
returns to an additional year of either experience or tenure, respectively, and are the parameters

of interest for the remainder of the paper. Other observables that may enter (1) are ignored for
ease of exposition. No generality is lost by also ignoring higher order terms in A' and T; they wilt
be introduced in the empirical analysis.
The most popular interpretation of (I) is that $1 represents the return on general human

capital (training and the like) that accumulates with experience, while $ represents the return on
accumulated job specific capital that would be lost if a job were to end. Biases in estimating
these returns are generated by covariance between the regressors and the unobservables, d. In
what follows my main concern will be with covariance that is the outcome of optimizing
behavior, as workers seek to locate and maintain a productive (high wage) employment

relationship. Thus decompose the unobservable as
(2)

-

where represena the stochastic component of wages that may be specific to a worker-firm pair

and p is a person-specific effect that accounts for unobserved differences in earning capacity

7

across

individuals (e.g., "ability"). The v,account for market-wide random shocks as well as

measurement error that is known to plague survey data. I assume that the components of (2) are
mutually orthogonal, and (for now) that p1 and v0 are orthogonal to the regressors in (I). Notice

that fixed "job effects" (#* — #) are a special case of (2) in which the specific value of a job does
not evolve over time. This component captures the notion of a "good match" in the sense of

wages that are higher than what a worker could obtain elsewhere. It will generate bias in
estimating (I) if is correlated with experience or job tenure. Thus let the auxiliary regression of
on the observables be

(3)

In light of (3), least squares applied to (I) will yield biased estimates of fi1 and fi since 6ft1 — fi +
b1 and E2 — ft2 + b. In much of what follows, I seek evidence on the importance of the
parameters b, and b3.

Theory offers some guidance on the signs of these effects. In light of job matching or
search theories of job mobility (e.g., Burdett, 1978; Jovanovic, l979ab, 1984) it is plausible that a

productive (high wage) match, once found, is unlikely to end. Given this, it is tempting to argue

that job quality, , and tenure are positively related (b2> 0) in survey data.4 This argument
ignores the fact that persons who change jobs gain, on avenge, from their move, and they are

included in the data at low job tenures.' In fact, the basic theory of search and matching implies
that b2 c 0—a comparison of wages for workers with different job tenures will understate the

returns to seniority—as the following argument demonstrates.

Consider identical individuals who sample new job offers from a stable offer distribution
G&). Offers arrive randomly at an exogenous rate. If the true values of fi and ft2 are zero, an
optimal job changing policy is to accept any offer that exceeds the wage on the current job. Thus

'Most matching models generate wage dispersion from the assumption that individuals'
productivities vary among tasks. A contrasting "segmented markets" view is that wage
differentials merely reflect the existence of "good" and "bad" jobs, for unspecified reasons (e.g.,
Doeringer and Piore, 1971). Which of these is true does not affect the following analysis.
'Lang (1987) makes a related point.

8

high-wage jobs survive because they are less likely to be dominated by an alternative offer.
Under these conditions, the current wage of any individual is the maximum offer received since

entering the market. The expected value of this maximum clearly rises with experience since the
number of offers sampled increases. Thus b1 > 0. In contrast, current job tenure only indicates
the order in which the maximum offer was receive& persons with high tenure received their best

offer earlier. But the distribution of the maximum offer (the first order statistic) depends only on
the number of offers received (experience) and not on their order (tenure).' This means that
EQIX,T) — £(y$X) and there is no sample selection on tenure (b2 — 0).' In this case experience is a

sufficient statistic for the distribution of wages and there is no bias in estimating $2. But things

are different if ftp.0.
If $2> 0 acceptable new job offers must compensate workers for the forgone returns to
tenure on the current job, so there is less mobility than when $2 — 0. Since a regression compares

conditional means, the issue is whether E(x,r+l) • EQIX,fl + 8,. That is, do persons with one
extra year of job tenure earn a wage that is higher, on avenge, by $,? With $2> 0 some otherwise acceptable offers have been rejected. Inclusion of these marginal workers reduces the
average wage of "stayers." Further, persons who change jobs require higher average wage offers

to induce their move. This raises the avenge wage of movers. Both of these selection effects

imply E(yJX,T+l) - E($jX,T) <$ so least squares applied to (I) must underestimate the return to
seniority.' Thus a basic matching technology with rising within-job wage profiles implies b1> 0

but b, < 0. Yet the notion that "good jobs survive" still holds. Let I, denote experience at the

'For it offers received, the density of the maximum offer is f(y) — G(y)g(j), which
depends only on n. With random (Poisson) arrival of offers, the expected number of offers is
proportional to time in the market (experience).
'Formally, the absence of a tenure effect in this case requires tha experience effects be
represented by a sequence of dummy variables for each level of experience.
'The selection is easiest to see in a two-period case. If-workers receive one offer per
period, then exchangeability implies that E(,yy,> y,) — E(y11y1> y. If wages grow by ft among

stayers.
thenE(y1jy1+$>y,)cgQ.jy1+ficy,). ThusE(y2+$ly1+$>y-E(yy,>y1+$)cfi.
Other

factors may increase or decrease the bias. For example, mobility corn strengthen the bias
because acceptable offers must be better to induce a move. Endogenous search intensity weakens
the bias because persons with high wages are less likely to sample.

9

start of

a job, so I. I, + T. Then (3) is equivalent to —

1b1 + T(b1 + b2). Thus the durability

of high wage jobs means that b1 + b2> O, so the sum of the returns to experience and tenure will

be biased up in a wage regression on survey data.
In light of this analysis, there can be no presumption that standard regression techniques
applied to cross-sectional data will overestimate the returns to tenure. Optimizing search
behavior generally implies the opposite, though there are other sources of selection that may

reinforce or offset these effects. For example, mobility costs tend to reinforce b2 c 0 by reducing
the set of acceptable wage often, while costly search may cause b5> 0 because only persons with

relatively poor employment matches are actively searching. Panel data on individuals' careers
provides leverage for isolating these effects, to which I turn next.

III. A Two-Stan Estimailpu Procedure
Panel data from sources like the PSID provide information on wages at different stages of

a single job, as well as on different jobs for a single individual. Given this, within-job wage
growth can be studied from the first differences of (I) for persons who do not change jobs, which
eliminates fixed job and individual effects:
(4)

since X * AT — I between periods of a single job. If e - ç has mean zero, then (4) will yield
a consistent estimate of average within—job wage growth, $ + P2.° Given (4), an estimate of fl1

can be obtained from initial wages on new jobs:
(5)

'Topel and Ward (1990) find direct evidence for both b1 > 0 and b1 + b2> 0. They estimate
that approximately one third of wage growth during the first ten years in the labor market is due
to job-changing activity. Controlling directly for unobserved personal heterogeneity, they also
find that wage increases and transitions to higher-paying jobs sharply reduce job mobility.

'°This is assumed for now, though mobility decisions may also generate selection in (5),
because only acceptable values of & are observed. This point is examined in section IV.d.

l0
where X is initial experience on the job. The error term in (5) is non-random because only
acceptable new job offers are observed. For example,

and A'0 are positively correlated if

expected match quality rises with time in the market. One approach to this problem is to
explicitly model the mobility decisions that underlie this selection bias, in which case standard
sample-selection corrections (e.g., Heckman, 1976) might be applied. With this strategy,

identification relics crucially on distributional assumptions (wage offers must be normally
distributed), as well as on other strong restrictions (Topel, 1986).

A more robust alternative is simply to note the selection bias implicit in (5) and to treat

(8 + fl2)

—

as

an estimate of the return to seniority. If fr is biased up, this two-step procedure

yields a lower bound on the return to seniority. More generally, since A' a A'0 + T model (1) may

be rewritten as
(6)
where B a $1 + fir Using (6), a two-step model is given by the first differences of within-job

wage growth (4), and

y- TE—181+e

(7)
where S • fi +
tenure, derived

is the consistent first-step estimator of the sum of the returns to experience and

from (4), and e e + T(R - 5). As a second-step model, equation (7) is

preferable to (5) because it makes use of data from all periods of all jobs.
The two-step model given by (4) and (7) yields consistent estimates of fi1 and P1 only if

£ x:€ — 0. This condition will not hold if job matching is important. Nevertheless, we may
calculate the expected values of the two-step estimators of $ and $2 up to the unknown
parameters b1 and br Applying least squares to (4) and (7), some algebra establishes that these are
(Ba)

E1ft1—fi1+ b1+111(b1+b3)

(Sb)

E—$- b1-,1Ab1+b1),

11

where 1 is the least squares coefficient from a regression of tenureon initial experience, 1e
Equations (Sa,b) indicate that the two-step procedure yields biased estimators of the

returns to market experience and job tenure. The biases are equivalent, but of opposite signs,

because the sum $1 + $ is consistently estimated from the flrn-step model. If systematic job
changing is important (b,> 0, b, + b2> 0), productive employment relationships are located later

in the typical worker's career. Then (8a) implies that E > 0,—the estimated returns to
experience are biased up because they include the return to changing jobs—while (Sb) implies E&

<ft for the same reason. Thus the two-step model establishes a lower bound on the avenge

return to seniority. Notice in particular the difference between the bias in (Sb) and the least
squares bias, br in estimating ft. Though earlier discussion indicates that the sign of b3 is not well
established by theory, the bias in (8b) is negative so long as "better" jobs are located as time in

the labor market accumulates. Virtually any model of optimal job changing has this property.
There are two possible caveats to this conclusion. First, if job changing is the outcome

of optimizing behavior for workers then jobs offering low wage growth may not survive. Since
equation (4) applies to an employment relationship that survived from date i—I to 1, avenge wage

growth in this sample of "stayers" may exceed the rate of growth in the population of all jobs. In
this case $2 could be overestimated. Second, persons who change jobs frequently may be less

productive, on average, than persons in stable employment relations. Then 1, is lower for able
persons—they started their current jobs earlier—end so,è, is biased down. Again, ft could be

overestimated. I provide evidence on both of these effects below.

IV. Estimation
A. The Data
The procedure described above is applied to panel data from the first 16(1968-1983)

waves of the PSID." Complete sample selection criteria are reported in the appendix. For the
estimates that follow, attention is restricted to white males between the ages of 18 and 60

"The data were kindly supplied by Joe Altonji and Nachum Sicherman.

12

(inclusive) who were not self employed, employed in agriculture, or employed by the government.
All individuals are from the random, non-poverty sample of the P511) (SEO observations are

deleted). The data analyzed here consists of 13128 job-years on 1340 individuals and 3228 jobs.
Summary statistics and definitions for all variables used in estimation are reported in appendix

Table Al. A complete listing of all programs and output underlying both data construction and
results in this paper will be supplied at cost for one year after the date of publication.
The wage data refer to (log) avenge hourly earnings in calendar years 1967-82. Since
the parameters in (1) refer to relative earnings differences at a point in time, the usual regression
strategy is to control for aggregate real wage growth and inflation by including year-specific

intercepts. There are two problems with this in the current context First, cross sections of the
PSID data may not be representative of the underlying population at each point in time. The
records available for analysis include households that participated in the survey at the last survey

datç here 1983. Households that left the survey before 1983 are not in the data. Thus even if the
1983 sample is representative, past cross-sections based on these households will reflect the

sample selection rule that causes households to remain in the PSID. Second, in following any

fixed population in panel data, time is not statistically exogenous for the same reason that

experience isn't average match quality rises with time in the market. In this situation, treating
time effects as exogenous may lead to an understatement of the return to seniority and an

overstatement of temporal wage growth." To avoid these problems, I deflated the wage data by a
wage index for white males calculated from the annual demographic (March) riles of the Current
Population Survey (see Murphy and Welch, 1988). This index nets out both real aggregate wage

growth and changes in any aggregate price level (the GNP price deflator for consumption was
used), so that wage data from different time periods of the panel are expressed in comparable

units. Values for the wage index are reported in the appendix.

UIn fact, avenge real wages rise slightly more rapidly in the P5W than in random samples
of the CPS. A vector of year dummies was included inc standard log wage regression as
specified below. The year effects indicated that P5W wages grew by about 7.0 percent relative to
CPS cross sections during the 1970s. When the same regression was applied to the subsample of
individuals who entered the data in 1968-69 (n - 6929), the time effects were elbninted. Thus,
there is no evidence that wages of individual P5W cohorts grew more rapidly than the population.

13

A key step in the analysis was the construction of a consistent measure of current job
tenure. Because of a number of sources of measurement error, reported tenure in the PSID data
is not reliable. It is often recorded in intervals of several years, and recorded values are often
inconsistent between successive years of the same job. This measurement error is magnified in
the first step model, which uses changes in seniority between successive years to estimate
parameters of wage growth. The problem is acute when higher-order terms (T',

)

are added to

the model.'3 To correct for these problems, the measure of job tenure used here relies on the fact
that tenure must rise by one year in each year of a job: For jobs that start within the panel,
tenure is started at zero and incremented by one each year. For jobs that were in progress at the

beginning of an individual's record, current tenure is measured relative to the maximum reported

during the job, again imposing the restriction that tenure change by one each year. Within jobs,
the resulting sequence of measured job tenures is perfectly correlated with labor market
experience, as required.'

B. Wan Growth Within Jobs
If the evolution of wages within jobs follows a random walk, then the residuals of the
wage growth model are serially independent and least squares applied to (4) is an efficient
estimator of fi1 + $3. Appendix B examines the time series properties of within-job wage changes,

yielding two important conclusions. First, there is no evidence of positive serial correlation in

within-job wage innovations, c -

This is a strong finding, since one might expect that some

types of jobs offer steeper wage profiles than others. The lack of serial correlation implies that
heterogeneity in permanent rates of wage growth among jobs is empirically unimportant. Second,

I find that the within-job evolution of the wage has a strong permanent component that closely

'Eurther details on these points are appended.
'l'here are many cases of ambiguity about job endings. For example, reported tenure
within a job may fall to zero, and then rise smoothly. These cases suggest unrecorded changes of
employer. These "jobs" were deleted, but doing so had no material effect on the results. See the
appendix for details.

14

approximates a random walk, so the residuals satisfy
(9)
where

is

serially independent with mean zero. Because of (9), values of 'lp reflect

"permanent" changes in a worker's expected lifetime wealth. For example1 these may reflect
uncertain returns on investments in human capital, or simply new information about a worker's

productivity. It follows that if these changes are firm—specific, then they are rents that will

affect future job-changing decisions. In contrast, if they mainly represent changes in general
human capital then future job mobility will be unaffected by them. These possibilities have

different implications for interpreting the estimated returns to seniority, to which I will return
below.
Given these findings, Table 2 reports various specifications for first-stage models of
within job wage growth. Generalizing the earlier discussion, these and all subsequent models

allow for higher order effects of experience and tenure on wages (e.g., fl, the effects of which
are identified from within-job wage changes (e.g., r a 2X - I). As above, the model is
underidentified by one parameter because linear terms in experience and tenure are perfectly

correlated within jobs. Thus the first coefficient in column (I) (.1242) is an estimate of th +
for new entrants to the labor force (I — 0). Wage profiles are concave in both experience and
tenure, though the usual quadratic specification is insufficient to describe the data: after an initial

period of rapid growth, wage profiles flatten out, which is captured in column (3) by quartics in
both experience and tenure.'5 To illustrate the impact of job tenure on wage changes within a

job, at the bottom of the table I report predicted wage growth for a worker with ten years of
market experience and varying job tenures. Wage growth clearly declines as tenure accumulates,

holding experience constant, a pattern that is difficult to reconcile with the idea that tenure has a
negligible effect on wage levels.

'5As Welch (1979) points out, the usual quadratic underestimates wage growth for young
workers. Murphy and Welch (1989) also advocate a quartic specification for the experience

profile.

TABLE 2

Models of Annual Within-Job Wage Growth

PSID White Males, 1968-83
(Dependent Variable is Change in Log Real Wage, Mean — .026)

Model
(1)
A Tenure

(2)

(3)

.1242

.1265

(.0161)

.1258

(.0162)

(.0162)

-.0518

-.4592

(.0178)

(.1080)

ATenure2(x 102)

A Tenure' (x l0)

.1846

(.0526)

A Tenure' (x 101)

-.0245
(.0079)
-.6052
(.1430)

A Experience2 (x 102)

A Experience' (x 10')
A Experience' (x 10')

-.6144

-.4067

(.1430)

(.1546)

.1460

.1620

.0989

(.0482)

(.0485)

(.05 17)

.0231

.0151

.0089

(.0054)

(.0055)

(.0058)

.022

.023

.025

SE

.218

.218

.218

Observations

8,683

Predicted Within-Job Wage Growth by Years of Job Tenure
(Workers with 10 Years of Labor Market Experience)
Tenure
1

Predicted
Wage Growth (%)

.068

2

.060

3

.052

4
.046

5
.041

.6
.037

7

.033

8

.030

9
.028

10

.026

Note.--Estimates based on within-job first differences of log avenge hourly earnings.

Standard errors are in parentheses.

15

The results that follow are based on the model in column (3) of Table 2.

C. Estimated Returns to Market Exoeriertce and lob Tenure
The main results for the separate returns to experience and tenure are reported in Table
3. In implementing the second step model that underlies these results, consistent estimates of $1+
fi, and the parameters of higher order terms in experience and tenure are taken from the within-

job growth model in column (3) of Table 2. Denote these terms by x. Subtracting xt from both
sides of the wage equation and letting F denote the vector of other factors (education, etc.) that
affect wages yields the second-step model

i,,- xt—X81+ F'+e

(10)

which is in the form of equation (7). As shown in column (I) of the table, the estimated value of

$ from implementing (10) is about seven percent. This estimator is substantially smaller than the
value of $ + fl estimated from within job growth, which is reproduced in column (2). The
remainder is the main effect of job tenure on wages. fit. I estimate that in the first year of the
typical new job, the real wage rises by over five percent ($— .0545) due to the accumulation of
job-specific experience alone.

Cumulative returns to various lengths of job tenure are reported in the bottom panel of

the table. The estimates are based on the main effect of $— .0545, together with the concavity of
the wage profile implied by the effects of higher order terms in Table 2. The returns to seniority
are large: I estimate 10 years of job seniority increases the wage of the typical worker by 28
percent (e.3e - I), relative to alternatives. For comparison, I also report estimates of the wage
profile generated by OLS applied to (1). These effects are larger, though not dramatically so.

Since I have argued that the two step procedure generates a lower bound on the true returns, the
OLS estimates may actually be close to the truth.

Are these results reasonable? An appropriate interpretation of the estimated returns to
seniority in Table 3 is that they represent the reduction in earning capacity that would be
suffered by a person whose job ends for exogenous reasons. Accordingly, these results imply that

TABLE 3

-

Second-Step Estimated Main Effects of Experience (8k) and
Tenure (fit) on Log Real Wages; and Least Squares Bias
in Wage Growth (b1 + b2)
Experience

Effect
$1

.0713
(.0181)

Within-Job
Wage Growth

fi+fi

.1258
(.0161)

Tenure
Effect

Wage Growth
Bias

.0545
(.0079)

.0020
(.0004)

Estimated Cumulative Return to iob Tenure

5 years
Two—Step Model

OLS

.1793
(.0235)

10 years
.2459

(.0341)

IS years

20 years

.2832
(.0411)

.3375
(.0438)

.2313

.3002

.3203

.3563

(.0098)

(.0105)

(.0110)

(.0116)

Notes.--Estimated within-job wage growth (fit + fit) from Table 2,
column (3). Dependent variable for other estimates is log real
hourly earnings less the effects of variables that are consistently
estimated from the within-job wage growth model. Other
regressors in the second-step model (10) include years of
completed schooling, marital status, residence in an SMSA, current
disability, union membership, and eight indicators for census
region of residence. Estimated cumulative returns are based on the
main effect of job tenure (82 — .0545) plus the effects of higherorder terms in tenure shown in column (3) of Table 2. Standard
errors (in parentheses) are corrected to reflect sampling error in
the first-step estimates. N — 10,685.

16

a person with IS years of current jeb tenure would suffer an immediate 33 percent (e - I)
wage loss if his job ended exogenously. This is the experiment underlying the estimated losses of
displaced workers in Table I, which shows an average wage reduction for workers in this tenure
category of about 32 percent. Despite obvious differences in the composition of the two samples,

the similarity of these estimates is gratifying. The results here also indicate that workers may
bounce back from these losses fairly rapidly relative wage growth is most rapid at the beginning
of new jobs, so initial wage losses would vastly overstate changes in lifetime wealth caused by a

job termination.

A final point about these estimates is noteworthy. Though the two step procedure cannot
identify the bias terms b1 and b1 separately, their sum is clearly identified since fi + fi is

consistently estimated. In fact, b1

+ b2 is

the component of wage growth that is caused by

systematic job changing. And since E e

+ T(b1 + b1), the

notion that "good jobs survive" is

equivalent to b1 + b2> 0. This sum can be estimated directly by reinserting the term T(b1 + b1) on

the right side of equation (10) and applying least squares. The resulting estimate, shown in

column (4) of Table , is a wage growth bias of about two tenths of one percent per year.
Finally, from (8) the bias in the two-step estimators of $ and fi is
(11)

A regression of current tenure on initial experience yields

— -.25, so

the second term in (II)

is -.25x(.0020) — .0005, or one twentieth of one percentage point per year. This means that the

bias in the two-step estimator of fit, the return to job tenure, is virtually independent of any
covariance of job tenure with the unobservables, that is of the unsigned value of b? Since ba?. 0,
the downward bias in the estimated return to seniority is solely due to improvement in match
quality with total labor market experience.

D. Other Sources of Bias
Under the stated assumptions, the estimates in Table 3 are a lower bound on the avenge
returns to job seniority. Other sources of bias can weaken this conclusion, and at least two are

17

worth investigating. One possibility is that the sample used to estimate

$ + $ is weights toward

jobs with unusually high wage growth, which may affect the interpretation of the return to

seniority. The second possibility is that more able or productive persons are also less mobile, so

estimated returns reflect the longer avenge job durations of high wage individuals. 1 treat these

in turn.

Selection Bias lii Wage Growth
The cumulative returns shown in Table 3 are estimates of job-specific

wage premiums

that would be earned by a typical worker as he accumulates seniority. The most popular
interpretation of these returns is that workers anticipate rising compensation over the life of a
job, as in contract models like Becker (1964), Lazear (1981), or Salop and Salop (1976). A second

interpretation is also possible, however, since jobs that yield high wage growth may be more

likely to survive. In this case returns to seniority are realized period by period, though they may

not be anticipated at the start of a job.
To illustrate this point, rewrite the wage growth model (4)
(4')
where q, is the "permanent" increment to the wage defined in (9). For a job that ends between

dates i-I and 1, the wage y,, that would have been earned up to (is not recorded, but it may have
been known by workers. if a substantial component of

,j is firm specific, then knowledge of q

wilt affect mobility decisions, and so jobs with high values of y

- y.1 will be more likely to

survive. This means that average wage growth among workers who do not change jobs may
overstate growth in the population, which is to say that Eq > 0 in the sample. An estimate of fi +

$ based on wage changes within jobs includes this selection effect1 which would cause a
corresponding overestimate of the anticipated returns to seniority, $' by the preceding methods.

As a practical matter, both $> 0 and Eq > 0 imply that wages rise with seniority. Senior
workers earn more, relative to alternatives, than they did when they started their jobs. This
means that previous conclusions are not materially affected if Eq, 0, but also that it is difficult

18

to distinguish these alternatives in the data. The difference in the interpretation of the returns to
seniority is of some theoretical interest, however. Some headway in distinguishing these explaintions is possible by examining the relationship between current wage growth and subsequent job
changing.
The key condition for E > 0 to be quantitatively important is that a substantial

component of q must be firm specific.'6 Then a large value of '. has a permanent effect on the
value of a job, reducing mobility in period I and all subsequent periods)7 For example, since the
wage follows a random walk, job-changing decisions in period t+l are based on

+

and the

expected value of ,y must be smaller for jobs that end in t+l than for those that survive to later
periods. More generally, when , is firm specific the expected value of

is increasing in Rr the

remaining life of the job measured from date I. Thus,
(12)

0< E(qJR,> 0) .c E(qJR,> 1) < E(JA1> 2).
Evidence on the inequalities in (12) is presented in Table 4. The first panel shows the

relationship between the remaining life of a job and current wage growth, after controlling for
observables. The estimate in row (1) shows that there is no linear relationship between these

variables. Row (2) is less restrictive, allowing separate effects for jobs that end in year t+l, t+2,
and so on. Since the omitted category is jobs that survive six or more years, all of these effects
should be negative but decreasing in magnitude if (12) is satisfied. This pattern does not hold,
though there is minor evidence that jobs that end in periods t+l and :+2 have slightly lower
growth.

The bottom panel of Table 4 makes the test more stringent. If high-growth jobs tend to

"The decision to change jobs depends on the job specific component of an alternative offer,
#, relative to innovations to job-specific capital on the current job. i. Mobility occurs when is larger than some critical value, say k. If # and q are independent normal random variables,
the expected value of ip in the sample of nonmovers is 501* - c k) — o/fr3+o4)' f(k)/F(k),
where 1(k) is the standard normal distribution function. Thus the amount 01 selection depends on
the relative magnitudes of e4 and

a.

"Timing is also importsnt. Even when'7 is firm specific, it may take time to locate an
acceptable new job. Then , affects mobility only after period 1, and estimates of fi, + fi based
on (4') are unbiased (E — 0).

TABLE 4

The Effects of Selection Bias in Wage Growth
on the Estimated Returns to Job Seniority
Panel A:
Relationship between Remaining Job
Duration and Current Wage Growth

Remaining
Job
Duration
(Years)

(1)

Job Ends in Periot
1+1

t+2

-.012

-.015

(.012)

(.013)

1+3

1+4

:+5

.0006
(.0010)

(2)

.013

.012

(.013)

(.014)

.020

.004

(.015)

(.017)

Panel B:

Returns to Job Seniority Based on
Various Remaining Job Durations in First-Step Model
Remaining Job Duration in Estimating Wage Growth (Yearsi

MainEffects
Experience (ftp)

>0

>1

>3

>5

.0713

.0792
(.0204)

.0716
(.0245)

.0607
(.0292)

.0546
(.0089)

.0559

(.0109)

.0584
(.0132)

(.0181)

Tenure ($)

.0545

(.0079)

Estimated

Tenure Profile

5 years

10 years
15 years

20 years

.1793

.1725

.1703

.1815

(.0235)

(.0265)

(.0319)

(.0379)

.2459
(.0341)

.2235
(.0376)

.218 I

(.0437)

.2330
(.0514)

.2832
(.0411)

(.0445)

.2503
(.0504)

(.0594)

.3375
(.0438)

.2865
(.0469)

.3232
(.0531)

.3066
(.0647)

.2439

.2565

Nons.--j,, Panel A. otb.r ngresson an — reported In Table 3. Paa.aMIng job duration Is the numb.: of lean
fronts to Sb. last obe.rv.d year of Sb. job. An Interaction of inag duration with a dummy for jobs that censor at the
end of 0*. panel I. also included, but It bad no effect on Sb. results. In row (3) the omitted category I. jobs that tasted six
or mon yeen beyond the current date. In panelS, the fins-step models mo jobs with different r..fllaing job durations.
For example. the last column estimate wags growth at tfrom jobs that pint.. five or mars yean beyond s. Standard
errors are In parentheses.

19

survive, then the inequalities (12) imply that estimates of the tint-step model of wage growth

based on more durable jobs wiU overstate $ + $, which will increase the estimated returns to job

seniority. I find no evidence for this effect. In fact, tenure profiles estimated from jobs with
longer remaining durations—five or more years beyond the current date in the last column—are

virtually the same as the full-sample estimates reproduced in the first column of the table.
Overall, I have not been able to find any evidence that selection on i, plays an important role in
affecting estimates of wage growth or the returns to seniority. This evidence favors substantial,
anticipated returns to seniority in the typical employment relationship.

Ability Bias In the Returns to Job Tenure
To this point I have maintained the assumption that unobserved characteristics of

individuals, p1. are unrelated to observed job tenure. Yet an alternative rationale for the positive
relationship between job tenure and wages is that workers' unobserved productivitie! are
negatively related to mobility. For example, more able (high wage) persons may change jobs less

often, so tenure and wages will be positively correlated in survey data even if $ — 0. Evidence
suggestive of this is that education, an observed element of human capital, is negatively related to

job changing. Alternatively, if turnover is costly to employers then the net productivity of stable
workers will be greater, and employers wilt pay more to obtain them. In either case, unobserved
characteristics that raise wages (pJ are positively correlated with observed tenure, which raises the
estimated returns to job seniority.
Because p, is a fixed effect, covariance of p with the regressors in (I) wilt not bias

estimators of $ + $2' which is based on wage changes. Yet estimates of $ and $ from the second
step model (7) will be biased if p and initial experience, X, are correlated. In this case, the bias
in the estimated return to seniority from the second step model is
(13)

where

—

(19'Xj'X,'p. If high-p persons change jobs less often, then on avenge they started

their current jobs earlier. This implies i,, <0, so the second step estimator of $may overstate

20

the returns to seniority.
The importance of this bias can be evaluated if there is an intrumental variable that is

uncorrelated with the fixed effects1 Un but correlated with A'r A plausible candidate is Lola!
experience. A'. Specifically, I assume that the distribution of g, is unrelated to experience
(successive

cohorts of workers are equally able and equally mobile) so that E(X'p) — 0. With this

condition, I may be used as an instrumental variable for

I, in estimating the second step model

(7). The resultingbias in the IV estimator of fi is

Efi7fi2b1-

(14)

where 1,,

is

"
•

the

least squares coefficient from a regression of tenure (7) on experience (X). This
bias in the IV estimator is independent of the distribution of Pr Further, 're. • .50 in the data and
previous results imply Li, + b1> 0 (see Table 3). Thus the right hand side of (14) is negative, so

that $7 provides a lower bound on $ even when ii, and tenure are correlated. If p, and tenure are
correlated, then the estimated return to seniority will be lower when i is used as an instrument

for X in the second step model."
Estimates of the returns to seniority when A' is used as an instrument in (7) differ

trivially from those reported above. The estimated main effect of seniority

falls from .055

per year, reported in Table 3, to .052 under IV. Over a 10 year horizon this implies a difference

of only 3 percent in the cumulative return to seniority, relative to the 25 percent cumulative
return shown above. This is fairly strong evidence that unobserved personal characteristics do not

account for the substantialreturns to seniority shown in Table 3.

• 0. Thus
"Comparison of equations (16) and (IS) implies that Efr7 c E&<fi when
least squares is the preferred estimator in (7) if unobserved characteristics and tenure are
uncorrelated.

21

E. Occunational Differences in Wage Profiles

All of the preceding results refer to workers in an array of occupations, ranging from
laborers to highly paid professionals. It is not hard to imagine technological or other differences
across occupations that would generate corresponding differences in wage profiles. For example,
investments in specific skills may be more important among professionals, while collective
bargaining agreements may limit the ability of employers to backload wages in unionized

environments. Thus the preceding results may be sensitive to aggregation across diverse groups.
Because of sample size limitations in the PSID it is not possible to examine these issues in fine

detail. Instead, evidence is presented for three broad categories of workers. Among craftsmen,
operatives, and laborers I treat union and non-union workers separately." The third category
consists of professional and service occupations. I finesse issues of promotion and the like by
categorizing all periods of a job on the basis of the reported occupation in its first observed
period.

Estimates of the time series properties of tge changes showed only minor differences
across groups. Briefly, the earlier finding that wages follow a random walk within jobs also holds

for each of the occupational groups. The only difference worth noting is a substantially smaller
variance in wage changes among unionized workers. Since collective bargaining arrangements
normally set wages according to scale, this finding is plausible.
Table 5 shows estimated main effects of experience and job tenure, as well as cumulative

returns to various levels of tenure, for each occupational group. The main finding is that
estimated returns to tenure are quite similar across broad occupational categories. Differences in
returns between white and blue collar professions are trivial, as are differences in returns between

union and non-union workers within blue collar professions. In fact, aggregation of the three
wage profiles cannot be rejected.

"Jobs were categorized as "union" if the respondent indicated union membership in more
than half of the years of the job. Other definitions were alsofried, but the results were not
sensitive to these changes.

t

I

TABLE 5

Estimated Returns to Job Seniority by Occupational
Category and Union Status, Two-Step Estimator

Main Effects
Experience (fir)
Tenure (fl1)

Professional
and Service

Craftsmen. Oneratives. Laborers
Nonunion
Union

(.0288)

.1066
(.0342)

.0592
(.0338)

.0601
(.0127)

.0513
(.0146)

.0399
(.0147)

.1309
(.0254)

.1520

.0992

(.0311)

(.0297)

.0707

Relative to:
Nonunion
Union
Sector
Sector

Estimated Cumulative

Returns to Tenure at
5 years

.1887
(.0388)

.1577
(.0428)

(.0437)

.2299
(.0931)

10 years

.2400
(.0560)

.2073
(.0641)

.2033
(.0620)

.3286
(.0854)

15 years

.2527
(.0656)

.2480
(.0802)

.2384
(.0739)

.4111
(.0855)

.2733
(.0783)

.4904
(.0957)

20 years
Observations

.2841

.3295

(.0663)

(.0914)

4946

2642

.1401

2741

Notes--The effects of higher-order terms in experience and tenure (X1, K', X, T2 r, 7")
are estimated from models of within—job wage growth in each occupation. These are not reported
separately. Other second-step regressors are as listed in the note to Table 4. For unionworkers
the column labeled "union sector" measures f(X,T) - y"(X,0), so it is the wage premium relative
to starting a new union job. The column labeled "nonunion sector" measures y"(X,T) so it is the premium relative to a new nonunion job.

22

Conceptually, the cumulative returns shown in Table $ measure the return to T years of

job seniority in sector i as y'(X,T) - (X,O); the difference between the wage at tenure 7' and
what could be earned on the typical alternative job in the same sector. This comparison may be
inappropriate for union members. Since union jobs (u) are normally rationed, the relevant
alternative may be employment on a nonunion job (n). In this case the correct estimate of the

return to T years of seniority is flX,T) - fiX,0). This estimate will differ from the return to
seniority for unionized workers because (i) unionized workers earn a premium that is lost in
moving to the nonunion sector, and (ii) the returns to total market experience differ between the
union and nonunion sectors. This point is demonstrated by comparing the two columns of
cumulative returns for union members. When measured relative to another union job, y'(X,O),
estimated returns are essentially identical to those in other sectors. But measured relative to the

nonunion alternative, y"(X,O), returns are both larger and risinga. According to the estimates in

the last column, the typical union worker with IS years of seniority would suffer a 50 percent
(e41' - I) wage cut if his current job were to end and he was forced to seek employment in the

nonunion sector. This estimate of what a union worker would lose if his job were to end

combines the union seniority effect. f(X,T) - f(X,0). and the union wage premium for new

workers, f(X,0) -

V. Comparisons wIth Other Research

My results and conclusions are substantially different from those reported in recent
research. Specifically, the PSID data have also been analyzed by Altonji and Shakotko (1987) and

The typical union member in these data started his job at X • 10 years of labor market
experience. For these calculations, I assume 2', — 10 and allow both experience and tenure to
accumulate from that point. Thus a person with 5 years of job tenure also has 15 years of labor
market experience, and so on. Effects of other regressors (education, etc.) also differed between
union and nonunion jobs. The calculations refer to a person with avenge characteristics, so these
differences are reflected in the estimates.

'A referee has pointed out that an estimate of the union wage premium at variouslevels of
tenure is the difference in the cost of displacement for union and nonunion workers, assuming

that all find nonunion jobs. This is (y'(X,T) - y'(X,O) - ) - (y'XX,T) - y'(X,O)) — /(X,T) y(X,T). This is the difference between column 4 and column 2 of Table 5. Notice that this
measure of the union wage premium rises with tenure.

23

by Abraham and Farber (1987), who conclude that the true returns to job seniority are minor.
This difference in results cannot be attributed to the samples analyzed, since they are virtually the

same. An accounting of the reasons for our different findings is therefore warranted.
Altonji and Shakotko apply an instrumental variables (IV) procedure to a model like (1).

They note that the deviation of job tenure from its observed, job-specific avenge is orthogonal

to factors that are fixed within a job. If job effects are not time varying (# — #) then
+ p1)

• 0, and so Or, •

-

- T is a valid instrumental variable.S They therefore estimate a

version of (1) by instrumental variables, using Z — (I, DT)

as

instruments. It turns out that this

IV estimator is a variant of the two—step procedure outlined above, which facilitates comparison.
Let FE —

(X,T), so the instrumental variables estimator of (I) is (fr, ft7)' — (Z'W'Ty. Writing

out these moments, some algebra establishes that
(I Sa)

fly - (UDT) 4rD'D,

(lSb)

r— (rx0)-'r(Y -

Notice that (ISa) is simply the least squares estimator of B —fit + $2 using deviations from within—

job means rather than wage changes as a first-step model. This estimator of B is consistent when

there are fixed job effects. The estimator of $ in (lSb) is equivalent to using I. X + T as an
instrument for X in the second-step model (7). Given a consistent estimator ftof 8, this IV
procedure is equivalent to the test used above for the importance of individual effects.
Straightforward calculations yield

(16)

where

K ft — £ $' +

- t,rXbt +

ft is the second-step estimator of fi found by applying least squares to (7), and where '7

and 7.a,,- are the least squares coefficients from regesssions of tenure (T) on I or X respectively.

flhe preceding evidence that the evolution of the wage within jobs follows a random walk
is not consistent with fixed job effects unless all of the random walk component occurs in genera
human capital.

24
Empiricaily, y,. — .50 and

• -.25.

Since b1 + b2> 0, this means that the IV procedure

produces a greater upward bias in the return to experience, and so a greater downward bias in the

return to tenure. This is one reason for the small tenure effects estimated by Altonji and
Shakotko.

A second reason for our different results is measurement error in recorded job tenure.
As I noted earlier, job tenure in the PSID contains a large number of inconsistencies. For

individuals used here, the range of within-job, year to year changes in recorded job tenure is
from -3! years to 7.5 years, and 36% of all changes in tenure fall below the theoretical value of
1.0. Because tenure is recorded in intervals, many jobs last several years with no change in

reported tenure. This measurement error is magnified when within-job changes in tenure are
used to estimate parameters of wage growth, so that estimated values of $ + fi will be biased
down. In fact, the measurement error problem is so serious that reasonable estimates of the

parameters of wage growth cannot be derived from the uncorrected data?
A final reason for the difference in our findings is that we use different methods to
control for aggregate changes in real wages. As noted earlier, my estimates are based on wage

data that are deflated by a real wage index calculated from cross-sections of the Current
Population Surveys. This means that wages in different years are expressed in comparable units.

In contrast, Altonji and Shakotko control for changes in real wages by including a time trend in
their regressions. If aggregate wage growth is truly linear, and if cross sections of the panel are

random samples of the population at each point in time, then this method is appropriate. Then
because experience, tenure, and time change at the same rate during a job, within-job wage
growth provides an estimate of A + fi + fi,, where fi, is the trend rate of growth of aggregate
wages. Comparison of avenge sample wage levels over time indentifies fi, separately. Problems

arise if the avenge "quality" of the sample improves through time, as the data indicate to be the
case in the P510. Then the avenge sample wage grows during the panel even if fi,— 0, causing fi,
to be overestimated. This causes an additional downward bias in estimated returns to job tenure

2'The appendix provides details.

25

because ft2 — (ft + ft2 +

- ft1 - ftr

Table 6 documents each

of these points. Column (1) of the table reproduces the basic

findings of Altonji and Shakotko, using the uncorrected PSID data on current job tenure, as well
as their IV procedure and specification. For these estimates, all terms in job tenure, such as

are instrumented by deviations from within job means, for example -T', but the levels of all
terms in experience, such as K and 2 are treated as exogenous. The estimates confirm the small

return to job tenure that was found by Altonji and Shakotko. Column (2) reproduces this
specification in the corrected data, where tenure rises by one in each year of a job. In these data
estimated returns are more substantial; at twenty years of seniority the cumulative return from the

corrected tenure data is roughly triple the estimate from the error-ridden data, though still
smaller than in the two-step procedure set out above.

Column (3) takes the next step, replacing current experience with initial experience in
the list of instrumental variables. Since higher order terms in experience are also endogenous,

they are also instrumented by deviations from job-specific means. For example, i'-r serves as
an instrument for X. With fixed job effects, this means that the effects of higher order terms in
experience and tenure are consistently estimated. With this adjustment in the instrument list,

estimated returns are larger still. Finally, column (4) drops the endogenous time trend from the
list of instrumental variables, which results in estimated returns that are roughly equivalent to
those produced by the two-step method employed above. This is not surprising, since (18)
indicates that the IV specification is essentially equivalent to a two—step procedure.

In contrast, the very small effects of seniority estimated by Abraham and Farber (1987)
are caused solely by differences in methodology. They argue that completed tenure (the ultimate

duration of the job) is a good proxy for unobserved dimensions of job or worker quality when
either good jobs survive or able persons are less mobile. Since completed duration is unobserved
for most observations in available panel data (the data end during each person's last observed job,

which tends to be his longest), they fill in "expected" completed job tenure for censored
observations based on the frequency of job endings in the data. Call the ultimate estimate of

completed duration 7' — 7' + R, where 7' is the last observed job tenure for a particular job and

TABLE 6

The Effects of Measurement Error and Alternative
Instrumental Variables on the Estimated
Returns to Job Tenure
Oritinal

(I, T-T, time)

Basic

Instruments

Corrected Tenure Data

Tenure Data

(X, i'-?, time) (.1°, T-?, time) (.1°, T-?)

Main Effect of

.030

.045

(.007)

.032
(.006)

.035

Job Tenure (82)

(.007)

(.007)

.078
(.0206)

.098
(.017)

.121
(.019)

(.021)

.074
(.025)

.122
(.024)

.177
(.022)

Cumulative Returns
at Tenure:
5 years
10

IS

years
years

20 years

.155
.223

(.025)

.052

.13!

.21!

.264

(.031)

(.028)

(.020)

(.024)

.052
(.039)

.161

(.035)

.252
(.018)

.316
(.024)

Notes.-—The basic specification is identical to that in earlier tables. Other instruments are as
follows. In all models T2 - P, - ?, i" - T', education, union membership, disability, residence
in an SMSA, census region, and married. In columns (1) and (2X r, A's, and t. In columns (3)
A" - A", X and (4) X -

I',

26

R is the predicted residual life of the job (— 0 for uncensored spells).

The procedure they propose for estimating $ is to include T' as a regressor in an

augmented version of (I)

y.s

(17)

Intuitively, 7' is meant to capture the effects of unobservables, and p. and so to reduce the bias

in the least squares estimate of fl. Again letting T denotethe avenge observed value of tenure
on job j, what is being estimated in (17) is illustrated by adding and subtracting a1 + fi,) from
the right-hand side
(18)

ye 1fi1 + (2" - TXPI + fit) +

TC81

+

+ 71 +

Least squares applied to (17) is equivalent to estimating (18) and imposing the restriction that the

coefficients on 2" - T and T are identical. Notice that A', a I - 2" and Y are fixed within a job, so

2"- T is orthogonal to both of them by construction. Thus estimates of (18) without the implied
parameter restriction will yield a consistent estimate of $ + 8 in the case of fixed job effects.
But the selection problem being addressed is that job—specific variables like T wilt be correlated

with the unobservables, so the least squares estimate of $1 + fi multiplying 7' will be biased. Thus

imposing the cross parameter restriction implicit in (17) yields an inconsistent estimator of fi +
Id 2•

"This inconsistency is a short panel bias caused by the fact that the PSID (and other data
sources) contain incomplete longitudinal histories. To see this, let 7" beJhe first observed value
of tenure on a job (7" — 0 for jobs that begin during the panel). Then 2" — (7" + T')/2. Substitute
this and r — + R into (20), yielding

(Fl)

y—

1% + (7' -

B+

+ .58) + RO + .57'S +

Again, TL, R, and 7' are fixed within jobs, and they are orthogonal to 2" - T by construction.
According to the theory that motivates this approach, they will be correlated with the
unobservables because of mobility decisions, so the restricted estimate of 8 will be inconsistent.
With complete longitudinal histories this source of bias vanishes because 7" — A — 0 when the
beginning and end of each job are observed. In this case, least squares estimation of (Fl) as
equivalent to a two-step procedure given by the deviations from means estimator of 8 and

(Fl)

y-71-X,31+lt#+e.

27

The evidence on these points is in Table 7. For purposes of comparison, the models in
Table 7 include only a quadratic in experience and only a linear effect of tenure, which is the

functional form used by Abraham and Farber. Because the estimated residual life of a job is a
(nonlinear) function of the observables, I also report estimates that control for the observed
completed duration of a job, T', plus the interaction of 7" with an indicator that is one for jobs

that censor at the end of the panel. Column (1) reports least squares estimates, while columns (2)
and (4) report the restricted estimates that include measures of completed tenure in the regression.

The unrestricted models that are not subject to the bias just described are in columns (3) and (5).
These estimates are derived by applying (18) and solving for $ from estimates of $ + $ and $.
The estimates in columns (2) and (4) are qualitatively the same as those produced by

Abraham and Farber, showing negligible effects of tenure in comparison to column (1). Columns
(3) and (5) show that the implicit restrictions in columns (2) and (4) are decisively rejected,
+ $ is
however, and that relaxing these restrictions changes the results. In these models fi
consistently estimated and the estimated return to seniority is of the same magnitude as the least

squares estimate in column (I). The effect of completed job tenure is larger than in columns (2)
and (4) as well. Thus the estimates are consistent with the notion that good jobs last longer, in the
sense that long jobs pay high wages throughout, yet this fact does not reduce the estimated

returns to seniority. As above, the returns to job seniority are substantial.
The main reason for this difference in results is a severe underestimate of within job wage
growth from the restricted modet evaluated at the sample mean level of experience (18.4 years)
the restricted estimates in column (4) yield a predicted annual rate of wage growth of only 1.9

Equation (P2) is in the form of the second-step model (7), augmented by the proxy variable P.
If T' is a positive predictor of the unobservables (D> 0) and that more durable jobs occurlater in
careers (cov(X0,T") > 0), then inclusion of 1" in the model will reduce the upward bias in
estimating fi and raise the estimated return to seniority.
Basic conclusions are unchanged for less restrictive functional forms.
"To model job endings, I estimated a discrete time proportional hazards model where the

hazard rate is A — exp{Z}, and Z includes the full vector of regressors used in the wage models.

The estimates are described in the appendix.

TABLE 7
LEAST SQUARES MODELS CONDITIONING ON (ESTIMATED)
COMPLETED JOB TENURE, PSID WHITE MALES

UI

(21

UI

(41

Experience

.0418
(.0013)

.0379
(.0014)

.0345
(.0015)

.0397
(.0013)

.0401
(.0014)

Experience

-.00079

-.00069
(.000032)

-.00072
(.000069)

—.00074

-.00073

(.000030)

(.000069)

(.00003)

Tenure

.0138
(.00052)

Imputed Completed
Tenure

Observed Completed
Tenure

xCensor

—

-

-.0015
(.0015)

-

.0060

.0163

(.00073)

(.0038)

-

.0165

.0316

(.0016)

(.0022)

-.0025
(.00073)

-.0024

-

(Experience2)

.0137
(.0038)

.0053

(.00042)

—

-

-

-

-

-.00075

(.00073)
—.00061

(.000033)

(.000036)

Tenure

-

-

.0429
(.0016)

.0 142

(.0033)
.422

.428

.0067

(.00036)

.432

.433

.435

NOTES --See notes to Table 4 for other regressors. Dependent variable is log average
hourly earnings. Standard errors are in parentheses. Columns (2) and (4) implement versions of

the restricted model given by equation (19) in text. Estimates in columns (3) and (5) are based on
the unrestricted model (20).

28

percent.3' The corresponding deviations from means estimate from column (5) is 3.0 percent. The

reason for the bias is apparent from the estimated impact of T, which is a biased estimate of ft1 +
fix,

For example, in column (3), this estimate is .0142, compared to an unrestricted estimate of

.0345 + .0137

—

.0482. Thus the restricted estimates of ft1 + ft1 are biased down because they

combine these two effects. This underestimate of within-job growth accounts (or most of the lost
value of ft2 in the restricted model.

Vi. Conclusion

The idea that compensation rises with job tenure or seniority is the most fundamental

prediction of the theory of specific human capital. It is also a key prediction of other contracting
models in which the timing of compensation over the life of a job plays a strategic role in

recruiting and motivating employees. Estimates of the return to seniority based on survey data
have tended to support this class of theories, though these estimates have ignored potential biases

generated by individuals' mobility decisions. Theory provides only limited guidance on the

direction of these biases, and virtually none on their importance. Correcting for these biases in
longitudinal data, my estimates imply a very strong connection between job seniority and wages
in the typical employment relationship: other things constant, 10 years of job seniority raises the

wage of the typical worker by over 25 percent. For the procedures that I have used, theory and
related evidence suggest that this estimate is a lower bound on the true return to job seniority.

These results conform to several related facts about wages and the durability of jobs. For
example, turnover rates are substantially lower among senior workers, even controlling for
individual and job—specific factors that affect mobility (Topel and Ward, 1988), and the typical

employment relationship in the U.S. is remarkably durable (Hall, 1982). These observations are

difficult to explain in the absence of rising wages and accumulating specific capital. Further,
estimates of the "costs" of displacement and unemployment indicate that the wage losses from
these events are substantially larger for workers who had held their jobs longer (Carrington,

mrhe corresponding estimate from Abraham and Farber (1987) is 1.7 percent.

29

1989). Results in this paper imply this, but also that the period of recovery from an initial

wage

loss may be fairly short.
These

conclusions must be tempered by the fact that tenure only measures time in a

particular job, and may be only remotely related to the relevant concept of human capital. In one
sense this measurement error implies that true returns may be even larger. Yet if human capital
is specific to industries or sectors of the economy, and not to jobs, then job tenure may easily
capture the returns to the broader concept of human capital, especially when job changes are
infrequent. Nevertheless, the evidence presented here offers no support for the view that seniority
has a negligible impact on wages.

APPENDIX A
THE DATA

The data used in this study are from the first 16 waves of the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics. The sample is restricted to white male heads of households who had positive earnings

during the previous calendar year,

and who were between the

ages of 18 and 60 at the survey

date. Persons from Alaska and Hawaii were excluded. Jobs were excluded if the respondent
reported that he was self employed at any time during the job,

if he worked for the government,

if he reported agricultural employment, or if the observation was from the SEO (poverty)
subsample of the PSID. Finally, since wages refer to avenge hourly earnings in the year
preceding the survey, observation for which current job tenure was less than one year were

deleted. Other exclusions based on reported job tenure are described below.
Job tenure is the key variable in the analysis. Measured job tenure in the data is often

recorded in wide intervals, and a large number of observations are lost because tenure is missing.
Further, a large number of inconsistencies occur in the data. For example, reported tenure may

fall by

ten years or more between years of a single job, and periods of missing tenure are

followed by years in which a respondent reports more than 20 years of seniority for the remainder

of the job. In the recorded tenure data the range of year to year changes in job tenure is from 31

years to 7.5 years. In 324 cases (3.8%) measured tenure declines between years of a job, and in

51 cases the decline is greater than five years. Because tenure is recorded in intervals. 36% of all
year to year changes in tenure fall below the theoretical value of 1.0.

In light of these errors, I reconstructed job tenure as follows. For jobs that begin in the
panel, tenure is started at zero and incremented by one for each year in which a person works.

Thus experience and tenure progress at the same rate. For jobs that were in progress at the
beginning of a person's record, I gauged starting tenure relative to the period in which the person

achieved his maximum reported tenure on a job. Again, tenure and experience increment by one

for each year in which the person works.
Even with this procedure, there are many ambiguities about starting and ending dates of

30

31

jobs. In many cases the recorded sequence of job tenures seems to indicate a job change (e.g.,
tenure falls to zero, and then rises smoothly for the remainder of the job, or the worker indicates
unemployment due to a permanent layoff), though no change of employer is recorded in the data.
I considered a large number of such circumstances generated by numerous cross-checks on the
data.

My basic procedure was to delete all jobs where significant ambiguities occurred. In

practice, these deletions had very minor effects on the results and none on the conclusions.
All of the sample selection criteria are documented in the programs and output underlying

this research. These are available at cost. Summary statistics are reported in Table Al.

TABLE A.1

VARIABLE DEFINITIONS AND SUMMARY STATISTICS
PSID WHITE MALES, 1968-83
Variable

Definition

S.D.

1.131

.497

20.021

11.045

Years of current job seniority

9.978

8.944

Years of completed schooling

12.645

2.809

.925

.263

Real wage

Log avenge hourly earnings
deflated by CI'S wage index
and ON? price deflator

Experience

Years in labor market

Tenure
Education

Married

Mean

I it currently married,
spouse present

Union

I if union member

.344

.473

SMSA

I it reside in SMSA

.644

.478

Disabled

1 if currently reporting disability

.074

.262

% of Samole

CPS Real
Wate Index

Survey Year
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983

.052
.050
.051
.053
.057
.058

.060

1.000
1.032
1.091
1.11$
1.113
1.151
1.167

.065

1.188
1.117

.065

1.121

.069

1.133
1.128
1.128
1.109
1.103
1.089

.061

.071

.073
.072
.071

.068

APPENDIX B
TIME SERIES PROPERTIES OF WAGE INNOVATIONS

As noted in IV.B, if the evolution of wages within jobs follows a random walk, then the
residuals of the wage growth model are serially independent. Then least squares applied to (4) is

an efficient estimator of fi1 + $. In fact, matters are slightly more complicated than that. Based

on estimates of the first difference model reported in Table 2, which are discussed below, Table
8.1 shows the estimated autocovariances of the residuals,

-

(8.1)

+ •—

—

Notice in panel A of Table 8.1 that the first-difference residuals are strongly negatively

correlated at lag one (—.39), and that higher order lags show weak and usually negative

autocorrelation? The strong negative correlation in the residuals at lag one suggests the
importance of transitory shocks, v, in c. However, if wage innovations were purely transitory,
the theoretical correlation at lag one would be —.50, which is decisively rejected by the data. I
therefore model the evolving component of c as

—

(8.2)

+

where the innovation q is iid with variance c,,,. Model (8.2) nests lid wage shocks (p • 0) and a

random walk (pa I) as special cases.

Given (B.2), the theoretical autocovariances of a are
—

2o,7,/(l+p) + 2e,,,

— -(l-p)/(l+p)c,.,, (8.3)

— —p(l-p)/(l+p)c,< 0

c— -p'(I-p)/(l+p)o,c 0.

acorrelatiou at higher lags than those shown in the table are negligible.
32

33

where c denotes the autocovariance at lag k. Inspection of (B.3) and the estimated
autocorrelation of -.39 strongly suggest p> 0, and the weak estimated correlations at higher tags
suggest p close to 1.0. Method of moments estimates of ft — (p,

Table DI?

a,,,) are shown in panel B of

The key result is that? is not materially different than unity. Thus the best evidence

is that the evolution of wages within jobs is a random walk (with drift)? This evidence is of
independent interest since it implies that the current wage is essentially a sufficient statistic for
the distribution of future wages, and therefore for mobility decisions. More importantly for
present purposes, this evidence also favors the first-difference model as an estimator of withinjob growth, since wage innovations are serially independent?

ame estimator minimizes the quadratic form (C - F(fl)rttlC - F(ulYJ, where C denotes the
estimated vector of autocovariances, 1(0) is the right hand side of (11), and E is an estimate of
the covariance matrix of C, calculated from the fourth moments of the data.
'°This finding is robust across data sets. Topel and Ward find nearly identical parameter
values among young men in the Longitudinal Employee-Employer Data (LEED).
31The specification in (10) attributes all of the random walk component of the wage to jobas a
specific (actors. This is an overly restrictive interpretation. If general productivity evolves
Thus
random walk, then the within-job autocovariances of the residuals would be unchanged.
and
the division between changes in job- and person-specific factors is not identified. Topel
which
Ward find that within-job wage changes have a strong impact on subsequent mobility,
implies an important role for job-specific factors.

TABLE B.!
ESTIMATED COVARIANCE STRUCTURE FOR WAGE INNOVATIONS
Panel A:

Covariances and Correlations of E -

0
Covariance

Correlation

I

.0476

-.0176

(.0019) (.0014)
-.3938

Lag
2

at Various Lags

3

4

5

.00058

-.00166

-.00014 -.00067

(.0008)

(.0007)

(.0008)

(.0007)

.0132

-.0394

-.0034

-.0163

Panel B:
Estimated Covariance Structure, I) — (p. c,,7, o,,)
p

0-

.9867

.0134

.0165

(.0989)

(.0020)

(.0015)

NOTES.--In panel A. estimates are autocovariances of residuals from the first difference
of within-job wage growth reported in Thbh4I column 3 Panel B reports method of
moments estimates of the permanent-transitory disturbance model given in equations (B.2) and
(B.3). Standard errors are in parentheses.
model

34

APPENDIX C

IMPUTATION OF THE RESIDUAL LIFE OF A JOB

In order to estimate the residual life of a job for right-censored spells used in Table 8. I
utilized a simple proportional hazards framework. Let the continuous time hazard rate for person

iattimeebe

-

AQ) —

(C.!)

of
where ZA:) is a vector of observable determinants of mobility. Note that unobserved sources
job of individual heterogeneity are ignored. In practice job endings are known to occur within a
calendar year, so the discrete time hazard based on (C. I) is
(C.2)

4r) —

I

—

exp(- JT+I eZt)1du).

Where XAT) is the probability that a job ends between periods rand r+I. In specifying

elements o

Z I assume the same vector of regressors listed in Table A.!. The estimated residual life of a job
is then constructed from the estimated survivor function of (C.2). Maximum likelihood estimates

of i are shown in Table C.l.

TABLE CA
ESTIMATED DISCRETE TIME HAZARD FOR JOB ENDINGS

Variable

Estimate

Experience
Experience3
Experience'
Tenure (0-1)
Tenure (> 1)
Tenure2 (> 1)
Tenure3 (> I)
Schooling
Union
Married
Disabled

-.0438

SMSA

Log Likelihood
N

.00145
.000021
—.5784

-.34699
.01718

-.00029
-.05377
-.34453
-.28062
.2528
.02868

-5986.4
12069

Standard Error
.0195
.0019
.000020
.0821
.0299
.0030
.000078
.00952
.06038
.06789
.08689
.05134

35

REFERENCES

Abraham, Katharine 0., and Farber. Henry S. "Job Duration, Seniority, and Earnings,"
American Economic Review 77 (June 1987): 278-97.
Review of Economic Studies,
Altonji, 3., and Shakotko, R. "Do Wages Rise with Job Seniority?"
1987.

Becker, Gary S. Human Capital. New Yort Columbia University Press, 1964.
Becker, Gary S., and Stigler, George.

"Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and Compensation of

Enforcers." Journal of Legal Studies 3 (January 1974): 1-18.
Economic Review 68 (1978): 212-20.
Burdett, Kenneth. "Employee Search and Quits," American
MA:
Doeringer, P., and Piore, M. J. internal Labor Markets and Manpower Analysis. Lexington,

D.C. Heath, 1971.

Freeman, Richard. "Union Wage Practices and Wage Dispersion within Establishment,"
Industrial and Labor Relations Review

York Basic Books, 1984.
Freeman, Richard, and Medoff, James. What Do Unions Do? New
Hall, Robert E. "The Importance of Lifetime Jobs in the U.S. Economy," American Economic
Review 72(1982): 7 16-24.

Harris, Milton, and Holmstrom, Bengt. "Theory of Wage Dynamics," Review of Economic Studies
49 (July 1982): 315—33.

Heckman, James J. "The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation, Sample Selection
and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator of Such Models," Annals of
Economic and Social Measurement 5 (December 1976): 475-92.

Jovanovic, Boyan. "Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover," Journalof Political Economy 87
(1979a): 972-90.

Jovanovic, Boyan. "Firm-Specific Capital and Turnover," Journal of Political Economy 87
(1979b): 1246-60.
of Political Economy 92
Jovanovic, Boyan. "Matching, Turnover, and Unemployment," Journal
(1984): 108—22.

36

Lang, Kevin. "Reinterpreting the Return to Seniority," unpublished manuscript, Boston
University, November 1987.

Lazear, Edward P. "Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity, and Hours Restrictions," American
Economic Review (September 1981).

Lazear, Edward P., and Rosen, Sherwin. "Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum Labor

Contracts," Journal of Political Economy 09 (October 1981): 841-64.
Lewis, H. Gregg. Union Relative Wage Effects: A Survey. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1986.

Lillard, Lee, and Tan, Hong. "Private Sector Training," Rand Corporation Working Paper
R3331, March 1986.

Marshall, Robert C., and Zarkin, Gary A. "The Effect of Job Tenure on Wage Offers," Journal
of Labor Economics 5 (July 1987): 308-30.
Mincer, Jacob. "Wage Changes in Job Changes," Research in Labor Economics 8 (1986): 171-97.

Mincer, Jacob. "Job Training, Wage Growth and Labor Turnover," unpublished manuscript,
Columbia University, 1988.

Mincer, Jacob, and Jovanovic, Boyan. "Labor Mobility and Wages," in Studies in Labor Markets,
ed. S. Rosen (Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER, 1982).

Mortensen, Dale. "Matching Finding a Partner for Life or Otherwise," American Journal of
Sociology, forthcoming 1988.

Mortensen, Dale T. "Wages, Separations, and Job Tenure: On-the-Job Specific Training or
Matching?" JournoJ of Labor Economics 6 (October 1988): 445-71.
Murphy, Kevin M., and Topel, Robert. "Estimation and Inference in 'Two-Step' Econometric
Models," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 3 (October 1985): 370-80.

Murphy, Kevin M. and Topel. Robert. "Ability Biases in Models of Earnings: New Methods and
Evidence," Graduate School of Business, Univ. of Chicago, 1989.

Murphy, Kevin M., and Welch, Finis. "The Structure of Wages," mimeographed. University of
Chicago, 1987.

-

37

Oi, Walter. "Heterogeneous Firms and the Organization of Production," Economic Inquiry 21
(April 1983).
Rosen, Sherwin. "Prizes and Incentives in Elimination Tournaments," American Economic Review
76 (September 1986): 701-15.

Rosen, Sherwin. "Transactions Costs and Internal Labor Markets," Journal of Law, Economics
and Organization, forthcoming 1988.

Salop, 1., and Salop, S. "Self-Selection and Turnover in the Labor Market," Quarterly Journal of
Economics 90 (November 1976): 619-27.

Shleifer, AndreA, and Summers, Lawrence H. "Breach of Trust in Hostile Takeovers," in
Corporate Takeovers: Causes and Consequences, ed. Alan J. Auerbach. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press, 1988.

Topel, Robert H. "Job Mobility, Search, and Earnings Growth: A Reinterpretation of Human
Capital Earnings Functions," in Research in Labor Economics 8, ed. Ron Ehrenberg
(Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1986).

Topel, Robert H., and Ward, Michael. "Job Mobility and the Careen of Young Men." Graduate
School of Business, University of Chicago, revised May 1988.

Welch, Finis. "Effects of Cohort Size on Earningt The Baby Boom Babies' Financial Bust,"
Journal of Political Economy 87 (October 1979).

