                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         PATENT STATISTICS AS ECONOMIC INDICATORS: A SURVEY PART I




                                Zvi Criliches




                              Working Paper No. 3301




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  March 1990




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Productivity. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3301 Part I
                                        March 1990


          PATENT STATISTICS AS ECONOMIC INDICATORS: A SURVEY PART I


                                   ABSTRACT

     This survey reviews the growing use of patent data in economic analysis.
After describing some of the main characteristics of patents and patent data,
it focuses on the use of patents as an indicator of technological change.
Cross-sectional and time-series studies of the relationship of patents to R&D
expenditures are reviewed, as well as scattered estimates of the distribution
of patent values and the value of patent rights, the latter being based on
recent analyses of European patent renewal data. Time-series trends of patents
granted in the U.S. are examined and their decline in the 1970s is found to be
an artifact of the budget stringencies at the Patent Office. The longer run
downward trend in patents per R&D dollar is interpreted not as an indication of
diminishing returns but rather as a reflection of the changing meaning of such
data over time. The conclusion is reached that, in spite of many difficulties
and reservations, patent data remain a unique resource for the study of
technical change.




                                        Zvi Griliches
                                        Harvard University and
                                        NBER
                                        1050 Massachusetts Ave.
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        Overheard at a Catskills Resort
                                        (one guest to another):

                                        --The food is so terrible here.
                                        - -Yes. And the portions are so small.


1. Introduction

     Patents and patent statistics have fascinated economists for a long time.

Questions about sources of economic growth, the rate of technological change,

the competitive position of different firms and countries, the dynamism   of
alternative industrial structures and arrangements all tend to revolve around

notions of differential inventiveness: What has happened to the "underlying"

rate of technical and scientific progress? How has it changed over time and

across industries and national boundaries? We have, in fact, have almost no

good measures on any of this and are thus reduced to pure speculation or to

the use of various, only distantly related, "residual" measures and other

proxies. In this desert of data patent statistics loom up as a mirage of

wonderful plentitude and objectivity. They are available; they are by

definition related to inventiveness, and they are based on what appears to be

an objective and only slowly changing standard. No wonder that the idea that



                               1
something interesting might be learned from such data tends to be rediscovered

in each generation.

     I shall try,   in   this survey,   to   show why I think patent statistics are

interesting in spite of all the difficulties that arise in their use             and
interpretation. To do so I shall first describe the nature of patents and the

types of data generated by their issuance, their current availability, and

some of the major problems that arise when one tries to use them in economic

analysis. I shall next review briefly some of the earlier work on this range

of issues, focusing particularily on Jacob Schmookler's work and the questions

raised by it. This will be followedby a review of the more modern, "computer

age," work of the NEER group (Griliches, Hall, Hausman, Jaffe, Pakes,

Schankerman and others), and I shall allude also to similar work of others.

especially that of Scherer and the Yale group (Levin, Nelson, Klevorick,

Winter, Reiss, Cohen, and others), and the SPR.U group (Freeman, Pavitt, Soete

and others).   I will not be able, however, to do justice to all of this work

(the work of others, of my collaborators, and even my own) but I hope to put

up enough guideposts so that the interested reader can find his own way to and

through this literature.1

     Over all this work hovers the question "what can one use patent statistics

for?" Can one use     it   to interpret longer term trends? If so, did

inventiveness really decline in the l930s and early l940s, as indicated by such

statistics, and again in the mid l970s? Does the fact that large firms have

alower patents par R&D dollar ratio imply diminishing returns        to   such

investments? Can one use such numbers to conclude that demand forces are the

stronger determining factors in the evolution of technological progress than

supply factors, than the evolution of science, as Schaookler could be



                                   2
interpreted to say? These are the type of substantive questions that    I will
explore, though not necessarily answer, in this survey.

     There is much that will not be covered in this survey.   I will not discuss

the literature that deals with the social value of the patent system and with

alternative lengths of protection and licensing arrangements. Nor will I deal

with the recent and rapidly growing theoretical literature on "patent races"

and related game-theoretical topics. One has to draw the line somewhere and

the task outlined above may be already too large for one article and one person

to deal with. Nor will this be a fully "balanced" survey.     I shall, per

force, concentrate more on topics that I and my research associates have found

most interesting, slighting thereby, sometimes unwittingly, some of the work
                           2
of others in this field.




2. Patents and Patent Statistics.


     A patent is a document, issued by an authorized governmental agency,

granting the right to exclude anyone else from the production or use of a

specific new device, apparatus, or process for a stated number of years (17 in

the U.S. currently). The grant is issued to the inventor of this device or

process after an examination that focuses on both the novelty of the claimed

item and its potential utility. The right embedded in the patent can be

assigned by the inventor to somebody else, usually to his employer, a

corporation, and/or sold to or licenced for use by somebody else. This right

can be enforced only by the potential threat of or an actual suit in the courts

for infringement damages. The stated purpose of the patent system is to

encourage invention and technical progress both by providing a temporary


                               3
monopoly for the inventor and by forcing the early disclosure of the

information necessary for the production of this item or the operation of the

new process.

     The standard of novelty and utility imposed on the granting of such a

right is not very high. (In this it probably does not differ greatly from the

standards imposed in most fields on the publication of scientific journal

articles.) In the U.S., for example, about 104,000 applications were filed in

1980 for ("utility") patents, of which about 65,000 were granted by the end of

1984; 1400 more were granted by the end of 1988, with another 300 or so to

follow over the next 3 to 5 years. These numbers are typical. In the U.S.

the granting success rate fluctuated around 65 percent in the 1970s. Roughly

speaking, two out of three applications are eventually granted. The granting

rate, the stringency of examination, varies greatly across countries and also

somewhat over time. It has been over 90 percent in France (until the mid-

1970s), about 80 percent in the U.K., and only 35 percent in Germany

(Schankerman and Pakes 1986, Table 1), and has varied in the U.S from a low

of 58 percent in 1965 to a high of 72 percent in 1967 (of domestic

applications between 1965 and 1980). This variablity is, as I will show

later, largely associated with differences in the procedures and resources of

the various patent offices, implying, therefore, also differences in the

average "quality" of a granted patent across countries and periods.

     Of the approximately 62,000 patents granted in 1980, 24,000 or 39 percent

were granted to foreign inventors, a ratio that has been rising sharply over

the last decades, from 19 percent in the early l960s to 48 percent in 1988.

U.S. corporations have accounted for about 73 percent of the total patents

granted to U.S. inventors (in 1988), with two percent being granted to agencies


                               4
of the U.S. government, and the rest, 25 percent, going to individual

inventors. The fraction accounted by foreign corporations of total foreign

patenting in the U.S. has risen from 64 percent in the mid 1960s to 82

percent in 1988. The general trends in such numbers are depicted in Figures 1

and 2.

     Even though grants can be thought of as a moving average of past

applications, it can be seen in these figures that they tend to fluctuate as

much or more than the number of patents applied for. It is also clear that

economic conditions impinge on the rate at which patents are applied for.

Applications were lower during the Great Depression and also during the World

War II years. and their growth is retarded in the 1970s.    Moreover, patents

assigned to U.S. corporations have not grown anywhere near the rate of growth

of total R&D expenditures in industry (and hence even less than the rate of

growth in company financed R&D in industry). Since I will argue below that

patents are a good index of inventive activity, a major aspect of which is

also measured by R&D expenditures, this view will need reconciling with the

aggregate facts depicted in Figure 2.

     Data are also available at the firm level. In 1984 the largest patenters

were General Electric, IBM, and Hitachi with 785, 608, and 596 patents granted

respectively. Most of the major U.S. patenting firma experienced a declining

trend in patents granted during the 1970s with some recovery in the l980s,

while there has been a rapid growth in U.S. patents granted to the major

Japanese electronics and motor vehicles firms. (See Figure 5, Griliches

1989.)

     What I have done in the above paragraphs is to discuss the information

implicit in patent counts, in the number of patents issued at different tii*es,


                               5
in different countries, and to different types of inventors. This is the type

of information that economists have largely focused on, also cross-classifying

it by industry and firm, and it is the use of such numbers in economic analysis

which will be the main topic of this survey. But a patent document, which

is public after it has been granted, contains much more information than that.

Besides information on the names of inventors and their addresses and the name

of the organization to which the patent right may have been assigned, it also

lists one or more patent classes to which it has been assigned by the

examiners, cites a number of previous patents and sometimes also scientific

articles to which this particular invention may be related, and also finally,

but from the social point of view most importantly, provides a reasonably

complete description of the invention covered by this particular patent.

Thus, there is much more information derivable from the patent documents than

just simply their aggregated number in a particular year or for a particular

firm. One can study the geographic distribution of particular inventions, one

can investigate citation networks and patterns, and one can actually read the

detailed text of a series of patents in a particular field as raw material for

an economic-technological history of it. Also, in a number of foreign

countries, and in the U.S. since 1982, a non-negligable renewal fee, which

rises with the age of the patent, has to be paid. This results in a

significant abandonment of patents before their statutory expiration date and

generates, in passing, a set of potentially very interesting patent mortality

statistics.

     In the U.S., aggregate patent statistics classified in a variety of ways

are released by the Office of Documentation (formerly the Office of

Technology Assessment and Forecast) at the U.S. Patent Office. Major series are


                               6
published in the National Science Foundation's biannual Science Indicators

compendium. More detailed tabulations are available from or can be prepared by

the Patent Office and summary information on all recent patents is now also

available on CD-ROM disks. The full text of the patents can be found in a

number of depository libraries in the U.S. and can be now also accessed via

several bibliographic computerized data base services, such as Dialog and BSR.

Given the advanced search software available on these services it is possible

to conduct a variety of specific searches of such data bases, looking for

patents in a particular area or those mentioning a particular material,

instrument, or a specific earlier patent, and tabulate the results at a

reasonable cost. Patent data for other countries are being collected by the

International Patent Documentation Center in Vienna, Austria and published

annually in World Intellectual Property Annual. Country summaries are

published in OECD,      Science and Technology Indicators, and by various

country statistical offices, such as Statistics, Canada. Current information

on individual foreign patents is available on line from Dialog.

    There are two major problems in using patents for economic analysis:

classification and intrinsic variability. The first is primarily a technical

problem. How does one allocate patent data organized by firms or by

substantive patent classes into economically relevant industry or product

groupings? I shall discuss it shortly. The second problem is fundamentally

much harder and will be discussed at some   length   below. It refers to the

obvious fact that patents differ greatly in their technical and economic

significance. Many of them reflect minor improvements of little economic

value. Some of them, however, prove extremely valuable. Unfortunately, we

rarely know which are which and do not have yet a good procedure for


                               7
"weighting" them appropriately.       I shall discuss the available scraps of

evidence on this topic in Section 5 of this survey.

     Patents are awarded for an invention of a chemical formula, a mechanical

device, or a process (procedure), and now even a computer program. The Patent

Office classifies patents into many (300+ in the mid l950s) classes and even

many more subclasses (over 50,000), based on its need to ease the search for

prior art. The resulting classification system is based primarily on

technological and functional principles and is only rarely related to

economists notions of products or well defined industries (which may be a

mirage anyway). A subclass dealing with the dispensing of liquids contains both

a patent for a water pistol and for a holy water dispenser. Another subclass

relating to the dispensing of solids contains patents on both manure spreaders

and toothpaste tubes. (Schinookler 1966, p.20) Nevertheless, with one notable

exception (Scherer 1984) and the more recent Canadian data based studies,

almost all attempts to relate patent numbers to industrial data use the

subclass system as their basic unit of assignment.

     3efore any classification is attempted one has to face the inherent

ambiguity of the task. Do we want to assign the invention to the industry in

which it was made ("origin), to the industry that is likely to produce it, or

to the industry which will use the resulting product or process and whose

productivity may benefit thereby (destination or industry of "use")? Consider,

as an example, the case of a new plow invente4 in a chemical firm's research

laboratory as part of its project on new combined fertilizer and tillage

systems. It depends on what question is to be asked of the data. If we want

to study the returns to R&D expenditures we may wish to count it in the

chemical industry whence the money came to develop it. If we want to analyze


                                  8
the impact of technological change on the rate of investment, on the sale of

new equipment, we may wish to count it in the farm equipment industry. If we

are interested in its effects on measured productivity we are more likely to

count it as being relevant to agriculture. This difference in questions

reflects itself also in different classification strategies pursued by

different researchers.

     Schmookler, in his main work, chose to construct data on capital goods

patents relevant to a particular industry by reviewing carefully a set of

subclasses, sampling a number of patents in them, and deciding whether most of

them were indeed likely to be used in the industry in question. He then

aggregated the total number of patents in each of the accepted subclasses into

an industry wide total. In this way he constructed time series for capital

goods inventions of relevance for the railroad industry, the paper making

industry, petroleum refining, and building construction. By focusing on

capital goods inventions only and on a few selected and better defined

industries, and by not insisting on completness or inclusivity, he made life

quite a bit easier for himself. This choice forced him, however, to forego any

serious analysis of consumer goods or manufacturing processes patenting. His

industrial classification was based on the third type: the locus of potential

use for the new or improved capital good.

     In the mid 1970s the Patent Office established a research unit, the

Office of Technology Assesaent and Forecast. One of its first jobs, on a

contract from the Science Indicators Unit of the National Science Foundation,

was to try and produce patent statistics at the three and two-and-a-half SIC

digit level, corresponding roughly to the NSF's classification of applied

research and development by product field. This was done by developing a


                               9
"concordance" between the patent class and sub-class classification and the

Standard Industrial Classification (SIC). Where a subclass did not obviously

belong into a single SIC industry, it waS counted in all of the relevant ones,

resulting in significant double counting. The industrial allocation was based

primarily on the second notion of the relevant industrial classification:

patents were allocated to the industries which were expected to produce the

products designed by them or to use the new processes in the manufacture of

their products. The new plow patent, in the previous example, would be

assigned by the OTAF concordance to the farm equipment manufacturing industry.

     The OTAF concordance was criticized early on both because of the

arbitrariness in the assigrusent of some of the subclasses and the misleading

inferences that could arise from the pervasive double counting (Scherer l982a,

Soete l983).          The two most glaring examples of problems raised by such

procedures was the appearance of significant and fast growing patenting by the

Japanese in the aircraft industry, a rather surprising and mysterious

development given the rather rudimentary state of the Japanese aircraft

industry at that time. It turned out to be the result of allocating the

"engines" patents category to both motor vehicles and aircraft. Almost all of

the Japanese engine patents were automobile engine patents and since patenting

in the engine category was high relative to other kinds of aircraft patents,

it came to dominate the aircaraft patents category almost entirely. Another

example was provided by the agricultural chemicals and drug industries where

the assigned patents overlapped at the rate of 90 percent[!]. That is, only

10 percent of the patents counted in those industries were unique to them.

It is   doubtful   whether such heavily overlapping data can be used in economic

analyses which try     to   learn something about sources of technical progress by


                                    10
examining the contrasting experiences of different industries. The OTAF

"industry" data contained too little independent data on the patenting

history of actual industries.

     As the result of such criticisms the 1985 version of these data has been

improved by correcting some of the more obvious errors   and by fractionalizing

the allocation of dubious subclasses, reducing thereby their overall importance

in the final totals. But most of the basic questions of classification remain

still to be answered.

     One way to get around some of these problems is to have the patent

examiner assign the individual patent to one or several SIC industries, based

on potential use. This is now being done in the Canadian patent system. One

possibility, currently being pursued by Robert Evenson and his students, is to

take a sample of U.S. patents also patented in Canada and to cross-tabulate

the Canadian SIC assignments against the U.S. patent classification system,

deriving thereby an entpiricaly based and already naturally   fractionized

alternative concordance. (See Annex A of Englander, Evenson, and Hanazaki,

1988, Evenson et al, 1988, and iCortum and Putnam, 1989.)

     An alternative approach, first pursued by Scherer (l965a and b) and more

currently by the NBER. group (see Bound at al, 1984), starts from patent totals

for p*rticular firms and then groups them into industries according to a firm's

primary activity. This is an "origin" classification.       It may be useful for

 the analysis of firm level data, relating patents to the R&D investments and

 the subsequent fortunes of the firms where they had been originally developed.

 But it is much less useful for the analysis of industrial data,    both because

 of the conglotierateness of many of the large U.S. corporations and because

 particular patents may be having an impact far beyond the boundaries of their


                                11
 industry of "origin."

      The extensive diversification of many firms and also the various    merger
 waves create severe technical p:oblems in trying to use the patent data even at

 the individual corporation level. What is noted on the patent is the name of

 the organization to which it has been assigned. This organization can easily

be a subsidiary or a separate division of a larger company. Moreover, a

company may change its name and/or may merge. Since the patent office does

not employ a consistent company code in its computer record, except for the

"top patenting companies" where the list of subsidiaries is checked manually,

the company patenting numbers produced by a simple aggregation of its computer

records can be seriously incomplete. (See Hall et al, 1988, for additional

detail on this range of issues).

     Because of such considerations and because he was interested in tracing

through the spillover effects of R&D on productivity in industries which were

most likely to benefit from them, Scherer (1982, 1984) undertook the large task

of examining over 15,000 patents awarded from June 1976 through March 1977 to

the 443 largest U.S. manufacturing corporations represented in the FTC's Lines

of Business survey in 1974. There are at least two unique aspects to this

data construction effort: Firsts each patent was examined individually,

classified as to product or process invention, and assigned to up to three

potential industries of "use" or two possible general use categories. In

addition, the patent was also assigned to an industry of "origin" on the basis

of the information on the location of the inventors within the Lines of

Business structure of the particular company. That is, and this is the second

unique aspect of these data, the industry of origin was defined "below" the

company level, at the more relevant "business" or divisional level and the R&D


                              12
expenditures of the companies were similarily subdivided and matched at this

more appropriate industrial level. One of the final products of this work was a

 "technology flow" matrix, using the resulting cross-classification of patents

by industry of origin and industry of use to "flow through" the R&D

expenditures from industries in which they have been incurred to industries

whose productivity growth may reflect the fruits of such expenditures. (Such

a matrix was suggested by Schaookler 1966, p. 167.)      Unfortunately, this

large, one-time data construction effort does not really have a time series

dimension to it. Moreover, the FTC has discontinued collecting data at the

Lines of Business level in 1979, making it less likely that it could be

replicated in the future.

     A less ambitious but somewhat more extensive data construction effort was

pursued by the NBER group (see Bound et al, 1984, Griliches, Pakes and Hall

1987, and Hall at al, 1988) who tried to match the patent office data on

patents issued to all organizations from 1969 through 1982 with income and

balance sheet amd stock market value data for all publicly traded manufacturing

corporations, defined as of 1976, and also create a consistent historical

record for them for the period 1959-1981. The resulting data sets consisted of

a cross-section of about 2600 firms in 1976 (with over 1700 firms receiving at

least one patent between 1969 and 1979, about a 1000 firms applying for at

least one, ultimately granted, patent in 1976, and about 1500 firms reporting

R&D expenditures in 1976) and a panel of about a 1000 to 1800 firms with

detailed data between 1963 and 1981, with a subset of about 700 firms Leportirtg

consistent R&D data between 1972 and 1980. These data sets formed the basis

for a number of studies which will be discussed below.




                              13
 3. Patents        Indicators    What?

         There   are two ways of asking this question: What aspects of economic

 activity do patent statistics actually capture? And, what would we like them

 to measure? Ultimately, only the first question is of relevance but it is

 useful to spend some time on the second, since it provides some
                                                                       understanding
 of the research in this field.

         Roughly speaking, we would like to measure and understand better the

 economic processes which lead to the reduction in the cost of producing

 existing products and the development of new products and services. We would

 like to measure both the inputs and the outputs of such processes, to

understand what determines the allocation of resources to such "technology

changing" activities, and also what is happening and why to the efficiency

with which they are pursued in different times and in different places.

Assuming that different new products can be brought to a common denominator

through the use of some meta-hedonic function, one can think of invention as

shifting outward the production possibilities frontier for some generalized

aggregate of potential human wants. Ideally, we might hope that patent

statistics would provide a measure of the output of such an activity, a direct

reading on the rate at which the potential production possibilities frontier

is shifting outward. The reality, however, is very far from it.

     The dream of getting hold of an output indicator of inventive activity

is one of the strong motivating forces for economic research in this        area.
After all,   a patent does represent a minimal quantum   of   invention which has

passed   both   the scrutiny of the patent office as to its novelty and the test

of the investment of effort and resources by the inventor and his organization



                                          14
 into the development of this product or idea, indicating thereby the presence

 of a non-negligible expectation as to its ultimate utility and marketability.

One recognizes, of course, the presence of a whole host of problems: Not all

 inventions are patentable, not all inventions are patented, and the inventions

 that are patented differ greatly in "quality," in the magnitude of inventive

output associated with them. The first two problems, one thinks, can be taken

care of by industry dummy variables, or by limiting the analysis to a

particular sector or industry. For the third, one tries to invoke the help of

the "Law of Large Numbers": "the economic ...   significance   of any sampled
patent can also be interpreted as a random variable with some probability

distribution." (Scherer 1965, p. 1098.) The question whether our samples are

large enough, given the underlying heterogeneity in what is measured by a

patent, is a topic to which I shall return below.

     It is interesting to note that Schmookler started out thinking that he

could use patent statistics as an index of inventive output and as an

explanation of the growth in the aggregate efficiency of the U.S. economy.

Schmookler was the first, as far as I can tell, to publish numbers on

aggregate "total factor productivity growth" (Schmookler 1952) (though he

never seemed to have claimed much originality for it), and to relate them to

patent statistics (Schmookler 1951).    Unfortunately, the relationship did not

work. There seemed to be little correlation between aggregate total factor

productivity and total patenting numbers. Schmookler did not give up on

patent statistics but ultimately redefined what he thought they could do.

In his hands patents became an index of inventive "activity," primarily an

input rather that an output index.

     He moved, essentially, in the direction of what patents can measure

rather than what we would want theii to measure. His interpretation of


                                       15
 inventive activity became quite narrow. It excluded research, which he

 interpreted as a search for new knowledge, an attempt to discover new

 properties of classes of objects or processes, and it excluded also

 development, which is largely the development and refinement of already made

 inventions (even though quite a few patents are likely to be generated also

during this phase).. Inventive activity per se is "work specifically directed

towards the formulation of the essential properties of a novel product or

process" (Schmookler 1966, p.8.) This is an "input" definition, to be thought

of as computable in manhour equivalents and corresponds to only a very thin

slice, both quantitatively and in the time dimension, of what is usually

covered by the notion of R&D and the associated R&D statistics.

     One should keep in mind, however, the historical context of most of the

earlier work on patents. There were no R&D expenditure statistics of any

generality before the late 1950s and only scattered numbers on scientists

employed in different industrial laboratories or on the distribution of the

technically trained labor force (see Mowery, 1983). Thus, an indicator of

input was also valuable. There was almost no substitute for it. Even today,

with data much more plentiful, the available detail in the published R&D

statistics is still quite limited. Thus, as I shall argue below, showing that

patent statistics are a good indicator of inputs into inventive activity is a

useful accomplishment on its own merit. tt allows us an insight into what is

going on in more areas and also in much more detail than is possible to

glimpse from the available R&D statistics.

    How does one come to know whether patent statistics measure anything

interesting? Input or output? One way of doing it is by looking for

correlatjop.g between patent counts and other variables which are thought to



                                      16
matter: input measures such as R&D expenditures, and output measures such as

productivity growth, profitability, or the stock market value of the firm. It

 is useful, therefore, to introduce here a figure (Fig. 3) from Fakes and

Griliches (1984) which essentially restates the previous sentence in graphic

terms and allows a more detailed discussion of its underlying assumptions.

     In the center of Figure 3 is an unobservable variable, K, the net

accretion of economically valuable knowledge. This is the variable that we

would like to measure. It is the measure of "inventive output" which one

would hope that patents would be a good indicator of. The diagram indicates

that and adds an error v to the determinants of patenting, making them an

imperfect, fallible measure of K. The causal part of this diagram starts in

the lover right hand corner with some observable measure of resources

invested in inventive activity (R), usually R&D expenditures, or the number

of research scientists, which are directed at the production of K. Because

knowledge production is stochastic, the u term is added to reflect its

changing efficiency and the impact of other informal and unmeasured sources of

 K. The variables that we are ultimately interested in explaining are

represented by the Vs. These could be various measures of growth, in the

productivity, profitability, or the stock market value of the firm. They are

all affectedby the unobservable K, by other measurable variables X, and by

additional random components, the a's.

     A number of extreme simplifications were made in drawing this figure and

in defining the various terms. For example, the relationship between K and

K should be defined explicitly to allow for the possibility of decay in the

private value of knowledge. Also, R is taken as exogeneous. If, as is

likely, the u's are correlated over time, then one might expect them to feed



                                         17
back into R in subsequent periods. Nor do patents play an explicit economic

role here. They are just an indicator of K. The assumption being made is

that some random fraction of K gets patented. It is a statistical

descriptive model rather than a theoryN of patenting. A Ntheoryu would have

to be more explicit about the conditions (economic, technological, and legal)

for the benefits from applying for a patent outweighing the potential monetary

costs and technology disclosure consequences and would add more structure to

the relationship between P and K.

     Such a theory would start with the underlying notion of a research

project whose success depends stochastically on both the amount of resources

devoted to it and the amount of time that such resources have been deployed.

Each technical success is associated with an expectation of the ultimate

economic value of a patent to the inventor or the employer. If this

expectation exceeds a certain minimum, the cost of patenting, a patent will be

applied for. That is, the number of patents applied for is a count of the

number of successful projects (inventions) with the economic value of the

patent right exceeding a minimal threshold level. If the distribution of the

expected value of patenting successful projects remains stable, and if the

level of current and past R&D expenditures shifts the probability that

projects will be technically successful, an increase in the number of patents

can be taken as an indicator of an upward shift in the distribution of K.

Whether the relationship is proportional will depend on the shape of the

assumed distributions and the nature of the underlying shifts in them. What

is depicted in Fig. 3   is at best a very crude reduced-form-type   relation whose
theoretical underpinnings   have still to be worked out. But one has to start

someplace



                                       18
         There are also ambiguities in the definition of K and K. Are we

talking about private or social returns to knowledge?              That depends on the

Z's available to us and the question we are particularily interested in

answering. For an analysis of productivity movements at the level of

industries, it is the social value that we care about. For an analysis of

the stock market value of different firms, only the private value version

makes any sense. One may also wish to distinguish between the value of patent
rithts and the economic value of a particular patent. It is the latter notion

that we might be interested in, though it is the former that is likely to show

up in survey responses of patentors or be implicit in the decision whether to

pay a fee and renew a particular patent. Nevertheless, Figure 3 does provide

a schema for discussing much of the research in this area and in particular

the question of the "quality" of patent counts as indicators of economically

valuable knowledge.

     There are several different ways of rephrasing this question: 1. How good

is   P    as an indicator of K?      2. If P is an "output" measure and R is an

"input" measure, are we better off in having one or the other if we had to, or

could, make such a choice? 3. What is the value added of P, above and beyond

1(, to the explanation of the Z's? Since IC is intrinsically unobservable,

the first question cannot really be answered without embedding it in some

model such as is sketched out in this figure. It may be helpful, at this

point, to write down the simplest possible model that might correspond to this

figure:
                             K—R+u
                             P —   sIC   +   v —   aR   + au + v
                             Z — bK + e — bR + bu + e

where the first equation is the "Knowledge production function" with the

                                              19
unobservable K being measured in units of R; the second equation is the

indicator function relating P to K; and third equation represents the

influence of K on subsequent variables of interest. The important

assumption that will be made here is that the various random components u, v,

and e are independent of each other.    I need not repeat the caveats about the

simplicity of this model. It is adequate, however, for making the following

points: 1. The "quality" of P as indicator of K depends on the size of v,

the error in the indicator relationship. If we take its variance as a measure

of its error and we substitute R for K in this relationship, as in the

right-hand part of the second equation above, we see that under the

assumptions of the model the "quality" of the relationship between P and R

provides a lower bound on the "quality" of P as an indicator of K. That is

var(au+v) > var(v). This argument suggests looking at the correlation between

P and R and claiming that if K is the output of the R process and P is

an indicator of its success then the correlation between P and K would

have been even higher, if it could have been measured. This is the sense in

which the correlation coefficient between P and R provides a downward

biased measure of the quality of P as a indicator.5 2. The comparative

qualities of P and R as proxies for K depend on the relative size of the

variance of v and u. If the error of measurement in P is large relative

to the stochastic fluctuation in K, then R may be the better variable even

if it does not reflect u.      3. If the stochastic component of K is

important and if P actually captures any of it, there should be some value

addd in P above and beyond R. But if th. error of measurement in P is

large and the samples are small, we may not really see it in the regressions

results when P is   included   as an additional variable.



                                       20
 4. Patents and R&D.

      In the attempt to "validate" patents as an economic indicator their

relationship to R&D activity has been investigated repeatedly. Schmookler

 (1966, Chapter 2) and Scherer (1965) are leading examples of earlier

investigations. More recent results can be found in Bound et al (1984), Hall

et al (1986), Pakes and Griliches (1984), Scherer (1983) and Acs and Audretch

(1989). Several conclusions as well as a number of unresolved questions

emerge from this work.

     A major conclusion, emphasized by Pakes and Griliches, is that there is

quite a strong relationship between R&D and the number of patents received at

the cross-sectional level, across firms and industries. The median R-square is

on the order of 0.9, indicating that patents may indeed be a good indicator of

unobserved inventive output, at least in this dimension. That this

relationship is not just due to size differences can be seen in Figure 4

(taken from Bound et al), which plots both patents and R&D per unit of a

firm's assets.

     The same relationship, thougi still statistically significant, is much

weaker in the within-firms time series dimension. The median R-square here is

on the order of 0.3 (in contrast to the 0.9 in the cross-sectional dimension).

Nevertheless, the evidence is quite strong that when a firm changes its R&D

expenditures, parallel changes occur also in its patent numbers. The

relationship is close to contemporaneous with some lag effects which are small

and not well estimated (Hall et al). This is consistent with the observation

that patents tend to be taken out relatively early in the life of a research

project. Since the bulk of R&D expenditures are spend on development, most of



                              21
the time series variance in this variable must come from the differential

success in the further development of existing projects rather than from the

initiation of new ones.6    The relatively low correlations in the time

dimension should, therefore, not be all that surprising, but they imply that

patent numbers are a much poorer indicator of short-term changes in the output

of inventive activity or the "fecundity" of R&D.

     The question of "Are there diminishing returns to R&D?" hovers over much

of this work. In the cross-sectional dimension it is related to the

"Schumpeterian" question whether large firms and large R&D labs are more or

less efficient as "engines of innovation." (See Baldwin and Scott, Chap. 3,

and Cohen and Levin for more general reviews of this topic.) In the time

series dimension one is faced with the declining ratio of patents received per

R&D dollar spent and the worry that technological and inventive opportunities

are being exhausted. There is also the question how does one reconcile the

significantly larger estimates of the elasticity of patenting with respect to

R&D in the cross-sectional versus the tlme-series dimensions.

     At the cross-sectional level the story is relatively simple. Small firms

appear to be more "efficient," receiving a larger number of patents per R&D

dollar. This can be seen most easily in Figure 5 (from Bound at a].), which

plots the patents per R&D ratio as a function of the size of the R&D program.

It shows both the much higher ratio for small firms and the fact that this

relationship becomes effectively flat, beyond some minimum size. At the

larger firm level, where anti-trust policy might be relevant, there is no

strong evidence of diminishing returns to the size of the R&D effort. (This is

also the conclusion reached by Scherer, 1983, on the basis of a different and

better set of data.) Given the non-linearity and the noisiness in this



                              22
 relation, the finding of "diminishing returns" is quite sensitive to

 functional form, weighting schemes, and the particular point at which the

elasticity is evaluated.

         All of this can be seen in Figure 6, also taken from Bound et al, which

plots the original data and the results of fitting various different models to

the same data. Two of the estimation techniques, Poisson and Non-linear Least

Squares, indicate diminishing returns, while the other two techniques, OLS and

Negative Binomial, imply increasing returns. A glance at the figure will make

it clear how a differential emphasis on parts of the data (large versus small

firms and the treatment of zeroes -    not   visible in the figure) could result in

such conflicting estimates. Basically there is a sharp contrast between

smaller and larger firms. For larger firms the relationship is close to linear

while there is a reasonably large number of smaller firms that exhibit

significant patenting while reporting very little R&D. When divided into two

samples, small (N—1015) and large(N—483), with $2 million in R&D expenditures

as the dividing line, the estimated average elasticities are 0.44 and 1.04

respectively. The latter number falls to 0.8 (0.1) if one allows separately for

the zero patents observations. Though this estimate of the elasticity of

patenting with respect to R&D for the larger firms is still "significantly"

less than unity at conventional test levels, allowing for the possibility that

the R&D numbers are themselves subject to error, one cannot really reject the

hypothesis of constant returns in this size range, since the "reciprocal"

regression of R&D on patents implies increasing returns or decreasing costs of

getting a patent. (The estimated elasticity of R&D with respect to patents is

0.76).

    ..The appearance of diminishing returns at the cross-sectional level is due.



                                 23
I think, primarily to two     effects:   selectivity and the differential role of

formal R&D and patents for small and large firms. Most of the data sets

available to us are not based on a random or carefully stratified sample from

the relevent underlying population. Rather, they are "opportunity" samples,

based on other criteria. For example, the 1976 cross-section of Bound et al,

is based on all manufacturing firms listed on the New York and American Stock

exchanges and also on the Over-the-counter market. But while almost all

relevant large firms are so listed, only a relatively small number of the

smaller firms trade in these markets. To be included in (listed on) the

market, a small firm has to be in some sense more "succsessful" than those

that are not, more "interesting" to the traders. Thus, it is not surprising

that it may also hold more patents than might be expected, given its size and

R&D program. How atypical these small firms might be is suggested by the

rarity of their selection. Table 1 shows the number of firms by size

(employment) in this cross-section and the corresponding numbers in the

relevant population. While about two-thirds of the large manufacturing firms

are included, the smaller one represent less than one percent of all small

firms and are obviously a heavily selected lot. Unfortunately, we have no

information on the firms not in the sample and hence cannot mak. an

appropriate sample selectivity adjustment.

    Another source of the difference between small and large firms is in the

role of formal R&D in them and the differential importance of patents to them.

A significant amount   of   patenting is not the result of formal R&D activities

though the relative importance of organized R&D rises with the size of the

company. Small firms are likely to be doing relatively more informal R&D,

reporting less of it, and hence providing the appearance of more patents per



                                 24
                       7
reported R&D dollar.       Also, for such firms patents may represent their

major hope for ultimate success and hence would lead them to pursue them with

more vigor. A well established major firm does not depend as much on current

patenting for its viability or the survival of its market position. Thus, even

at equal underlying true inventiveness rates, the propensity to patent may be

lower for large firms, at least relative to the successful new entrants in

their field. But in the major range of the data, from middle size to giant

firms, there is little evidence for diminishing returns, at least in terms of

patents per R&D dollar.8     That is not surprising, after all. If there were

such diminishing returns, firms could split themselves into divisions or

separate enterprises and escape them.

     The time series dimension has been examined most extensively by Hall et

al (1986) (see also Fakes and Griliches 1984 and Hausman et al 1984). The

estimated total elasticity of patents with respect to R&D expenditures is

between 0.3 and 0.6, even after allowing for several lagged effects. This

finding, in contrast to the cros-sectional results, is robust with respect to

differential weighting and alternative estimation methods. It is tempting then

to accept the diminishing returns result in the within-time-series dimension

and interpret it as reflecting real diminishing returns, in terms of patents

received, to the expansion of existing research programs. But this conclusion

is unnecessary. The relationship between annual changes in R&D and in

patenting is very weak, although ustatisticallyhs significant, at the firm

level. If one allows for the possibility that much of the annual   fluctuations
in R&D has little to do with that part of inventive activity which generates

patents, being largely the result of fluctuations in and vaguaries of the

development portion of the various research projects, then the relevantM R&D



                              25
is measured with error and the estimated coefficients are downward biased.

This is not a pure "measurement error" case, since reported R&D may be

correctly reported as far as its own definition goes, but not exactly what we

want (R&D directed at patentable inventions). This is parallel to the

transitory-permanent distinction in consumption theory and is isomorphic to

the "errors-in-variables" model. Invoking the latter, we may be able to

"bracket" the true returns to scale coefficient by running the regression the

other way, R&D on patents, and computing the reciprocal of the resulting

coefficient. The low correlation between the two rates of change results also

in a very low coefficient in this second dimension, on the order of 0.1-0.2,

and an implication of increasing returns. The latter should not be taken

seriously either, since it is the result of the great randomness in the patent

series themselves. The point of this digression is, however, to remind one

that the appearance of diminishing returns in such data could be an artifact

of the incompleteness of the underlying data rather then a reflection of the

characteristics of the invention process itself. As of the moment, the

evidence is suggestive but not conclusive.

     Besides differing by size of firm, the R&D to patents relationship

differs also across industries. In absolute terms, the industries with the

largest numbers of patents are drugs, plastics, other rubber products, and

computers (in Scherer's LB based data) and instruments, comeunication

equipment, and industrial chemical. (in the OTAP concordance based data). In

t.rms of the "propensity to patent" (patent. per R&D dollar), the differences

are less   apparent and more   difficult to interpret. One can look at the tables

(5-9) in Griliches (1989) or the Appendix to Cockburn and Criliches (1988)     and
observe that "low" propensity to patent industries include obvious cases of



                                  26
large R&D industries with significant governmental research support, such as

motor vehicles and aircraft, who patent very much less than would be predicted

from their R&D numbers alone. Amongst the "high" propensity to patent

industries, besides the expected presence of communication equipment, there

are a number of industries (such as Screws, Nuts, and Bolts) whose appearance

is due to their doing very little R&D but still taking out some occasional

patents. An attempt to explain the dispersion in such numbers across

industries using data from the Yale Survey (Levin et al, 1987) on the

perceived differential effectiveness of patents as a method of appropriating

the benefits from innovation was largely unsuccessful. The patent to R&D

ratios appear to be dominated by what may be largely irrelevant fluctuations

in the R&D numbers and the Yale Survey responses themselves appear to have

little relevant cross industry variability in them (see Griliches, 1987,

Cockburn and Gri].iches 1988 and Cockburn 1989). For example, while the drug

industry has the highest rating on the patents provide protection scale, its

patents per R&D ratio is much lower than that for firms in the paper industry,

where the effectiveness of patents is rated to be somewhat below average (see

Cockburn and Griliches, appendix C). Since the effectiveness of patents as an

appropriability mechanism will affect also the incentive to do R&D, the

resulting impact on the ratio of the two is far from obvious. In drugs it

clearly encourages research with the result that even with extensive patenting

the observed ratio is not much above average. Thus, it is probably misleading

to interpret such numbers as being direct indicators of either the

effectiveness of patenting or the efficiency of the R&D processes.




                              27
5. Patents Rights and Patent Values

       Because the economic significance of individual patents is so variable,

there has been continued interest in trying to estimate the average value of

patent rights, the average value of the invention represented by a particular

patent, and the dispersion in both of these concepts. Looking at patents as

indicators of success of the underlying inventive activity or R&D program, we

are mainly interested in the second concept. The available data, however,

are mostly informative only about the first: the value associated with the

differential legal situation created by the possession of the patent.

       There are basically three sources of data on this topic: 1. Results of

direct surveys of patent owners or assignees about past returns and the

potential market value of their rights. 2. The valuation implicit in the

decision whether to pay a fee to renew the patent, a decision that had to be

made by European patent holders in the past and is now also facing U.S.

patent holders.      And 3, econometric analyses of the relationship of some

other value denominated variable, such as profits or stock market value, to the

number of patents. An example is the use of patent numbers as a proxy for

"intangible" capital in stock-market-value of the firm     regressions.
       The most detailed and extensive survey of patent holders was conducted

over 30 years ago by Bark.v Sanders and associates at the Patent and

Trademarks Foundation (see Rossnan and Sanders 1957, Sanders et al 1958, and

Sanders 1962 and 1964, and the discussion of it in Schmookler's book, pp. 47-

55). They conducted a mail survey in 1957 of the      owners atd assignees of a
two   percent   random sample of all patents issued in 1938, 1948, and 1952. There

were two   major   findings in this survey: 1. A surprisingly large fraction of

all sampled patents was    reported   to have been "used" co.rcia11y, either



                                 28
currently or in the past. The actual fraction "used" is sensitive to the

treatment of non-response. it is over 55 percent for those responding and

about 41 percent if one assumes that non-response is equivalent to non-use.

The "use" percentage is higher for "small" companies, but so is also the non.

response rate (71 percent used among respondents, 40 percent if adjusted for

non-response). Thus,   it   is not true that most patents are never used and are

hence not associated with a significant economic event. This finding is also

consistent with the renewal information to be discussed below. In Europe,

about 50 percent of all patents granted are still being renewed and a renewal

fee is being paid 10 years after they had been applied for. 2. The reported

economic gain from the innovations associated with these patents was very

dispersed. Among the patents reported to be in current use and with relevant

numerical responses and a positive gain (accounting for about 20 percent of

all the relevant responses), the mean value was $577,000 per patent, but the

median value was only about $25,000 (implying, under the assumption of log-

normality, 2.5 as the coefficient of variation and a standard deviation of

about $1.5 million). If one includes all the no gain, loss, and not yet used

patents, the mean gain falls to about $112,000, and the median is close to

zero or below, (computed from the tables in Sanders et ci, 1958, p. 355 and

357). Even this lover mean number is quite impressive, roughly equivalent to

$473,000 per average patent in 1988 prices (using the GNP deflator to convert

it from 1957 prices), but so is      also   the associated dispersion. Scherer

(1965) reports that fitting a Pareto-Levy distribution to these data

graphically yielded an estimate of the exponent (alpha) of about 0.5, implying

a distribution with no finite mean or variance. If this were truly the case,

then even in large samples the mean value of patents would not converge



                                29
rapidly, if at all, to its underlying population average.

       There   have been only very few other attempts at    such   a survey and they
all reach      rather similar conclusions. Schmookler (1966, P. 54-5) reports on a

small mail sample with a mean value of $80,000 and a median of about zero. In

1982 the Chemistry Program of NSF decided to evaluate the economic value of

patents attributable to its grants (Cutler 1984). Of the 96 patents surveyed,

52 had been licensed or were deemed licensable with an average "economic

value" of about $500,000 per patent. (The concept of "economic value" is

unclear in this study. It appears to refer to total potential sales of the

product rather than net returns to the owners of the patent.) A related

study, done for the NSF by SRI International (1985), examined a sample of patents

received by the grantees of the Engineering Program and estimated the royalty

potential of each patent, which turned out to be about $73,000 on average,

again with a very large dispersion. A more representative and large scale

survey of patent holders is both feasible and desirable but nothing has been

don. in this regard since 1957 and there does not seem to be anything like it

in th. works either in the U.S. or abroad.

       In many countries and recently also in the U.S., holders of patents must

pay   an annual renewal fee in order to keep their patents in force. If the

renewal fee is not paid in any single year th.        patent is permanently
cancelled.      Assuming that renewal    decisions are based on economic criteria,
ag.nts   will only renew their patents      if the value of holding them over an

additional year      exceeds th.   cost of such renewal. Observations on the

proportion     of   patents that are renewed at alternative ages, together with

the r.levant renewal fee schedules, will then contain information on the

distribution of the value of holding patents, and on the evolution of this



                                    30
distribution function over the lifespan of the patents. Since patent rights

are seldom marketed, this is one of the few sources of information on their

value. In a series of papers Fakes and Schankerman (1984), Fakes (1986), and

Schanicerman and Pakes (1986) present and estimate models which allow them to

recover the distribution of returns from holding patents at each age over

their lifespan. Since the renewal decision is based on the value of patent

protection to the patentee, the procedure used in these articles directly

estimates the private value of the benefits derived from the patent laws.

     In Figure 8 typical European data on renewal fees and patent survival

proportions are reproduced from Schankerman and Fakes (1986). They indicate

several interesting facts that should be kept in mind. About half of all

patents are renewed through age 10, indicating a significant expectation of

some "usefulness" for the majority of patents for some non-negligible time

period. On the other hand, the same data indicate that about half of all

patents are not renewed within ten years, indicating that the expected value

of the future income stream from these rights has fallen below the rather low

renewal cost. This implies that the majority of patents are either of low

value, or that their value depreciates (obsoletes) rapidly, or both. About 10

percent of all patents survive and pay the fees for the whole statutory period

and obviously contain a smaller number of very valuable patents. Fakes and

Schankerman use these facts in their various papers to construct models of the

renewal process and estimate both a distribution of the underlying patent

right values and also their rate of depreciation. Given the existence of an

open-ended class of patents in these data (those paying the renewal fees

throughout the whole period) and the rather low and relatively stable renewal

fee schedules, serious identification problems arise in such models. The



                              31
estimates of the mean value of patent rights rest, therefore, on specific

assumptions about the functional form of their distribution (how it looks in

the unseen tail) and on assumptions about the form of the depreciation

process. Some of these assumptions may be testable and some of the more

interesting conclusions of their work do not depend on them, but ultimately we

have to put some prior notions into such data to have them yield specific

numerical answers. The issues of identification and estimation are discussed

in much detail in the recent papers by Pakes and Simpson (1989) and

Schankerman (1989), together with the presentation of interesting new results

on additional countries and on industrial detail, and hence will not be

pursued further here. (See also Lanjouw, 1989, Schankerman 1990, and Lanjouw

and Schankerman 1989.)

       In the United States, patents which were applied for after 1980 have to

pay renewal fees 3 1/2, 7 1/2, and 11 1/2 years after the granting date.

Thes. fees are currently $450, $890, and $1340 respectively for corporations

and somewhat less than that for individuals and "small entities." As of the

end of 1988, 16 percent of the 1981-84 patents coming up to the payment of the

first maintenace fee "expired," with a slightly higher expiration rate for

U.s.   (17 percent) than for patents owned by foreign residents (15 percent)
implying, possibly, a higher average value or "quality"   for   the latter. An

earlier study of a smaller sample of such data found that individually owned

patents were expiring at a much higher rate than assigned patents (39 vs 13

percent for U.S. origin patents) and that "mechanical" patents had the highest

and "chemical" patents the lowest rates of expiration (Manchuso et al, 1987).

The growing availability of such renewal data in the future will provide us

with another very interesting window on the inventive process and its rewards


                                32
in the U.S.

     Returning to the specific results from the work on European patent

renewals, using a learning model for the early years of a patent's life, Pakes

(1986) finds that patents are applied for at an early stage in the inventive

process, a stage in which there is still substantial uncertainty concerning

both the returns that will be earned from holding the patents, and the returns

that will accrue to the patented ideas. Gradually the patentors uncover more

information about the actual value of their patents.   t'lost turn out to be of

little value, but the rare "winner" justifies the investments that were made

in developing them. His estimates imply also that most of the uncertainty

with respect to the value of a patent is resolved during the first three or

four years of its life. Using this result, Schankerman and Pakes (1986)

examine changes in the distribution of patent values over time and the

correlates of these changes. The substantive results from these papers imply

that the average value of a patent right is quite small, about $7,000 in the

population of patent applications in France and the UK. In Germany, where

only about 35 percent of all patent applications are granted (about 93 percent

and 83 percent were granted in France and the UK respectively), the average

value of a patent right among grants was about $17,000. The distribution of

these values, however, is very dispersed and skewed. One percent of patent

applications in France and the UK had values in excess of $70,000 while in

Germany one percent of patents granted had values in excess of $120,000.

Moreover, half of all the estimated value of patent rights accrues to between

five and ten percent of all the patents. The annual returns to patent

protection decay rather quickly over time, with rates of obsolescence on the

order of 10 to 20 percent per year. Since about 35,000 patents were applied


                              33
for per year in France and the UK and about 60,000 in Germany, these figures

imply that though the aggregate value of patent rights is quite large, it is

only on the order of 10 to 15 Dercent of the total national expenditures on

R&D. Other means of appropriating the benefits of R&D must be, therefore,

quite important.

     Schankerman and Pakes used their results to adjust the aggregate patent

time series for changes in their average "quality" (value). In their 1986

paper they find that even though the number of patents per scientist fell rather

sharply between 1965 and 1975 in the three countries examined by them, the

estimated "quality-adjusted" total value of patent rights per scientist and

engineer was effectively stable in both Germany and the UK, and dropped

only slightly in France (Schankerman and Pakes, 1986, Table 6).10




                              34
6. Patents      Stock Market Value



     Another line of work has used data on the stock market valuation of finns

to investigate both the "value" of patents and the information content of the

variability in their numbers. The use of stock market values as an "output"

indicator of the research process has one major advantage. All other

indicators of success, such as profits or productivity are likely to reflect

it only slowly and erratically. On the other hand, when an event occurs that

causes the market to reevaluate the accumulated output of a firm's research

endeavours, its full effect on the expected present value of a firm's future

net cash flows should be recorded immediately. This, of course, need not

equal what will eventually materialize. The downside of this type of

measurement is the large volatility in stock market measures. The needle

might be there but the haystack can be very large.

    The simplest market value model starts from the market valuation

identity, with the market value of the firm proportional to its physical

("tangible") and intangible capital, the latter being in part the product of

its past R&D investments and possibly 'also reflected in its accumulated patent

position (Griliches 1981, Ben-Zion 1984, Hirschey 1982, and Cockburn and

Griliches 1988, among others). It can be written as follows:



                        V — q(A+gK) — qA(l+gK/A)


where V is the market value of the firm, A is the current replacement cost of

its tangible assets, K is its level of intangible ("knowledge") capital and g

is its relative shadow price, and q is the current premium or discount of

market value over the replacement cost of tangible assets.11 Writing q as

                                     35
exp(a+u), where a represents individual firm   differences   in average valuation

due to the exclusion of other unmeasured capital components or market position

variables, taking logarithms, and approximating log(l+x) —    x,   we can rewrite

the estimating equation as:


                      lnQ—ln(V/A) —a+g}(/A+u

where the dependent variable is the logarithm of what has come to be called

"Tobin's Q." Using different measures of current and past patents and current

and past R&D expenditures as proxies for K, this kind of equation has been

estimated by various researchers. Table 3 reproduces a number of results from

the Cockburn and Criliches study. It shows that if we look at patents alone

the estimated value of a recent patent is about $500,000. This estimate is

halved when we put in both past and current R&D expenditures in the equation.

By and large. R&D is the "stronger" variable. The evidence for additional

information in the patent variables varies from sample to sample (patents were

stronger in the Criliches 1981 study which was based on a much smaller sample

of firms but also used the panel aspects of the data) and depends on which

other variables are included in the equation (see the move of the results from

columns 2 to 3 in this table).12

     A more dynamic point of view is taken by Pakes (1985) in his analysis of

the relationship between patents, R&D, and the stock market rate of return.

Events occur which affect the market value of a firm's R&D program and what

one estimates ar. the reduced form relationships between the percentage

increase in this valu, and current and subsequent changes in the firm's R&D

expenditures, its patent applications, and the market rate of return on its

stock. His empirical results indicate that about five percent of the variance

in the stock market rate of return is caused by the events which change both

R&D and patent applications. This leads to a significant correlation between

                                   36
movements in the stock market rate of return and unpredictable changes in both

patents and R&D expenditures. changes which could not be predicted from past

values of patents and R&D. On average, an "unexpected" increase in one patent

is associated with an increase in the firm's market value of $810,000, while

an unexpected increase of $100 of R&D expenditures is, on average, associated

with a $1,870 increase in the value of the firm. Patents are estimated to

                                                      whose variance is not
contain a significant noise component (a component

related to either the R&D or the stock market rate of return series). This

noise component accounts for only a small fraction of the large differences

in the number of patent applications of different firms (about 25%), but plays

a much larger role among the smaller fluctuations that occur in the patent

applications of a given firm over time (about 95%).     Similarly, the effect of

unexpected increases in patents on market value is highly variable.

Nevertheless, there is still some information in the time-series dimension.

If we were to observe, for example, a sudden large burst in the patent

applications of a given firm, we could be quite sure that events have occurred

 to cause a large change in the market value of its R&D program; but smaller
           ii the patent applications of a given firm are not likely to be very
 changes

 informative.

      The timing of the response of patents and R&D to events which change the

 value of a firm's R&D effort is quite similar.    One gets the impression from

 the estimates that such events cause a chain reaction, inducing an increase in

 R&D expenditures far into the future, and that firms patent around the links
                                                           resulting in a rather
 of this chain almost as quickly as they are completed,

 close relationship between R&D expenditures and the number of patents applied

 for. Perhaps surprisingly, Pakes finds no evidence that independent changes
                                                      of current and earlier R&D
 in the number of patents applied for (independent


                                      37
expenditures) produce significant effects on the market's valuation of the

firm.     Hence it is not possible to distinguish between demand shocks, where
demand shocks are loosely defined as events which cause increases in patenting

only through the R&D expenditures they induce, and technological or supply

shocks which may have a direct effect on patents as well as an indirect effect

via induced R&D demand.

        It is not obvious whether one can separate "demand" from "supply" factors

in this area, even conceptually. One way of defining "demand" factors is to

identify them with macro shifts in aggregate demand, population, exchange

rates, and relative factor prices that make inventive activity more (or less)

profitable at a given level of scientific information, a fixed "innovation

possibilities frontier." Changes in technological "opportunity," on the other

hand, are those scientific and technological breakthroughs which made

additional innovation more profitable or less costly at a fixed aggregate or

industry level demand. These distinctions are far from sharp, especially

given our inability to measure the contributions of science and technology

directly. Moreover, what is a technological opportunity in one industry

may     spillover   as a derived demand effect to another. Nevertheless, there is

something distinct in these factors, in their sources of change and

dynamics.13

        Patent   data could help here if one were willing to assume that

independent, "unanticipated" shifts in the level of patenting by firms,

represent shifts in technological opportunities and not responses to

changes in economic conditions (demand forces). That is, the identiying

assumption is that demand impinges on the level of patenting only through

the level of R&D expenditures (and slowly changing trends) and that the "news"

component in the patent statistics reflects technological "news," the

information that a particular line of research has turned out to be more (or


                                         38
less) fruitful or easier (harder) than expected when the decision to invest in

it was made originally. Changes in technological opportunity are thus

identified with "abnormal," "unexpected," bursts (or declines) in the number

of patents applied for.

     Several implications of this formulation are immediate. If patent

statistics contain additional information about shifts in technological

opportunities, then they should be correlated with current changes in market

value above and beyond their current relationship with R&D and they

should affect R&D levels in the future, even in the presence of the change in

market value variable since the latter variable is measured with much error.

Patents should "cause" R&D in the sense of Granger (1969).

     The available evidence on this point is not too encouraging: As noted

above, Griliches (1981) found a significant independent affect of patents on

the market values of firms, above and beyond their R&D expenditures, but Pakes

did not detect a significant influence of lagged patents on R&D in the

presence of lagged R&D and the stock market rate of return variables. Nor did

Hall, Griliches and Hausman (1986) find future R&D affecting current patenting

as the "causality" argument might have implied.   Griliches, Hall and Pakes

(1990) replicate some of Fakes' computations on a larger sample (340 firms)

and expand his equation system to add equations for sales, employment, and

investment. Their results indicate that the addition of the latter variables

is helpful, in the sense that fluctuations in their growth rates are related

to fluctuations in both the growth rate of R&D and the stock market rate   of

return and hence should help in identifying the relationships we are

interested in. But the expansion of the sample to include many small firms

with low levels of patenting, deteriorates significantly the informational

content of this variable, raising its noise to signal ratio, and making it

hard to discern a feedback from the independent variablity in patenting to any


                                    39
of the other variables. Thus, at the moment, it does not look as if the data

can sustain a model with. two separate factors ("market" and "technological"

innovations), even though in principle such a model is identifiable.

     The difficulties in implementing such models arise to a large extent

from the large "noise" component in patents as indicators of R&D output in the

short-run within-firm dimension. While the problem may      have   been obvious from

the beginning, it was the work of Pakes and Schankerman (1984) and their

estimates of the dispersion and the skewness in patent value which alerted

us to its actual magnitude.

     To derive quantitative implications of such a skewed distribution of

values for the quality of this indicator we can combine what we know about

patent counts in both the time series and cross section dimension with

estimates of the distribution of their values.

     One can write the innovation in the value of the firm      (net   of its

expected dividend and investment policy) as    the   sum of three components:




                              qV — w +         + Ut


wher.     is the rate of return on stock holding, Vt is the total

market-value of the firm's assets, and the    three components u            and u
are defined to be orthogonal to each other; w corresponds to the change in

the value of a firm's R&D "position" (program) arising from the "news"

associated with current patent applications;          reflects revaluations of

previous achievements associated with past patents (above and beyond their

correlation with current patents); while u reflects all other sources of

fluctuation in the value of the firm, including also possibly the contribution

of not patented R&D. Looking first at w and the role of patent numbers as



                                   40
an indicator of it we can ask about the possible magnitude                 of the variance of


w (relative to the variance of qV). That is, how large could the
contribution of current patents be to the explanation of fluctuations in

market value, even if we had a perfect measures of these values?

       To decompose the variance of the first component, we write it as


                                                 p
                                          w— Ey
                                                 i—l



and assume that (1) p, the number of patents applied for each year is

distributed as a Poisson random variable with a mean, A,                   which is a

distributed lag of past R&D expenditures (see Hausman, Hall,                 and Criliches

1985); and (2) y. is the underlying value of each patent and is distributed

as a log-normal random variable with a mean and variance which will be derived

from the earlier literature.

       The first two moments of w (under independence) are



                      E(w) —   E [py) —     AE[y)           where A — E[p]


                                     n
                           V(v) — V( E            —    A   V[y] + A(Ey)2
                                      i—i


       The component of the variance of w which could be accounted for by

 patent numbers corresponds to the last term



                   Var (p-] —   A2


 and   its   relative size is given by



                                            41
            Var (py]/Var [wJ —   l/(l+V[yJ/E[y)2)   —   l/(l+r2)

where v is the coefficient of variation in the distribution of patent

values.

     Turning to the literature for some order of magnitude estimates of

various parameters, we have estimates of the mean value of the news

associated with patents in the U.S. of between $200,000 (Griliches, 1981) and

$800,000 (Pakes, 1985) per patent. There is also some information on this

point in Criliches, Hall and Pakes: an estimate of $98,000 per unexpected

patent at the geometric mean of their data (with a very large standard error).

For the drug industry, where patents are more important, they get a larger and

somewhat more precise estimate: an $821,000 average increase in the value of

the firm per unexpected patent. This, in fact, is very similar to the Pakes

estimate which was based on a smaller sample of larger firms and is therefore

more comparable to their drug firms subset.

     Taking the upper range of these numbers, $800,000 per "unexpected

patent, and using ) — 13, the average (geometric) number of patents received

in the Criliches, Hall, Pakes sample (per year, per firm), the expected

contribution of the variance in patent numbers to the average variance in

market value is 13(0.8)2 (mil$)2 — $8.3 millions squared. To get an

estimate of Var(y), I borrow the estimated coefficertt of variation of the

distribution of patent values from Pakes (1986) and Schankerman and Pakes

(l986)) Both these articles produced coefficients of variation on the

order of 2 to 3.6. Since we are looking for upper-bound estimates, taking

3.6 and applying it to the "upper" range estimate of Ey — $0.8 million, gives

an estimate of the total variance of w as



                    13[(3.6x0.8)2 +   (0.8)2]   — $116 million sq.



                                       42
This is to be compared to the average variance of qV .      The variance of

q in the Criliches, Hall, Pakes sample is 0.133 which, evaluated at the

geometric average value of their firms ($276 million), yields a variance   of

market value changes on the order of $10,000 million squared. Comparing the

two variances gives an estimate of the relative importance of fluctuations in

the market value of new patented innovations as at about one percent of the

total fluctuations in market value.15 That is, even if one had good estimates

of patent values, they would account for little of the fluctuations in market

value. Having numbers instead of values makes matters much worse, reducing

this fraction even further. The contribution of patent numbers to the

variance in their values is only on the order of 7 percent (1/(1 +   (3.6)2)),
and their contribution to the explanation of the variance in the unexpected

changes in the market values of individual firms is much   smaller (less than

0.1 percent).16 One should not, therefore, use data on stock market

fluctuations in this fashion to test detailed hypotheses about the information

content of patent statistics. On the other hand, whilethe estimated variance

components are rather small, they should not be interpreted as   implying that

the returns to inventive activity are small or that the topic we have been

pursuing is not interesting, only that we have been looking for our particular

needle in a very large haystack.




                                    43
7. Spillovers and Other Uses of Patent Data


    A major unresolved issue in the area of economics of technology is     the

identification and measurement of R&D spillovers, the benefits that one company

or industry receives from the R&D activity of another. It is difficult to

trace such spillovers without having strong a priori notions about who are the

potential beneficiaries of whose research. (See Griliches, 1979, pp. 102-5

for additional discussion of these issues.) One way to approach this

problem is to use the detailed information on patenting by type of patent

(patent class) to cluster firms into common "technological activity"   clusters

and looking whether a firm's variables are related to the overall activity

levels of its cluster.

     In his thesis and several recent papers, Adam Jaffe (1983, 1985, 1986,

1988) has used firm level data on patenting by class of patent and on the

distribution of sales by 4-digit SIC to cluster firms into 21 distinct

technological clusters and 20 industry (sales orientation) clusters. It turns

out that these two criteria lead to different clusterings. Using the

technological clusters Jaffe constructed a measure of the total R&D "pool"

available for spillovers (borrowing or stealing) in a cluster. He then looked

at three "outcome" variables: R&D investment ratio for the firm (in 1976),

patents received (average number applied for during 1975-77), and output

growth, between 1972 and 1977. In each of these cases, his measure of the R&D

pool contributed significantly and positively to the explanation of the firm

level "outcome" variables even in the presence of industry dummies (based on

sales clustering). Not surprisingly, perhaps, firms in technological clusters



                              44
with large overall R&D "pools" invested more intensively in R&D than would be

predicted just from their industrial (SIC) location. More interesting is the

finding that firms received more patents per R&D dollar in clusters where more

R&D was performed by others, again above and beyond any pure industry

differences (based on a classification of their sales). Similarly, his

analysis of firm productivitry growth during the 1972-77 period showed that it

was related positively to both the average R&D intensity of the individual

firms and the change in the size of the R&D pool available to these firms. In

terms of profits, or market value, there were, however, both positive and

negative effects of neighboring firms' R&D. The net effect was positive for

high R&D firms, but firms with R&D about one standard deviation below the mean

were made worse off overall by the R&D of others. Here the idea of R&D

spillovers is made operational by using the firm's patenting pattern to

construct a measure of its location in "technological space" and showing that

the R&D of others, weighted inversely to their distance from this location has

an observable impact on its own success. More recently, Jaffe (1989) has used

regional data on patenting to investigate spillovers from academic research.

     Patent documents contain also citations to other, previous, patents.

Following the growth of interest in citations in general and the development

of computer software which allows the search for all subsequent citations of a

particular patent (or article), there has been a growing interest in using

citations counts as alternative "indexes" of differential quality. It should

be noted here that patent citations differ from usual scientific citations to

the work of others in that that they are largely the contribution of patent

examiners whose task is to delimit the reach of the new patent and note the

context in which it is granted. In that sense, the "objectivity" of such



                              45
citations is greater and may contribute to the validity of citation counts as

indexes of relative importance. But in another sense, they are like citations

added at the insistence of the eaitor; they may reflect the importance that is

put in the field on particular papers but are not a valid indicator for

channels of influence, for intellectual spillovers. On the other hand, they

bring us closer to something that might be interpreted as measuring the social

rather than just the private returns to these patents.

     The use of patent citations as "indicators" is discussed, largely in a

bibliometric style, by Campbell and Nieves (1979), Carpenter et al (1981),

Carpenter and Narin (1983), and Narin et al (1987) (see also the more general

discussion of bibliometric evidence in OTA, 1986, Chapter 3). An interesting

economic application is to be found in Trajtenberg (1987) who shows    that

citation weighted patent numbers are more closely correlated with his "output"

measure, consumer surplus gains from the development and diffusion of CAT-

scanners (computed tomography), while unweighted patent counts are more

closely related to "input," to &D expenditures by the various firms in this

field. (For another application of citation data see Lieberman, 1987). This

way of using patent data is only in its beginnings and we are likely to see a

much wider use of it in the future.

     A number of studies have tried to "validate" patents as indicators of

 technical change by connecting them to counts of innovations, new chemical

 entities, and subsequent measures of profits or growth. One   of   the earliest

 and best studies of this kind, Comanor and Scherer (1969), related

 pharmaceutical patents to the number of new chemical entities and all new

 products introduced by the different firms in subsequent years and found

 a closer relationship between patent applications (rather than grants) with


                               46
all new products (rather than just the number of new chemical entities). I

will not consider in detail a number of studies which found varying degrees of

relationship between patents, "invention" or "innovation" counts, because the

subjectivity and elasticity of such innovation count data makes their results

very difficult to interpret. For examples of such work see Achilladelis et al

(1987), Basberg (1982), Kleinknecht (1982) and Walsh (1984). Scherer (1965)

shows a positive relationship between earlier patenting rates and subsequent

profitability and sales growth differences in a cross-section of firms, but I

know of no studies which relate "successfully" patenting rates or patenting

stocks to subsequent growth of productivity at the firm level.

     Patent data have been used by Pavitt and Soete and their associates, to

analyze the relative "competitiveness" of various countries, to construct

"Revealed Technology Advantage" indexes for various countries, and to describe

and contrast the international location of inventive activity in different

industries. (Pavitt and Soete 1980. 1981, Pavitt 1982, Pavitt and Patel 1988,

and Soete 1987). Patents have been used by economic historians to study

regional patterns of economic growth and the externalities of population size

and agglomeration (Kelly 1972, Sokoloff 1988, and Sokoloff and Khan 1989, among

others). There have been also many other attempts to use patent data in

different areas of economic analysis. It is not possible, unfortunately, to

do justice to all of them here.




                              47
                                       FOOTNOTES




*   I am   indebted to my friends and collaborators for many ideas and comments.

Parts of this survey borrow heavily (often verbatim) from our earlier work on

this topic1 especially from Gri].iches, Pakes and Hall (1987), Griliches, Hall

and Pakes (1988) and Griliches (1989). I am indebted to the National Science

Foundation (PRA8S-12758 and SES 82-08006) and the National Bureau of Economic

Research Productivity Program for financial support of this work and to B.

Hall, A. Pakes, K. Pavitt, M. Schankerman, and F.M. Scherer for their comments

on an earlier draft. The first draft of this survey was begun while I was a

guest of the Rockefeller Foundation at the Sellagio Study and Conference

Center in Italy. An earlier version of this paper was presented as the W.S.

Woytinsky Lecture of 1989 at the University of Michigan.



I. There are several other good surveys on this range of topics. See

especially Basberg (1987), Pavitt (1978 and 1985), Pakes and Simpson (1989),

Schankerman (1989), and the earlier books by Schmookler (1966) and Taylor

and Silberston (1973).


2. This is especially true of some of the European work on related topics,

since it often asks somewhat different questions in a different intellectual

 framework.


 3. See OTAF 1985, the proceedings of the conference on the concordance, for a

more detailed discussion of some of these issues.


 4. Of course, one need not start here. It is a particularly American view,


                                   1
which finds thinking in terms of a "production function of knowledge"

congenial and useful, and looks for patents to serve as a proxy for the

"output" of this process. Less "neo-classically" oriented economists would

deny the usefulness of this view or the uniform direction of causality that it

implicitly espouses.


5. This conclusion depends on the additive nature of the error in the

indicator function. If K were to be looked at just as an aggregation of

inventive events, each with a potential value of its own, drawn independently

from some value distribution, and P counted only some fraction of such

events and was not related to their values, (as in the calculations outlined

in Section 6), then the above inequalities would not hold anymore. If,    on the

other hand, the patenting decision itself were a function of the size of the

expected gain from the invention, as noted in the text, then the situation

would be somewhere in between.


6. To the extent that some patents arise in the development stage, they would

also be related to R&D with only a short lag.


7. Sirrilli (1987) shows that in small firms in Italy (less than 100

employees) over a third of the inventors (36 percent) come from production

and quality and control activities, while in the large firms (employees >1000)

only 11 percent of the inventors come from this category. The proportion     of

                                        from 39 percent in small firms to    63
patents originating in formal R&D rises

percent in the large ones with the rest (25 and 26 percent) being in the more
ambigious "design" category. Similar conclusions can also be infered from
Kleinknecht (1989), who reports a significant underestimate of R&D activities


                                 2
in small firms by the conventional data collection methodology.


8. See Jensen 1987 for similar results using new chemical entities rather
                                                       other measures, see Scherer
than patents. For contradictor)' evidence, using

1985b, Chapter 11 and Acs and Audretsch, 1989.



9. Based on unpublished tabluations of the Office of Documentation

Information at the U.S. Patent Office.


                                                           1989 and 1990 for an extension
10. See Pakes and Simpson 1989 and Schankerman,
                                                           approach to the same problem.
of these results and Trajtenberg 1988 for another


11. This equation would hold exactly in a world in which all assets were fully
                                                                       is valid in a
traded in the same market. More generally, such an equation
                                                       conditions, such as the
multi-capital setting only under very stringent

linear-homogeneitY of the profit function. See Wildasin (1984) and Hayashi and

Inous (1989) for more discussion.


12. See Hall 1989, Chapter 2, for similar results.


 13. This is, of course, related to Schaookler's distinction between patents

 classified by industry of origin versus industry of use.           "Who Does the

 invention" depends more on supply considerations            "For whom the invention is

 doneTM is more likely to be affected by demand shifts.


 14. They   estimate the value   of the patent rights. I assume         that the value of
 th. underlying innovation is    proportional   to   its   patent right value and highly
 correlated   to it.




                                   3
15. There are two major problems in using this procedure to estimate the

variance of the news in the economic value of patents held by the firm: the

first is that the distribution estimated by Schankerman and Pakes is a

distribution of the value of patent rights, which may vary less than

proportionally with the true economic valueof the associated invention to the

firm. The second problem probably goes in the other direction: some of the

change in the firm's patent value this year may not be news, and thus may have

already been incorporated into the market value at the beginning of the year.

Allowing for some predictability of patent numbers would only reduce such

fractions futher, multiplying them essentially by   l-R2 of the prediction

equation. (See Griliches, Hall and Pakes (1990) for a more detailed discussion

of this and related issues.)


16. An alternative approach to this question is developed in Griliches,     Hall

and Pakes by modelling the components of variance in stock market value

surprises explicitly as functions of current and past patenting and R&D

activity, allowing one to estimate also the contribution of revisions in past

patents values to current changes in market value. Though the resulting

estimates are rather imprecise, since they are based essentially on fourth

moments of the data, they do imply that the variance in the news about the

value of patents (current and past) could account for about five percent of

the total variance in market value surprises, a number which may   look low but

is actually a number as high as any that have been found in other studies of

market value revisions. Only about one-fifth of this, however, can be

attributed to news associated with current patent applications.




                                4
                              Table 1


                  Selectivity of Firms in 1976 Cross-Section

                            by Size of Employment




               Number of firmsa          Number of firms          Ratio
Employment                                                    b
              in cross-section       in Census of Enterprises


                      24                     16,000               .0015
< 10

                     301                     14,300               .021
10-99

                     952                      9,000               .106
100-999

                    1267                      1,900               .667
1000 +



                    2541                     41,200               .062
Total



a With good employment data. Computed from the data used in Bound et   al
(1984).
b    comparable manufacturing industries. From U.S. Bureau of the Census,
EnterDrise Statistics nfl, General Report on Industrial Organization, Table
3, pp. 152-198.
                                    Table 2



           The Stock Market's Relative %luatian of R&D and Patents

                           Dependent Variable: log (q)



                        0.493                    0.111               0.246
SP/A
                       (0.165)                  (0.094)              (0.082)


                                                 1.374               0.741
K/A
                                                 (0.182)             (0.15.2)

                                                                     11.99
NR/A
                                                                     (1.556)




                          0.027                  0.125                0.258
R2




V —     market value of the firm
A —     Total   net assets at replacement cost

Q      —V
K —     "Stock"   of R&D using 15 percent depreciation rate

MR —    "News in R&D": Current R&D less depreciation of the R&D stock
SP —    "Stock"   of Patents using 30 percent depreciation rate


                                                                        0.697.
N — 722. Mean of the dependent variable — -0.272, standard deviation —
HeteroscedasticitY.Conststent standard errors in parentheses.
Matched by IND, 1980 Data.
All equ.ations also contain an intercept term and the logarithm of Assets,
whose coefficient was small but consistently
                                              significant, on the order of
.0.03 (0.01).

From Cockb,trn and Griliches (1987), Table 3.




                                         1
  Figure     1: U.S.    Patent Applications and Grants,                   1880—1988,
                            in Thousands.


125


•100•
                                   Applica
 75

 50                                               I'
                                                           —



                            ,%l_
                                                                                     —
 25                                                                             —,
                                                                            /            -V

   0
             90      00       10       20       30         40   50   60    70

  Sources:   U.S. Patent Office.   See Notes to Table 2.
Figure 2: U.S. Domestic Patents and                                 R&D, 1953—88, log                        scale.




35,
                                    /     /                             "—DomCorpGr
                                  \                                          \                       -
3.0
      \   I1
                                                            CoR&D            -
25




               .       .          •   •          •          U   I   U    I   U   I   I   I   I   I       I
1.0   .            .       . I             I          I

      1955                 1960           1965       1970           1975             1980                1985
                                     Figure 3


             A simplified   path analysis diagran of the overall del.
             Squares   denote unobservabli magnitudes and circles denote
             observable ones.




      eu                                                      _
                                                             The Z's are indicators
                                                             of other expected or
                                                             realized benefits fro
                                                             invention



                                                              The K.P.P.




•
                                                      Research txpendi bares
    Quantitative Indicator
    of Number of Inventions




    Froe: Pakea A. and Z. Griliches, 1984. p. 56
                                                                                                               FIGURE 4

                                            LOG OF PATENTS/ASSETS VS LOG OF R&D/ASSETS

      2.0
I.


0     3.5
G                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S
      3.0                                                                                                                                                            I.
0                                                                                                                                                                             S     •                    •    •5
      0.   5                                                                                                                                                           S      5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       •
                                                                                                                                                                SI
0                                                                                                                                                                             •5
F     0.   0                                                                                                        •ø   ••'                                                               SI
                                                                                                                                                                                            •S
                                                                         •                                                                                                                 55%        S
P    -0.   5                                                                                      •
                                                                                                          .                                                                                I .s
A                                                                                                 I
I    -1.0                                                                                                      I                                                                                    .'
                                                                     • •5                S                    I.
E                                                •        S

N    -1.5                                                     I                                       •       •
                                                         S5          •               •
T                                                                    S.              S
                                                          •              S
                                                                                 S
S    -2.   0                                                                     S                                                      •I        S.
/                                                    • :             •.
                                                                     S                                             •. •I
A    -2.   5                                         55                                               S
                                                     I            5.                     •
S                                                                 I                      S
S    -3.   0—
E
                                                 S
 I   -3.   5-                                                                                                                                             s-                  s    s   s        S            5 S   5   E            ri   I
                                   S   S   S S   •5—$                ,       ,               $                                  s                s-s is
                  r      '''''                                •                  sir             ii                 i* t i-s        p
                                                                                                                                        i   ii                 tpi   ii ..i                         ri 1,                  1'$r s            I.
 S
                —3.5        -3.0                              -2.5                                -2.0
                                                                                                          i i,                 -1.5                       —1.0                         -0.5                            0.0                   0.5

                                                                                                  BASE 10 LOG OF R&D/ASSETS


                From:   Bound, J.,         et    al, 1984, FIg. 2.4
                                   FIGURE 5




p
A
r
£
N
I
/
S

M
I
I..

L
0
N

R
 I
 0
 0
 0
 t.
 L
    A

    $

         5.0   3.2 5.4   5.5 5.1 5.0 1.2 54 5.6 6.6 7.0 7.2         7.4   7.6 7.6
                                 $O 512! CLASS CIAS! 10 LOG OP W)




      From Bound et al, 1984, Figure 2.6
                                                                                                   FIGURE 6

                                                                     PREDICTIONS OF VARIOUS PATENTS MODELS




                                                                                                                                                                                   a,
                                                                                                                                                                                                     —
                                                                                                                                                                                                         r   —


           .4                                                                                                                                          a           •
,.    5-                                                                                                                                                          •            •
                                                                                                                                                  a
()         1



0                                                                                                                  •                      4
                                                                                                             •0                     a
                                                                                                                                              a
F                                                                                                            •
                                                                                                             •          .
           4                                                                                                   •                     a,                                    'a •
I-)
                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                               •    _ea
A     3-                                                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                                                                      •        a
I.
                                                                                                    1•
                                                                                                   a.
                                                                                                                                                          a
                                                                 a                      a.
 I    -
      r.        •                                                                   a    a    •                                                               •        a
            .                                                            a• a •         a.                                                  a
 I;                                                         aa       .                  • .
                                                    .        a       a a                                                                a.
                                                                           ..a.....
                                               I.                                                                                       •             a
      1-i
                             S..——
                                          —   a.. a • •* .,
            .1



                    •    a        a ...
                                                                                         /
                                                                                 — .i.ui.uiai..uuiuuaa              ..      a        a•
      (3                                       ..
            -5               —4               —3        —2                  —1
                                                                                              1•
                                                                                              0
                                                                                                         .
                                                                                                         1                  2                     3                        4            5      6         7       8

                                                                                              LOG OF     RO        IN       MILLIONS

                                                        •    •                                    -— NB                         —   — —                                                  OLS       —— Pot.
                        LEUENO. MODEl.                               • Data                                                                       NLLS

                        From Bound et al 1984,              Figure          2.1
                                FIGURE 7
                   Renewal Costs and Renewal Proportions




t. 1,420

    1,220


    1,020


         820


         620




                   0      3          7        10      14          18
                                          A
                         Age paths   o(ddlazed renewal ccsta.


   Pt.
          10


          0'8




          06


          04


          02


               0
                   0       3         7        10      14          1$

                               Age paths o( rewiI pco      cm..




From Schankerman and Pakes, 1986, Figures 2 and 3
