                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        DOES LABOR SUPPLY EXPLAIN FLUCTUATIONS IN AVERAGE HOURS WORKED?




                              Joshua D. Angrist




                            Working Paper No. 3312




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 1990




I thank Gary Chamberlain, Greg Mankiw and seminar participants at the Harvard
Labor Workshop for helpful comments and suggestions. Thanks also go to John
Lemkemeier and David Rodda for exemplary research assistance. Financial
support of the author and funding for computation were provided by the
Princeton Industrial Relations Section and the Harvard Institute for Economic
Research. Data and computer programs used in this study are available on
request. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #3312
                                       March 199Q


       DOES LABOR SUPPLY EXPLAIN FLUCTUATIONS IN AVERAGE HOURS WORKED?


                                  ABSTRACT

     Economists have long debated over what labor supply has to do with
fluctuations in hours worked. This paper uses a time series of cross-sections
from the 1964-88 Current Population Surveys to study whether microeconomic
intertemporal substitution models can explain time series fluctuations in
annual averages. Conditional on a parametric trend, labor supply equations fit
the 1975-87 data remarkably well. But estimates for 1963-74 are not robust,
and estimated labor supply elasticities are much lower in the earlier period.




                                      Joshua D. Angrist
                                      Department of Economics
                                      Harvard University
                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      (617)495-4132
1. Introduction



       Twenty years ago, Lucas and Rapping (1970) proposed that unemployment

be interpreted as a labor supply response to temporarily low wage rates.

Since then economists have continued to argue over what labor supply has to

do with fluctuations in employment and hours worked, most recently in the

debate over Real Business Cycle theory (Plosser 1989, Mankiw 1989). At a

minimum, intertemporal substitution theories such as that of Lucas and

Rapping require that wages and hours worked be positively correlated.

Recent evidence that wages are procyclical include the work of Bils (1985)

and Solon and Barsky (1988). On the other hand, Chirinko (1980), Ceary and

Kennan (1982), and others have argued that wages are noncyclical. Even if

wages are procyclical, the fact that hours rise when wages rise does not

mean that hours rise because wages rise.

       In addition to wage cyclicality, the contemporary discussion of

intertemporal substitution appears to revolve around two issues. Some

authors have focused on the fraction of variance in hours worked that can

be explained by changes in wage rates. For example, in his recent survey

of the labor supply literature, Pencavel (1986) concludes that the

behavioral response to changing wage rates is a "second order effect".

Others have been concerned with whether labor supply models pass a variety

of specification tests. The ability of labor supply models to pass such

tests can be taken as a litmus test for whether labor supply explains

of   the variance in hours worked)

      In this paper, a time series of cross-sections from the Current

Population Survey (CPS) is used to study whether microeconomic


                                       1
 intertemporal substitution models can explain time series fluctuations in

average hours worked. Labor supply equations are fit to annual averages

tabulated from each CE'S from 1963 through 1987. Paralleling the two

branches of argument over intertemporal substitution theories of the

business cycle, the empirical work has two components. First, real wages

are shown to be strongly procyclical between 1975 and 1987, but only weakly

procyclical or noncyclical between 1963 and 1974. Second, goodness-of-fit

tests are used to evaluate the labor supply interpretation of the

correlation between average hours worked and wages.

     Section II outlines an econometric framework for the application of

microeconornic models to annual averages. The main point in this section is

that when individual observations are grouped into a fixed number of annual

averages, period effects must be excluded from the underlying microeconomic

equation. Thus, if period effects are found to be necessary in individual

labor supply equations, such equations cannot be used to explain movements

in annual averages. If period effects need not be included, however, they

may be used as instrumental variables. Use of period effects as

instrumental variables for a microeconomic model is the same as Ceneralized

Least Squares (OLS) on annual averages. Furthermore, the

overidentificatjon test associated with instrumental variables can be

interpreted as a test of goodness-of-fit of the microeconomic model to

annual averages.

     Other issues raised in Section II include the possibility of

simultaneous equations bias in models fit to annual averages, the

implications of uncertainty in the micro model and random effects in the

aggregate model, and the implications of including only working men in the


                                      2
estimating sample. Given the assumptions commonly invoked in life-cycle

models, there is no simultaneous equations bias in estimates based on

grouped data. Allowing for uncertainty or random effects does not change

this conclusion, although standard errors and test statistics are affected.

As is well known, restricting the sample to working men does bias labor

supply estimates, but in some circumstances consistent estimates can be

recovered simply by including aggregate macroeconomic variables as

regressors in equations for annual averages.

     Section III presents graphical and statistical evidence on the labor

supply interpretation of movements in wages and hours. Conditional on a

quadratic trend, labor supply equations fit the 1975-87 data rather well.

But estimates for 1963-74 are not robust, and estimated labor supply

elasticities are generally much lower in the earlier period.

     Estimation using data for 1963-74 is complicated by the lack of

information on hours and weeks worked, and annual hours worked must be

imputed for these years. Section IV presents evidence that aggregation of

the micro model eliminates most of the bias induced by the use of imputed

data in 1963-75, so that reduced procyclicality of wages in the earlier

period is not a consequence of measurement error in hours data. Section V

discusses labor supply equations with measures of aggregate demand included

as regressors, and Section VI offers a summary   and   conclusions.



II. Econometric Framework



Estimatin Life-Cycle Labor Supyly Models

     In standard life-cycle theory, consumers are assumed to face a known


                                     3
stream of wages and prices, and to maximize a lifetime utility function

that is intertemporally additive and additively separable in consumption

and leisure. Given these assumptions, current period labor supply or labor

earnings depends solely on contemporaneous wage rates and the time-

invariant marginal utility of lifetime wealth. In fact, for the purposes

of estimation, any time-invariant individual characteristics may be viewed

as being absorbed into a fixed effect. Life-cycle theory therefore

provides a parsimonious specification for empirical research.2

     One commonly estimated life-cycle model is a log-linear equation for

hours, derived from the utility function discussed by Heckman and MaCurdy

(1980) and MaCurdy (1981). then the rate of time preference and the

interest rate are constant, the Heckinan and MaCurdy hours equation for

individual i at time t is (   i — 1,   .   . , N;   t —   1,...,   T)



                      —
                          a1 + fi1(p-r)t + G1w +            + u1.,         (1)




where Ai is proportional to the log of i's time-invariant marginal utility

of wealth, r is the interest rate and p is the rate of time preference.

hi and      are the log of hours and wages, and l denotes the

intertemporal substitution elasticity.

    As originally pointed out by MaCurdy (1981), equation (1) generates a

relationship between log hours and log earnings that may also be used to

estimate the labor supply elasticity. Adding 9hi to both sides of

equation (1) and dividing by (1+9) gives



             hi —     +                                                   (2)
                          2(p-r)t + (O/(1+92)]y + Ai + u2ie

                                           4
where y is log earnings. Elasticities based on this equation have been

relabelled 2' and Ai includes 11(1+82]. Defining p — 921(1+82], we have

97 p/[l-s). Note that because the log of earnings equals log wages plus

log hours, equation (2) must be estimated by instrumental variables.

     Most of the empirical work based on equations (1) and (2) uses panel

data to control for       which is necessarily correlated with wage rates.3

Bias from the unobserved      is usually eliminated by transformations such

as differencing or deviations from means, and bias from measurement error

is treated with instrumental variables.

     In a survey of applied labor supply research, Ashenfelter (1984)

points out that the life-cycle framework may also be used to investigate

the ability of intertemporal substitution models to explain macroeconomic

fluctuations. Ashenfelter notes that because the only source of omitted

variables bias in (1) and (2) is the time-invariant Aj,         consistent
estimates of l or 921(1+92) may be tabulated by flitting (1) or (2) to

annual averages. For example, equation (1) is fit to annual averages by

estimating                                          -




                      —      +    + 461(p-r)t   +          +                     (3)


     Ashenfelter's point about annual   averages        (an observation also made by

Macurdy [1985]) is primarily a statistical one. Although 9 does capture

the response to a perfectly foreseen business cycle, life-cycle models are

not really formulated to explain responses to transitory wage changes.

Rather, 8 is meant to capture intertemporal substitution in response to

evolutionary wage changes over the life-cycle, say as a consequence of

human capital accumulation. Nevertheless, microeconometric evidence from


                                        5
 life-cycle models has been widely used to evaluate intertemporaj.

 substitution theories of aggregate fluctuations (e.g., Card 1987, Mankiw

 1989). The justification for this is that in models where wages are

 uncertain, the impact of unforseen movements in wages on    is small

 relative to the impact on contemporaneous wage rates (e.g., Altonji 1986).

The life-cycle model under uncertainty is therefore conceptually more

attractive for relating cyclical fluctuations to intertemporal

substitution. But for empirical strategies, the practical consequences of

uncertainty are rather minor. Therefore, most of the discussion that

follows uses the simpler framework of life-cycle labor supply under

certainty.

     Angrist (1991) offers an instrumental variables interpretation of

grouped equations like (3). It is well known that the minimum variance

estimator for grouped data is a form of Generalized Least Squares (Prais

and Aitchison 1954). In the standard case where the micro residual is

homoscedastic, the GLS estimator is simply weighted least squares with

weights proportional to the group size. In Angrist (1991), the Prais and

Aitchison Generalized Least squares (CLS) estimates of an equation such as

(3) are shown to be Two-Stage Least Squares (TSLS) estimates, where the

instruments consist of dummy variables that indicate each period. Thus,

the key identifying assumption required for estimation using grouped data

is that there be no group effects in the ungrouped equation.4 If this

assumption is satisfied, grouping provides a means of controlling for time

invariant unobserved heterogeneity, and for eliminating bias from

measurement error in regressors.5

    The TSLS interpretation of grouping also provides a simple framework


                                      6
for evaluating whether equations such as (1) and (2) can explain cyclical

fluctuations, If the underlying micro model contains a period specific

intercept, then period effects will not be legitimate instrumental

variables. On the other hand, if period effects are legitimately excluded

from (1) and (2), possibly after conditioning on other macroeconomic

variables, then Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) or Generalized Least Squares

(GLS) estimates of the grouped equations will be consistent. The exclusion

of period effects may be formally tested using standard TSLS   over-
identification tests, which give a measure of the correlation between

instruments and residuals in the underlying microeconomic model. The test

may also be interpreted as measuring the goodness of fit of the micro model

to sample means.6



Simultaneous Ecuations Bias

     In an equilibrium labor market, how can it be that least squares

estimates of equation (3) are consistent ?    The reason simultaneous

equations bias may be ignored in this model is that the agzre2ate supply

curve is assumed to be fixed over time. The only temporal variation in

average wages and hours comes from demand shocks that "trace out" the

aggregate supply curve. To see this more formally, assume that the

following equation characterizes firm f's demand for labor




                    S h. —
                    icf       'o   +l   S w + St
                                        ief
                                                   +
                                                       tf               (4)



Thus, the fins' demand for hours is function of the total wage bill. In


                                        7
this model average hours work demanded are



                           —       + &JC + 71W + c,                       (5)




where    is the reciprocal of the average number of workers hired per firm

in period t.

        is likely to be determined as part of equilibrium in a larger

system, but the level of average wages and hours is assumed to be

determined by equality of supply and demand. Therefore, the reduced form

for average wages is given by



                      —        +    +       +   -
                          '0

where 'cr w1 and '2 denote reduced form parameters and   is the reduced

form period effect.

    Although the error term alt appears in both the grouped supply curve

and the reduced form for grouped wages, it is asymptotically negligible

when group size gets large. Intuitively, period effects in the reduced

form for wages can be thought of as the sole source of random error in the

model grouped into annual averages; there is no time series random error in

the grouped supply curve. Because the supply curve is fixed over time,

shifts in n identify intertemporal substitution elasticities.

    It should be noted that the question of simultaneity bias turns on the

assumption that group sizes are large enough for a valid asymptotic

approximation. If group size is held fixed while the number of groups get

large, then it is clear from the reduced form for wages that regressor-


                                        8
 error correlation will not be asymptotically negligible. Furthermore,
                                                                          when
 asymptotics are done on the number of groups, group sample means no
                                                                       longer
 converge to population means. The sample means must then be treated as

 mismeasured observations of the population means. Deaton (1985)
                                                                   develops
 this approach to grouped estimation, and offers formulas to correct

 estimates and standard errors for attenuation bias from measurement error.



A Note on Random Effects and Uncertainty

     The estimation of equations grouped into annual averages is justified

by the assumption that there are no period effects in the underlying micro

labor supply model, and therefore no period effects in the grouped

equation. An alternative specification adds an aggregate random effect

that is uncorrelated with average wages to the grouped equation. This

modification is attractive because the basic life-cycle model generates no

'macro residual". That is, population means should fit the grouped life-

cycle model perfectly.

     In an equilibrium labor market model, the random period effect must be

"tacked on to the equation for annual averages. Otherwise, if the period

effect is assumed to appear in the underlying microeconomic model, the same

period effect will appear in the reduced form for wages as appears in the

labor supply error term. Thus, the random effects model is an ad hoc

generalization of the model discussed above; average wages are determined

in equilibrium by equations (5) and (1), but the aggregate hours equation

has the form

                  — Mo +     + fl1(p-r)t +     + [e +                    (3')




                                      9
where     is asymptotically uncorrelated with the regressors in (3').

     The assumption that           is asymptotically uncorrelated with wages

implies that CLS estimates of parameters in (3') will be consistent as both

T and N get large. But standard errors and test statistics must be revised

to take account of the fact that the variance of                   is not negligible even

for very large N.

     To keep the notation simple, assume that                  and u11 are uncorrelated,

with variances      and 2, and that the groups are of equal size, n.

Assuming that the      are not serially correlated, the correct GLS weighting

matrix is diagonal with elements equal to              +     (a2/n).7   But estimates

constructed using time dummies as instruments are equivalent to GLS

estimates using a weighting matrix with (2 +             a2)/n     on the diagonal.

Therefore, the over-identification test statistic for the random effects

model (equal to the quadratic form minimized by GLS) is the over-

identification test statistic for the model without random effects

multiplied by
                           2                 2
                               —    [r 2           2
                                           +u 1/In'- +       a]2

Similarly, standard errors for parameters in the random effects model are

computed by multiplying the standard errors from the model without random

effects by w1•. An estimator for the numerator of €,,2 is the residual

variance reported by most TSLS software. The denominator may be estimated

by substituting the TSLS parameter estimates into equation (3') to compute

an average residual with variance equal to               +   (c2/n).
    An alternative random effects-type model for grouped data can be

motivated by the life-cycle model with uncertainty. In MaCurdy's (1985)


                                              10
version of the life-cycle model where consumers maximize expected
                                                                              utility,
 A obeys the following stochastic process;


                      Ai —   Ai1     + b +
                                             ei —   Aio
                                                          +   bt

where ei is a one-period forecast error. The parameter b is fixed when

interest rates and discount rates are assumed constant. The annual
                                                                                   average
of A        is therefore
       ft

                                    A —À +bt÷z
                                                    i_api

where         is the average forecast error in period j. The term A0 may be

absorbed into the constant, and bt is the same trend as in the model with

certainty. Rut the sum        of   average forecast errors is a random effect that

becomes part of the grouped regression error.

       In contrast to the case where an arbitrary random period effect is

tacked on,     the sum of   average forecast errors is clearly heteroscedastic.

The question of whether A. has a variance that is asymptotically negligible

turns on whether there is a common component in the individual forecast

errors. For example, when the errors are independent over i and the group

                                 t
                                                              2         2
size is ntP then the variance of i
                                       i-oJ
                                               is just tr
                                                               /n where r is the
variance     of ei. Even here, the residual variance may not be

asymptotically negligible if the asymptotics are done on both nt and T.

       A simple procedure for estimating the uncertainty model with

uncorrelated forecast errors is weighted least squares, where the weights

are equal to the inverse variances of the grouped residuals. That is, the

weights are given by c/n. where              is the variance of residuals in period

t.   This    may be contrasted with the hoinoscedastic Prais and Aitchison

                                              11
 (1954) case, where the same 2 is used each period. As when the micro

residuals are homoscedastic, the more general weighted least squares

procedure is also a TSLS estimator. In this case, the TSLS equivalent of

grouping is White's (1982) optimally weighted TSLS estimator for

independent, not identically dIstributed samples.8



Sample    Selection
     An important feature of labor supply behavior is the participation

decision. Because individuals who work are not a random sample of the

population, allowance should be made for the possibility of sample

selection bias. Beckman (1979) shows that a general solution to the

selection bias problem can be obtained by including the conditional mean of

the error term in an equation estimated using the selected sample. In the

micro labor supply model, the problem of sample selection is treated by

fitting

              hi —         +               +               +   + E(uiiISSR)
                      ci       fl1(p-r)t       91w1
                                                                              +
                                                                                  1it     (6)




to individuals with positive hours and earnings, where E(ui.ISSR) denotes

the mean of the error term conditional on the Sample Selection Rule (SSR).

     A consequence of equation (6) is that the sample selection can be

analyzed as a problem of missing regressors. Of particular interest here

is the question of whether sample selection induces a period effect in the

labor supply model. Suppose that the sample is selected according to

whether the expected wage exceeds the reservation wage, where the expected

wage is linear combination of variables,                       and the reservation wage is a

linear combination of variables, X2. Then participation by individual i at


                                                      12
time t is determined by the condition

                         xlit#l -   "lit >   2it2 -
                                                      "2it                   (7)




where *. and      are parameters, and           and     are random variables. It

is convenient to rewrite this as

                                             > Mit,                          (8)




where       —            and        — "lit"zit

        Following Olsen (1980), I assume that E(uijlvit) is a linear function

of "it' and that       is uniformly distributed. Then E(uiiISSR) is a

linear function of         so that sample selection bias may be eliminated

simply by including additional regressors, Zfr If            has no time-varying

components, then sample selection does not induce a period effect in the

grouped model. On the other hand, if expected or reservation wages are a

function of aggregate labor market conditions, then the period mean of

will not be fixed. In this case, the parameters of labor supply equations

cannot usually be identified solely by time series variation in hours and

wages or hours and earnings.9

    The need to control for sample selection may justify the inclusion of

demand side variables in the labor supply equation. 11am (1986), Card

(1987), and others have argued that one important implication of

equilibrium models is that suppliers obtain all the information they need

about the demand side of the market from equilibrium wage rates. According

to this view, nonzero coefficients on measures of aggregate labor market

conditions in individual labor supply equations should be taken as evidence

against the equilibrium hypothesis. But in the sample selection model,


                                         13
demand side aggregates should be included in equilibrium labor supply

equations whenever these aggregates determine offered or reservation wages.

For example, if reservation wages are determined partly by unemployment

rates, these rates may appear as a regressors even though unemployment is

not a result of constraints on supply.1°



III. Intertemporal Substitution: 1963-87



Data

       Data on earnings and hours worked from 1975-87 are drawn from March

CPS Public Use Tapes for 1976-88. Earnings data for 1963-74 are drawn from

the Mare-Winship Uniform Extracts of March CPS data for 1964-1975. The

sample is divided into two periods because the quality of information on

hours worked changes in 1976. From 1976 on, the March CPS records the

number of weeks worked and the usual hours worked per week in the year

preceding the survey year. For 1975-87, annual hours worked last year is

then estimated as the product of these two   variables.   Preceding the 1976

CPS, however, information on usual hours per week is not recorded, and

weeks worked are only recorded as a categorical variable with seven
              11
categories.

       For the purposes of estimation in the earlier period, annual hours

worked were imputed using two   approximations.   First, men were assigned the

midpoint of the category interval for weeks worked last year. For example,

men in category 1 worked 1-13 weeks and were assigned a value of 7.

Second, usual hours per week last year was replaced by actual hours worked

last jç. The first of these approximations is unsatisfactory because the


                                       14
 use of interval midpoints for categorical dependent
                                                       variables leads to
 inconsistent estimates (Stewart 1983). The second approximation is poor

 because the R2 from a regression of hours last week on usual hours last
                     12
 year is only 0.15

      Imputation of hours worked is also complicated by the fact
                                                                   that there
 are people with positive hours worked last year but no hours worked last

 week. This is approximately 10% of men in 1976-88 CI'S's. Again a simple

 approach to this problem was taken - men with hours last year who did not

 work last week were discarded from the 1963-74
                                                  estimating sample.
     To evaluate the consequences of imputation, data from 1976-88 were

used to compute both imputed and actual hours worked. The a2 from a

 regression of log imputed hours on log actual hours is only 0.54 in a

regression with period effects. Average hourly earnings (wages) were also

computed from imputed hours worked. For log wages, the       is considerably
higher than for log hours, equal to 0.83. Imputed wages remain a noisy

signal, however and OLS estimates of coefficients on wages and earnings

reflect substantial measurement-error bias when tabulated using imputed

data. Nevertheless, the grouped estimates appear remarkably insensitive to

the use of imputed data. This fact is documented in Section IV, below.

     Individuals sampled for the CPS are interviewed a total of 8 times

over a period of 16 months: one interview a month for four months,
                                                                       eight
months without an interview, and again one interview a month for four

months. Thus, the CI'S sample is designed so that consecutive March Surveys

have a 50% overlap, with respondents who were in the sample 1-4 times as of

their first March Survey appearing the following year for sample months 5-

8. The reappearance of sampled individuals generates year to year


                                     15
correlation in individual earnings and hours, inducing a nondiagonal

covariance matrix in data grouped into annual averages. The theoretical

structure of this covariance matrix is easily derived, but estimation of

the parameters in the covariance structure requires information from other

sources)3 To avoid the problems generated by a nondiagonal covariance

matrix, individuals in sample months 5-8 were simply discarded, so that the

remaining data points are independently distributed over both i and t.

     The extracts used in estimation contain all 25-SO year old men in

sample months 1-4 with positive hours worked and positive wage and salary

earnings. Attention is focused on men aged 25-50 because results reported

below suggest that data for this group are most likely to fit the labor

supply model. Figure 1 plots the time series of real wages, hours worked

and labor force participation (defined here as having positive earnings).

An important feature of the labor force participation series is the five

percentage point increase in the fraction of the sample with positive

earnings between 1964-67. This apparent increase is an artifact of the

improvements in data collection procedures during the early years of the

CPS, and not a reflection of labor force behavior)4

    As predicted by the intertemporal substitution hypothesis, Figure 1

shows that wages and hours move together in most of the later years. After

1967, labor force participation is also procyclical. In the earlier years,

however, wages appear only weakly procyclical or noncyclical.



Microeconomics with CrouDed Data

     Figure 2 depicts the 1975-87 profiles of average hourly earnings and

hours worked for S-year cohorts aged 18-55 in 1976. For example, the solid


                                     16
line at the left of the figure shows the 1975-87 earnings of men aged 18-23

 in 1976. Lines for different cohorts exhibit different trends, but common

period shocks are apparent in patterns of deviation front trend, Of course,

different period shocks hit different cohorts at different ages.

     A labor supply interpretation of the data in Figure 2 is presented in

Figure 3. Points plotted in Figure 3 were tabulated by removing a cohort

specific intercept and a cohort specific linear trend term from the average

wages and hours data plotted in Figure 2. A separate trend was removed

from averages for each five year age group. Thus, the slope of the line

drawn through the points corresponds to an estimate of
                                                         ei
                                                              in

                       —
                           Oc   +
                                    alc_rt + 1ct + a1,                   (9)




where the subscript c indexes cohorts. This is the grouped equivalent of

model (1) with a cohort specific trend, where instruments used to group the

micro model consist of year and cohort main effects and interactions.

     Note that Oc in (9) captures the time-invariant cohort specific mean

of A1. Equation (9) is therefore a form of Analysis of Covariance based on

the removal of cohort fixed effects. This approach is an application of

Deaton's (1985) suggestion that panel data be formed from a time series of

cross-sections by following cohorts over time.

     Figure 3 depicts an upward sloping relationship that seems to fit well

for data on the wages and hours of men aged 25-50. Different symbols are

used to distinguish the earnings of this middle group from the earnings of

younger and older men. Data points for the younger and older cohorts are

less likely to fall around the regression line (which has slope 0.46).


                                        17
     Labor supply estimates to accompany Figure 3 are reported in Table la.

This table reports estimates of equation (9) using data on the 1975-87

earnings of men aged 25-50 in 1976, while Table lb reports the

corresponding estimates for 1963-74. Both OLS and TSLS estimates are

reported -- as noted above, the instrument list for TSLS includes a full

set of year and cohort main effects and interactions. Therefore, even if

the underlying micro equation includes a period effect, labor supply

parameters in equation (9) are still identified, and so estimates with and

without period effects are shown.

     Estimates of      are reported in column (1) of Table la. OLS estimates

of l are quite small, though significantly different from zero because of

the large sample size. For example, the OLS estimate of       in a model with

period effects is 0.035 .    TSLS estimates are substantially larger,

suggesting the presence of measurement error in the OLS estimates. The

overidentification test statistic for TSLS estimates of      in a model

without period effects is 160.7, and compared to a chi-square distribution

with 54 degrees of freedom this indicates a poor fit..15 Inclusion of

period effects improves the fit to the point where the model is accepted at

conventional levels of significance. Interestingly, the overidentification

test strongly suggests that period effects belong in the equation, but

estimates of      do not appear particularly sensitive to the presence of

period effects.

     Estimates of 2 are reported in Column (2) of Table la. As usual,

these estimates are larger than the estimates of l' Again, the estimates

are not sensitive to the inclusion of period effects, although period

effects must be included to pass the overidentification test. Reasonably


                                       18
precise elasticities in the range 0.3 -     0.8 are generated by models with
and without period effects.

       Table lb reports estimates of equation (9) for 1963-74. As suggested

by the lack of procyclical wage movements in Figure 1, here the labor

supply model performs poorly. TSLS estimates of U are zero in a model

without period effects and negative in a model with period effects.

Estimates of 62 are positive, though not statistically different from zero

in the model with period effects. This is consistent with Solon and

Barskys (1988) finding of reduced cyclicality in earlier years. On the

other hand, a labor supply optimist might prefer the TSLS estimate of
                                                                           97
from a model without period effects     this number is 0.357 with a standard

error of 0.075.



Macroeconomics

       Estimation of equation (9) using data grouped by cohort and year is a

natural analog of fixed effects techniques for panel data. Of primary

interest here, however, is the question of whether labor supply models can

be used to explain year to year fluctuations in hours worked, without

controlling for cohort specific trends.

       Table 2a reports estimates of equations (1) and (2) fit to annual

averages from 1975-87. The TSLS equivalent of this procedure is to use a

full   set of period dummies as instrumental variables. Three sets of
estimates are reported. The first shows results from equations with no
trend,   theoretically justified when the interest rate equals the rate of

time preference. The second and third sets of estimates are for equations

that include a linear and quadratic trend. Estimates are tabulated using


                                       19
two separate samples. The first sample includes all men aged 25-SO in

1976, and is the same as the sample used to construct the estimates in

Table 1aJ6 In time series macroeconomics, however, it is not customary to

follow true cohorts, and results for a second sample including all men 25-

SO each year are also reported. Assuming there is no sample selection bias

and that labor supply parameters do not vary with age, these samples should

lead to the same (within sampling variance) parameter estimates.

     Estimates of models without a trend, reported in column (1) of Table

2a, show that the simple correlation between hours and wages or earnings

for 1975-87 is positive. Overidentification test statistics lead to a

strong rejection of models without a trend, however, and the addition of a

one or two parameter trend substantially improves the fit. The trend is

more important for goodness of fit in models estimated with the sample of

men aged 25-50 each year. Remarkably, given the large sample size,

equation (2) estimated with a quadratic trend is close to passing the

overidentification test at conventional levels of significance (   x2(9)   1%

critical value — 21.7

     In models with a trend, estimates of 62 are all bigger than unity,

while estimates of 61 are range from 0.6 to 1.1 .   The elasticities are

generally largest in models with a quadratic trend. Parameter estimates

based on men aged 25-50 each year do not differ importantly from estimates

based on men aged 25-50 in 1976.

    Table 2b shows results for annual averages for 1963-74. In contrast

to the later period, the raw correlation of hours and earnings or wages in

this period, reported in column (I), is zero or negative. Estimates of 61

using a linear trend are on the order of 0.3, and estimates of 2 using a


                                     20
 linear or quadratic trend are 0.37 to 0.79 .   But estimates of l using a
quadratic trend are negative, and the quadratic tern (not reported) has a

t-statistic around 3. On the other hand, the quadratic trend specification

may be rejected on relative goodness-of-fit groundsj7 As in Table 2, the

estimates do not appear sensitive to whether the sample is selected on the

basis of age in 1964 or age each year.

     The estimates from specifications with a linear trend in Tables 2a and

2b are all larger than the TSLS linear trend estimates reported in Tables

la and lb for models grouped by cohort and year, and estimated without

period effects. This suggests that grouping data by cohort and year so as

to remove period effects has a cost: the reduction in group size that is a

consequence of finer grouping may lead to increased measurement error bias.

In fact, additional results (not reported) from experimentation with

alternative group sizes and classification schemes support this hypothesis.

Larger group size is usually associated with larger estimates of l and



The Imoact of Random Effects and Uncertainty on the Macro Estimates

     In the discussion of Table I, it was noted that allowance for period

effects in a model grouped by cohort and year improves goodness-of-fit

without substantially affecting inferences regarding the magnitude of

intertemporal substitution. This suggests that random period effects may

provide a useful strategy for the analysis of grouped labor supply data.

Random period effects do not affect the consistency of estimates when the

number of periods gets large, but standard errors and test statistics must

be adjusted. The adjustment factor is the residual variance for the micro

model estimated using time dummies as instruments, divided by the group


                                     21
size times the residual variance from the same model fit to annual

averages.

     As an example, consider the model used to estimate       in column (3) of

Table 2a. The residual variance estimate for TSLS estimates using year

dummies as instruments is 0.641 .   Using the TSLS coefficients to compute a
residual from the 13 annual averages gives a residual variance of

0.0001748. The average group size is roughly 9,600. Therefore, the over-

identification test statistic reported in Table 2a should be multiplied by



                       .6411(9600 * .0001748) —    .382.


The standard error in Table 2a should be multiplied by 1/1.382 —   1.62
This calculation is meant to be illustrative; 13 annual observations is not

enough to estimate the denominator of        very precisely. But the

calculation suggests that the test statistics reported for models with a

quadratic trend indicate a substantially better fit than would appear at

first blush. Similarly, standard errors are probably somewhat higher than

reported.

     A similar conclusion regarding standard errors emerges when the

microeconomic life-cycle model allows for uncertainty. As noted in Section

II, the appropriate grouped data estimation strategy for models with

uncertain wages is weighted least squares on the group means. In this

case, the weights reflect the fact that the residual variance, as well as

the group size, differs across groups.

     Using the TSLS estimate of     from Table 2a (for the sample of men

aged 25-50 in 1976, in a model with quadratic trend) to estimate residuals,


                                        22
 weighted least squares estimates of        are 0.967 with a standard error of
 0.249 .   This   differs little from the TSLS estimate of 0.941, although the

 standard error is nearly 80% larger. Given that the t-statistics are on

 the order of 6 or 7, however, such a change has little impact on

 inferences. The test statistic in this example falls
                                                          only 10 percent, from
 32.7 to 29.3 .    A complete set of weighted Least squares estimates for the

 uncertainty model, corresponding to Tables 2a and 2b, is reported in

 Appendix Tables Al and A2.



 Additional Results: Interest Rates and Education

      Table 3 reports estimates for models that include real interest rates

as an additional regressor. When interest rates are not assumed constant

 in the Heckxnan-Macurdy version of the life-cycle model, the parametric

trend should be augmented by the sum of all past rates. As an

approximation to this more general specification, contemporaneous interest

rates were included as regressors in the basic labor supply models.18 The

rate used here is the annualized real expected 3-month treasury bill rate

calculated by Barro and Sala-I-Martin (1990). The interest rate is treated

as endogenous, so that TSLS using time dummies is the same as fitting

annual averages.

     The results in Table 3 are for the samples of men aged 25-50 in 1976

and men aged 25-50 in 1964. Models with interest rates lead inferences

similar to those arising in models without interest rates. For example,

the estimate of l in models with a linear trend and the interest rate

included as regressors is 0.530, whereas the same parameter is estimated to

be 0.581 when the interest rate is excluded. The goodness-of-fit statistic


                                       23
is actually larger when the interest rate is included. Coefficients on the

interest rate vary from -0.544 to 0.632, although they are often not

statistically significant. It may be noted that macroeconomic Real

Business Cycle models suggest the interest rate should be positively

related to hours worked because when interest rates are high, current labor

supply has a bigger payoff than future labor supply. But the results in

Table 3 seem to support Mankiw's (1989) contention that interest rates and

labor supply are not systematically related.

     Considerable information is lost in aggregate models such as those

discussed here. For example, it could be that spurious inferences are

generated when one group's hours are rising at fixed wage rates while

another's wages are rising with no change in hours. To check on this, the

analysis was repeated separately for men with different levels of

education. Tables 4a and 4b show estimates for models equivalent to those

in Table 2a and 2b, tabulated separately for men who did not finish high

school, high school graduates, and men with some college. The general

pattern found in Table 2 is replicated for each subgroup in Table 4. There

are substantial positive elasticities estimated in the more recent period,

while there appears to be little labor supply response in the earlier

period. Interestingly, the least educated sub-sample appears to have the

most elastic labor supply.



IV. Missing Data Problems for 1963-74



     Data underlying the annual hours worked variable are of poorer quality

in 1963-74 than in 1975-87. Imputation of hours worked for 1963-74


                                     24
undoubtedly adds measurement error to the dependent variable, log hours.

Measurement error is also added to the regressor in model (1), log
                                                                         wages,
because wages are defined here to be the ratio of annual earnings to annual

hours worked.

     To gauge the extent of bias in estimates for 1963-74, data from 1985-

87 were used to calculate a variety of imputed wage and hours measures.

Estimates using imputed variables are then compared with estimates based on

the best available annual hours variable. The two imputations used in the

earlier period are the assignment of interval midpoints to categorical

weeks worked, and the substitution of actual hours worked last week for

usual hours per week last year. Combining the imputations with the best

available data, a total of five variables were constructed:



          (1) weeks worked last year *    usual   hours/week last year

          (2) Erouved weeks worked last year *     usual   hours/week last year



For the sample with positive hours last week only:



          (3) weeks worked last year *    usual hours/week last year
          (4) weeks worked last year * hours worked last week

          (5) zrouved weeks worked last year * hours worked last week.



     The hours measures range in quality from having no imputed input in

variable (1), used in Table 2, to the imputed hours variable, (5), used in

Table 2b. Variable (3) differs from variable (1) only in that the sample

is restricted to men with positive hours last week. It should be noted


                                     25
that many researchers have also been concerned with the possibility of

measurement error in variable (l)J9 The maintained assumption here is

that grouping (instrumental variables) eliminates measurement error bias in

parameter estimates based on (1). We can then ask whether grouping also

eliminates bias in estimates based on variables (2)-(5).

     0LS and TSLS estimates of    are reported in the first two rows of

Table Sa. All estimates are reported for the sample of men aged 25-50 in

1976 in a specification with a quadratic trend. OLS estimates appear

highly sensitive to the use of imputed hours, declining from 0.037 in

column (1) to -0.112 in column (4). Differences in the 0LS estimates are

highly significant. TSLS estimates decline from 0.94 in column (1) to 0.67

in column (5). Although larger in magnitude than the decline in OLS

estimates, the attenuation of TSLS estimates represents less than 30% of

the estimate in column (1). Furthermore, comparison of columns (1) and (3)

suggest that the decline in TSLS is entirely attributable to the

elimination of men with zero hours of work last week. Thus, the imputation

appears to induce selection bias; measurement error bias is eliminated by

the grouping procedure.

     The lower half of Table Sa reports estimates of       OLS estimates do

not appear very sensitive to the use of imputed hours, moving from 0.44 to

0.28 as the imputation becomes increasingly crude, a decline of 35%. This

is not surprising given that model (2) puts all the measurement error on

the left hand side; there is no bias from classical measurement error in

dependent variables (Durbin 1954). TSLS estimates of 2 appear even less

sensitive to the use of imputed data, ranging from 1.3 to 0.95, a decline

of 25%, with most of the decline again attributable to sample selection.


                                     26
Thus, imputation does not appear to explain the fact that estimates of

in the earlier period are roughly half as large as estimates for 1975-87.

     As a final check on the estimates for 1963-74, Table Sb reports

estimates for both 1963-74 and 1975-87 from equations fit to weeks worked.

Estimates of       in Table Sb were tabulated by regressing the log of weeks

worked on the log of average weekly earnings. Estimates of       were

tabulated by regressing the log of weeks worked on annual earnings. For

the 1975-87 subsample, weeks worked were coded as the interval midpoints

for a categorical variable identical to that available in the earlier

period. Thus, estimates for the two period are based on identical measures

of labor supply. Elasticities in Table Sb for 1964-75 are all positive in

models with a trend. But estimates for the earlier period tend to be

around half as large as those for the later period.

     It is interesting to contrast the elasticities in Table Sb with those

in Table 2a. For 1975-87, elasticities estimated using weeks worked are

roughly half of those estimated using hours worked. This suggests that a

substantial fraction of the labor supply response to changing wage rates is

in changing hours per week.2°



V. Labor Supply with Demand-Side Variables



     Bias induced by conditioning on labor force participation may be

reduced by adding regressors from the sample selection rule to labor supply

models. This fact justifies the inclusion of "demand side" variables in

the labor supply equation and leads to an estimating equation for micro

data of the form


                                        27
                      — a1   +
                                 fi1(p-r)t   +
                                                 O1wft
                                                         +        +   ÷                 (10)




where Z are regressors from the sample selection rule (8). The grouped

version of this equation is



                      —
                          [a     +     + ,91(p-r)t       +
                                                             lt   +   +                 (11)


As a preliminary exploration of the empirical implications of equation

(11), we set      —       — the unemployment rate for all workers.

     In addition to correcting for sample selection, the inclusion of

unemployment rates in labor supply models has been interpreted as a test of

labor market equilibrium.21 But as Pencavel (1986) and Card (1987) have

pointed out, even in equilibrium labor markets it is likely that the error

term in an hours equation will be correlated with other dimensions of the

same time-allocation problem. Furthermore, hours worked and hours

unemployed are linked by an identify that necessarily induces negative

correlation. One response to these criticisms is to look for instrumental

variables for unemployment, although there are no obviously attractive

candidates.

     In the current context, the focus is not on whether #                is   zero, but on

what happens to       and        when unemployment is included in the estimating

equations. Inclusion of unemployment rates or other measures of aggregate

demand in labor supply regressions may be a simple strategy for reducing

the impact of sample selection on parameter estimates. As in the previous

analysis, time dummies as used as instrumental variables for all regressors

in the model, including the unemployment rate.


                                                 28
     Table Ga reports estimates of equation (11) for versions with linear

and quadratic trends and the unemployment rate, and estimates for

regressions on annual earnings instead of wages. The sample is men aged

25-50 in each year, corresponding more closely to the type of data studied

by macroeconomists than the cohort samples.

     As a bench mark, columns (1) and (2) show the estimates from models

with a linear trend that were previously reported in Table 2.     Columns (3)

and (4) report the results of adding the unemployment rate to these

equations, and columns (5) and (6) show the results of adding the

unemployment rate and a quadratic trend term.22   For   models with and

without the quadratic trend, addition of the unemployment rate causes

estimates of both l and     in 1975-87 to drop by over half. For 1963-74,

estimates of 61 in models with the unemployment rate are not statistically

different from zero, although the estimate of 62 is not substantially

reduced in the model with a quadratic trend.

     The fact that estimated labor supply elasticities drop when

unemployment rates are included as regressors suggests that adding

unemployment to the labor supply model is not an effective control for

sample selection bias. This is because the theoretical consequence of

omitting E(u1.Z. >         is   negative bias in l and 2' so that estimated

labor supply elasticities should rise when      is included. To see why

sample selection is likely to induce negative bias, note that if hours are

high when labor force participation is high, then ui and Mit will be

negatively correlated. If wages are also high when labor force

participation is high, then w. and the omitted variable, E(u1iIZi >

will be negatively correlated as well.23


                                       29
    The unemployment rate is scaled so that the coefficient *   is   an

elasticity. Estimates of   appear to fluctuate around unity, suggesting

that the relationship between hours of labor supply and unemployment rates

largely reflects the identity linking different types of hours. Not

surprisingly, inclusion of the unemployment rate improves the goodness-of-

fit of the grouped equations. Equations for 1915-87 that include the

unemployment rate easily pass the overidentification test at conventional

levels. Goodness-of-fit is also improved in the earlier period. In both

periods, inclusion of the unemployment rate causes the two   trend   tens to

become insignificant.

     The unemployment rate may be a poor choice of exogenous variation for

the control of sample selection bias. Results using alternative controls

are reported in Table Sb, which shows estimates from versions of equation

(11) that include the growth rate of Ml. and defense spending as additional

regressors. Columns (3) and (4) in Table Sb show stimates from a

specification with linear trend. The additional regressors do not lead to

any substantial change in either estimates of l or        For example, the

estimate of l in the model with a linear trend estimated using the sample

of men aged 25-50 in 1915-87 Is Q.833 .   Column (1) of Table Sb shows that

this estimate increases trivially to 0.866 when the growth rate of Ml is

included as a regressor. Inclusion of the percent change in Ml, however;

does lead to a substantial Improvement in fit. On the other hand including

the growth rate of defense spending does not affect parameter estimates

very much or lead to an improvement in fit.

     Results from a model that includes the growth rate of Ml along with a

quadratic trend are reported in columns (5) and (6) of Table Gb.      In this


                                     30
specification, elasticities are larger, although the contrast with

specifications that exclude the growth rate of Ml is not statistically

significant. The models in columns (5) and (6) fit the data for 1975-87

quite well and lead to some of the largest elasticity estimates in the

paper. In fact, these are on the order of the representative estimate of

1.4 preferred by Lucas and Rapping (1970) in their work with aggregate

data. But it should be noted that the estimate of l      the earlier

period, which corresponds more closely to the period studied by Lucas and

Rapping, is zero.



VI. Summary and Conclusions



     Does labor supply explain fluctuations in average hours worked ? I

began this project with the hope that labor supply models would either fit

the data well for the whole sample period, or that the labor supply

interpretation of fluctuations in annual hours would be decisively

rejected. Perhaps not surprisingly, the results support neither of these

conclusions unambiguously.

     On the positive side, the estimates in Table la, based on cohort and

year groups, suggest that intertemporal substitution elasticities are

positive for 1975-87, and that labor supply models pass goodness-of-fit

tests when year dummies are included. Table 2a suggests that an important

component of aggregate movements in hours worked from 1975-87 is the labor

supply response to changing wages. The elasticities reported in Table 2a

are larger than many previously reported. For example, MaCurdy (1981) and

Altonji both report estimates on the order of 0.3 using a sample of men


                                     31
from the PSID. On the other hand, estimates constructed using annual

averages from the PSID are closer to those found here, ranging from 0.6 to

0.8 (Angrist 1991).

     The results for 1975-87 are robust to the specification of trend, and

models with a quadratic trend come close to passing the overidentification

test at conventional levels of significance. The quadratic trend models

pass these tests easily when allowance is made for uncorrelated, random

period effects or uncertainty.24 None of the estimates were found to be

sensitive to whether the sample analyzed was a true cohort or repeated

observations on the same age group. This is encouraging because

macroeconomists commonly apply representative agent models to samples of

the latter type.

     In contrast to the generally favorable picture for 1975-87, the

estimates in Table 2b suggest that labor supply behavior is less important

in 1963-75, or that the models are misspecified for this period. TSLS

estimates of the coefficient on hourly wages are negative in models that

include a quadratic trend. Although the quadratic specifications may be

rejected on goodness-of-fit grounds, other labor supply elasticities

estimated for this period are also substantially less than those estimated

for 1975-87.

     Detailed analysis in the rest of the paper supports these basic

findings. Many of the results are summarized in Table 7, which shows

partial R2's from unweighted time series regressions of average log wages

on average log hours and earnings. The sample contains all men aged 25-SO

each year. Movements in average wages account for a surprisingly large

fraction --    roughly   2/3 --   of   the variance in average hours worked between


                                              32
1975 and 1987. The fraction of variance accounted for between 1963 and

1975 is considerably lower, and the importance of wages and earnings for

hours fluctuations from 1963-74 is disturbingly sensitive to the details of

model specification. Accounting for differences between estimates for the

two sample periods appears to be a natural candidate for future research.




                                     33
               PLOT OF WAGES PER HOUR. HOURS AND
                 LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION RATE
                    Wages Deflated by CPI. All Items
                                    (1982—84—100)
      13.5
      13.0
      12.5
-1
g 12.0
I.-                                                          WAGES
x4                                                           PER HOUR
      11.0
 x
3 10.5
      10.0


      2210

      2170
                                                             ANNUAL
                                                             HOURS
 n    2130
 r
 0
 -J
 4    2090
 xz
  4
      2050


      2010




                                                             LFP
                                                             RATE




      0.82
         60          65        70           75     80   85         90
                                           YEARS
Cfl Men Ag. 25—50.   Month In Sample 1—4

                                     Figure 1
WAGES AND HOURS OF EMPLOYED MEN AGED 18—55 IN 1976
     7.7
                                                                                                        2.0




                      S.




                                                             Hours Worked




    7.2
                                                                                                              L
                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                              6

                                                                                                              H
L
                                                                                                              0
a
                                                                                                              U
B
                                            Th                                                                R

H
                                                                                                              L
                                                                                                              Y
0
U
                                                                                                              E
R                                                                                                             A
S
                                                                                               I              R
                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                              N
                           F                                                                                  8
    6.7
                                                             Hourly Earnings
                                                                                                              S




    6.2 -

          lB   24              30      36        42         48           54           60           56

                                                 AGE

                    COHORT          —20     ————25     ——--—-30          ——35
                                    ——40    ———45 ——50 ———54
                                                 PS AVGES   F    FIVE YEAR AGE PS. P04111 IN SAfltE 1—4
                                                                    AVERAGE I$Yfl.Y EAaIINGS 114 1967 Q.LA


                                            Figure 2
    LABOR SUPPLY OF EMPLOYED MEN AGED 18—55                                                                                        1N76
     0.2

                                                                                                         +

                                                                                                0                       0

     0.1
                                                                                    +       S                           0      a
L                                                                                       0
                                                         +              +
0                                                            ++                                      0
C                                                        +          0               *                *       *
                                                                                                                                   *
                                 *
H    0.0                                             Sf
                                           *                                                *
0
U                                                                               a                                +
                                               *    *0                          *           *
R                                    * *        a                           *
S                                                                               +
                                               0.0+
    —0.I'
                                                         a
                   0
                                       +
                                                                                                                               +
               +
                                                +

    —0.2
                                                —I
       —0.09             —0.06                 —0.03                0.00                            0.03                    0.06       0.09

                                                             LOG HOURLY EARNINGS

                       AGE IN 1976     00 0         18   — 24       * * * 25 — 49                        +   + +     50 - 55

                                                                                                   CPS AVERAGES FOR FIVE YEAR AGE GROUPS
                                                                                RESIDUAL FROM REGRESSION ON 5 YEAR COHORT SPECIFIC TREND
                         Table is - Labor Supply Equation. 1915-81                                               Table lb - Labor Supply Equation. 1963-14



Method        Year Dumai.es                                                    x2(dof)       Method Year Dummies
                                                                                                                               'i                                     x2(dof)

OLS               no                0.036                         -              -           OLS           no                -0.163                     -
                                    (0.002)                                                                                  (0.002)
                                                                  -
                  yea               0.035                                                                  SS                -0164
                                    (0.002)                                                                                  (0.002)
TSLS              no                0460                          -
                                                                              160.7 (54)     TSLS          no                 0.018                     -
                                                                                                                                                                     138.6   (49)
                                    (0.058)                                                                                  (0.050)

                                    0.289                         -
                  yes                                                          53.3   (44)                 yes               -0.316                                   57.6 (39)
                                    (0.091)                                                                                  (0076)
                  no                  -                                          -
                                                                0.435                        01.5          no                                          0.202
                                                                (0.002)
                                                                                                                                                      (0.003)
                                      .                         0,433            -                                             -
                  ye.                                                                                      yes                                         0.202
                                                                (0.002)                                                                               (0.003)
TSLS              no                  .                         0.832                        TSLS          no                  -
                                                                              114.3 (54)                                                               0.357         108.4 (49)
                                                                (0.087)                                                                               (0.075)
                                      -                         0.631                                                          -
                  ye.                                                         41.9 (44)                    yes                                         0.164         78.0 (39)
                                                                (0.130)
                                                                                                                                                      (0.110)


                                                                                             NOTES .. See notes to Table is:
NOTES    -.   All   models include a cohort specific linear trend for 5-year age
               groups.                                                                               Sample —    eli men   aged 25-50 in 1964, month in sample l-4
              Sample — men aged 25-50 in 1976 v/non-imputed earnings,                                 (n   — 85,000)
              month in sample 1-4, (n — 112,000)
              Dependent variable — log (annual hours worked).

               TSLS instruments are a full    set   of cohort and year main
               effects and interactions.
                              Tabi. 2. - Labor Supply Slascicici..               197587
                                                                                                                               Table 2b     -   Labor Supply       Elasticities   1963-14
                       Tnn4
                        (1)                            (2)                                (3)
                       None                                                                                                   (1)                           (2)                                 (3)
                                                      Linear                        Quadratic                                None                         Linear                              Quadratic
             A.               1   --
                  Sample                Hen Aged 25-50 in 1976 (n — 125,000)
                                                                                                                             A.     Sample I    --   Hen Aged 25-50 in 1964 (n — 85,000)
                        0.605                         0.581                           0.941
                                                                                                                              -0.005                       0.245                              -0.042
                       (0.089)                       (0.088)                         (0.139)                 1
                                                                                                                              (0.013)                     (0.080)                             (0.101)
r2(dof)                96.4 (11)                     94.6 (10)                       32.1 (9)
                                                                                                            x2(dof)          65.6 (11)                    35.7 (10)                           38.7 (9)
                        1.079                         1.041                           1.268
                       (0.166)                       (2.141)                                                                   0,007                       0.427                               0.373
                                                                                     (0.188)
                                                                                                                              (0.014)                     (0.049)                             (0.165)
r2(dof)                61.2 (11)                     60.8 (10)                      24.4    (               x2(dof)           65.6 (11)                   29.5 (10)                           29.7 (9)
             B.                   -                25-50 Each Year (n —
                  Sample 2            - Hen Aged                               149,000)
                                                                                                                             B.    Sample   2   -- Men
                                                                                                                                                       Aged 25-SO Each                    —
                                                                                                                                                                             Year   (ii       91.000)
                        0.327                         0.833                           1.149
                       (0.028)                       (0.074)                                                                 -0.065                        0.316                              -0.034
                                                                                     (0.139)                •1
                                                                                                                             (0.016)                      (0.082)                             (0.144)
X2(dof)             254.4      (11)                 63.1   (10)                     31.4 (9)
                                                                                                            x2(dof)          84.2 (11)                   28.6 (10)                            38.3 (9)
                        0.477                         1.020                          1.433
82                                                                                                                           '0.042
                       (0.032)                       (0,088)                        (0.1,76)                 2                                            0.463                               0.789
                                                                                                                             (0.016)                     (0.098)                              (0.364)
                    237.4 (11)                      53.2 (10)                       25.0    (9)
x2(dof)                                                                                                     X(dof)           84.9 (11)                   24.8 (10)                            20,6 (9)


NOTES   .-    Samples include eon with positive earnings                  in   19i6-ás    C2Ss,             NOTES   -. See note,    to Table 2.
             •onth-in-ssmple            1-4.

              Estimationmethod is Two-Stage Least Square..                      Instruments       are
              a full set of year dumaie..

                  is from a regression of log annual              hours   on    log hourly earning..
                  1.   from a         regression of log annual    hours on log annual           earning..
          Table 3 - Labor Supply Elasticities: Models with Interest Rates

                   Trend
                    (1)                 (2)                (3)
                    one                Linear            Quadratic


                   A. 1976-88 CPS, Men Aged 25-50 in 1976 (n — 125,000)

0                    .530                .603                  .814
    1
                    (.093)              (.110)             (.1.34)

Interest Rate       -   .130   .            .049           -   .544
                    (.071)              (.139)             (l93)

x2(dof)           104.6 (10)           91.2               31.6

                    1.12                1.29               1.13
02
                    (.171)              (.216)             (.182)

Interest Rate        .032                .242              -.184
                    (.053)              (.094)             (.122)

x2(dof)            59.6 (10)           48.2 (9)           23.5 (8)


                   B. 1964-75 CI'S, Men Aged 25-50 in 1964 (n — 85,000)

                     .029                .075              -   .092
01
                    (.016)              (.107)             (.112)

Interest Rate        .610                .522               .242
                    (.141)              (.248)             (.246)

x2(dof)            44.6 (9)            42.0 (8)           38.9 (7)

                     .040                .519               .445
                    (.016)              (.184)             (.208)

Interest Rate        .632               -   .168           -   .201
                    (.132)              (.248)             (.251)

x(dof)             44.6 (9)            27.9 (8)           28.5 (7)


NOTES: Samples include men with positive earnings in 1976-88 CPS's,
        month-in-sample 1-4. Interest rates are annualized expected real rates
        on 3-month treasury bills from Barro and Sala-I-Martin (1990).

          Estimation method of Two-Stage Least Squares. Instruments are a full
          set of year dummies.

             is from a regression of log annual hours on log hourly earnings.
             is from a regression of log annual hours on log annual earnings.
               Table 4.    -   Labor Supply Elasticiti..        1975-87:                                                Tabla 41   -   Labor Supply      Elasticities    1963-74:    8y Education
                                                                            ly Education
                                    land                                                                                                    Iau
                                        (1)                   (2)                      (3)                                                    (1)                  (2)                            (3)
Education                           None                   Linear                  Quadratic          Education                             None                 Linear                    Quadratic

                                                                                                                  A.                     -- Men                            —
                                                                                                                         Sample 1                 Aged 25-50 in 1964 n         (31,000;   30,000; 24,000)
          A     Sample I       -- Men   Aged 25-SO In 1976 n — (26,000; 44.000; 54,000)
                                                                                                      Loss than                               -   .060             .028                       -   .229
Less than                               .577                  .836                   1.21             high school                             (.027)              (.149)                      (.171)
high school                         (.084)                  (.218)                   (.335)                                  2
                                                                                                                            x (doE)         25.9 (10)            23.6 (9)                    19.9 (8)
                   x (doE)        41.0 (11)                26.9 (10)                14.9 (9)
                                                                                                                school                        -   .101             .386                       - .137
                                                                                                      High                   l
High school                           630                    .702                     .789                                                    (.022)              (.117)                      C204)
                   81
                                    (.088)                  (.161)                   (.180)                                  2
                                                                                                                            x    (doE)      45.3 (10)            13.2 (9)                    19.1 (8)
                       2
                   x (dof)        46.9 (11)                41.8 (10)                34.0 (9)
                                                                                                      Some                                     .081                .150                       -   .059
                                                                                                                            81
Some                                 .216                    .150                     .557            college                                 (.024)              (.061)                      (.080)
                   81
college                             (.058)                  (.080)                   (.145)                                  2
                                                                                                                            x (dof)         29.2 (10)            24,4 (9)                    20j        (8)
                   x2(dof)         65.9 (11)               69.1 (10)                19.0 (9)
                                                                                                                   B.     Sample    2 -.   Ken Aged 25-50 Each Year n — (28,000; 34.000; 29,000)
          B.    Sample 2 -- Hen Aged 25-50 Each Year a — (25,000; 55,000; 68,000)
                                                                                                      Loss than                               -.128                .160                       -   .548
Lea, than          8                 .431                    1.10                    1.22             high school                             (.033)              (.171)                      (.298)
                       1
high school                         (.042)                   (.218)                  (.271)                                  2
                                                                                                                            x (dot)          24.8 (10)           15.8 (9)                     8.07 (8)
                                   64.5 (11)                22.0 (10)               16.2 (9)
                                                                                                                                              -.185                .615                       -   .005
                                                                                                      High school
High school        8                 .306                    1.20                    1.19                                                     (.027)              (.254)                      (.208)
                                    (.029)                   (.183)                  (.219)                                  2
                                                                                                                            x (dot)         72.1 (10)            12.0 (9)                    14.9 (6)
                   x2(dof)        158.0 (11)                22.3 (10)               22.5
                                                                                                      Some                                    -   .076              .063                      -   .157
                                                                                                                            'I
Some               9                 .221                     .392                     .634           college                                 (.041)              (.059)                      (.118)
                       1
College                             (.044)                   (.056)                — (.137).                                 2
                                                                                                                            x (doE)         45.9 (10)            29.2 (9)                    29.3 (8)
                   x2(dof)         99.0 (11)                46.2 (10)               27,7 (9)

                                                                                                      NOTES:       Samples include men with positive earning, in 1964-15 CI'S'., month-in
NOTES:    Samples include men with positive earning. In 1976-88 CI'S's.                                            sample 1-4.
          month-in-sample 1-4.
                                                                                                                   Se. note, to Table 4a.
          Estimationmethod     Two'Stag. Least Squares.
                                    i.                                     Instrumonta are a   full
          set of year dummies.
                is from    a   r.gression      of log   annual hours en log heurly earnings.
                                                                                                                         Toblo Sb - Labor lepply                   tl..ttcttt..,         0.0.4 0s Vsfl.      Vorfl4
                   TOt.   S.    - Altarnat. V.;.,         and (ours     M..sur..
                   •
                                                                                                                          land
                                AOMMI Hour.Construction                                                                            (I)                              (2)                                 (1)
                                                                                                                               Si—                                Ltanr                              Du.drstlt
Method      Pert—ear             (1)              (2)              i3              (41            (5
                                                                                                                         A.                  I •. 1974-51          Cr3,    lien                 In   1916    (a   —
                                                                                                                               s.t.                                               A;.d 21-SO                          125,000)
                                  (n — 125,000)                            (n — 112,000)
                                                                                                                                    .292                              .2I                               .411
                                                                                                                                   (.044)                           (.00)                              (.041)
OU             I                0.037            0.011         0.011           -0.006            -0.112
                               (0.002)          (0.002)                                                       y2(ant)         114.0      (Ii)                     111.0 (10)                          39.3 (0)
                                                               (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.002)
                                                                                                                                    .463                              .446                              .170
TSLS                            0.941            0.090         0.660            0.699                           2
                                                                                                  0.667                            (.055)                           (.036)                             (.071)
                               (0.139)          (0.137)        (0.112)         (0.144)           (0,143)
                                                                                                              x2(dui)          94.0      (LI)                      94.0 (tO)                          34,2 49)

x2(9)                          32.7             33.0          27.4              23.0              22.9                   0.    5O9l•         2 --        1976-SI   Ct'S,   lion   A8S 25-50 loch Teat (a                  149.000)
                                                                                                                                    .179                              .347                              .14)
                                0.435            0.399         0.271             0.292                0.200     l                  (.011)                           (.03))                             (.030)
                               (0.002)          (0.002)       (0.002)           (0.002)           (0.003)
                                                                                                              z'(dol)         196,0      (II)                      97.0 (10)                          30.4 (9)
TSLS                            1.268            1.232         0.866            0.980             0.949
                               (0.190)          (0.189)       (0.143)          (0.192)                                              .2)4                              .444                              .645
                                                                                                 (0.194)
                                                                                                                                   (.019)                           (.034)                             (.064)
                            24.4                24.5          21.1             17.4              17.3

____________________________________________________________________________                                                                                                                          t:t.f!
                                                                                                                         A.                      -   -
                                                                                                                               3..pl.        L           1944-71 Cr3,      lion   A;.d   23.10 La 1944 (a — 92,000)

Staple - Non Ags 25-50 in 1976, .onth in staplo 1.4.                                                                                .010                               .217                            .104
All e.d.t. contain a qusdrsttc trond.                                                                         l                    (.010)                            (.0)7)                             (.061)

flu Inetrusonts    sr. a full cot of yost          dat..,                                                     12d0ø           '06.0 (10)                            3).4 (9)                          37.7 (5)

Annual   (our. ConstructIon                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                    .020                               .27'                               .2!?
                                                  vorkod                   •                                                       (.010)                            (.041)                             (.010)
                                  (I) (w.fl.                last   y.sr)       (usual hours/nok
                                         last   yost);                                                        k(dO()          110.0      (10)                       40.5 (9)                          45.0     (5)
                                  (2)    (group.d yoke vorkod           last yost)       •   (usual
                                         hour./vo.k      last yost)                                                      0.    Isaplo        2   - - 1964-fl Ct'S.         Non A.d 23-10 loch Toot (n                 —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          90,000)
Soapl.   with pooitiv.   hour.   1..t    vook                                                                                      - .034                            .16)          '
                                                only:                                                                                                                                                   ill
                                                                                                                                   (.01))                           (.033)                            (.083)
                                 (3)     (wook. vorksd la.t yost) 0 (usual hours/v.ok
                                                                                                              k(dat)          115.0 (tO)                           49.6 (9)
                                         lest yoor);                                                                                                                                                 70.6 (5)
                                 (4)     (w..fl vorkad lan yo.r) 0 (hour. vorkad                                                   - .0t4
                                                                                                              12                                                     .2)7                               .371
                                          lastv.ok);                                                                               (.013)                  ,        (OH)                              (.140)
                                 (5)     (roupod v..ks worked last yosr) * (hours
                                         worked lest wo.k).                                                   * (an)          110.0(10)                            16.4 (9)                          42.0 (I)

                                                                                                              Net., In T.blo Sb:


                                                                                                                       Solos       trctud.       —n wIth oarntnp,             nath.te..aI.            1-4.
                                                                                                                         Lstl..tI.a .oO,.d I. T—.-stsja Ls.ct                          Sqv.no. Inotnonto                  St. a
                                                                                                                         Cult ..t        at yost tat..,
                                                                                                                              to    It.. a       ro;r..oto.        Of to; .ooks Oo
                                                                                                                         IL                                                                1$   voo&Iy •.ntngs.
                                                                                                                              I. Ira. • nirsoot.. of Iaj                      ska 00       Iq ..1       .arntnso.
                                                                                                                                   Ito      tobwl.t.d          Ire. gro..d        casks'   •t4.(nt.
. •n nuuinj               s-tsi       .nnbs 3nfl .It25-O..L
                                                                 .inp
                                                         •3 poIfl UOflnlafl
                                                                           ze.L ;°   i'
                                                                               tS°iM3"N
                                                                                           TT"2
                                                                                                              C   Cl' .1usrUflJ tics          •3eb3    aflfl
                                                                                                                                                                   •'flt       30    TTfl
                                                                                                                                                               •D23-oal Cl P°P UOT3fllafl
                                                                                                                                                                                              fl
                                                        It'      u. •jdn
                                                                 oc-ct   n.       —
                                                                                                  BUON
                                                                                                                                                                       t•j
                                                                                                                                                           neil ii' ac-ct   •ts-u;-inuow
                                                                                                                                                                                         u   —
                                                                                                                                                                                                 de.s      S3X0N
U)     i/i (i) r9t          (8)   tfl    (I)   91t     (t) c-u       (8)   £9C                               (t)91t      (OVU         (s)r61    (v)roz          (o)Efl         (6)9-st                    (jop)X
 (9fl)                       (t601                      (9601
  1(6                                              -                                                         (nro)                    (zoi-o)                   (seoo)
                                                                                                              .o'o          -         arc          -             two             -
               (09V)                      (no)                       (no)
      -
                110               -
                                           SOC               -           tOt                           1                 (nro)                  (Lgoo)                         (1100)
                                                                                                                          osoo-         -                              -
                                                                                                                                                                               91to
                                                                                                                  -
                                                                                                                                                 cso-o                                                        1,
                             (siol        (to)
                     -                                                                                        (no)
(iso)
      -
               (oval

                              no          zco                -             -      •CU•JCQ UJ •?ueq3 I
                                                                                                               C90-
                                                                                                                         •fln)
                                                                                                                           (CD-
                                                                                                                                      (cr0)
                                                                                                                                       fl0
                                                                                                                                                 (u0)
                                                                                                                                                  i-                   .         -           ei anodueu0
                                                        (9101        (zoo')
 StE            (90               -            -         flO             £T-           tw °T   •2u'q        (r000o) (t000o)
('0.)
 9000
              ()-
              LOOA
                                  -            -             -             -
                                                                                      )U•lj    DTnIPPTt
                                                                                                             tooo-o      ooro-          -          -               -             -               punj pnei,b
                                                                                                             (10o0)      (LOOO)       (tooo) (zooo)             (1000) (zooo)
(tool          ooo)          (Tool       (zoo-)         (tool (tool                                          ClO0-        £00.0-       9000 t000                 6000- 0100                         P°"L lPtUfl
 Ito      -                   600-        6O0           010-             010-
               Lo0                                                                        9"21 fl.Ufl
                                                                                SIUTUICI   tt96t       -q                                                                                •2u1uie2    t-rgot   -q
(I)   SM (v)        Fit    (6)    Ct     (o) 6-cl      (o)   Zt     (6)    c-cc                              (flgZt      (v)rct       (6)Ezt (6)1-ti           (oi)t-tc    (01)1(9
                                                                                                                                                                                                          (JcP)zX
(tor)                       (till                       (t601
  cc-i          -            ,f6               -
                                                          cot              -                                 (ttto)                  (LEo)                      (9300)
                                                                                                             cu,o           -
                                                                                                                                      iota        -             otot             -
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1,
              (liE)               -
                                         (tool                       (uo)
      -
               C1                         Cl,-               -
                                                                         99                                       -
                                                                                                                         (otro)
                                                                                                                         CCt0           -
                                                                                                                                                (ttoo)
                                                                                                                                                octo               -
                                                                                                                                                                               (too)
                                                                                                                                                                               ((50                           19
                            (coo-)-      (0111
      -         -            (CO.         Ott-               -             -    •WUCJCQ UT     •!Ueq         (tz0)        (fra)       (910)     (91-0)
(no) (tool-                                            (no)          (190)-                                   tQl         19t          MT        991-              -       -     -           'in    useeCods.ug
 VIE -        nt                  -            -
                                                        080-             tt           TN U •!uvq3
                                                                                                            (tooo-o)    (t000-o)
                                                                                                                                        -         -    -
(woo) (,00Ql                                                                                                10000        O0O0                                      -             -               puslj pn.nb5
 9000   400 -                                                                        pUnL ,inpen             (tooo)     (oo-o)       (bra)      (Too-a)        (,00o) (woo)
(zoo)         (too)        (O00l         (too)         (ooo1         (iool
                                                                                                             ,oo-o       woo          zoo-a     coro            coo-a          sooo                p'•x
 cia          no             coo-         900           coo              ooo              PUfl.L 2,0011
                                                                                ,Suluin tS-ctoi        -e                                                                                C?UTU2VI   is-ciot -,
                                                                                                                  (9)     U)            (W       (CI              (1)           (1)
  (9)          Cc)            (1)         (C)            (C)         (1)                   UI1ilJ)eOD
                     •.qe;i •pis-pn'a qua £jddns                 ioqfl -       q •n.z                                           iu..LOTS.oo n1a £jdn$      loqfl - '9      'tq'z
                     TabLe 7 -   Partial   R2's for Hours Worked



                       Controlling for:

                       Nothinz       Linear Trend        Ouad Trend

a. 1975-87


Wages                   .36                 .67           .71



Earnings                .66                 .91           .94




b. 1963-74


Wages                  .20                  .41           .001


Earnings               .06                 .72            .32




c. 1963-87


Wages                  .14                 .11            .46



Earnings               .32                 .28            .77



NOTES -    Partial R2's are from unweighted regressions of average log hours
           on average log wages or earnings. Sample includes men aged 25-SO
           each year.
          Table Al -    Labor Supply Elaacicicia. 1915-87:                 Uncertainty Model
                                                                                                                  Teble   AZ   - Labor Supply Elaaticities               1963-14:    Uncertainty Model
                        land
                         (1)                          (2)                            (3)                                         land
                        None                         Linear                    quadratic                                             (1)                          (2)                           (3)
                                                                                                                                 None                            Linear                   Quadratic

                        A.   Sample    1   --   Hen Aged      25-50 in 1976                                                      A.        Sample   I   --   Hen Aged 25-SO   in               —
                                                                              (n — 125,000)                                                                                         1964 (xi       85,000)
                                                                                                                                 -   .010
1                        .633                         .604'                       .967                  •1                                                        .239                         - .039
                        (.270)                  •    (.283)                      (.249)                                          (.035)                          (.150)                        (.224)

r2(dof)                99.5 (11)                    99,5 (10)          ,        29.7 (9)                r2(dof)                 66.2 (10)                       35,3 (9)                   39.9 (8)

                        1.120                        1.100                        1,250                 82                        .012                            .323                          .327
                        (.353)                       (.373)                       (.284)                                         (.039)                          (.123)                        (.231)

x2(dof)                61.5 (11)                    62.2 (10)                    22.1                   x2(dof)                 66.2 (10)                       27.3 (9)                   28.0 (8)


                       8,    Sample 2 -- Han Aged 25-50 Each Year               (n   —     149.000)                              8.        Sample 2     --   Hen Aged 25-50 Each Year (n — 91,000)

                         .303                         .805                        1.140                 'i                       -.065                            .304                         -.045
                        (129)                        (.189)                       C 248)                                         (.046)                          (.145)                        (.305)

x2(dof)            239,2     (11)                   62.8 (10)                    29.6       (9)         x2(dof)                 81,6 (10)                       27.8 (9)                   37,6

                        .445                         1.004                        1.400                                          -.028                             397                          .700
                       (.144)                        (.210)                       (.277)                                         (.053)                          (.113)                        (.335)
x2(dof)            233.6        (11)                54.5   (10)                  24.0 9)                x2(dof)                 86.2 (10)                      18.8   (9)                  13.8 (8)


NOTES:    Samples include men with positive                earnings in     1976-88 Cfl's,               Notes: See notes to table Al.
          month-in-sample 1-4.

          Estimation method is White (1982) two-Stage Least Square.,
          In.trua.nts ar, a full set of year dujpais..
              is fro. a regression of log annual hour.                on log hourly earnings.
              is from a regression of log annual hours                on log annual         earnings.
                                    References

Allen, Jodie 1. (1973).  "Data Banks and Files: A Guide to the 1960-71 Current
Population Survey Files," Annals of Economic and Social Measurement 2/2, 189-
 199.

Altonji, Joseph C. (1986). "Intertemporal Substitution in Labor Supply:
Evidence From Micro Data," Journal of Political Economy 94 (Vol. 3, Part 2):
5176-5215.

Abowd, John M. and David Card (1987). "Intertemporal Labor Supply and
                                                                      Long
Term Employment Contracts," American Economic Review 77: 50-68.

_________ and _________ (1989).    "On the Covariance Structure of Earnings
and Hours Changes, Econometrica 57 (March 1989): 411-445.

Ashenfelter, Orley C. (1980). "Unemployment as Disequilibrium in a Model of
Aggregate Labor Supply," Econometrica 48(3): 547-564.

           (1984). "Macroeconomic Analyses and Microeconomic Analyses of
Labor Supply," Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy 21: 117-156.

_________ and John Ham (1979). "Education, Unemployment and Earnings,"
Journal of Political Economy 87: S99-S116,

Angrist, J.D. (1991). "Grouped Data Estimation and Testing in Simple Labor
Supply Models,' Journal of Econometrics 45, forthcoming.

Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-I-Martin (1990). "World Real Interest
Rates," paper presented at the NBER Fifth Annual Conference on Macroeconomics.

Becker, Gary S. (1975). "The Allocation of Time Over the Life-Cycle," in G.R.
Chez and 0.5. Becker, The Allocation of Time and 200ds Over the Life Cycle,
t4ew York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1975.

Bils, Mark J. (1985). "Real Wages over the Business Cycle," Journal of
Political Economy 93, August 1985, 666-689.

Bound, John and Alan Krueger (1991). "The Extent of Measurement Error in
Longitudinal Earning Data: Do Two Wrongs Make a Right 7, Journal of Labor
Economics, forthcoming.

Browning, M., A. Deaton and M. Irish (1985). "A Profitable Approach to Labor
Supply and Commodity Demands over the Life-Cycle," Econometrica 53: 503-543.

Card, David (1987). "Supply and Demand in the Labor Market," Princeton
Industrial relations Section Working Paper No. 228, November.

________ (1989).    "Labor Supply with a Minimum Hours Threshold," Princeton
Industrial Relations Section, mimeo, October.

Chirinko, Robert S. "The Real Wage Over the Business Cycle," Review of
gconomics and Statistics 62, August 1980, 459-461.
Deaton, Angus (1985). "Panel Data from a Time Series of Gross-Sections,"
Journal, of Econometrics 30: 109-126.

Duncan, Greg J. and D.H. Hill (1985). "An Investigation into the Extent and
Consequences of Measurement Error in Labor-economic Survey Data," Journal of
Labor Economics 3: 508-532.

Durbin, J. (1954). "Errors in Variables," Review of the International
Statistical Institute 22: 23-32.

Geary, Patrick T. and John Kennan (1982). "The Employment-Real Wage
Relationship: An International Study," Journal of Political Economy 90, April
1982, 854-871.

Griliches, Zvi and Jerry A. Hausman (1986). "Errors in Variables in Panel
Data," Journal of Econometrics: 31: 93-118.

Ham, John C. (1986). "Testing Whether Unemployment Represents Intertemporal
Labor Supply," Review of Economic Studies 53: 559-578.

Heclcman, James J. (1979). "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,"
Econometrica, 1979, 153-62.

Heckman, James J. and Thomas E. MaCurdy (1980).  "A Life-Cycle Model of Female
Labor Supply," The Review of Economic Studies 47: 47-74.

________ (1988), "Empirical Tests of Labor-Market Equilibrium: An
Evaluation," Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy 28: 231-258.

Lucas, R.E and L.A. Rapping (1970), "Real Wages. Employment and Inflation," in
E.S. Phelps (ed.) Microeconoinic Foundations of Employment and Inflation
Theory, Norton.

MaCurdy, Thomas E. (1981). "An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life
Cyc1 Setting," Journal of Political Economy 89: 1059-1086.

________ (1985), "Interpreting Empirical Models of Labor Supply in an
Intertemporal Framework with Uncertainty," Chapter 3 in J. Heclcman and B.
Singer, eds., Longitudinal Analysis of Labor Market Data. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Mankiw, Gregory (1989). "Real Business Cycles: A New Keynesian Perspective,"
Journal of Economic Persyectives 3 (Summer 1989): 79-90.

Newey, Whitney .K. (1985). "Generalized Method of Moments Estimation and
Testing," Journal of Econometrics 29: 229-256.

Olsen, Randall J. (1980). "A Least Squares Correction for Selectivity Bias,"
Econometrica 48(7): 1815-1820.

Fakes, Ariel (1983), "On Group Effects and Errors in Variables in
Aggregation," The Review of Economics and Statistics 65: 168-172.
Pencavel, John. (1986). "Labor Supply of Men: A Survey," In 0. Ashenfelter
and R. Layard, eds. The Handbook of Labor Economics Volume I, Amsterdam: North
Holland, 1986.

Plosser, Charles I. (1989). "Understanding Real Business Cycles," Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 3 (Summer 1989): 51-78.

Prais, S.J. and J. Aitchison (1954). "The Grouping of Observations in
Regression Analysis," Review of the International Statistical Institute 22: 1-
22.


Schwarz, Gideon. (1978). "Estimating The Dimensions of a Model," Annals of
Mathematical Statistics 6; 461-464.

Solon, Gary and R. Barsky (1988). Real Wages Over the Business Cycle,"
University of Michigan, Mirneo, October.

Stewart, Mark B. (1983). "On Least Squares Estimation when the Dependent
Variable is Grouped," Review of Economic Studies 50, 737-753.

Wald, A. (1940). "The Fitting of Straight Lines if Both Variables are Subject
to Error," Annals of Mathematical Statistics 11: 284-300.

White, Halbert (1982). "Instrumental Variables Regression with Independent
Observations," Econometrica 50: 482-499.
                                  Notes

1. Studies that test assumptions underlying intertemporal substitution
models include Abowd and Card (1987, 1989), Han (1986), and Ashenfelter (1984).

2. The assumption that future wages and prices are known is not
restrictive. When future wages and prices are uncertain and consumers
maximize expected utility, the log of the marginal utility of wealth is
(approximately) a random walk with drift (See, e.g., Altonji 1986), and may
still be eliminated by transformations such as differencing. The
implications of uncertainty for grouping strategies are explored below.

3. This includes the work of Ashenfelter and Ham (1979), Beckman and
MaCurdy (1980), MaCurdy (1981, 1985), Altonji (1986) and Abowd and Card
(1987, 1989).

4. Pakes (1983) also makes this point. An early grouping strategy for
estimating life-cycle labor supply models is Becker (1975), who groups a
single cross-section by age. Other references to the instrumental
variables interpretation of grouping are given by Angrist (1991).

S. Evidence on the extent of measurement error in labor market data has
been presented by Duncan and Hill (1985) for the PSID and Bound and Krueger
(1991) for the CPS. Solutions to the measurement error problem in panel
data are cataloged by Criliches and Hausman (1986).

6. A general reference on overi4entification testing is Newey (1985) or
Hausman (1984). In the case of dummy variable instruments for a bivariate
regression, the overidentification test may be interpreted as a test for
equality of all the linearly independent Wald (1940) estimates that can be
computed front I groups. See Angrist (1991) for details.

7. For models including trend terms, Durbin-Watson statistics show no
evidence of serially correlated residuals in regressions using annual averages.

8. The White (1982) weighting matrix is (1 — 2   z zic/N. where     is the
ith r9y of l The1optimally weighted TSLS estfmahr is
(X'Zfl Z'X) X'Zfl Z'y. In the case where Z consists of mutually exclusive
dummy 9riables, Q is easily seen to be a diagonal matrix with elements
(n/N)o . Substitution into the TSLS formula establishes the equivalence
to weighted least squares.

9. The exception is when the period mean of      is orthogonal to average
wages. As an empirical matter, the problem of sample selection may be
somewhat less important than the theoretical discussion would imply. Many
labor supply studies (including this one) are carried out using a sample of
prime age males. Few members of this sample report zero hours worked over
an entire year. More troubling, perhaps, is the practice of requiring
continuous employment in all years in studies using panel data (e.g.,
Barsky and Solon 1988). Thus, someone who is out of the labor force for a
single year, possibly because of sickness or schooling, is dropped from the
sample for all years.
10. Pencavel  (1986) offers a critique of the inclusion of aggregate
unemployment rates in labor supply equations as a test of equilibrium.
Heckman and MaCurdy (1988) discuss the complicating role of selection bias
in the use of microeconounic labor supply elasticities for macroeconomic
inferences. Card (1989) uses sample selection to justify the inclusion of
unemployment rates in labor supply equations.

11. Although certain variables are missing from the Mare-Winship Extracts
(most importantly, allocation flags), they are used for the earlier sample
because they are a source of CPS micro data for 1964-67. CPS Micro data
before 1964 are not available and CPS data for 1964-67 are not available
from the Census Bureau (Allen 1973). Because allocation flags for person's
wage and salary income are not included on Census Bureau tapes before 1972,
little is lost by using the more convenient Mare-Winship Extracts to form
consistent time series for 1963-75.

12. This     is from a regression that includes period effects.

13. What is required is an estimate of the year to year correlation in
individual hours and earnings. This information is available for a few
CPS's from extracts containing matched rotation groups.

14. The 1988 Economic Report of the President (page 290) shows a one
percentage point decline in labor force participation (as defined by the
Census Bureau) for men aged 20 and over in the same period. As noted
above, Allen (1973) documents problems with the early CPS tapes.

15. Degrees of freedom are calculated as follows. There are 65
instruments: 13 years of earnings * 5 cohorts — 65; there are 11
parameters: l' 4 cohort dummies plus intercept, and 5 linear trend terms.

16. The sample used in Table 2 and all subsequent tables differs slightly
from that in Table la in that it includes men for whom the Census Bureau
imputed earnings. Results were insensitive to this variation.

17. The ranking of overidentification test statistics here is somewhat
anomalous but theoretically possible. To see this, let Z be the matrix of
instr?ents, P be the projection matrix for Z, G be the TSLS residuals,2
and a be the ksidual variance. Then the test statistic is S — G'p G/c
(Hausman 1984). The numerator of S is necessarily smaller in the qJdratic
than in the linear trend specification, but the residual variance estimate
turns out to be substantially smaller as well.

18. The approximation may be rationalized by the assumption that people
behave each period as if past interest rates were constant, but
contemporaneous rates may differ.

19. See, e.g., Altonji (1986). Evidence that grouping eliminates
measurement error in estimates based on variable (I) is presented in
Angrist (1991).

20. Card (1989) provides a recent detailed analysis of the relationship
between wages, weeks worked per year, and hours worked per week.
21. See, e.g.. Ashenfelter and Ham (1979) and Ashenfelter (1980).

22. The unemployment rate is the civilian unemployment rate for all
workers on p. 293 of the 1988 Economic report of the President. The Ml
growth series, used below, is on p. 325. The growth of real expenditure on
national defense is derived from calender year levels on p. 403 of the 1989
Report for 1967-87, and from p. 345 of the 1986 Report for 1963-66.

23. A formal argument is as follows. Assuming that E(ulv) is linear and
    is uniformly distributed on [0,11, we have

                                + e1E(wiIziPvi)   —   +
       E(u1J Zi>vi) —
If the hours residual is positivelysocorrelated
                                      that
                                                with participation, then it
                                              C 0. The bias from omitting
is negatively correlated with
E(uiitl ZiNi) is e1c0Vw.z4). The covariance term is positive if
wages are also positively correlated with participation, so that sample
selection bias is negative.

24. Testing standards that account for sample size would accept models
with a linear trend as well. For example, Schwarz (1978) critical values
for these models are qln(n), where n is sample size and q is degrees of
freedom. Schwarz critical values for the models in table 2 are all greater
than 100.
