                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE WELFARE ECONOMICS OF MORAL HAZARD




                                 Richard   Arnott
                                Joseph   Stiglitz




                             Working Paper No. 3316




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  April 1990




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Taxation.  Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3316
                                        April 1990


                     THE WELFARE ECONOMICS OF MORAL HAZARD


                                   ABSTRACT

     This paper shows that, except in certain limiting cases, competitive
equilibrium with moral hazard is constrained inefficient. The first section
compares the competitive equilibrium and the constrained social optimum in a
fairly general model, and identifies types of market failure. Each of the
subsequent sections focuses on a particular market failure,




    Richard Arnott                     Joseph Stiglitz
    Boston College                     Stanford University
    Carney 247                         Department of Economics
    Chestnut Hill, MA 02167            Stanford, CA 94305
      It is now widely recognized that the phenomenon of moral hazard, which

arises whenever risk-averse individuals obtain insurance and their accident-

avoidance activities cannot be perfectly monitored, is pervasive in the

economy.' Since individuals do not bear the full consequences of their

actions, incentives for accident avoidance tend to be Less than if they did.

This, in itself, does not imply that the market is (constrained)

inefficient; to establish inefficiency, it needs to be shown that there is

some intervention in the economy which would lead to a Pareto improvement.

The object of this paper is to show that,,in general, whenever moral hazard

is present, market equilibrium is indeed "potentially" inefficient (i.e.

assuming    no costs of government intervention),    The inefficiencies

associated    with   market equilibrium with moral hazard take on a number of

different forms, and this paper provides a taxonomy of these market

failures.

     Such a taxonomy is useful for several reasons. First, it helps in

identifying    different forms of government intervention which might yield
Pareto improvements. Secondly, several of the inefficiencies which we
identify in decentralized market economies can be thought of as
externalities. There is a strong presumption that market economies respond
to the existence of externalities by attempting to internalize them. Our
analysis thus provides some insights into patterns of market structure which

are otherwise difficult to explain, and, in the process of identifying the

various forms of inefficiencies associated with moral hazard, enables us to
                                                                                       2

 ascertain the circumstances in which market solutions' -     - internalizing    the

 informational externalities -   - are   more likely to be effective. Finally.

 the literature has identified certain limiting cases in which     equilibrium is
 efficient. Our analysis helps to understand why these limiting cases are so

 special.

      One of Arrow's great contributions was to show that the traditional

 competitive analysis, and hence the basic welfare theorems, can be extended

 to treat uncertainty, provided there is a complete set of insurance markets.

The markets in which we are interested differ from Arrow-Debreu markets in

an important way. Those markets provide insurance against states of

nature, the occurrence of which is unaffected (by definition) by

individuals' actions. Most insurance, however is for events (like

hospitalization), the likelihood of which is affected by individuals'

actions.2

     Traditional results on the efficiency of market economies can be

obtained even when the insured-against events are endogenous, so long as

individuals' accident-prevention activities are observable. Inefficiencies

ens, only when neither the exogenous states of nature nor the individuals'

accident-prevention activities are observable.

     The fact that moral hazard alters the nature of market equilibrium has

long been recognized. With moral hazard and complete insurance,3

individuals have no incentive to avoid the accident; hence competitive

markets typically entail incomplete insurance. But the existence of

incomplete insurance does not imply that the market is necessarily Pareto

inefficient, ziven the informational problems which are at the core of the



Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                  3

moral hazard problem, One might argue (as Shavell [1979] and Pauly [1974],

and several other authors have) that a competitive insurance firm takes into

account how the level of insurance it provides affects the accident

avoidance of those it insures and efficiently balances this against the

benefits of risk reduction. This argument, as attractiv, as it has been      to

those who believe that markets must be efficient, is simply wrong. The

expected profitability of an insurance contract depends on the actions taken

by the insured, which are affected by his purchase of other commodities and

other insurance (his savings, his income. etc.) all of which depend on

prices. In an Arrow-Debreu economy, the externalities that such dependency

on prices gives rise to do not cause inefficiency.4 When moral hazard is

present, however, we shall show that they do, and hence that competitive

equilibrium ii inefficient.

        In earlier works, we showed that the nature of market equilibrium with

moral hazard depends critically on whether the quantity of insurance which

the individual purchases is or is not observable. In both cases, market

equilibria are inefficient, but the nature of the inefficiencies and the

potential role of the government differ. This paper focuses on the case

where   the quantity of insurance observable, In that case, we know that
                                    is

the equilibrium is characterized by a single firm providing the individual
all of his insurance for a particular accident (see Arnott and Stiglitz

(1987]).'

     The basic source of the externalities is that if individuals take more

care, some of the benefits from reduced accidents accrue to the insurance

firm, not to the individual. If only one individual takes more care, his



Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                               4

 reduced accident probability will not be reflected in his premium; when all

 individuals take more care, they will be. Hence, policy interventions

 which increase care for all individual,s -         - provided   they do not cost too
 much --     are desirable,

       We can, accordingly, classify market failures by the avenue through

which accident-avoidance activities are influenced. Accident avoidance
                                                                                         may
be affected by purchases of goods, which in turn            are affected by prices.
Firms, in setting their prices, fail, to take this into account. This we

call   the pecuniary externalities market failure.
     Accident avoidance also depends on individuals' income in different
states. And individuals' income in different states depends on the
insurance     provided by               including insurance provided against
                              different firms,

seemingly unrelated risks. Thus, the insurance which one firm provides may
affect the profitability of insurance            contracts offered by other firms

against other risks. Associated with             this is the seeminzly unrelated events

market failure.

       Accident avoidanc, at date t is affected by wealth (and other state

variables such as health) at dats t; and this is affected by insurance

provided in both prior and subsequent years. This is true               even   if

accidents     at different dates are     independent events. Here a wealth or

income effect gives rise to a seemingly unrelated events market failure.

       One   of   the central implications of the efficiency of market economies

is that cross-subsidies are not required. The fact that the amount                  of
insurance purchased for one (seemingly unrelated) accident affects care in

another suggests that there may        be   instances where it   pays   for one insurance



Arrtott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                      5

 policy to be taxed, to crass-subsidize another. This turns out in fact to

 be the case. That cross subsidies are not provided in Competitive

 equilibrium causes the cross-subsidization market failure.

         We establish these market failures using the following
                                                                   general
 approach. We first set up the optimization problem of the planner

 attempting to attain Pareto efficient outcomes and compare these with the

market equilibrium. The planner, it turns out, takes into account certain

 terms   which   the market ignores, and while the market faces zero profit

constraints for each firm,      the   planner has only an aggregate feasibility

constraint. The shadow prices on goods derived in the planning problem turn

out to differ from market prices, which implies the (potential)
                                                                       desirability
of commodity taxation. And since the shadow prices on profits of different

firms will, typically differ, cross subsidies are in general desirable.

       The general approach allows us to identify the limiting cases where

market equilibrium is Pareto efficient. The expressions characterizing

market equilibrium and Pareto efficiency turn out to be identical when

certain behavioral responses are absent, i.e. certain derivatives are zero.

By focusing on special, cases of our general model, we obtain insights into

the   highly unusual conditions under which these behavioral responses do not
appear, Unfortunately, much of        the earlier literature, attempting to

establish the efficiency of market economies, focused precisely on those

special cases, for instance, where there is a single consumption good and a

single accident, and where each individual purchases all of his insurance

from a single competitive insurer,'

      The paper is divided into four sections. The next section sets up the



Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                           6

 general model, while the following sections examine in greater detail

 several of the market failures we have identified.



 1. A Fairly General Kodel

      There is a group of individuals identical in all, respects8   ,   faced with
 the possibility of several mutually exclusive outcomes or events,9         iE[.

 Each event may affect an individual's welfare directly and/or result in the

 Loss of a given bundle of consumer goods, d. It is assumed that an

individual receives utility from one vector of consumer goods that he

purchases prior to the outcome,      ,   and another vector of consumer goods

that he purchases subsequent to the outcome,      c , and disutility from
various types of accident-prevention effort, e        i.e., utility with outcome
i   is given by


        — u1C, &1-d1, e) .
                                                                                   (1.1)

The probability of each outcome depends on both Z and e


     Pt —   p(Z,e)   .
                                                                                   (1.2)

     The individual is assumed to supply a fixed quantity of labor, as well

as a fixed number of units of non-labor factors of production. The economy

is large, and different individuals' outcome probabilities are independent.

Thus, there is no aggregate uncertainty. Furthermore, it is assumed that

there are constant returns to scale in production, and that production is

competitively organized. As a result, with labor income as numéraire, the

return to non-labor factors of production or producer profits,          .   can be



Arnott/Stiglitz; Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                           7

expressed as a function of producer prices, r •      i.e.

       —   (r)                                                                   (1.3)


The individual's before-insurance income is therefore


     x — 1 +     r(r)   .
                                                                                 (1.4)

     It is assumed that insurers can observe neither an individual's effort

nor his total purchase of various commodities. This is the source of moral.

hazard. As a result, insurance policies cannot be based on these

magnitudes. To simplify the analysis, we assume that there is a separate

insurance policy for each outcome. For a subset of these outcomes, id'

we assume that insurance purchases are observable, in which case (see Arnott

and Stiglitz (1987]) exclusive insurance contracts specify both the quantity

of insurance the individual is to purchase and its price: equivalently,

policy i is characterized by $ , the premium, and -y              ,   the gross (of
the contract's own premium) payout. For the remaining outcomes, il/t'             ,   an

individual's total insurance purchases are not observable, and we assume

that the individual can purchase as much insurance as he wants at the price

(premium/gross payout ratio) 9. Thus, where             is the net insurance

payout with outcome J,


        — 7,      Z
                 iii'
                        p            .
                                                                                 (1.5)
                            i€I/I'


Also, the expected profits of the ith    insurance   policy are




Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                                    8




                  —   J $1-yp                 for itt'
                            - ;p1             for itt/I'                                    (1 6)



Hence, the total expected profits of all policies together are



r   —        S        — S
                               fl   +     S                 -    S    'yp — - S    pz
            itt        itI              itt/I'                  itt          itt            (1.7)


To be consistent with earlier assumptions about the composition of

individuals' incomes and to keep the model general equilibrium in nature,

these insurance profits accrue to the governmentJ°

            We assume that transactions, but not individuals' total purchases, of

goods are observable. This allows linear, but not non-Linear, commodity

taxation. Where q denotes the vector of consumer prices, from (1.4) and

(1.5), the individual's budget constraint with outcome j is


            x+z4 —l÷;(r) +-y - S
                                               itt'
                                                        -

                                                        id/I'
                                                             S        ;# — +&           .
                                                                                            (1.8)


The individual maximizes expected utility subject to his outcome-contingent

budget constraints, i.e.


       —      itax                       Eli — S
 e •   c (c )
        ,        ,     (-y )        ,            it I
                                                                                            (1.9)




subject to (1.8), the outcome-dependent budget constraints.

            Thus, using obvious vector notation,



Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                                           9


         — Z(r,-y.$.8,q)       ,                 — a(r,,,fl,9,q)         for jet


     e   —
             .(r,i,fi,9,q)     ,         EU —      V(r.,$,S.q)      ,    and                    (1.. 10)

           —
               7(r.7,fl,8,q)       for hi/I'



where y        denotes   the vector of              for Let'    .       if   fi,   •   q   and y are
fixed, then r is determined by market-clearing in the goods, factor, and

insurance markets. Hence we nay write


     r —     r(-y,$.#.q)   .                                                                    (1.11)

     Total expected tax revenue is


     t —       (-)Z t E p(-)& .                                                                 (1.12)
                      iii


The feasibility constraint for the economy is that


                                                                                                (1.13)


Also, using (1.7), (1.10), (1.11). and (1.12). we have


     EU —V(r(,$,#,q).,$,9,q),                                                                  (l.l4a)


           —                                      and
               w1(r(.fl,9,q),y,fl,#,q)       ,                                                 (l.14b)


     T —     T(r(-y,fl,#.q),,fl,S,q)     .                                                     (1.14c)

     If the planner has i           — (i.$.#,q)         as instruments,'' the social optimum

is characterized by



Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                             LO


            max 2 —        V(r(,),,)   +   A[ S r(rOt)q) +
                                             ut
                                                              t(r(q),)]   .         (1.15)
                '7




the first-order conditions of which areL2




 p+        [E+W]+z[W+A[z+J]io
                     (a)      (b)             (ci)     (a2)       (a,)              (1.16)


where L is the set of all. commodities (i.e. includes both                    and

commodities).

     This needs to be contrasted with the market equilibrium (assuming it

exists), in which each competitive insurance firm can be viewed as providing

a single policy, choosing the parameters of the policy to maximize the

individual's expected utility subject to its at least breaking even, and

taking the vector of producer prices and the parameters of all other

insurance contracts as given. The competitive equilibrium can be shown to

be the solution to the following set of equations:


     q —   r(i.fl,8,q)                                                              (1.17)


i.e. consumer prices equal producer prices; in the normal case (see Arnott

and Stigl.itz [1981] for a discussion of the other cases)



            0                                                                       (1.18)




for price insurance contracts (i.e. ia/I') , which can be shown to imply



Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                    11

that the private marginal utility of income must be the same for all

outcomes covered by price insurance contracts; and



     av
          +   A y—   —0         + A4    — 0
                                                                           (1.19)



for quantity-constrained insurance policies, where A3        is the Lagrange

multiplier associated with the jth insurance firm's profit constraint.

     Comparing (1.16) with (1.17) -    (1.19).   we can see the major sources of

market failure noted in the introduction. The market ignores: (a) the

effect of a change in the terms of the policy (or a price) on profits of

other policies; (b) the effect of the change on tax revenues; (c) the effect

of the change on producer prices, and the consequent effect on utility.

either directly, or indirectly through the effect on producer and insurance

profits and on tax revenues. We now describe each of these market failures

more fully.



a. The insurance externality with quantity rationin2

     In general, the quantity of insurance purchased for the jtK outcome

affects the actions individuals undertake, which affect the likelihood of

the occurrence of other events and hence the insurance profits for all other

outcomes (as well as profits in other industries). The competitive firm

ignores   this, while the social planner takes it into account.

     Formally, this can be seen in the comparison between (1.19) and (1.16).

We can rewrite (1.19) to read




Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                                         12


       8v/alj
       avjap1
                     —
                         'OWJ /87J
                                      ' jii
and (1.16),              to read

                                      0w1                     Or4         Ow1
                                                                                + i_ ] + I _ ]
               3w/3y + y— +                        fr
           —
                                                                                                 ic's.
av,ap                                 Ow,
                                               +
                                                              Or1         8w
                                                                                +     +
                                                                                          i av
               &r/O$
                                                        lit
The effect with which we are concerned here arises when r is constant and

t —   0.     Then (1.16) becomes



       ava.y3
                     —
                         Ow/O-r +                  (ar1/op
                                                                    JcI
                         3r/3$        +
                                                   (3r1/3$)


The distortion arises from the effect of insurance on other insurance firms'

profits, which is captured by the terms

               Sw1
                         and          — 13
                                      Ow1

       i_i      ii             i_I        •J
       jet'                    jil'


To emphasize the fact that this arises even when the events which are being

insured are apparently unrelated, we refer to this as the "seemingly

unrelated events market failure.




b. The       pecurtjarv externalities market failure
       (1.16) also suggests that it may in general be desirable to impose a
tax   on the commodities purchased. To see this, consider the case in which

Arnatt/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                                            13

producer prices are constant. Then, from (116). in the absence of

commodity taxes,


        at                av                              at
        —
        eq2
                        ——+A
                         8q2
                             E —+—
                                 8q2     iii 8q2
                  q—r


From the individual's maximization problem. (1.9),


        8V
               —   -

where              is the individual's marginal utility of income under event


Since                     —   Z p1c1      from (1.12), then,
                           jet
                    q—r



        at


               q—r
                    —

                          i
                        - I (c A)pcj -                +   A




Thus,    if A —                for   all i and                Z
                                                                   8w1
                                                                  i—— 0     .    it is not optimal to tax
good 2             But typically A #                      for     all i • and from (1.6)



                               —
                               aq
                                         for       iii'



                        -
        awl
              —
                               api                        871
                                     +   (°    -
                                                   p1)    —        for   id/I'



which is not in general equal to zero. Thus, it appears generally desirable

to tax    or   subsidize commodities which affect accident probabilities, because


Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                    L4




of their direct and indirect effects on accident-avoidance activities and

the consumption of commodities which directly affect the likelihood of an

accident. That this is indeed the case is demonstrated in Arnott and

Stiglitz [19861.



c. The income effect

        In the previous subsection, producer prices, and hence incomes, were

held constant. In general, a change in ,        fi , 9    and q will affect

producer prices and hence profits. These changes in profits will affect

care, and hence will have further repercussions on profits in the insurance

industry. This effect, captured in (1.16) by terms in ôrj/ö              is

obviously neglected by the insurance firm     in   choosing its profit-maximizing

contract, and is a second source of pecuniary externalities.



d.     The insurance externality without quantity    rationina
       Though the   government cannot directly control the quantity of insurance

chat    the individual, purchases against those outcomes for which individual
total insuranc, coverage is unobservable, it can affect the quantity
purchased by taxing such insurance - This will reduce the inefficiencies
stemming from the inadequate precautions taken as a result of excessive
insurance purchased against those outcomes. To isolate this effect, set T
— 0  and take producer prices as fixed. Fro. the consumer's maximization




Arnott/Stiglitz:    Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                                              LS

                                       av
 problem for iC/I'
                                           4
                                                — -
                                                              py3    ,   while from (17)


 8w
          —     -I                8p
                                       +       I      — ( - p)            .   From (1.16), at the
      4             iii            3   icE/I'             3




 competitiv, equilibrium


 82             —

                    89,
                          +   A3
                               ô8
 883
          '-p

                                                               apt
                — (A
                          id
                              I   pe)          y3
                                                    -A
                                                         id      4


which will not in general equal zero.


e. No cross-subsidization

          to isolate this market failure, ignore taxes. The market equilibrium

generates non-negative profits for the insurance policies covering each

outcome. If the government were constrained to at least break even in each

policy rather than on all policies together, (1.15) would become


max 2— V(r(q),,p) + Aw1 (r(q),q), and since A3 0                                   A   in general,
 II




a Pareto improvement could be made by transferring funds                               from   one insurance
policy to another.
          The careful reader at this point may be wondering: Some of these

effects arise in the classic competitive economy, but do not give rise to

inefficiency there. The actions taken by one firm may affect producer



Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                              16

     prices, and hence the profits faced by other fins, but inefficiency does

     not result; and firms face separate budget constraints but there is no

     cross-subsidization market failure. In the remaining sections, we explain

    why these effects give rise to market failure when moral hazard is present.

    even though they do not when it is absent, and provide some insight            into the
    nature   and direction of the biases generated by moral-hazard. induced

    inefficiencies. Our discussion below focuses on three of the market

    failure., the seemingly unrelated events market failure, the cross-

    subsidization market failure, and pecuniary externalities market failures

    arising from income effects. In three companion papers (Arnott and

    Stiglitz, 1986, l988c, l988d], we describe in greater detail the other
-
    market failures.



    2.    Seemingly Unrelated Events Market Failure

           In a previous paper (Arnott and Stiglitz (19871) in which there was a

    single fixed-damage accident and insurance policies were observable, we

    showed that competitive equilibrium entails exclusive contracts- -each

    individual purchases all his insurance from a single firm          (see   Footnote 6).

    Since there are many   firms offering   such policies, exclusivity is consistent

    with competitiveness. Here we extend that result to show that when there are

    several risks and insurance policies are observable, an individual should

    have all his insurance   needs   served by a single firm,   even   when the risks
    are   seemingly unrelated; we term this "extended exclusivity".
           In the previous section, we argued that the actions of a firm offering
    insurance against one type of accident generally affect the profits of firms


    Arnott/Stiglitz:   Welfare Economics
    February,   1989
                                                                                 17

offering insurance against other types of accident. Exclusivity is required

to internalize these externalities. We did not, however, prove that each

firm's actions affect the profitability of other firms, nor did we

investigate the direction of the biases introduced by these inefficiencies.

We do so in this section.

     That there are   important   interactions among different risks seems

clear: An individual who drinks excessively will have a higher likelihood

of an automobile accident and a higher likelihood of hospitalization.

Increasing the degree of hospitalization insurance means that the magnitude

of an individual's total losses from drinking will be reduced, and he may

therefore be induced to drink more, increasing the automobile accident rate

and lowering profits of automobile insurance. In this case, there would be

a negative externality- - the market would be characterized by excessive

hospitalization insurance (and by symmetry) excessive automobile insurance.

     ¶.that is not so apparent, however, is that even when there is apparently

no relation between the events (and the accident-avoidance activities),

there is an interdependence. Not surprisingly, the effects are complicated,

and it is not an easy task to sign them. Though the calculations are

complex, the analytic approach we take is simple: We ascertain the effect

of a change in insurance against one accident on the likelihood of the

occurrence of other accidents; that is, we calculate the derivative of the

probability of accident J with respect to the tens of insurance against

accident i; so long as this derivative is not zero, the market equilibrium

is inefficient.

    to simplify the discussion, we consider a world in which there are only



Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                  18

 two types of fixed-daaage accident, I and 2. There are four possible

 outcomes:   no accident, accident 1. accident 2, and both accidents. Suppose

 that a representative competitive insurance firm I provides insurance

against accident 1, and a representative competitive insurance firm 2

against accident 2.   To simplify further, we assume that there is a single

commodity, the consumption of which has no effect on accident probabilities.

The probabilities of the accidents depend only on the levels of various

types of accident-prevention effort.

     There are three avenues through which a budget-balancing perturbation

of firm l's contract can affect the profitability of firm 2.     Firs:, one or

more of the types of accident-prevention effort may directly affect (i.e.,

enter the probability-of-accident functions for) both accidents.'       Suppose

firm I offers more insurance. This will affect the effort levels chosen by

the individual, which will affect the probability of accident 2 and hence

the profitability of firm 2.   Second, even when the various types of

accident-prevention effort are accident-specific, the level of one type of

effort may affect the marginal disutility of other types of effortLS and

hence the levels of these other types of effort that the individual chooses.

When firm 1 offers more insurance, this may affect the marginal, disutility

of a type of effort that influences the profitability of firm 216 Third,

even with neither of these effects operative, an increase in the provision

of insuranc, against one accident may make the individual more or less

complacent and careless in preventing the other because it affects the

differences in average marginal utilities between those states where the

accident does and does not occur.      The nature of this effect depends



Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                                           19

critically on the correlations between the two accidents, as we shall

shortly see.

      The first two avenues, discussed above, through which the contract

offered by firm 1 can affect the profitability of firm 2. are obvious. We

shall therefore model only the last, Let j—l,2 index both the firm and

accident type, and i index the outcome with:                           i — 0   •   no accident; 1. —   1

accident 1 ; i —     2, accident 2 ; and I —           3       •   bath accidents. Corresponding
to each accident, there is a single unobservable, accident-specific type of

accident-prevention effort e

      To simplify the algebra, we assume that there Is complete symmetry

between the two accidents. Let                   —
                                                     P(e)          be the probability of accident

j •with r <0 p.> 0 • and p be the probability of outcome i
which are related as follows


            p0 — 1         -
                               P2
                                    +   OP1 P2       p1 —          P(l.flP2)
                                                                                                   (2.1)
                                                           —
            Pa —   P2A'W1)

The parameter U captures the correlation between the accidents; U —                               0

corresponds to mutually exclusive accidents, U —                         I   to statistically

independent accidents, and U > 1                 to positively-correlated accidents.

      The expected utility function has the special form

             3                  2
      EU— E u(y1)p1 - Z              s .                                                        (2.2)
            i—O                j—l



where y1 is net-of-insurance income (consumption) with outcome I •                                We


term this a separable, event-independent expected utility function--event-



Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                                                20

independent since the accidents do not affect the utility function directly.

       Note that since the effort types are accident-specific the first

avenue of interdependence is excluded. Since the marginal disutility of

each effort type is independent of the level of the other effort type, the

second avenue of interdependence is excluded too.

       Firm I and firm 2 both offer quantity-constrained contracts of the form

(a 'fi)
              where            is the net (of premium) insurance payout if accident j

occurs, and fl           is   the insurance premium for accident j .                        Thus,


              y0 — w     -      -             y1
                                                   — w   -       d +       -
                                                                                                        (2.3)
              ' —w-$1 -d+a2 y3 —w- dia1 -

where w is the individual's pre-insurance income when an accident does not

occur, and d is the size of the fixed-damage accident.                              -




      The first-order conditions of the individual's effort choice decision

ate


       [(l-flP)(u. 'u0) +           flP3(u3-u)]F'.           —    I    j,j'—l,2; j"j' .                 (2.4)

We assume an interior solution, which may be written as


              e —    e       11a2•$11$2) j—l,2.                                                         (2.5)


Expected utility (substituting (2.5) into (2.2)) is


              EU —
                     V(aL,aa,$L,flz)      -                                                             (2.6)

      Firm J's problem is to

        max      V(o1,a2,$1,fl1)       s.t.        —
                                                       $(l-P)          -        0   ,   j   — 1.2   .   (2.7)
      (ni ,fl)



Arnott/Stiglitz:         Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                           21



Firm j must at least break even on policy j                 and takes a,, and fi,
as given. Where             is the multiplier on            the first-order conditions

are

       aV            aB          By
                                          8B
                                                                                   (2.8)



       To ascertain whether competitive equilibrium entails over- or under-

provision of insurance, we perform the following exercise: We ask if a

budget-balancing increase in insurance offered by firm I in the neighborhood

of the competitive equilibrium, holding firm          2's   contract fixed, stimulates

or discourages the effort expended by the individual to prevent accident 2.

If the increase stimulates e2 ,       then     the social benefit from the increase

exceeds the private benefit, and it is desirable that firm 1 offer more

insurance; hence, competitive equilibrium entails under-insurance. Let


—
de2
             denote the change induced from an increase in a1              holding a2

       6
and $ constant, but allowing fl           to   change to maintain budget balance.

Then

       de1                            >         under-insurance
                     7 + —j < 0 •
                     8e2   8e2 dfl1
                 —                                                                 (2,9)
             3                                  over-insurance      -




Now, at the competitive equilibrium, from (2.8). —                      —4fl
                                                                          —
                                                            do1   B da1 V

Hence,



Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                              22

                        802   8e2 d$1
                   a —roa; V
         de2
                                                                                     (2.10)




ae                 8e
         and             are obtained from total differentiation of (2.4), while
a1                 p1


               is obtained from (2.2). Where P —        ?    —
                                                                 P2   and u. •   —




since     the two accidents are symmetric, substitution of these results gives



de2                 f   -0PP'(u-u)            fl(P')2(u3-2u,+u0)
                                                                        +
du   I   Bt        A1
                        -((l-1ZP)u+ 0?u)P'              F
 (l-QUP'(u-u)                   O(?')2(u, -2u.+u0)
                                        P                   (l-2P+(1P2)u+P(l-QP)u
                                                                                     (2.11)


where A > 0             from the second-order conditions of the individual's effort-

choice problem.

         We shall consider two special cases.


a. Mutually exclusive accidents (0—0)

         We obtain


                   (u-u) —
de1
               —                                  > 0
         B,
                                 (12?)'?'                                            (2.12)



since u -           u   > 0   (with moral hazard, insurance is only partial, which

implies that y0 > y2)            and r' > 0   .   Thus, with mutually exclusive

accidents, the competitive equilibrium entails underinsurance. The reason


Arnott/Stigtitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                                                          23

for this is as follows: With mutually exclusive accidents, p0 —                                         I   -       -

p2        P1 — P1               Pz —              and   p3 — 0       •    and from (2.4), the first-order

condition for e2 is

         -(u0-u2) P-1 — 0
In deciding on e2                 -    the       individual will, compare the utility in the no-

accident event with that in the accident 2 event (since e2 does not affect

the probability of accident 1). The increase in insurance against accident

1 decreases y0 and y2 by the same amount (recall (2.3)). Because of

diminishing marginal utility of income, and since y0 > y2                                    .   this   increases

     -
         u2    -   which stimulates effort.


b. Statistically independent accidents (0—1)

         We obtain


                                                                         (p')3
              — 1
de2I
                                                                 +               ((l-P)u÷PuP(u3-2u+u0)
                   A          (lp)u+pu:                                   1-P
                         j
                                                                                                                 (2.13)

The second term in the curly brackets is unambiguously positive (since

(P')3 < 0                and u3 - 2u. +            u0 < 0   (concavity of u)), while the first term

is positive if absolute risk aversion is constant or increasing over the

relevantrange ((u)2                          -
                                                 uu >0      —            2   1nu tlnu +1nu                      lnu'


is concave in y (since y2 — y1 —
                                                          y0 +y3
                                                            2
                                                                             — constant   or increasing

absolute risk aversion). Hence,there is a presumption that the market also

under-provides insurance in the case of statistically independent accidents.

If, however, absolute risk aversion is sufficiently decreasing, the market



Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February.,             1989
will, over-provide insurance.''

      The general point is that an increase in the amount of insurance

provided by a firm against one type of accident will, by altering the

marginal utilities of income of several outcomes, affect the marginal

benefit of effort, and hence the effort level chosen, in preventing other

accidents. As a result, insurance firms generate external effects that can

be internalized if each individual purchases all his insurance from one

agent- -   the extended exclusivity requirement for efficiency. If individuals

purchase different types of insurance from different firms, the market will

be inefficient, but the direction of bias--what types of accident the market

will, over-insure and what types it will under-insure- -   is   in general

ambiguous, depending in a complex way on such factors as the correlation

between the accidents, the risk-aversion properties of the utility function,

and the characteristics of the accident-prevention technology.



c.   Dynamic interactions

     Thus far, we have discussed different types of risk at a point in time.

The rule that exclusivity is a necessary condition for efficiency applies as

well to the provision of insurance against the same type of risk and

different types of risk over time. Thus, not only should an individual's

insurance needs be served by a single insurance agent at a point in time,

but the individual should also have the same insurance agent through time.

This is an important implication of our analysis. For most types of risks.

the probability of accident depends on the value of some imoerfectlv

observable'5 stock or state variables- -weight, state of health, education,



Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Econoeics
February, 1989
                                                                                       25

savings- -over which the individual has at least partial control and which

are influenced by the amount of insurance provided through time. An agent

who provides insurance over only part of the insured's Life will neglect the

effect of the insurance he provides on the value of         these stock variables.
and hence on accident probabilities, before and after the period in which he

is the insurer.

       traditional theories have stressed the importance of precautionary

savings. Since these savings are not earmarked, they serve to "insure"

simultaneously against all risks. The provision of greater market

insurance against some risk (say fire) reduces the need for savings; but at

reduced level of savings, individuals will tend to take greater care (at

fixed leveLs of insurance) against other risks. With this effect, an

increase in insurance against one risk will nonalLy have a positive effect

on the profitability of insurance against other risks, which implies that

precautionary savings lead to under-insurance.

       An extended example of these       dynamic externalities is   provided by

Arnott and Stiglitz [1985].



d. The seetinely unrelated events market failure.

       Since we have assumed that there are no administrative costs in the

provision of insurance and that individuals are perfectly informed

concerning   the   menu   of contracts   being offered, competition should result in

extended   exclusivity- -a firm which offers the socially optimal exclusive
contract covering all of       one individual's insurance needs throughout his

life   would drive all other    firms out of business. Assume, more



Arnott/Stiglitz:    Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                               26

realistically, that insurance administrative costs are characterized by

diseconomies of scope, so that competition will result in each firm

specializing in the provision of only a subset of types of insurance.

Moreover, for a variety of reasons, intertemporal. exclusivity is unlikely;

individuals would have to sign up at birth with an insurance fin that would

cover them for all risks (even those which, at the tie, they are not fully

aware of) throughout their lives, regardless of where they subsequently

choose to live or the occupation or lifestyle they decide to pursue. In

either of these cases, the externalities we have identified in this section

would be present. Not only would the market over- or under-provide

insurance, but also insurance fins would in general be over- or under-

specialized. Thus, we have identified a genuine potential market failure.

The inefficiency arises when accidents are related, but since its appearance

is most surprising when the accidents appear unrelated, we ten it the

seemintly unrelated events market failure.

     In fact, individuals do obtain insurance from a variety of sources;

typically, one obtains market insurance from more than one carrier; and if

one is sick, one usually gets compensated sick leave from work and medical

care that is subsidized by the government.

     Whether insurance markets are well-described by a competitive model

such as   the   one we have presented is moot, but whatever the market

structure, in the absence of extended exclusivity, the seemingly unrelated

events market failure is present.



3. The Cross-Subsidization Inefficiency



Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February,   1989
                                                                                       27

     A central property of competitive models is that no crosssubsjdies

between firms are needed. Consider two constant returns industries

producing consumer goods. Assume that an infinitesimal specific tax is

imposed on consumer good i      ,   and that the revenues are used to finance a

subsidy on good j.   Good j's price is lowered, and is price is raised;

the gain on one account is just equal to the loss on the other. There are,

of course, further repercussions: consumption of other goods, supply of

labor, etc. will, all change. But since all individuals are maximizing

their utility, these adjustments have second-order welfare effects (because

of the envelope theorem), and any consequent price changes have, at most.

redistributive effects.         Any subsidies/taxes that are not infinitesimal

have further distortionary effects, and are welfare-reducing.

     In contrast, with moral hazard, cross-subsidization is in general

desirable. The basic idea is that the transfer of a dollar from one firm          to
another will alter the general equilibrium of the economy, including

individuals' effort levels and hence the "deadweight loss" associated with

moral, hazard (i.e. the loss relative to the equilibrium in which effort is

observable). The tax on one insurance policy leads to a prico increase, a

decrease in the quantity   of   insurance purchased, and an increase in

accident-avoidance effort against that risk. The subsidy on the other

insurance policy has qualitatively the opposite effects. These effort

effects will not in general be offsetting. There may, of course, be other

general equilibrium effects, for instance on the prices of various

commodities and the levels of consumption, but (apart from any further

induced effects on effort) these have second-order welfare consequences,



Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                                28

because of the fact that individuals are utility-maximizing and fins are

profit-maximizing.

     We shall demonstrate th, desirability of cross-subsidization for

insurance firms, but it holds generally. This gives a further argument for

exclusivity, since if an individual purchases all his insurance from a

single carrier, the carrier can cross-subsidize between contracts. When

insurance against different risks is provided by different carriers, due to

regulation, diseconomies of scope, etc., then cross-subsidization between

carrier! is potentially welfare-improving. This is true even when the

government cannot impose taxes or subsidies directly on the quantity of

insurance purchased by an individual, because of costly monitoring, for

example.

     To establish the desirability of cross-subsidization, we employ a model

in which there are two possible accidents, I and 2. The individual commits

himself to undertaking either project 1 or project 2 with equal

probability (e.g.. project 1 could be a sunny-day project, and project 2 a

rainy-day project) before expending any accident-prevention effort.

Accident I can occur only if the individual embarks on project 1, while

accident 2 only with project 2. Thus, the two                accidents   are mutually

exclusive. But here they    are      cx ante exclusive--the roll of the die to

determine   which of the accidents cannot occur is made before the individual
makes his effort decision; while in the previous section, the mutual
exclusivity was      D2. We denote variables associated with project 1 by a
   and with project   2 with a
                                     -
                                         -    Thus,   the expected utility function is
     EU —                                    R,(L-?)÷1P-;) .                            (3.1)
              (G,(l-)+a1-;1      +



Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                    29


Subsequently, we shall drop the        .   We impose a Lump-sun tax

S    (possibly negative) on contracts providing insurance against accident I.

and use the proceeds to finance a lump-sum subsidy of S for contracts

providing insurance against accident 2.      Thus, contracts 1 and 2 have the

budget constraints

             -    -S    0 ,   and   (l-P) - a? + S     a-                   (3.2)
We wish to show that the optimal value of S       is not in general zero.

      to isoLate the cross-subsidization market failure, we must purge the

model of other factors which could result in a non-zero optimal value for

S.   First, since the effort decision for either accident is made when it is

known that the other accident cannot occur, the seemingLy unrelated events

externality is inoperative, and need not concern us. Second, if the

expected marginal utilities of income were different for the two projects,

a cross-subsidy would be desirable to equalize the expected marginal

utilities.   (The cross-subsidy, in this case, is effectively a form of

insurance.) to isolate the cross-subsidization market failure, we want to

rule out this possibility, and so require that the expected marginal

utilities of income be the sale for both projects. Third, cross-

subsidization can be desirable because it provides an indirect form of z

      (before the individual has made his effort decision) randomization,

when direct ex ante randomization is excluded (as in this paperY2° The way

we shall proceed is to prove that SO in general at the social optimum,

and then argue that this is not due to any considerations related to

randomization -

      From (3.1) the first-order conditions of the individual's effort

Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                                                     30

decision problem are

                          — 1   and (-0+1)P                —1        .
                                                                                                             (33)
Substituting (3.2) into (3.3). eliminating the fl's                                     and totally

differentiating the resulting equations gives



     3e
         A
                          1-?                      3.
                                                       —        ( —--+j)?'
                                                                   1-P
                  "        a(0+S)(P')2             3a           j3
                  —+
                                 (l-P)                                         (j.)Z

                                                                                                             (3.4)


                                                                           uo —
                          —Ps                                              —P.
             ______                                                        i-P
     85      "            G(0÷S)(.)2               as           - i,(aS)(p)1
                                                                —4
                               (lP)                             P'             (1.P)2


where the denominators are negative in the relevant range.

     Next we set up the social optimization problem by substituting (3.2)

into (3.1) and treating the planner as choosing                                            and S .    The

corresponding first-order conditions are

     A        A
     a: (-u+u)P -
                      A    A
                                u
                                 A
                                         A
                                              F'   — —0                                                     (3.Sa)
                                      1-2          oa


                                      (;-S)        3
     a:      (-u+u)P -                   —
                                              2'   — —0         .        and                                (3.Sb)
                                      1-P          öa




Arnotc/Stiglitz:           Welfare Economics
February,    1989
                                                                                                    31

                  —     u'(a+S)P' öe u'(a-S)' 8
       5: (-u+u)      - __________ — -                        ——0
                                                      —                                    (3.5c)
                              l-        as           1-p      as




Note that (-u+u)P —               -u         where         • (1-?)u   +
                                                                          Pu   is the average


marginal utility of income. Multiply (3.Sa) by — and (3.5b) by - —- and


add the resulting equations to (3.Sc). This yields



            dEU       (rf)2        (i)2
                              +     —
                                             —0.                                            (3.6)
            d5


       From (3.4), it follows that giving a subsidy retards effort, while

imposing a lump-sum tax stimulates it. The natural conjecture therefore is

that one wants to tax policies for which, damage fixed, the probability of

accident is more sensitive to the size of the subsidy, since doing so will

reduce the probability of that accident and the deadweight Loss associated

with it substantiaLly, while the subsidy provided on the other accident wiLl

increase its, probability only slightly. This intuition is supported by

(3.6). If we impose the requirement that the expected marginal utility of

income for the two projects be the same, then (3.6) reduces to                       —

In   the absence of cross-subsidization, more insurance is provided against

that accident for which the elasticity of the accident probability with

respect to the amount of insurance provided, ceteris paribus, is lower.

Suppose this is accident 1. Then one expects that with £—0, G >                       ti    and




Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                                           32


therefore, from (3.6Lthat                            C 0   .   which   icpI.ies that accident 1.


should be subsidized.

        The above argument can be formalized by considering a speciaL case. in

which the two accidents are the same except with respect to the


probability-of-accident functions. Define 0 — -                                   (thus 0 is the

elasticity of the probability of                       having an accident with respect to a

the amount of insurance provided), and assume that:                          i)   <<0       •   where 0

and          are constants when profits are zero, and ii) the probability-of-

accident functions differ in such a way that                              — ' when     S—O in

competitive equilibrium. Then (35a) and (3.5b), evaluated at 5—0 ,                               become


                -         +         — 0, and                                                     (3.Sa')

         :      -         +         —0   -
                                                                                                 (3.Sb)



Since               C 0       •   then       >   iIQ . which     implies that         L—o < o

Note that this local cross-subsidization has a non-zero first-order effect

on expected utility.

        Cross-subsidization may be desirable because it provides an indirect

forts of cx ante randomization. That is, it might be efficient to ex ante

randomize either or both the aàcident 1 and accident 2 contracts, but when

such direct randomization is not permitted, cross-subsidization between the

accident I. and accident 2 contracts may provide an indirect or second-best



Arnott/Sttglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                                         33

form of randomization. We wish to demonstrate that the desirability of

local cross-subsidization in the above example is independent of such

randomization considerations. To do this, we show that local2' ex ante

randomization of either contract has a zero first-order effect on
                                                                                            expected
utility.

        Undertake any local cx ante randomization of the contract against

accident I. Arnctt and StigLitz [1988b] have shown that all the potential

gains from cx ante randomization can be obtained with two contracts. Thus,

without loss of generality, we may assume that the randomization entails two

contracts. Contract A occurs with probability Q and makes arbitrarily

small profits of ri —                 , while      contract B occurs with probability (l-Q)

and makes a profit of                    —   -      .    Both contracts A and B maximize

expected utility subject to the respective levels of profit. Thus,


        EU — QEUA +   (l-Q)        EU3
where
                                  +
              — u     -                                  + U (w-d+a)
        EUA               1   -                                        FA-eA


and similarly for contract B.                    For both contracts, individuals choose effort

to maximize expected utility, which yields e — e(aA,                            and        e3 —

e(a3, 1I). Thus, we may write                    EUA —   EU(a, 11A and    EU3 — EU3(a3,      III).

          dEli       ('8EUA A ÔEUA d114 1                          18E13 da3        aEU3   d113
Hence,           —
                                         +. — — J + (l-Q)                  r'   +                    -




        Now, since aA and a3 are chosen to maximize expected utility,




Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                    34


         a;            a;
                ÷ (1Q)—1 (_.S)
                            l-Q
                                  '   and
                                            d   A—O
                                                      —   Q
                                                              an
                                                                   -
                                                                       Q
                                                                           an
                                                                                —


     Since    the above argument holds for any Q, it also holds for the

optimal Q. Thus, whether or not local cx ante randomization is desirable,

it has a zero first-order effect on expected utility. Since local cross-

subsidization has a non-zero first-order effect on expected utility, the

desirability of local cross-subsidization must be independent of

randomization considerations.

     Thus, ceteris Daribus, insurance for accidents in which moral hazard is

more (less) severe than "average" should be taxed (subsidized) since doing

so stimulates "average" effort, thereby reducing the deadweight loss

associated with moral hazard.



4. Pecuniary Externalities Market Failure

     Recall from the discussion in section 1 that the market failure here

arises because insurance firms fail to take into account that collectively

the amount of insurance they provide affects producer prices and profits,

which in turn affect

 individuals' effort at accident avoidance. In the classic, competitive

economy, these pecuniary externalities "do not matter"- -they cause

transfers, but do not generate inefficiency. In economies with moral

hazard, however, shadow prices deviate from market prices. With

heterogeneous individuals, the marginal deadweight loss associated with an

extra dollar of consumption by Mr. A may be larger than that for Mr. 3. In

this case, the transfers generated by pecuniary externalities can alter the




Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                                  33
aggregate deadweight loss associated with moral hazard. Thus, Pecuniary

externalities matter"- -affect the efficiency of the economy- -when moral

hazard is present22

        Rather than present a general characterization of the nature of the

inefficiency1 we shall, as in the previous two sections, develop a simpLe

example in which the cause of market failure is transparent.

        We assume that there is only one type of risk and one consumer good.

Now, however, the accident repair industry does not have constant costs;

instead, the cost of repairing the damage from an accident is an increasing

function of the number of accidents. Ze assume, furthermore, that there are

two classes of individuals- -workers who have to drive and therefore face the

risk of accident, and rentiers who sit at home consuming the profits from

the accident-repair industry.23

        The expected utility of workers is


        EU —   (1-p(eflu(w-$)+p(e)u(w-D'(p(efl+a)-e            ,                          (4.Ij

where D(p(e)) is the total cost of damage repairs as a function of the

number of accidents, with D' > 0 and D"                      0 .     Workers pay the marginal

cost, D'(p(e)) , and choose effort. ignoring the fact that .,heir collective

effort affects the price of damage                repairs.   Thus,



        p'(-u0+u1)
                     —   1   ,   where    u, —   u(w-$)   and u1 — u(w.D'+a)     .        (6.2)

This    implies e —      e   (a,$) , substituted into (4.1) gives EU — V(a,$).
                                         which

        Competitive insurance firms, meanwhile, choose 2 and fi , taking
(4.2)    into account, but like           workers ignoring    the endogeniety of the cost of




Arnott/Stiglitz:     Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                                36

damage repairs. They effectively maximize expected utility subject to a

zero profit constraint, i.e.

                max V(a,$) s.t. C(,$)                     —   fl(l-p).ap      — 0   .
                                                                                        (4.3)

where B denotes the market budget constraint.

        At this competitive equilibrium. renders obtain an income of I —                 D'p-
D       Can the planner do better, given the same informational constraints as

the market? Suppose the planner provides the rentiers with I and then

chooses a and $                  .     The consumer's choice of effort as a function of a

and $      is      the same as before. The planner's resource constraint, however,

differs from firms'. It is


                             —       $(l.p).ap-D(p)   +   D'(p)p      -   I   — 0   .
                                                                                        (4.4)

     The market'! choice of a                    and      $     is   characterized by




         Va p+(a+$)p'
           $            3C




while    the planner's is characterized by



         V0                          p+(a+$)p'        Dwpp
     -         —             —
                   dn                                                                   (4 6)
         Vp             0             (l-p)-(a+fl)p'      + D"p'p




Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                               37

Since i < 0        •   P   > 0   ,   <0   and    <   C   •   while   >   C




then           >            30 at the competitive equilibrium unless D" — 0



In a-fl    space the budget constraint perceived by the market is steeper
than the real resource constraint, which implies that the market under-

supplies insurance. Collectively, firms ignore that if they provide more

insurance, damage costs go up, which, since this is equivalent to a fall in

  • stimulates effort. Thus, the market perceives the responsiveness of

effort to increased insurance to be greater than it actually is, and hence

provides too little insurance.

       The externality identified here could be corrected in a variety of

ways. It would be internalized if both insurance and damage repairs were

provided by the same company; this is an extension of the exclusivity

requirement. Alternatively, the government could subsidize automobile

accident insurance, which in general equilibrium with the consumer good as

numeraire entails taxing repairs.

       The exampl.e of this section was rather specific. The essential point

is that, with moral hazard, pecuniary externalities have real efficiency

effects that are ignored by the market. Thus, we term the inefficiency

identified in this section the yecuniarv externalities market failure.




Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                                38

5. Conclusions

     For over a quarter of a century. the fundamental theorems of welfare

economics, the formalization of Adam Smith's invisibLe hand, have been the

central propositions in welfare economics. Though the informational

assumptions underlying the theorems were generally not made explicit,

intuitive discussions of the advantages of the market fàcussed on the

"informational economy" of the price system. This paper examined the

behavior of competitive markets under a particular informational hypothesis.

We postulated that there are many misfortunes against which individuals wish

to purchase insurance and the occurrence of which are affected by their

actions; moreover, insurance firms recognize that these actions, though not

directly observable, will be affected by the nature of the insurance

coverage provided.

     These moral hazard problems are pervasive in the economy. They arise

not only in explicit insurance policies, but also in the implicit insurance

associated with labor markets (wages not equal to the marginal revenue

product), land markets (sharecropping), capital markets (with equity and

loan contracts, when there is a finite probability of default which can be

affected by the borrowers' actions) and product markets (product

guarantees), etc. We have   contended   in this paper that economies in which

these moral hazard problems are present contain numerous forms of potential

inefficiency and are essentially never constrained Pareto efficient. Our

analysis therefore casts serious doubt on the relevance of the fundamental

theorems of welfare economics, and on the basic results concerning the

efficient decentralizability of economies.



Arnott/Stiglitz; Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                               39

     The presence of these externalities has both descriptive and

prescriptive consequences.2' We discuss the descriptive consequences first.

As usual whenever there are externalities, there are private incentives for

the internalization of those externalities. Our theory provides arationale

for the kind of incerlinking of labor, land, and credit markets often --

observed in LDCs.   (Indeed, our paper may be viewed as a generalization as

the earlier Braverman-Stiglitz [19821 results in this area,) It also

provides a rationale for firms to subsidize health care programs, which may

reduce the Losses associated with absenteeism and employer-financed health

insurance.   Our analysis may also provide part of the explanation for why

insurance firms typically provide insurance against several different risks.

     The intertemporal linkages, in particular the externalities between

insurance provided at different dates, provide part of the explanation for

long-term relations, for why individuals should work for the same employers

for many periods, or why the same bank should provide credit over several

periods. (See also Stiglitz and Weiss (1983].)

     There is also the issue of the relationship between competitiveness and

exclusivity. Exclusivity is not conceptually inconsistent with full

competitiveness, provided each individual has perfect information regarding

the full set of insurance contracts offered before he signs a contract which

will cover all his risks for his entire life.2 In fact, however.

individuals are typically poorly informed at the time they sign their first

insurance policy, and gradually acquire more information through costly

search and by switching firms. Thus, there is a tradeoff between

competitiveness and extended exclusivity. How the market will resolve this



Arnott/S tiglitz: Welfare Economics
February. 1989
                                                                                     40

tradeoff is £   difficult   issue. But it seems safe to say that the market

will be characterized by imperfect competition, only partial exclusivity.

and constrained inefficiency.

       Though we have identified a set of externalities which might lead to

exclusive relations among a pair of economic agents, possibly covering a

wide range of transactions (insurance covering various kinds of risks), the

enforcement of these exclusive relations is frequently either costly or

infeasible. As a result, in many insurance contexts, individuals obtain

insurance against a particular risk from a variety of sources. For example.

health insurance is provided not only by the individual's insurance firm,

since, if he is sick, his employer generally gives him sick leave and his

family will continue to provide him food and shelter. The         aphorism   "a

friend in need is   a   friend indeed" can be   translated   "true friends provide

insurance."     There is a widespread view that a critical function of non-

market institutions is to remedy the deficiencies of markets. Elsewhere

(Arnott-Stiglitz, 1988d), we have shown that this need not be true; whether

the supplemental insurance provided by non-market institutions is welfare-

improving depends on whether these non-market insurance providers monitor

the   level of care provided by the insured.
      The prescriptive    implications of our results are somewhat more
ambiguous. We   would    not argue that we have established an overwhelming
case for government intervention wherever there is moral, hazard. What we
have established is that an ideal government can, through intervention,
improve the performance of a market economy, as we have described it. But
actual governments are not ideal. The potential market failures we have



Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                               41

identified become actual market failures only when the benefits of

government intervention exceed the costs. To estabLish this, it will be

necessary, on the benefit side, to obtain estimates of the deadweight losses

associated with the inefficiencies we have identified,26 and on the cost

side, to develop models of the public sector that capture the inefficiencies

to which j is prone. We suspect, however, that there are some instances

where government intervention may be warranted. In an earLier paper, for

instance, we showed how subsidies to fire extinguishers or taxes on

cigarettes may be welfare-enhancing.

     In any case, the government is engaged in the provision of a variety of

forms of insurance, and our analysis indicates that it should take these

externalities into account in the design of public insurance programs.2'

     Our analysis can be criticized in another way as overstating the case

for government intervention. Throughout the paper we ignored the

possibility that individuaLs and firms may privately contract or organize to

mitigate the moral hazard problems and to at least partially internalize

the externalities we have identified. Consider, for example, the case of a

construction firm whose accident insurance is experience-rated and in which

workers with a hangover have a significantly greater probability of

accident. Workers may collectively agree to restrict their alcohol

consumption on evenings before work, realizing that failure to do so will,

result in higher accident insurance premiums. Even though each worker would

have an incentive to renege on the agreement and even though monitoring and

enforcing strict compliance would be very difficult, social disapproval

directed at workers who came to the job hung over would be somewhat



Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                               42

effective. In other contexts, where members of the insurance group were

more anonymous and diffuse, there would be less compliance with agreed-to

safety standards.

       The possibility that individuals may privately cooperate to mitigate

moral hazard and to partially internalize the externalities we have

identified raises the question: In this context, what advantages does

government have over coalitions of individuals? One is universality, along

with which come advantages of scale and scope in reaching, monitoring, and

enforcing agreements. For example, it is considerably cheaper to have the

police monitor reckless driving than it would be for each insurance company

to monitor its own clients' driving. Relatedly, it is much cheaper for the

government to decide on universal safety standards than it is for each firm

to   reach agreement with its own workers on safety standards. A second

advantage the government has is the cower to tax. Suppose that as a result

of moral hazard, people smoke too much. While an insurance company can

"tax" smoking by making a clients premium dependent on his cigarette

consumption, to do this it has to monitor the client's cigarette

consumption, which is excessively costly. The government could imperfectly

monitor each individual's consumption of cigarettes at lower cost, by

requiring that storeowners record the identity of all cigarette purchasers.

But more cost-effective than this is for it to anonymously tax the sale of

cigarettes, which it can do because of universality. Because of

universality and the power to tax, the government could be considerably more

effective in internalizing the pecuniary externalities market failure than

the collectivity of firms. A third advantage is the government's monopoly



Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February. 1989
                                                                            43

on comtulsion. Private contracting requires agreement among the parties.

whereas governments can compel. with no quid org aug. The inter-firm

transfers required to internaLize the cross-subsidization market faiLure

wouLd not be possible without compulsion. Finally, the government can and

does restrict the terms of private contracts, for instance the forms of

punishments that can be meted out.




Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                              44

                                    BIBLIOGRAPHY

rnotc, a. •  and J. Stigliez, 1985, "Labor turnover, Wage Structures, and
      Moral Hazard: The Inefficiency of Competitive Markets", Journal pE
  -   Labor   Econofflies, 3, 434-462.

Arnott, a. • and J. Stiglitz. 1986, "Moral Hazard and Optimal Commodity
     Taxation", Journal of Public Economics, 29, 1-24.

Arnott, R., and .1. Stiglitz, 1987, "The Existence and Properties of Market
     Equilibrium with floral Hazard", mimeo.

Arnott. a., and .3. Stiglitz, 1988a, "The Basic Analytics of Moral Hazard".
     Scandinavian Journal of Economics. forthcoming.

Arnott, R., and J. Stiglitz, 1988b, "aandomizaticn with Asymmetric
     information", Rand Journal of Econo.ics, forthcoming.

Arnott, R. • and 3. Stiglttz, 1988c, "Price Equilibrium, Efficiency, and
     Decentralizability in Insurance Markets," mimea, Stanford University.

Arnott, a,, and J. Stiglitz, 1988d, "Dysfunctional. Non-market Institutions
     and the Market," NBER Working Paper 2666.

Arrow, K., AsDects of the Theory of Risk Searint (Helsinki: YrJo
     Jabnssonin SSttio, 1965),

Braverman, A. and J. Stiglitz, 1982, "Sharecropping and the Interlinking of
     Agrarian Markets," American Economic Review, 72, 695-715.

Creenwald, B., and J. Stiglitz, 1986. "Externalities in Economies with
     imperfect Information and Incomplete Markets", Ouarterlv Journal of
     Economics, 101, 229-264.

Hellvig, M, 1983a, "Moral Hazard and Monopolistically Competitive
     Insurance Markets", University of Bonn, discussion paper no. 105.

Hellwig, H. 198Th, "On Moral Hazard and Non-Price Equilibria in Competitive
     insurance Markets", University of Bonn, discussion paper no. 109.

Marshall, J.M., 1916, "Moral Hazard", American Economic Review, 66, 880-
      890.

Newbery, D. and 3. Stiglitz, 1981, "Wage Rigidity. Implicit Contracts,
     Unemployment and Economic Efficiency," Economic Journal, 97, 416-430.

Pauly, M., 1974, "Overprovision and Public Provision of Insurance,"
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 88, 44-61.




Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                                                               65

Shavel]., 5,, 1919, "On MoraL Hazard and Insurance,' Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 93, 541-562.

Spence. K., 1978. "Product Differentiation and Performance in insurance
     Markets", Journal of Public Economics, La, 427-447.

Stiglitz; J., 1988, "Technological Change, Sunk Costs, and Competition,'
     BrookinEs FaDers on Economic Activity, 3, 1987, Special Issue on
     Macroeconomics, M.N. Baily and C. Winston (eds.), The Brookings
     Institution, pp. 171.-ill.

Stigiitz, J. and A. Weiss, 1981, "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
     Information," American Economic Review, 71(3), 393-410.

Stigiitz. J. and A. Weiss, 1983, "Incentive Effects of Terminations:
     Applications to the Credit and Labor Markets," American Economic
     Review, 73(5), 912-927.




  —-..../Crlclltz. Welfare   Economics
                                                                                   46

                                     FOOTNOTES


*      Thi, is th. thirdof a series of papers investigating competitive
equilibrium when insurance markets are characterized by moral, hazard.
Arnott and Stiglitz (1988aJ examines the behavior of both the insurer
and the insured, showing that, as i     result
                                            of moral hazard, neither
indifference curves nor feasibility sets , in general, have the usual,
convexity properties. Arnott and Stiglitz (1987) analyzes the existence
and properties of equilibrium in insurance markets with moral hazard.
     Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the L.S.E. • the
Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration, M.I.T.,
C.O.R.E., and Dortmund, Yale, and Columbia Universities, We are indebted
to participants in those seminars and to Bruce Creenwald for helpful
discussions.
     Financial support from the National Science Foundation, the Hoover
Institution, the Olin Foundation, and the Social Science and Humanities
Research Council of Canada is gratefully acknowledged.



1. Moral hazard-incentive problems also arise in imperfect capital markets,
even when individuals are not risk-averse. See Stiglitz-Weiss (1981]. The
welfare economics for that case is similar to that presented here.


2. These events, moreover, occur in many states of nature. This, by itself,
presents no serious problem.


3.   Complete insurance equalizes marginal utilities of income across states
of nature. So  long as accidents do     not affect the marginal utility of
income (at any income level), providing complete insurance eliminates all
incentives for accident avoidance. For a more complete analysis, see Arnott
and Stiglit: (l988aJ and (19871.


4.   Because these externalities   operate exclusively through the price system.
they are   sometimes referred to   as pecuniary.


5.   The welfareeconomics of the other case are treated in Arnott and
Stiglitz (198k]. tie   use the terms "observable" and "monitorable"
interchangeably, and whenever we use either we assume verifiability. More
generally, it should be clear that these are distinct concepts; an action
may be observable by the two parties     to a contract, but
                                                          not verifiable by a
third party, and therefore not legally enforceable. Enforcement in such
circumstances may rely on reputation mechanisms. For a discussion of this
distinction and its implications, see Newbery and Stiglitz (19871.




        "14r.. Welfare     Economics
6. This is equivalent to the individual purchasing insurance from more than
one company, subject to the requirements that each insurance company write
its insurance conditional on the insurance that the individual purchases
from all other companies.


7. Under these circumstances, the equilibrium insurance contract maximizes
the utility of the insured subject to the non-negativity constraint on
profits, and is therefore evidently efficient.


8. This paper ignores adverse selection effects in order to identify the
particular market inefficiencies which arise from moral hazard. It should
be clear that many of the inefficiencies which we identify here also relate
to markets with adverse selection.


9. Different levels of damage associated with the same type of accident are
treated as separate events.


10. Alternatively, we could have assumed that the government pays out 'these
profits and taxes as a Lump-sum payment to individuals. See footnotes 12
and 13 for how the analysis is modified.


11. It is perhaps unrealistic to assume that there are forms of insurance
for which the government can specify price but not quantity, but doing so
simplifies the analysis. The government may be able to indirectly control
the price through tax-subsidy instruments, but incorporating these indirect
controls complicates the analysis without changing the qualitative results.


12. If tax revenues plus profits, R, are distributed to individuals as
lump-sum payments, then (1.16) remains unchanged, but the derivative of V
now contains a term, the derivative of V with respect to income, times the
derivative of a.
    If the government can impose lump-sum taxes, the feasibility constraint
(1.13) is dropped. The market equilibirium is still not Pareto efficient.
(See footnote 13.)


13. In the case where profits and tax revenues are rebated to individuals,
and lump-sum taxes can be imposed, the equation corresponding to (1.16)
takes on exa,tly the same form, but now A has the interpretation of the
expected marginal utility of income.
     The derivatives will take on different values, because of the induced
income effects. The derivatives are now general equilibrium derivatives;
that is, for each value of, say, , (and all the other parameters of the
model) we calculate the general equilibrium solution; as     changes, each of
the variables characterizing the equilibrium changes; the magnitude of the
change is given by the general equilibrium derivative.


Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February. 1989
                                                                                 48

14. The two accidents could be fire and death, and the activity "care in
smoking in bed0.


15. A decrease in automobil, insurance cay indice individuals to drive more
attentively, making them sufficiently more tired when they arrive at their
destination that they are more likely to fall asleep while smoking in bed
(that is. the marginal disutility of the effort required to undertake the
fire-accident avoidance activity is increased,)


16. Walking round the house at night checking that windows are locked (to
prevent burglary) facilitates checking that the wood-stove door is closed,
elements turned off, etc. (to prevent fire).


17. The first-order condition for e2    is

       ((t-P1)(u0-u2) + PL(ul-u,)](.PZ') - 1 —   0.
The increase in insurance against accident I stimulates e2 if it causes the
term in square brackets to increase. Since $ increases, ts0-u2 increases,
but since    increases too, u1-u3 decreases, and which effect dominates
depends on whether the marginal utility of income falls more or less
rapidly as income increases,


18. The reason why we stress this is that if these state variables are
observable, then the terms of a policy will be made contingent on the
current val,ues of the stock variable, and there is no externality. For an
important example where this distinction is clearly significant, see Arnott
and Stiglitz (19851.


19. In the present model, where all individuals are identical, induced
changes in the demands for various goods may result in changes in producer
prices, and hence in profits. But any loss in welfare as a consumer from
an increase in a price is exactly offset by a gain in welfare as a shareowner.


20. In an earlier paper, we showed that equilibrium insurance contracts
may, under not restrictive conditions, be characterized by both ex ante and
cx Dost randomization. (Arnott and Stiglitz [1988b]).


21.   If this conuition is satisfied, a lane amount of cx ante randomization
may   still  be desirable. See Arnott and Stiglitz (l988b].



22. It is generally true that pecuniary externalities matter in economies
with distortions. The unobservability of effort, which gives rise to moral
hazard, may be viewed as a distortion when individuals are risk-averse.


Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
rahn,.,.,,   lQgg
                                                                               49
23. We may imagine that the consumer goods industry produces a single
consumer good with constant returns to labor. The price of the consumer
good is the numeraire, and the wage is determined as the marginal product in
this industry. In the car repair industry, labor is combined with some
other factor provided by rentiers. Each worker's labor supply is inelastic.


24. This paper has focused on those cases where the quantity of insurance
purchased is observable. When it is not, similar inefficiencies arise; in
addition, however, there is a further inefficiency associated with the
quantity of insurance purchased, which may be partially remedied by imposing
a tax on insurance purchases. This point is elaborated in Arnott and
Stiglitz [1988c)


25. The argument that markets may be efficient even with a single insurance
firm has much of the flavor of the contestability arguments that all that is
required for competitive-like outcomes (efficiency, zero profits) is
øotential competition. As Stiglitz (1988) has shown, even the slightest
sunk costs alter this conclusion. Markets will not be efficient, and
profits will not be zero.


26. Since adverse selection and moral hazard almost invariably appear
together, before such estimation is possible, it will be necessary to
develop the welfare economics of moral hazard     adverse selection.


27. Adverse selection plays an important role, both in understanding the
institutional structure of markets involving risk and in designing
appropriate policies. It should be noted that adverse selection gives rise
to a set of market failures analogous to those we identified in the paper as
stemming from moral hazard. For example taxation of commodities and cross-
subsidization between insurance policies can be employed to partially relax
self-selection constraints. Furthermore, as here, pecuniary externalities
alter the efficiency loss associated with adverse selection. These and
other points are developed in Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986].




Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
                                     Abstract

     This paper shows that, except in certain limiting cases, competitive

equilibrius with moral hazard is constrained inefficient. The first section

compares the competitive equilibrium and the constrained social cpttmum in a

fairly general model, and identifies six types of market failure. Each of

the subsequent sections focuses on a particular market failure.




Arnott/Stiglitz: Welfare Economics
February, 1989
