NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RE-INTERPRETING THE FAILURE OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET EFFICIENCY TESTS:
SMALL TRANSACTION COSTS. BIG HYSTERESIS BANDS

Richard E. Baldwin

Working Paper No. 3319

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 MassachusettS Avenue
Cambridge. MA 02138
April 1990

This paper is part of NBERs research program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3319
April 1990

RE-INTERPRETING THE FAIUJRE OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET EFFICIENCY TESTS:
, BIG HYSTERESIS BANDS
SMALL TRANSACTION
ABSTRACT

Small transaction costs and uncertainty imply that optimal cross—currency interest rate
speculation is marked by a first—order hysteresis band. Consequently uncovered interest
parity does not hold and market efficiency tests based on it are miaspecified. Indeed
measured prediction errors are a combination of true prediction errors and a wedge that
consists of the "option value" of being in foreign currency and either plus or minus the
transaction cost. Due to the nature of this wedge, we should expect measured prediction
errors to be serially correlated, correlated with the current forward rate and perhaps have a
non—zero mean, if the interest differential itself is serially correlated. The existence of the
wedge helps account both for the failure of market efficiency tests and the difficulties in
finding

an empirically successful model of

the

risk premium.

Richard

E. Baldwin
Columbia University Business School
611 Uris Hall
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027

If the foreign exchange market i. efficient, traders risk neutral and transactions costs
negligible, the difference between the forward rate and the realised future spot rate should be
white noise. Empirical research has resoundingly rejected this joint hypothesis. Hansen and
Hodrick (1980), Meese and Singleton (1980), Levich (1980), Frenkel (1981), Cumby and Obstfeld

(1981), Hsieh (1984) and Frankel and Froot (1987), inter aim, find that prediction errors
sometimes have a non—sero mean, are serially correlated and correlated with lagged variables
including the forward rate itself. Meese and Rogoff (1983) find that the current spot and forward

rate are equally good predictors of the future spot. Hodrick (1987) and Levich (1985) provide
excellent analytic surveys of this vast literature.

Hodrick (1987) states that there are three interpretations of this evidence.

The first

claims that the data are not ergodic (due to regime changes) and attributes the failure. to severe

small sample bias.

The second views the failure. as evidence of foreign exchange market

inefficiency (e.g., Bilson 1981, Krugman 1989). The third views the failure. as evidence of a risk

premium in the foreign exchange market. Roll and Solnik (1977), Meese and Singleton (1980),
Frankel (1982, 1986), Hansen and Hodrick (1983), Faint (1984), Hodrick and Srivutava (1984),
Rogoff (1984), Domowits and Hakkio (1985), Giovannini and Jorion (1987), Caznpell and Clarida

(1987) and Lewis (1988) consider various models of the risk premium, however, a theoretical
model of the risk premium that performs well empirically has proved elusive.

1

Thu paper contributes a fourth (not mutually exclusive) interpretation to this list. We
argue that very small transaction costs can help account for the failure of these market efficiency

tests, and may help explain why an empirical model of the risk premium has proved elusive.
Foreign exchange market efficiency tests assume that uncovered arbitrage equalizes expected rates

of return on all currencies. With this assumption1 unobservable expectations can be deduced from

observed interest differentials and spot rate.. An entirely unrelated line of research shows that
sunk entry and/or exit costs create a range of inactivity in firms' dynamic entry—exit strategic.,

and that this band permits hysteresis.' Dixit (1989c) provides an analytic approximation which
shows that even third—order small sunk costs produces a first—order hysteresis band.

Since

transaction costs are sunk co.ti, cross—currency interest rate arbitrage should be marked by a
first—order hysteresis band even if trading costs are only third—order small. In other word., even

third—order small transaction coats may prevent arbitrage from equalizing expected rates of
return and so invalidate uncovered interest parity. The importance of this observation is that the

prediction errors used in market efficiency tests are actually a combination of true prediction
errors and a first—order wedge that consists of the "option value" of being in foreign currency and

either plus or minus the transaction cost. As it turns out the wedge is positive for low interest rate
differentials and negative for high differential..

This suggest an alternative interpretation of market efficiency tests. Namely, the failure

of measured prediction errors to be white noise may be due to the wedge. Even if the true
prediction errors were white noise, if the interest differential itself is serially correlated, the
measured prediction errors will be serially correlated, correlated with the forward rate and other
lagged variables, and may have a non—sero mean due to the nature of the wedge. We also show
that white noise tests should fail more strongly during prolonged appreciation, and depreciations

of the exchange rate. Furthermore, since empirical models of the risk premium use measured
prediction errors as data, their lack of success may be due in part to the presence of the wedge.

2

More constructively, any attempt to identify a risk premium must first separate out the wedge.

It has Long been known that transaction costs lead to a band within which deviations
from covered interest rate parity may persist because they cannot be profitably exploited. The
literature on transaction cost has tended to focus on these deviations as a direct measure of the

cost of exchange rate uncertainty.

Levich (1979), Frenkel and Levich (1975, 1977) and

McCormick (1979) find these costs vary considerably across currencies and have increased under

floating rates. Fieleke (1975) find, that they are positively related to uncertainty.
Aiyaga.ri and Gertler (1989) and Constantinides (1986) consider the impact of differential

transaction costs on capital market equilibrium in a closed economy.

These models require

numerical solutions and focus on the liquidity premium when trading stocks involves a transaction

cost while trading bonds does not. Constantinide. (1986) finds that transaction costs have only a
second—order effect on equity prices. Aiyagari and Gertler (1989) include uninsurable income risk
which forces a trading volume large enough to make transaction costs a significant determinant of

equity prices. We focus instead on the hysteresis band and its impLications for foreign exchange
market efficiency tests.

Note that unlike market efficiency tests in international economics,

differences between expected rates of return in domestic markets axe not interpreted as tests of
market efficiency.

II. AnIlZvtraLive Example
That tiny transaction costs may account for the failure of market efficiency tests is
implausible at first glance. To address such prices, this section studies an illustrative example.
The example employs the regulated Brownian motion approach. Althou&i this approach is not
appropriate for the principle purpose of this paper, its renown and analytic convenience makes it
well—suited to addressing priors.

In particular we wish to demonstrate that even minuscule

transaction costs together with uncertainty significantly alter the basis of market efficiency tests.

3

Consider a risk neutral trader choosing between holding his wealth in dollar denominated

certificates of deposits (CD.) and pound denominated CD..

The return on dollar CD., 1,

is

constant. The trader'. expectation of the dollar rate of return on sterling, V, obey.:
(2.1)

dR/V =

pdt

+ ads,

where ds is the increment of a Wiener process. A small transaction co.t, c, is incurred in moving

between dollar CD. and sterling CD..

The problem is to find the arbitrage strategy that

maxirnises discounted expected cash flow measured in dollars.

This problem can be reduced to one previously solved. Consider an equivalent problem:
the trader receive, a flow of i whether he is in dollars or pound.; when in pounds he receive. I plus

V—i. Consider a third problem: He receives zero when in dollar, and R—i when in pounds. The

objective functions of the second and third problems different only by a constant, so they have
identical optimal strategies. The third problem is isomorphic to Dixit (1989a). Assign i to Dixits

w, V to hi. P, and 'c

to hi. k and 1. Dixit (1989a) is well known, so the solution I. relegated to

the appendix.
2.1 How Wi4e is LA. ilpsk,e.iz Ba4?

Analytic solutions for the hysteresi, band are impossible with Brownian motion
uncertainty due to non—integer powers in the value function. Numerical solutions are readily

had. Dint (1989a,b), Bertola (1989), Constantinides (1986), Brennan and Schwarts (1985) and

Beutolila and Bertola (1988) find the band I. remarkably wide for reasonable parameter. in
applications ranging from hysteresi, in trade to natural resource management. Dixit (1989c)
provides an analytic approximation to the band which help us understand why these bands are
so wide. Dint's result... imply that for small ?ç
2

(2.2)
where

a'—a°

1/3

I. the V at which a dollar holder switches to pounds and a° ii where a sterling holder

4

of the
switches to dollars. The key feature of this relationship is the 1/3 power. Even if the value
expression inside the brackets is only 0.000001 the band width will be two percentage points.

Suppose a is 0.02 (i.e., there is a 95 percent chance that annual changes in the differential

are less than plus or minus 4 percent), I is 5 percent and the transaction coat is 10 basis points.
(Frenkel and Levich 1977 estimate these to be 50 basis points in the early 1970s. McCormick 1979

estimate them to be 9 to 18 basis points in 1976. Currently bid—ssk spreads on spot transactions

are about 5 to 10 basis points.) The re.ultina band width is 5.7 percenta&e points. Suppose the
transaction costs are only one basis point, and 0is 0.02. The resulting band is still 2.7 percentage
points wide. Finally, supposing 0

percentage points wide.

is

only 0.01 and i

is

only one basis point the band is still 1.3

The thrust of all this i. clear —

uncertainty and even minuscule

transaction costs require a significant modification of optimal uncovered interest arbitrage, if
indeed the dollar return on sterling is close to Brownian motion. Dixit (1989c) shows that the
band is centered on i for small r.
£1.1 Bead Width sad the Meowed Forward Rate ProJictioa Error

If isis zero, the trader sells pounds whenever Re is less than i and buys pounds when ever

is greater than I. In a more complete model with many such agents, the price of pounds would

adjust to maintain parity between expected rates of return at all instants when ,=0. If covered
interest parity also holds, the difference between the forward and future spot exactly equals the
unobservable expectation errors. If the market is efficient these errors should be white noise.
However, if c is not zero no arbitrage occurs when R fails in the hysteresis band. Consequently,

uncovered interest parity need not hold, so the forward—future spot gap does not equal pure

be white noise. A key
expectations errors. Consequently measured prediction errors need not
predication
question is how is the band width related to the difference between measured and true
errors. Clearly, R can differ from i by plus or minus

(O'_(°)/2 without inducing arbitrage.

Stepping outside the continuous time setup, suppose V equals t +

5

where

ii the

need not equal i—i+s, rather it equals this

expected future spot. The band implies that

plus a wedge which is bounded by plus or minus (a'—Q°)/2. That ii even with risk neutrality and

efficient information processing, the expected difference between the forward and future spot
mieht be a couple percentage points on an annual basis without inducing arbitrage.

LI.I

Ckarli,la sa Fsa4smeaImIiala
An informal check on the plausibility of the assertion that transaction coats are important

is to examine real world trading strategies. The data necessary to do this formally are not easily
bad, however, the optimal trading strategy implied by the hysteresis band could be implemented
with commonly used technical or chartists methods. One such strategy draws a line across the top

of recent quotes and a line across the bottom of recent quotes. The trader buys sterling when R

passes through the top line; he sells when it passes through the bottom line. The chart ii redraw
after major market movements. In our example the trader should draw lines a chart of R5—i, not

the spot rate chart as foreign exchange traders are wont to do. However if the spot ii serially
correlated and the interest differential relatively constant, the two are equivalent. Note that the

band width is related to some measure of spot rate volatility. By contrast, arbitrage strategie.
which would be neccessary to enforce uncovered interest parity condition would not lead to an
inactivity range in traders' charts.

LI

L*miMbo. of ike RepJetei Broi.iiiais MOiiO* Appromck
The

virtues

of the regulated

Brownian

motion

approach

are

abundant

and

well—appreciated. However, it is of limited use in analysing the behavior of rational agents when

the forcing variable is an endogenously determined price since such prices tend to revert to a
steady—state value or trend.

In the present situation it is plain that ft cannot literally be a

random walk with drift. Almost any sensible macro model would imply that it ii mean—reverting,

or at least trend—reverting. Furthermore, the market data and efficiencies tests are explicitly

stated in a discrete time framework. Of course, if Brownian motion closely approximates the

6

mean reverting process, the regulated Brownian motion solution may closely approximate the true

solution. Krugman (1988), Miller and Weller (1988) and Svenuon (1989) discuss how to stretch
the regulated Brownian motion framework to address such problems.

Lucas and Prescott (1974), Caplin and Krishna (1986). Rafael (1989), Baldwin and Lyons

(1989) and Baldwin (1989) take a different approach.

Applying discrete time dynamic

programming techniques, these papers show that the sunk cost hysteresis band exists when the
forcing variable follows almost any process. Baldwin (1989) develops techniques that allow the

characterization of the hysteresis band for a general Markov process. In Baldwin and Lyons

(1989) the number firms is determined by free entry.

We shall see that the analytics for

determining the spot rate are quite similar to those determining the number of fiims in Baldwin
and Lyons (1989). The next section applies this analysis to exchange rate dynamics.

IlL Basic Model
Consider a world with two investments possibilities, one period dollar CD. and one period

sterling CD., populated by atomistic, risk neutral foreign exchange traders who face a email

transaction cost, , of moving between dollars and sterling. The dollar return on dollar CD. is
constant.

The pound return on sterling CD. is stochastic. The log of the spot rate, s,

is

endogenously determined by the traders' behavior. The timing is as follows: all traders observe i

at the beginning of every period and then trade simultaneously.

We assume the interest

differential follows the simple Mazkov process:
(3.1)

i—.4 =

p(i1.4)

+

where O p < i, E{e1)= 0, E{e1,(.}=O, all j,

1

P[.J is E's density function, G(. ,i1J is it's conditional density and the real line is their support.
The state 'variables

t'

and

At (A1 ii a binary variable equal to one when the

trader was in pounds last period and equal to zero otherwise). The first two are occasionally
grouped together in the vector x for notational convenience. The control variable ii U1 (U= 1 if

7

the investor chooses to be in pounds,
(3.2)

0 otherwise). The laws of motion Lie:

it+i_ = p(i—i)

At+i =

+

t=

S[is1I.

The typical trader chooses a trading strategy, p=14xt,AtJ, to maximize hi. discounted

cash flow:
V[x01 =

(3.3)

g[x,Aj4x)]

E{E6tg[x,Aj4x]j,
=

where:

fit + E{s+i Ix} _S[x] — (1._A)?c
I

iAt?c

Here we have made use of the standard log approximation of the dollar rate of return on sterling,
and t5

is

(1+r)1 where r is the constant discount rate (r i). Expectations are over all E.
Our two primary taik.. are to characterize the optimal arbitrage strategy and the law of

motion for the spot rate, S[• ,.J. To this end we employ discrete time dynamic programming
techniques.

That is, we suppose the existence of a value function, V V[x,A], use it to

characterize the optimal strategy acd then use the optimal strategy to characterize the value
Given

the value function, we characterize the optimal trading strategy by

characterizing the

much simpler problem of choosing U to maximize g[x,A.UJ plus

fun,tion.

x,Ut}, where E{V+i I xt,U} is the expectation of V1 conditioned on x, Ut.
3.1 OplimeI Trc4in Str.tegiea
A

holder of a dollar's worth of pounds ha.. two options: move into dollars or stay in

pounds. If he .tays in pounds the expected value of his cash flow today will be:
it + E{st+i I xt} — S(it,st 11 + oE{V+i I
If he moves out of sterling he pays c so the expected value of his cash flow would be:

+ 6E{Vt1 I x,O} —
Likewise

a dollar holder who stays in dollars ii worth i plus 5E{Vt+i I x,O}; in pound. he is

worth it+E{st+i Ix}_S[it,._iI plus 5E{Vt+i Ix1} less #.

8

Since

a trader may switch between

being a pound holder and a dollar holder, the value function is:

V=Max [it+E{s+1 I xt}_S(xJ+oE{V+i x,1}—(1—A)ic i+6E{Vt+i kt,0_.kt1.
I

Plainly, a trader's current decision can be summarised by two numbers,
holding pounds and i turns out to be below Ck,

he

a and a.

If he was

goes out of pounds; otherwise he stays put. If

he was holding dollars and i turns out to be above a, he goes into pounds; otherwise he stays

put. a and

are the it's at which he is indifferent between the alternatives (for clarity the

elements of x are written out), that is:

+ E{st+i I d,s1)

(3.4)

—

S[a,s1 I + 6E{V1+1 I a,s1_111}

= i + öE{V41 I a1s1_1,O} —
(3.5)

a1 + E{st+i I

a,s}

—

S(a,s1_1J + 5E{V1+1 I

—

= i + öE{V1 I ,1_i,0}.
(3.4) and (3.5) are the value—matching conditions. Note that the traders' indifference implies

S(a,s_1] and S[a,s_1I both

equal

3.2 Determianlioa of Ike Spol Ral.

The actual spot rate will be determined by the actions of traders. Traders' strategie. and

the a'. are depicted in Figure 3.1. The i curve plots the difference between the current value of
being in sterling and dollars when the spot rate is unchanged, vi.. it_i+E{st+i I xj—s

plus
1

5E{Vt+i x1,1}E{Vt+i x1,O}. The two horisontal lines plot plus and minus ic. For i to the

left of d

pound holders would like to sell pounds; to the right they would do nothing. For it to

the right of a, dollar holders would like to buy pounds; to the left they would do nothing. With

homogeneous traders there would be sero activity in the foreign exchange market for
realisations of it between

and a. This is the sunk cost hysteresis band. Consequently for

such it, the dollar price of pounds posted at the close of the previous period would stili be the
posted price at the end of the current period. That i., for it in the hysteresi, band,
This is one segment of the S(. ,.j function.

9

equal.

the hysteresis band, the market is entirely one—sided.

For i outside

Below

there

would be no pound buyers, only pound sellers. To eliminate excess supply the price of pounds, s

must fall to the point where pound sellers are indifferent between dollar, and pounds:

i + E{st+i it,st

(3.6)
Since

all traders

are

—

,i} = i + ÔE{V it,. ,O} —

. + 5E{vt+i

,c.

aware of this, the posted spot would jump down immediately to this level

upon announcement on it. Likewise, if it turned out greater than a, there will be only pound
buyers so the spot jumps up to:

t + E{st+i

(3.7)

,i} —

—si + 5E{Vt1

= i + 5E{V I

Equations (3.6) and (3.7) implicitly define the rest of the S[.,.] function. Formally:

it_i+E{s+1Ix}+öW(it,s1J+1c, i a
SEi,stiJ

(3.8)

=

it-i +E{s+1 I x}-l. SIS[it,s
where we have defined 5E{Vt+1
relationship between s,

it

I

,i}

1]—,c,

minus 5E{Vt+i I x,O}

t

i<
cv

as P[it,s1J.

The implied

is shown in Figure 3.2 as the solid line SS.

and

The Properties of the Law of Motion of s

It is clear from Figure 3.2 that the current dollar price of pounds is non—decreasing in
The dependence of . Ofl

that

.

band

is increasing in

'—

is

slightly more complicated. Inside the hysteresis band, it is clear

Bowever, outside the band

has no effect on

since outside the

s ii determined by forward—looking behavior.
Of course the a's and Vs must be determined simultaneously by solving the value

matching conditions and definition of V together with the laws of motion for s and i. Except for a
number of simple distributions of C, it is not possible to solve analytically for the a'.. This lack of

an explicit solution

is the price we

pay for

being

able to

consider general

i'

processes.

Nevertheless such a solution is not really necessary since we can characterise the band position
and width.

10

5.3 Co,Ailioaml Ezpecialson of Ike
Figure

expectation of

iare Spol

3.2 will be similar for t+l. We can therefore use it to calculate the conditional
5t41

We integrate over SS weighted by the distribution of it conditional on it.

Formally, the conditional expectation of

(3.9)

j

a°t+1

is:

s,s,s1j+ö'' [s,sDt,st_1J]+c)dGEs,itj
+ ao J

a't+l5.,Jj($sJ

t+1

+ a+{T(14E{5t+2 I z,S[i,s_i1}+ö'1 [z,S(,s_11}_lc)dG(z,itJ.
The properties of the conditional expectation are easily established.

Since

is

non—decreasing in it+i and 1 display. positive persistence, E{s+i I it,s_j} ii increasing in

That is a higher realization of it shifts the distribution of i1 (conditioned in it) to the right,
shifting weight from low values of
non—decreasing in

Specifically, for

to high values. Also the conditional expectation is

is less than a', or greater than a, it ii unaffected by

This should be intuitively obvious since when forward—looking arbitrage i. taking place
lagged values of. are irrelevant. Also for it in the band, E{st+i I

) is increasing in

3.4 Erpecled Velve sni Oplion VsJse of Ri5 ia Poai4s
The actual value of a dollar holder's and a pound holder's wealth next period depend on

the realization of t+1• If it+i< a+l the dollar holder stays in dollars so the value of his wealth
is i+6E{Vt+2Ixt,O}, otherwise all he and all other dollar holders attempt to sell dollars forcing

the spot up to the point where they are indifferent to moving. Thus whether he actually moves
into pounds or not, the value of his cash flow is i+6E{Vt+2 x,O}. This obviously equals (i/i).

If it+i< a1 pound holders' desire to buy dollars would force the spot down to the point where

they are indifferent between the two aeta. In this region a dollar's worth of pounds is worth

it+i+E{st+2Ixt}_.t+i+5E{Vt+21Xt,l} which is equal to (i/r)—ic.

11

if i1> a11 dollar

deiiies

holders'

to

sterling

buy

force.

up

s

band,

the

value

of

increases

sterling

the

where

point

If i41 turns out to be in

equals (i/r)+#c.
hysteresis

to

with

i

according

the
to

+i+E{5t+2Ixt}1t+i+sE{t+2Ixt,1} These relationships are plotted in Figure 3.3.
A concept that plays an important port in the analysis is the difference between the
when U equals zero and one. We refer to this as the option

conditional expectation of

value of being in sterling as opposed to dollars (or the incumbency premium for short).
function that relates

is defined as:

to x,

a't+l(_,ç)[1j*

(3.10)

5

+ aOJ

The

+ it+1

5

[.__i_s [z,s[x1l+E{s.÷2 I s,s [z,sixi} }+54' [zs[ss(x]1]} dG[s,itl.

The properties of 'P are also simple to establish. First ' is increasing in

To see this

note that the realized difference between being in pounds and dollars depends on what

out to be. By inspection of Figure 3.3, this difference in non—decreasing in

i1 turns

Since the i'

process displays positive persistence, a higher i shifts the conditional distribution of it11 to the

right, giving more weight to higher values of the difference. Obviously, then the conditional
expectation of the difference is increasing in i. By similar reasoning,

is bounded between

— and c.
3.5 £aracterixing the Width of the Hysteresis Bsis4
Re—..rranging the value matching conditions we have:

(3.11) a —

= 2c — (E{s+i

I

1}_E{s+i I a,s)) —

3.5.1 Peraisieace ai4 Band Width

Consider two polar cases of the it procese: perfect persistence and no persistence. When

it is iid there is no persistence in it. In this case both the expected future spot and

12

are

independent of i, so the band width is 21c regardless of how volatile the lid process is. Basically

when i is lid the current realization of it tells the traders nothing about future returns to holding
pounds, so a dollar holder will require the full ic to be covered by this period's interest differential
before moving.

Likewise, a pound holder would suffer a negative differential up to 'c before

moving. Thus greater uncertainty does not always widen the band. The other extreme is of
perfect persistence. That is, any change in it is expected to persist forever (i.e., all future es are
zero, and p = 1). In this case the current i is a perfect signal about future i's. In this case the
band is much narrower, namely, r2s'c.

Comparing the two polar cases we see that the band is

wider with some uncertainty than with zero uncertainty, but increasing the amount of uncertainty
does not always widen the band. A heuristic way of thinking about this is to examine the effect of
more uncertainty on the signal quality of the current
5.5.1

i.

P.roi Lea$& sad Awslised InLered Rsie DifferenU ala
The Link between transaction costs and the band width measured in terms of annualized

rates of return depends crucially on the period length since the band end points in (3.11) are in

terms of interest rates quoted on the basis of the period length. To illustrate this point assume
that i is lid and ?C is small. In this came the band is exactly 2ic wide and approximately centered

on i. Take #c equal to 0.0005 and i equal to a 5 percent annual rate and contrast the case of

trading only once a year with the case of daily trading. In the first case arbitrage forces the
expected dollar return on pounds to be between 0.0495 and 0.0505, so uncovered interest parity
comes pretty close to holding. Consequently the miupecification of the market efficiency test is
minimal. However with daily trading, arbitrage keeps the daily dollar return on pounds between

0.000637 and —0.000363 (5 percent on a daily basis ii 0.000137). On an annualized basis the

upper end point of the band ii 25.44 percent mind the lower end point ii —12.12 percent.
Consequently the measured prediction error may be an extremely poor estimate of the true
prediction errors.

13

The formula used to generate the end points

( ()5)1/N + , and i+a° = (1 05)l/N
(We ignore the constant

—

ic, where

on

the period

length basis is

N ii the number of periods per year.

since ,ç is small. This implies the band ii approximately centered
((l.o5)hhlN

+
Expressing the a'. in terms of annual rates, we have a=
1/N
\N
Using a log approximation, for large N and small ic
—1.
a = t,(1.05) —

on i)

of

ln(a'I—ln[a°J

and
we have

N2'c. This dovetails with Dixit's result that in continuous time the derivative of

the band width with respect to

is infinite at ic = 0. In the modern foreign exchange market a

trade only takes a few seconds, so even a tiny band would translate to an enormous annualised
interest rate differential, if it were indeed iid.

3.5.3 Mstmlg of CD. sad the term strctrc of LAs lqsleresis Asi4
The hysteresis band described above applies to CD. of a one period maturity. In this
subsection we show that it can be applied to CDs of longer maturities with little modification. If

the English capital market i. efficient (maintaining the assumption of risk neutral investors)
sterling CDs of various maturities will be priced such that investors are indifferent to holding the

various CDs during the next period. Thus whether regardless of a CD'. maturity, the optimal
cross—currency arbitrage can be deduced from the

band described above. Of course, in

deciding when to trade long CD., it is not sufficient to look at the interest rates; expected price
changes of the long CD. must also be included.

It is simple to restate the band in terms of the interest rates on sterling of any maturity.
For instance suppose the period length is one day and traders have the choice between one day
and two day sterling. We know that incipient cross—currency arbitrage will be triggered when the

daily sterling rate of return is greater that

or less than

d.2 If the English capital market is

efficient, the expected return on holding a two day CD for one day equals the return on a one

day CDs. That is, E{(1+i)/(1+it+i)} equals (1+it), where ibis the two day sterling rate.
Thus the high side of the band stated in terms of 2 day interest rates is defined implicitly by:

14

(1+a) = E{
where

l+wi
1+i

=

denotes the critical value in terms of 2 day interest rates. To get a handle on this

expression, we take a log approximation:

(w—2i) = (a—i)(1+p)—7,
where

7 is the correction from Jensen's inequality and i is on a daily basis.

Two cues highlight the implications of this formula. On one hand, suppose pu near one
and 7 is negligible. In this case the high end of the band for two day sterling rates is twice as far
from the 2 day dollar rate as

is from the one day dollar rate. In other words the band in terms

of two day rates is roughly twice the width of the band in terms of one day rates. On the other
hand, if p is sero (via, the interest differential is Ud) and

is negligible, the band width is roughly

invariant to maturities. Thus the band should be insignificant for long term interest rates. In this
case, we also have a strong testabLe implication. White noise tests on measured prediction errors

should fail much more strongly on .hort term interest rates than on long term interest rates.

5.5.4 Ba,4 Wiitk and Unexpisited Profit Opportnailiea
We just showed that the band in terms of long sterling rates can be more that 2ic wide, if

the interest differential is close to a random walk. At first glance this seems impossible. That is,

it would seem that if the expected dollar rate of return between dollar CD. and say one year
sterling CD. differed by more than twice the transaction costs there would be unexploited profit
opportunities. Dixit's seminal work on costly entry and exit under uncertainty explains why this
is possible. The easiest way to explain this is to first lay out the incorrect argument that the rates

of return cannot get more than 2c out of line, and then directly show what this argument is
leaving out. To be concrete, suppose the expected future spot equals the current spot and the one

year sterling rate ii 2i'c plus epsilon (epsilon is an arbitrarily small positive number) above the
dollar rate.

15

Here is the (incorrect) argument that this cannot

be

a equilibrium situation: An investor

could borrow at the dollar rate and invest in a one year sterling and thereby expect to earn

enough to more than cover the cost of the round trip in and out of sterling. Since a very large
number of dollar holders would want to do this the spot rate is not an equilibrium. Now we argue

that it would not be optimal for any investors to undertake the arbitrage just described.3 To be
concrete, suppose the expected dollar rate of return differential (including both the interest and

exchange rate change components) is close to a random walk; each period there is about 50

percent chance that the differential ii x percent higher than last period and about 50 percent
chance that it is x percent lower. If an investor borrows dollars and invests in one year sterling
when the differential is 2ic plus epsilon, his expected profit would be epsilon per dollar. Suppose

instead he waited till next period. If the expected rate of return rises and then he buys into one
year sterling, his expected profit would be x plus epsilon per dollar. If he waits and the expected

return falls, he need not move into sterling so his expected profit is worth no less than sero.
Clearly, if the discount factor is not too large then the expected value of waiting till next period
exceeds the expected value of investing in sterling today. Consequently, no investor would move

to take advantage of the 2i'c plus epsilon differential. They would require more than 2?c plus

epsilon in order to find the invest—now alternative more attractive than the wait-and—.ee
alternative.

The basic fault with the incorrect argument is that it looks at the problem as if the
investor's choice is between dollars today and sterling today. In fact the true problem is whether
to move into pounds today, or wait and see whether to move tomorrow. As Dixit (1989) describes

it, a dolla.r holder owns a dollar and a call option to buy into the randomly fluctuating rate of
return differential. Due to transaction costs and uncertainty, the value of this call option is not
zero. When he moves into pounds he gives up the option on pounds and get. a call option on
dollar,. Consequently, he will not move until the expected return to being in pound. exceeds the

16

expected return to being in dollars by at least 2ic plus the difference in the values of the options.
As the maturity of the sterling CD, increases, the volatility of the daily rate of return on holding

them increases (as loig as i is not lid), so the value of the call option on them increases.
Consequently, the investor will require a greater interest rate differential in order to find it
optimal to exercise the call option.

3.5.5 Upper .*i Lower Boar4s o ike Bead Width
To get a rough idea of the band width for one period CDs, we establish lower a.nd upper

bounds. Certainly the band is wider than r2lc, since there is leu than perfect persistence. Taking
= 0.000 1 and r = I = 0.05 on an annual basis and consider daily trading. We have that
equals 0.000005 on a daily basis. Annualized, this ii 18.7 basis points. Thus a lower bound on the

band width is approximately 3.7 tenth of one percentage point. For the upper bound we take the

lid case, where half the band ii equal to
=

0.0005,

IC.

Employing

daily trade, the same i but taking

we get a band which is 37.56 percentage points wide on an annualized basis. Clearly

these upper and lower limits are a long way from good estimates. The interest differential is quite

volatile so the lower limit is too low, however, it displays significant persistence, so the upper
bound case is too high.

33

kerecterixiag ike Poutioa of Ike Bead
From the value matching conditions the band position depends upon

illustrates this relationship. LL plots (3.6) for i<
current spot does not depend on

Figure 3.4

a, end HR plots (3.7) for i> a.

Since

the

when i falls outside the band, LL and HR are in exactly the

same position in both the top panel (which depicts the period t situation) and the bottom panel

(which depicts the period t+1 situation) of the diagram. If i turns out to be greater than (, say

t', then

be

which is higher than

This implies that in the bottom panel, the band

will be shifted to the right as shown. Note that the band in t+i is such that a.1

equals

I'.

This should be obvious since the equation that determines s looks exactly like the value matching

17

condition in t+1. If p is near unity and

has

a single—peaked symmetric distribution then the

will fall near the higb side of the band is large. Basically it displays

likelihood that

positive persistence and the band tends to follow it around.

. A Number of Testable Implicaioris
If the hysteresis band has a significant effect on the foreign exchange market it should be
evident in the data. This section discusses several empirically testable propositions.
4.1 The ffpsleresi.

Beii aw4 Le Forward Rats Prrdichon Errors

If uncovered and covered interest parity hold, the forward rate is an unbiased predictor of
the future spot. The hysteresis band invalidates uncovered interest parity.
Prouosition 1: The forward rate may not be an unbiased predictor ot the future spot.

The spot is determined by i + E{s+i I x)_.s+oP[it,.t_iI

i—Ic in the sell—pounds

region of Figure 3.2. Clearly, in this region the expected value of the measured prediction error is:

(f_E{s+1Ix})

(4.1)

defining t to be

—

i

+ Ic

=

+s. Similar reasoning implies that in the buy—pounds region:

(— E{st+i x}) = ö1'[i,i_1j — Ic

(4.2)

> 0,

I

< 0.

Lastly in the hysteresis band:

where

(c_E{st+ilxt}) > ö'I'(a,s_1—Ic

0< ö'I1[a,sJ + K

(4.3)

s=

<0,

Inspection of Figure 3.4 show. that 'I' [it,.....ij is increasing in i', is strictly less

than K and strictly greater than —ic. Plainly, then (4.3) implies that there is a unique realization

of i' for which (— E.(.+i xe)) =
I

0.

In summary, equations (4.1)—(43) imply that the measured difference between the
forward rate and the actual future spot should not be expected to be sero. Measured prediction

errors are not pure expectation errors even when trader. are risk neutral. They are expectation
errors plus the incumbency premium and either K or

18

—Ic.

We

continue to refer to

(c—E{5+1kJ) as the measured predictions errors to suggest comparisons with existing
empirical literature. Proposition 4 consider. the magnitude of the wedge.
Proposition 2: The prediction errors should display positive serial correlation

is increasing in t'

Using equation. (4.1)—(4.3) and the fact that
(ç—

E{s

I

x}) as a function of i

we

plot

in Figure 4.1. Clearly, the errors arc positive for low i', and

negative for high i. If i itself is positively .erially correlated, then the errors should be positively
serially correlated as well.

Proposition 3: The prediction errors should be positively correlated with the current forward rate
and negatively correlated with i

Inspection of Figure 4.1 indicates that (— E{s+i

I

x}) decreases as i

increases. Since

the forward rate moves negatively with the interest differential, (i— E{.+i Ix})

move.

positively with

Proposition 4: The absolute value of (c

hysteresi. band.

(ç_ E{st+i

+11 '})

should be greatest at the end. of the

The difference between the Largest (ç—

E{. x})
I

sad the srnallcst

x}) is greater than the width of the hysteresis band.

Consider Figure 4.2 which is similar to Figure 3.1. The locus 1 + E{st+i I }—

plotted as ,

is

'

convex in i since E{s+ilx1} is increasing in i. Given (4.1) and (4.2) the

difference between the maximum and minimum (ç_-. B{st+i

I

x})

equal, the distance between

and _ec_öW[d,st_iJ. The dashed line is what iR would look like if E{s+j I
were constant. It i. obvious that the distance between lc—5W(a

and
51

x}

—1c_öW[a,s_1I is

greater than the distance between ?c._ö'P[a,s_1J and X. This latter distance obviou.ly equals
Thus the maximum wedge is of the same order of magnitude as one half of the band
width.

Proposition 5:

Measured prediction errors should be especially large and positive during

prolonged dollar appreciations, and especially Large and negative during prolonged dollar

19

depreciaons.
As we showed in Section 3, a realization of i outside the band shifts the nearest edge of

the band to the realization. Thu. if by chance we observed that for a number of sequential
periods the interest rate differential decreased, lowering the spot rate, we know that the band was

shifting to the left. Thus we know that period alter period the i' realizations are typically falling
near the lower end of band where the wedge ii largest. Similarly, sequential increases in the spot
lead us to expect that the measure prediction errors will be quite negative.

4.1 The Size of tke Bi—Ash Sprsm4 ike Dqree of Persistence sad Fajisres of W?site Noise Tuja
of ike Forw

Preiklioa Errors

The hysteresi. band widens as ic increases, and as the i process gets less persistent. Since

Proposition 4 shows that the size of (ç_- E{st+i
band, greater ic and a 1e

I

x}) increases with the size of the hysteresis

persistent it should magnify the effects predicted in Propositions 1

through 3. Consequently we should expect Propositions 1 through 3 should look better, the larger

are the bid—ask spread. on the spot rate, and the less persistent is

This suggests that

comparisons of tests on different time periods and different currencies would provide evidence on
the importance of the transaction costs.

5. Summary and Concluding Remarks

It seems quite plausible that foreign exchange traders are risk averse. This paper aumes

they ale risk neutral and rational in order to apply the basic intuition of the irreversible
investment literature to the foreign exchange market. We showed that very small transaction
costs together with uncertainty Imply that uncovered interest speculation .hould be marked by a
non—negligible hysteresis band. Thus the most general point in this paper is that measured

prediction errors include a wedge in addition to true prediction errors.

We show that the

empirically observed properties of measured prediction errors are consistent with the nature of the

20

wedge. More generally, we show that even tiny transaction costa should not be ignored in models
of exchange rate determination. Specifically, any empirical effort to identify a risk premium must
somehow separate the wedge from the risk premium.
Additional Implications

Uncovered interest parity is one of the linchpins of modern exchange rate theory. Since
small transaction cost require a modification of this condition, the analysis in this paper suggests a

number of interesting extensions. Uncovered intere.t parity implies that fixed exchange rates

require i = i exactly at all times. We just showed that the presence of transaction costs equal to
one hundredth of one percent implies that central banks might not face pressure on its reserves as

long as the interest differential was less than something like 1 to 4 percentage points. Thus
exchange rate variability together with tiny transaction costs would allow a moderate degree on
monetary independence in a fixed exchange rate regime.

Additionally removing all uncertainty on cross interest arbitrage, by maintaining aero
margins around parity, might lead to greatly increased arbitrage on the interest rate differential.

This would argue that the as the European Monetary System attempts to reduce margins to zero
it might encounter difficulties. Namely, unless EC interest rate are actually pegged to each other
on a niinute—to—-rninute basis substantial cross—border interest rate arbitrage could strain rceerve

hcldings.

The hysteresis band also suggests an approach to calculating optimal margins for fixed
exchange rate systems. Introducing margins around parity introduces uncertainry, and so would
lead to non—negligible bands. The bands would permit the central bank to use the interest rate to

stabilize some minor domestic shocks. This minor gain in stabilization is traded off against the
costs of slightly increased exchange rate uncertainty.

Standard exchange rate dynamics are based on uncovered interest parity.

Since we

showed that uncovered interest parity is not in general supported by cross—currency interest

21

arbitrage, the standard dynamics may be incorrect or incomplete.

Lastly, note that there is absolutely nothing international about the point. The band.
would exists even for arbitrage between assets denominated in the same currency. This suggests

that assets price, even in domestic market can get quite out of line without leading to equalizing
arbitrage. Unlike market efficiency test in international economics, difference. between expected

rates of return in domestic markets are not interpreted as tests of market efficiency. Moreover, it
suggests that even a small Tobin tax on asset trade could allow rates of return on various assets to
get fairly far out of line. This clearly has a deleterious effect on economic efficiency.

APPENDIX 1: Smooth Pa3ting and the Sctnk Cost Model
Dixlt (1989a) is well—known so we only briefly sketch the derivation of the optimal
strategy. (See Dixit 1988 for an intuitive exposition of the smooth pasting approach.)

The

strategy is summarized by two time—invariant numbers, cx° and a'. If V is greater than a', he
goes into pounds (if he was in dollars); if V is less than a° be goe. out of pounds (if he was in
pound.).

Four necessary conditions help us determine a° and a' and the value functions. Clearly,
at the Qs the trader must be indifferent to acting, o we have the value—matching conditions:

(All)

V5[ail_,c = V[a'l,

and

V[a°I = V[a°)—?c

Because the decision making is ceaseless, and V is Brownian motion, we get another set of
necessary condition., the so—called smooth—pasting conditions:
(A1.2)

V'[a°I = V'Ia°,

and

V'[a'J = v'dj

By Ito'. lemma and option pricing techniques the value function V and V obey:
(A1.3)

rV(ftJ = (R.—i) + (a2/2)(R')2V"[V) + p V V'[R', and

(A1.4)

rV[RJ = (2/2) (R)2V"(RI + p V V'[Ri

22

The general solution, for these second order differential equations are:

V'[R) =

(A 1.5)

Ae

+ R1/(rj) — i/r,

and

V[R'l =

where —a and /3 are the roots of the associated quadratic equation:

(cr2/2)e(el) +

(A1.6)

—r

=

0

Using these definitions of V and V5 with the two value—match and two smooth—pasting
conditions, we have four necessary conditions to solve for the four unknowns: a', a°, A and B.

Jj*ak/dy ac4w.deIp lie
qeil4z, a.ts4n

dcawih a daa,pdu a/4 4aiu,

.a.i eYøon&az za'oVauy km, A 'izz,

za'ayana'A4e

Foot not
1.

Hysteresis is the failure of an effect to reverse itself as its underlying cause is reversed.

2. Here we have ignored the positive covariance between the future spot and the future short term

sterling rate.

This is a problem even in the absence of transaction costs.

For instance, if

uncovered interest parity holds for one period deposits, then (14.i) = (1+it) (s+i/st), where it

is

the one period sterling rate. But if the English market is efficient and investors risk neutral, then

(l+it) equals E{(1+i t)/(l+it+i)}, where i is the two day sterling rate. Now since it+i

and

have positive covariance, it is clear that the expected dollar rate of return on holding two

day sterling CD. for one day, which equals E{st+i(l+i t)/(l+it+i)st}i is greater than the dollar
rate of return on dollar CD.. To put it differently, if the spot adjusts to equate the expected rate
of return on one period deposits, the expected rates of return on long deposits cannot be equalized.
3.

Here we assume that each investor can buy only a finite amount of sterling. (The finite

23

amount need not be small; limiting them to, say, 100 billion time! world GNP apiece would
suffice). The problem is that if he can borrow an infinite amount at i and invest it in sterling at I
plus ep.ilon his expected profit would be infinite. Thus although he could expect to earn more per

dollar by waiting, this involve. the comparison of two infinite values. We could, however, allow
an infinite supply of investors, each of which has a finite investment potential.

REFERENCES

Aiyagari, ft. and Certler, M (1989) "Asset pricing with transaction costs and uniniurable
individual risk", Columbia Business School mimeo, November.
Baldwin, ft. (1989) "Sunk Cost Hysteresis" NBER working paper 2911.
Baldwin, ft. and Lyon., R. (1989) "Exchange rate hysteresis" NBER working paper 2828.
Bentolila, S. and Bertola, C. (1988) "Firing costs and labor demand: how bad is
Euro.clero.i.?" Princeton working paper.
Bertola, C. (1988) "Irreversible investment" Princeton working paper.
Bilson, 1. (1981) "The speculative efficiency hypothesis," Journal of Business, 54, p435—452.
Brennan, M. and Schwart, E. (1985) "Evaluating natural resource investments," Journal of
Business, 58, pp135—157.

Caznpell, 3. and Clarida, ft. (1987) "The term structure of Euromarket interest rates: an
empirical investigation," Journal of Monetary Economici, 19, 25—44.

Caplin, A. and Krishna, K. (1986) "A .ixnple dynamic model of employment" Harvard
working paper.

Constantinides, G.(1986), "Capital market equilibrium with transaction costs" Journal of
Political Economy.

Cumby, R. and Ob.tfeld, M. (1981) "A note on exchange rate expectations and nominal
interest differentials: a test of the Fisher hypothesis" Journal of Finance. 36, pp697—703.
Dizit, A (1989a) "Entry and exit decisions under uncertainty", Journal of Political Economy.
97, pp620—639.

Dixit, A (1989b) "Hysteresis, import penetration and exchange rate pas..—through",
Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Dixit, A (198k) "Analytic approximations in models of hysteresis", Princeton Working
Paper, July.

Domowiti, I. and Hakkio, C. (1985) "Conditional variance and the risk premium in the
foreign exchange market," Journal of International Economici, 19, 47—66.

Engle, C. (1984) "Testing for the absence of expected real profits from forward market
speculation,", 17, 309—324.

Fama, B. (1984) "Forward and spot exchange rates," Journal of Monetary Economics, 14,
319—338.

Fieleke (1975) "Exchange rate flexibility and the efficiency of the foreign exchange market"
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 10, pplO9—426.
Frankel, 3. (1982) "In search of the exchange risk premium: a six currency test assuming
mean—variance optirnisation", Journal of International Money and Finance. 1, pp255—274.
Frankel, 3 and Engle, C. (1984) "Do asset demands optimist over the means and variance of
the real return?" Journal of International Economics, 17, 309—329.

Frankel, 3. and Froot, K (1987) "Using survey data to test some standard propositions

24

regarding exchange rate expectations", American Economic Review.
Frenkel, J (1981) "Flexible exchange rates, prices and the role of news: lessons from the

1970s," Journal of Political Economy, 89, 655—705.
Frenkel, 1 and Levich, It. (1977) "Transaction costs and interest arbitrage: tranquil versus
turbulent periods, Journal of Political Economy, 86, 1209—1226.
Giovannini, A. and Jorion, P. (1987) "Interest rates and risk premia in the stock market and

in the foriegn exchange markets," Journal International Money and Finance
Hakkio, C. (1981) "Expectations and the forward rate" International Economic Review, 22,
pp663.

Hansen, L.P. and Bodrick, It. (1980), "Forward exchange rates as optimal predictors of

future spot rates: and econometric analysis", Journal of Political Economy, 88, pp 829—854.

Hansen, L.P. and Hodrick, It. (1983), "Risk averse speculation in the forward foreign

exchange market: an econometric analysis," in Exchange
Macroeconomics, J. Frenkel (ed.), University Chicago Press.

Rates

and

International

Hodrick, R.J. (1987), The Empirical Evidence on the Efficiency of the Forward and Futures
Foreign Exchange Markets, Harwoord, Chur, Switzerland.
Hodrick and Srvastava (1984) "An investigation of risk and return in forward foreign
exchange," Journal of International Money and Finance, 3, 1—29.
Hsieh, (1984) "Tests of rational expectations and no risk premium in forward exchange

markets", pal of International Economics.

Krugman, P. (1988) "Target Zones and exchange rate dynamics" NBER working paper 2481.
Krugman, P. (1981) Ionumption preferences, assets demands and distribution effects in
international financial markets" NBER working paper 651.
Krugman, P. (1989) "Exchange rate instability" Ohlin Lectures, LSE.
Krugman, P. (1985) "Is the strong dollar sustainable?" NBER working paper 1644, June.
Levich, It. (1985) "Empirical Studies of exchange rates: prices behavior, rate determinations
and market efficiency" in Jones and Kenen, Handbook of InternatiortLJcimt, Elsevier
Science Publisher.
Levich (1979) "On the efficiency of markets for foreign exchange" in 1),iriibuvch and Frenkel

(eds) International Economic Polici: An assessment of theory and evidence, Johns hopkins

University Press, Baltimore.
Lewis, K. (1986) "The persistence of the peso problem when policy is noisy" NYU Business
School mxmneo, Dacember.

Longworth (1981), "Testing the efficiency of the Canadian exchange market under the

assumption of no risk premium" Journal of Finance, 36, pp43—SO.
Levich, It. (1980) "Analysing the accuracy of foreign exchange advisory services" in Levich
and Wilborg (eds) Exchange risk and exposure
Lucas, It. and Prescott (1974) "...", Journal of Economic Theory.
McCormick, F. (1979) "Covered interest arbitrage: unexploited profits?: Comment", Journal
of Political Economy, 87, pp4l i—417.
Meese, It. and Rogoff, K (1983), "Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies: do they
fit out of sample?" Journal of International Economics, 14, pp3—24.

Mee.e, R. and Singleton, K. (1980), "Rational expectations, risk premia and the market for
forward exchange" IFD Discussion Paper 165, Federal Reserve Board of Governors.
Miller, M. and Weller P. (1988) "Target zones, currency options and monetary policy"
University of Warwick working paper.
Mussa, M. (1977) "A dynamic theory of foreign exchange", in Artis and Nobay (eds) Studies
in modern economic analysis, Basil Blackwell, Oxford.
Mussa, M. (1982) "A model of exchange rate dynamics" Journal of Political Economy, 90,
pp74—104.

25

Muua, M. (1981) Sticky Prices and disequilibrium adjustment in a rational model of the
inflationary process", American Economic Review. 71, pp1020—1027.

Rafael, R. (1989) "Labor movement. in a two sector economy with switching cost."
University of Pennsylvania working paper.

Rogoff, K. (1984) "On the effect. of sterilised intervention: an analysi, of weekly data,'4
Journal of Monetary Economic., 14, 133—150.
Roll, R. and Solnik, B. (1977) "A pure foreign exchange market aiset pricing model," Journal
of International Economics, 7, 161—180.

Wilson, C. (1979) "Anticipated shocks and exchange rate dynamic." Journal of Political
Economy.

26

-

*

-k

IU.

'TrccL

27

c..

—.

*.e.. :,. •...

C /r'
I

I

I

1tI

29

0

La

"N
.

\

. ..

\\

S

S

4)

4'

N

15.S.

4'

A-

-k

31

LTL
-ii

i2

x
4

-'-1
JO

D<L

32

tt

