                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF CIGARETTE ADDICTION




                                Gary S. Becker

                               Michael Grossman

                               Kevin M. Murphy




                            Working Paper No. 3322




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   April 1990




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Health Economics.  Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3322
                                        April 1990


                 AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF CIGARETTE ADDICTION


                                   AZ S TRACT


     We use a framework suggested by a model of rational addiction to analyze
empirically the demand for cigarettes. The data consist of per capita
cigarettes sales (in packs) annually by state for the period 1955 through 1985.
The empirical results provide support for the implications of a rational
addiction model that cross price effects are negative (consumption in different
periods are complements), that long-run price responses exceed short-run
responses, and that permanent price effects exceed temporary price effects. A
10 percent permanent increase in the price of cigarettes reduces current
consumption by 4 percent in the short run and by 7.5 percent in the long run.
In contrast, a 10 percent increase in the price for only one period decreases
consumption by only 3 percent.   In addition, a one period price increase of 10
percent reduces consumption in the previous period by approximately .7 percent
and consumption in the subsequent period by 1.5 percent.   These estimates
illustrate the importance of the intertemporal linkages in cigarette demand
implied by rational addictive behavior.




Gary S. Becker          Michael Grossman               Kevin M. Murphy
Dept. of Economics      City University of New York    Graduate School of
University of Chicago   Graduate School                Business
1126 East 59th Street   33 West 42nd Street            University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637       New York, NY 10036             Chicago, IL 60637
 I.   Introduction and Summary

         Becker and Murphy (1988) develop a theoretical model of rational

 addiction and outline its key empirical predictions.     This paper uses that

 framework to analyze empirically the demand for cigarettes.     The data consist

 of per capita cigarette sales (in packs) annually by state for the period 1955

 through 1985.     The empirical results indicate that smoking is addictive.

         The Becker-Murphy model follows Stigler and Becker (1977), lannaccone

 (1986), Ryder and Heal (1973), Boyer (1978, 1983), and Spinnewyn (1981) by

considering the interaction of past and current consumption in a rational

model.    The main feature of these models is that past consumption of some

goods influences their current consumption by affecting the marginal utility

of current and future consumption.      Greater past consumption of harmfully

addictive goods such as cigarettes stimulates current consumption by

increasing the marginal utility of current consumption more than the present

value of the marginal harm from future consumption.      Therefore, past con-

sumption is reinforcing for addictive goods.     The Becker-Murphy model has

several empirical implications for addictive behavior that include a bimodal

distribution of consumption, quitting by cold turkey,    a negative cross effect,

or complementarity, between the price of the good at one time and its

consumption at another time, larger long-run than short-run elasticities of

demand, larger responses to anticipated than unanticipated prices changes, and

larger responses to permanent than temporary price changes.

      This paper mainly tests the effect of addiction on the response of

cigarette consumption to a change in cigarette prices.     We examine whether

lower past and future prices for cigarettes raise current cigarette

consumption.     The empirical results support the implication of addictive

behavior that cross price effects are negative, and that long-run responses
exceed short-run responses.

      For example     we find that a 1.0 percent permanent increase in the price

of cigarettes reduces current consumption by 4 percent in the short run and by

1.5 percent in the long run.     In contrast, a 10 percent increase in price for

only one period decreases consumption by only 3 percent.       In addition, a one

period price increase of 10 percent decreases consumption in the previous

period by approximately .7 percent and consumption in the subsequent period by

1.5 percent.     These estimates illustrate the importance of the intertemporal

linkages in cigarette demand implied by addictive behavior.

      In myopic models of addictive behavior, past consumption stimulates

current consumption, but individuals ignore the future when making consumption

decisions.     We show that these models typically have negative effects of past

prices on current consumption, but no effect of anticipated future prices on

current consumption.     Since rational models always exhibit the symmetry of

(compensated) cross price effects implied by optimizing behavior, testing for

the effects of future prices on current consumption distinguishes rational

models of addiction from myopic models.       The results strongly reject myopic

behavior and generally support the model of rational addiction.

      The Becker-Murphy model also relates the consumption of addictive goods

to stressful events, such as unemployment and divorce.      We test these

implications and evaluate the effects of education and religious affiliation

by using state- and time-specific measures of divorce, unemployment, the

fraction of the population with a high school degree, and measures of

religion.    The results for stressful events are mixed.    Greater divorce rates

are associated with higher levels of cigarette consumption.      However,

cigarette consumption is basically unrelated to state unemployment rates,


                                          2
perhaps because state differences are mainly anticipated permanent differences

in unemployment rather than unexpected temporary differences that are more

stressful.

       The cigarette industry raised the price of cigarettes in 1982 as well as

in 1983 when the federal excise tax on cigarettes increased.     Apparently, the

industry also raised cigarette prices in the 1980s in anticipation of a

continuing fall in smoking.   Such pricing is inconsistent with perfect

competition, but it is consistent with monopoly power in the cigarette

industry if cigarette smoking is addictive.     Since other evidence also

suggests that the industry has monopoly power, this pricing policy is further

testimony to the large effect of addictive behavior on aggregate cigarette

consumption.



II.   The Basic Model

       Most empirical analyses of consumption deal with single period models or

implicitly assume time-separable utility.     By definition, single period models

cannot deal with the dynamics of consumption behavior, and the usual two stage

budgeting property of time-separable models precludes any dynamics other than

those arising from dynamic wealth changes and aggregate consumption effects.

Since addictions imply linkages in consumption of the same good over time, it

is essential to relax the additive separability assumption to model

consumption of addictive goods.

      The simplest way to relax the separability assumption is to allow

utility in each period to depend on consumption in that period and consumption

in the previous period.   In particular, following Boyer (1978, 1983), we

consider a model with two goods and current period utility in period t given


                                       3
by a concave utility function


(1)                          U(Y, C, Cr1, e)

Here C is the quantity of cigarettes consumed in period t, C1 is the

quantity of cigarettes consumed in period t-l, Y is the consumption of a

composite commodity in period t, and et reflects the impact of unmeasured life

cycle variables on utility.              Individuals are assumed to be infinite lived and

maximize the sum of lifetime utility discounted at the rate r.

        If the composite commodity, Y,           is taken as nurnraire, if the rate of

interest is equal to the rate of time preference, and if the price of

cigarettes in period t is denoted by P, then the consumer's problem is




(2)                   Max
                             t-l         U(C, Cr1,       e)


such that C0 — C° and


                                   c-l
                                            + PC) — A°
                            t— 1




where      —   l/(l+r).   We ignore any effect of C on earnings, and hence on the

present value of wealth (A°), and we also ignore any effect of C on the length

of life.       The initial condition for the consumer in period 1,       C0,   measures the

level of cigarette consumption in the period prior to that under

consideration.

        The associated first-order conditions are




                                                  4
(3a)                        U(C. C1, Y' e) —              A




(3b)         U1(C, Cr1,        e)     +   U2(C+i,   C,              e1)   —   AP


Equation (3a) is the usual condition that the marginal utility of consumption

in each period, U,, equals the marginal utility of wealth, A.                  Equation (3b)

implies that the marginal utility of current cigarette consumption, U1, plus

the discounted marginal effect on next period's utility of today's

consumption, U2, equals the current price multiplied by the marginal utility

of wealth.     In the case of a harmfully addictive good such as cigarettes, U2

is negative, although the model that we develop simply assumes that this term

is not zero.     That is, the predictions contained in this section are also

valid in the case of beneficial addiction (U2 > 0).

       Since the marginal utility of wealth, A, is constant over time,

variations in the price of cigarettes over time trace out marginal utility of

wealth-constant demand curves for Y and C.          In the time-separable case, these

demand curves depend only on the current price,               }'   and the marginal utility

of wealth, but with nonseparable utility, they depend on prices in all periods



                                                                                         (
through the effects of past and future prices on past and future consumption.

       To illustrate, consider a utility function that is quadratic in

and et. The first-order conditions become


(4a)         Uy +UyyYt +U ylC t +Uy2 Ct-1 +U yee t —A

(4b)         U1 +   U1Y   + U11,C +   UC1 + U1et
             + fl(U2 +          +            + U22C   +   U2e1)        — AP




                                             5
Equation (4a) can be solved for Yt in terms of A and C:



(5)                                 -
                                                  (U          +   Y1C             +       U22C1       +   Uyeet)




If equation (5) is used to substitute for                                                  in equation (4b), we get a linear

difference equation that determines current cigarette consumption as a

function of past and future cigarette consumption, the current price of

cigarettes, P, and the shift variables e and


(6)                 Ct —       9c1      +   9C41              +           +
                                                                                               + Oe       +   e3etl

where
                                    -(U       U           -       U     U
                                            l2yy                      ly2y
                                             U)                   fl(U22U                        U)

                                                                              l
                          (U11U         -                 +                                -




                    —     (U    -   A)(U1         +   flU2)           -
                                                                                          ÷ flU2)


                          (UU           -   U)        + fl(U22U                       -    U)
                                                      UA
                                                       yy                                                 <0
                                                      + 8(U 22yy
                          (U
                               llyy
                                U       -   U2
                                             ly
                                                  )           U                       -    U2 )
                                                                                            2y



                    —
                                     -(U
                                            yyle
                                             U   -Ulyey
                                                    U                         )


                2
                          (U11U - U12)                +       fl(U22U                     U22)



                    —
                                    -fl(U     U
                                            yy2e -U 2y2e
                                                     U
                          (U11U, -          U)        +       fl(U22U,                -    U)

        Since           is negative by concavity of U, equation (6) implies that

increases in the current price decrease current consumption, C, when the


                                                                          6
marginal utility of wealth is fixed.                  The effects of changes in future or past

consumption on current consumption depend only on the sign of the term 0.

When 0    is       positive, forces that increase past or future consumption, such as

lower past or future cigarette prices, also increase current consumption.                    In

contrast, when 9 is negative, greater past or future consumption decreases

current consumption.              Hence current and past consumption are complements, if

and only if,


                                 -(Ul2yy
                                     U      -U U)
(7)            9                              -Y2'              >0
                       (U
                            llyy -U2)+fl(U
                             U
                                   ly
                                            U-U2)
                                         22yy  2y


         Since past consumption reinforces current consumption when behavior is

addictive, we say that a good is addictive if and only if an increase in past

consumption leads to an increase in current consumption holding current

prices, et, e÷i, and the marginal utility of wealth fixed.                  A good is more

addictive when the reinforcement from past consumption is greater.                  This

definition means that a good is addictive if 9 > 0, and the degree of

addiction is greater when 0            is   larger.

      Equation (6) is the basis of the empirical analysis in this paper.

Cigarette consumption in period t is a function of cigarette consumption in

periods t-l and t+l, the current price of cigarettes,
                                                                     '
                                                                         and the

unobservables e and e+i.               Ordinary least squares estimation of equation (6)

would lead to biased estimates of the parameters of interest.                 The

unobservable errors, e, that affect utility in each period are likely to be

serially correlated; even if these variables are uncorrelated, the same error

et directly affects consumption at all dates through the optimizing behavior

implied by equation (6).             Positive serial correlation in the unobserved



                                                      7
effects incorrectly imply that past and future consumption positively affect

current consumption, even when the true value of 9 is zero.

      Fortunately, the specification in equation (6) suggests a way to solve

this endogeneity problem that is similar to the estimation strategy proposed

by Hansen (1982) and McCalluxn (1979).        Equation (6) implies that current

consumption is independent of past and future prices when             and C÷1 are

held fixed, that any effect of past or future prices must come through their

effects on Ctl or         Provided that the unobservables are uncorrelated

with prices in these periods, past and future prices are logical instruments

for C1 and C+1, since past prices directly affect past consumption, and

future prices directly affect future consumption.        Therefore, our empirical

strategy is to estimate 0 and 9, the main parameters of equation (6), by

using past and future price variables as instruments for past and future

consumption,

      These estimates can be used to derive short- and long-run demand

elasticities for cigarettes, and cross price elasticities between cigarette

consumption at different points in time that test how important addiction is

to aggregate cigarette consumption.      It is intuitively clear from equation (6)

that a fall in the current price of cigarettes, P, increases current

consumption, C, which will increase cigarette consumption at time t+1 when 9

is positive. Similarly, if this fall in P is anticipated in t-l, the rise in

C also stimulates a rise in consumption at time t-l.         In addition, a

permanent fall in price has a larger effect on current consumption than does a

temporary fall in price, since a permanent fall in price combines a fall in

the current price with a fall in all future prices.

     These and other results can be seen more formally by solving the second-


                                          8
order difference equation in (6).                                   The dynamics of the system are determined

by the roots of the quadratic equation



(8)                                 +           -          -0


The two roots are



                                                                                                          492)h/2
()
 9
             i          1       -       (1      -

                                                28
                                                     482fi)1"2                             1 + (1    -


                                                                                                     29




with    492      < I by concavity.                          These roots are both real and of the same sign as

0.      Both roots are positive if and only if cigarettes are addictive (8 > 0);

otherwise, both roots will be zero or negative.                                                The general solution to

equation (6) is



(10)
                                        1       -
                                                                    h(t       + s) +
                                                                                                 1                -S   h(t       s)
              Ct    —       8
                                l2                         s—l
                                                                                           8
                                                                                               l[2l1        s—0
                                                                                                                             -




         +                      (c -                            1
                                                                                 q       h(s))
                                                     °l2                s—i


where
                            h(t)
                                            —       0o +            +   O2ei         +    O3e


        Equation (10) determines the sign of the effects of changes in the price

of cigarettes in period r on cigarette consumption in period t.                                                     These

effects, which are temporary in nature since prices in other periods are held

constant, are




                                                                          9
                                ________




                                     r-t
             dC                                                             t

(ha)                      —                           1       -        —/             0 as 9 < 0

              dPr         r>t



              dC                                                            r
                   t                                                                             < 0
(lib)                     —                           1       -                       0 as   0

              dP
                          r<t    °2l
              dC                                                        t
                   t
                                01
(lic)                                             1       -                     < 0
              dP                0[2-h1



Clearly the sign of the cross price effect depends entirely on the sign of 0.

The goods in any two consecutive periods are complements (i.e., negative cross

price effects) if and oniy if 0              is       positive.

        The temporary current or own price effect given by equation (lic)

depends on t and rises in absolute value as t rises.                                    This is because t

measures the number of years in advance that a change in                                          is anticipated.

If t on the right-hand side of te equation equals one, the price change is

not anticipated until period t.                   This gives the completely unanticipated own

price effect.          If t approaches infinity, the price change is fully anticipated

as of the planning date.             Thus, the limit of (llc) as t goes to infinity

yields the fully anticipated temporary own price effect.

        Along the same lines, the limit of equation (ha) as t on the right-hand

side of the equation goes to infinity gives the effect of a fully anticipated

temporary change in t+l (r —               t+1).              If t is set equal to one in the same

equation, one obtains the effect of a change in future price that is not

anticipated until one period before it occurs.                                  Finally, the limit of equation



                                                                  10
(lib) as    r   goes to infinity shows the effect of a fully anticipated temporary

change in                (r       — t-l).              The corresponding unanticipated past price effect

results when r on the right-hand side of (llb) is set equal to one.

       If a temporary increase or decrease in                                   or t+l is not anticipated

until period t, C11 remains the same.                                    If a temporary change in t-l is not

anticipated until period t-l, consumption in prior periods does not change.

Since past consumption is held constant in the case of unanticipated price

changes and since an increase in past consumption raises current consumption

given addiction, anticipated price effects are larger in absolute value than

unanticipated price effects.                                Based on equation (11), the ratio of a fully

anticipated temporary price effect to the corresponding unanticipated price

effect is                     -



       In addition to the own price and cross price effects given in (ha)-
(lic) and to the difference between anticipated and unanticipated price

effects, we are interested in the difference between long- and short-run

responses to permanent price changes.                                These differences can be

derived directly from equation (10) as well.                                  The effect on consumption in

period t of a permanent reduction in price beginning in period t, which we
                     *
denote dC/dP , is given by



(12)
                dC
                     t
                                  0
                                      1
                                          [1       -   ( / )t]
                                                        1   2

                dP                8(1
                                               -                -




Once again, t on the right-hand side of equation (12) shows the number of

periods in advance that the price change is anticipated.                                  With t equal to one,

the equation gives the effect on current consumption of a completely

unanticipated permanent reduction in price.                                  This effect is


                                                                    11
           dC                           01
(13)         *       —
           dP             0(1
                                    -




Equation (13) shows the short-run price effect, defined as the impact on
consumption of a reduction in current price and all future prices, with past

consumption held constant.

  Finally the -effect of a permanent reduction in price in .fl.                                   periods   on


consumption in period t is



                 -       0l2-t                        -       1    -   (1
                                                                                  +   0112)t)
(14)                                                                        -
           dP                                 1                         1
                                                  -                         -




                                                                     effect of
The limit of equation (14) as t goes to infinity equals the long-run

a permanent reduction in price:


           dC
(15)       —
           dP
                 —
                            0
                                1




       Equations (15) and (13) show that the long-run response to a permanent

price reduction exceeds the short-run response by the factor                                            -   1).

This exceeds one if and only if                           > 1, which is equivalent to having                     0 > 0.


In addition, the long-run price effect exceeds the fully anticipated temporary

own price effect by the factor [(q2                       -       i)I/[(1 -            -   1)].
       The differences between long-run and short-run, temporary and permanent,

and anticipated and unanticipated, price changes are greater when there is a

greater degree of addiction or complementarity; i.e., when 9 is larger.                                           The

cross price effects, and hence the differences between these various

elasticities are small when 0                is   close to zero.                The simplicity of a time-

                                                                  12
separable model then would make it superior to the addiction model.                    However,

if $ is quite different from zero, a time-separable model is likely to give

highly misleading predictions about both the short-run and long-run response

of consumption to changes in taxes and prices.



III.     A Mvotic Model of Addiction

         While the model presented in Becker and Murphy (1988) shows that

addictive behavior can be successfully modeled in a rational choice framework,

many previous researchers have considered nonrational or myopic models of

addition and habit formation (see, for example, Pollak 1970, 1976 or Yaari

1977).    We cannot hope to develop an empirical framework that encompasses the

structures used in all nonrational models, but this section presents a myopic

model related to those suggested in the literature.                    Even this sample model

highlights an important empirical distinction between myopic and nonmyopic

models.

         To maintain as much similarity to the previous model as possible, we use

the same utility function and the same assumptions about the goods Y and C.

The key distinction is that myopic individuals fail to consider the impact of

current consumption on future utility and future consumption.                    Analytically,

this corresponds to individuals using the first-order conditions


(l6a)           Uy +U yy   Y
                               t
                                   +   U
                                           yl Ct +Uy2C t-l +Uye et     —
(16b)           U1 + U1    Y + U11C            + U12    C1 +   IJ1et    —   AP


Equation (l6a) is the same as that used in the previous section since the

consumption of Y has no effects on future utility.                 However, when individuals


                                                   13
behave myopically, the first-order condition for cigarette consumption changes

significantly.   In contrast to the first-order condition, (4b), in the

previous section, equation (16b) does not contain the future effect

       Differences between myopic and rational behavior are highlighted by

solving (l6a-b) for C, as we did in the previous section.     Solving for

using (l6a), and substituting the result into equation (16b), we get the

myopic equivalent of equation (6).   The major difference between equation (6)

and the myopic equation is that the latter is entirely backward looking.

Current consumption depends only on current price, lagged consumption, the

marginal utility of wealth, and current events.    Current consumption is

independent of both future consumption, C÷i     and future events, et+l

Because of these distinctions, myopic models and rational models have

different implications about responses to future changes.    In particular,

rational addicts increase their current consumption when future prices are

expected to fall, but myopic addicts do not.

       Empirically, the difference between the two equations provides a clear

test between rational and myopic addiction.    Myopic behavior implies that the

coefficient on instrumented future consumption should be zero, while the

rational model implies that it should have the same sign as the coefficient on

lagged consumption (the sizes differ only by the discount factor).    Future

price (and consumption) changes have no impact on the current consumption of a

myopic addict, but they have significant effects on the current consumption of

a rational addict.



IV.   Data and EmDirical Imtlementation
      The data consist of a time series of state cross sections covering the


                                       14
period from 1955 through 1985.    We assume that aggregate cigarette consumption

in these data reflects the behavior of a representative consumer.     Table 1

contains definitions, means, and standard deviations of the primary variables

in the data set.     A detailed description of the variables and their sources

appears in the first section of the appendix.     All prices, taxes, and income

measures were deflated to 1967 dollars with the consumer price index for all

goods.    State- and year-specific cigarette prices were obtained from the

Tobacco Tax Council (1986).     The consumption data were taken from the same

source and pertain to per capita tax-paid cigarette sales (in packs).        A

number of studies have used these data to estimate cigarette demand functions.

The most recent one, which contains a review of past research, is by Baltagi

and Levin (1986).     None of them contain the refined measures of incentives for

short- and long-distance smuggling of cigarettes across state lines (see

below) that we employ or consider how addiction affects the estimates.

         Cigarette sales are reported on the basis of a fiscal year running from

July 1 through June 30.    Therefore, real per capita income also is on a fiscal

year basis, and the retail price of a pack of cigarettes pertains to January

of the year at issue.     The price is given as a weighted-average price per

pack, using national weights for type of cigarette (regulaiz, king, 100 mm) and

type of transaction (carton, single pack, machine).     It is inclusive of

federal, state, and municipal excise taxes and state sales taxes imposed on

cigarettes.

     There are 1,581 potential observations in the data set (50 states and the

District of Columbia times 31 years).     Missing sales and price data in nine

states in certain years reduce the actual number of observations to 1,516.

There are no gaps in the state-specific price and sales series.     That is, if


                                         15
one of these variables is reported in year t,    it   is reported in all future

years.   Note that states are deleted Qnjy in years in which data are missing.

     The existence of state excise taxes on cigarettes provides much of the

empirical leverage required to estimate the parameters of cigarette demand.

Cigarette tax rates vary greatly across states at a point in time and within a

given state over time.    For example, for the period of our sample, the average

tax level (in 1967 dollars) is 6.4 cents per pack or about 21 percent of the

average retail price of 30 cents.    The range of tax rates also is substantial.

A rate one standard deviation above the mean is 6 cents higher than a rate one

standard deviation below the mean.    This difference is 20 percent of the

average retail price.    The variation in retail prices due to differences in

taxes across states and over time within a state helps identify the impact of

price changes on consumption.

     The state and time-series data have several pitfalls.      In particular, the

diffusion of new information about the health hazards of smoking may have

greatly affected smoking over the period of our sample.      To incorporate such

effects, we use time-specific dummy variables.     Unfortunately, the

coefficients of these time variables also contain the responses in aggregate

consumption to national changes in the price of cigarettes.

     In addition, states differ in demographic composition, income, and other

variables that are correlated with smoking.     Our estimates of price effects

would be biased if these differences are also correlated with tax or price

differentials across states.    To mitigate this bias, we estimate all

specifications with real per capita income and most specifications with fixed

state effects.   In a few models we replace the set of dichotomous variables

for each state except one with the education, divorce, religion, and


                                       16
unemployment measures listed in Table 1.     These four variables are too

collinear with the state dummies to be included in the same regression.1

     The measure of cigarette smoking refers to per capita sales within

states, which can differ from per capita consumption within states.     Jhen

adjacent states have significantly different tax policies, there is an obvious

incentive to smuggle cigarettes across states.     We constructed three measures

that attempt to correct for both short-distance and long-distance smuggling.

The short-distance smuggling variable uses tax differentials between

surrounding states together with information on the proportion of individuals

living within 20 miles of neighboring states that have     lower cigarette tax

rates (for imports) or higher tax rates (for exports).     The long-distance

smuggling measure uses the difference between a state's tax and the tax in

each of the states of Kentucky, North Carolina, and Virginia.     These three

states account for almost all of the cigarettes produced in the U.S. based on

value added and had the three lowest excise tax rates in the country starting

in fiscal 1967.     The smuggling variables are described in greater detail in

the appendix.



V. Empirical Results

      The major implication of the addiction model is that cigarette

consumption decisions are linked over time.    In particular, both past and

future consumption affect current consumption.     Since future and past prices

have direct effects on future and past consumption, future and past prices

indirectly impact current consumption when current prices are held fixed.

Both future and past prices negatively affect the current consumption of

rational addicts.    Table 2 checks the implication of the model that the


                                        17
 coefficients on all past and future prices in equation (10) should be negative

 if cigarettes are addictive.

      The first two columns of Table 2 give estimates of a standard cigarette

 demand function that includes only current price in addition to income, dummy

variables for years, the smuggling variables and state dummies (column 1) or

 state demographic controls (column 2).        The implied price elasticity at the

mean of   -   .71 is similar to the estimates in other studies.    The highly

significant effects of the smuggling variables (2dtax, sdimp, and sdexp)

indicate the importance of interstate smuggling of cigarettes.

     The switch from state dummies in column 1 to state demographic variables

in column 2 lowers the R-square of the regression substantially, but it has

almost no effect on the price and income effects.        This indicates that the

correlation between prices and omitted state effects may not be large.          Higher

divorce rates are positively associated with smoking.        This is consistent with

higher divorce rates causing (or being caused by) greater tension levels that

increase the demand for smoking.      Other explanations are also possible.     These

estimates confirm the finding by other researchers that more educated people

smoke less (for example, Lewit and Coate 1982).        Per capita consumption of

cigarettes is lower in states where Mormons are more prevalent and higher in

states where Catholics are more prevalent.        The state unemployment rate is

essentially unrelated to smoking.

     The regressions in columns 3 and 4 include one lag and one lead of the

cigarette price in addition to the other variables in columns 1 and 2.2

These coefficients are not consistent estimates of the true cross price

effects due to the omission of the other prices implied by equation (10),

which surely are correlated with the included prices.3        Nevertheless, they


                                          18
suggest that past and future cigarette prices are important determinants of

current cigarette consumption in the direction implied by rational addiction.

The F test that past and future prices have no effect, valid under the null

hypothesis that cigarettes are not addictive, strongly rejects this hypothesis

in both specifications.        The F-statistics are 10.7 and 34.8 for the models in

columns 1 and 2, respectively.

       Table 3 tests the addictive model more directly by estimating the

following equation (disturbance term omitted) with various instrumental sets:


(17)         Ct —   0
                        Ct i+ OFCt+l+ °o   + 9it
The instruments used in column 1 consist of past and future prices (Pti and

1+ respectively) plus the other explanatory variables in the model.5

Column 2 adds the current and one period lag values of the state cigarette tax

to the instruments, column 3 further adds the one period lead value of the

tax, and column 4 further adds two additional lags of the price and tax

variables.    State excise taxes are used as instruments in some of the models

because consumers may have more knowledge about taxes, especially future

taxes, than about future prices.       A complete list of instruments for all

models is given in the second section of the appendix

       The estimated effects of past and future consumption on current

consumption are positive in the first four models in Table 3, and the

estimated price effects are significantly negative in all cases.       The final

column replaces the state dummies with the state demographic controls used in

columns 2 and 4 of Table 2.       The estimated effects are quite similar to those

obtained with state dummies and also show positive and large impacts of past

and future consumption on current consumption.6


                                             19
       The roots of the quadratic equation (see equation (8)]


(18)               -             +          -       —




determine the dynamic response of consumption to various states, where 9                 is


the coefficient on past consumption and                 is the coefficient on future

consumption.    The smaller root, , gives the change in current consumption

generated by shocks Co future consumption, dC/dC+i,                while   the inverse of the

larger root gives the effect of shocks to past consumption on current

consumption.    Table 4 presents estimates of these roots implied by each of the

five models in Table 3 (standard errors are given in parentheses).                The range

of estimates implies that a 10 percent increase in current consumption due

perhaps to a fall in the current price of cigarettes will increase next

period's consumption by between 4.2 and 5.5 percent, and a 10 percent increase

in future consumption (due perhaps to a fall in future price) will increase

current consumption by between 1.4 and 2.6 percent.7

       Table 5 uses the estimates from Table 3 to compute the elasticity of

cigarette consumption with respect to various price changes.                Estimates of the

long-run response to a permanent change in price based on equation (15) in the

first row range from   -   .74   to    -   .80, and are about 5 to 10 percent larger than

the estimates in Table 2.            More important are the significant cross price

effects.   A ten percent unanticipated reduction in current price leads to an

increase of between 1.5 and 1.6 percent in next period's consumption [see row

5, which is based on equation (llb) with r and r-t on the right-hand side

equal to one and minus one, respectively]               and to a .5 to .9 percent increase

in the previous period's consumption [see row 4, which is based on equation

(ha) with t and r-t on the right-hand side both equal to one].

                                                  20
     These estimates imply that a ten percent decline in cigarette prices

causes a short-run increase in cigarette consumption of 4 percent [see row 6,

which is based on equation (13)], which is only about 50 percent of the

estimated long-run response of 7.5 percent.    Finally, a 10 percent temporary

increase in the current price of cigarettes would decrease current consumption

by 3.5 percent if it is anticipated [see row 2, which is based on equation

(ha) with t on the right-hand side approaching infinityl and by 3 percent if

it is unanticipated [see row 2, which is based on equation (lla) with t on the

right-hand side equal to one].   Each of these responses is less than one-half

of the long-run response of approximately 7.5 percent.

      Clearly, the estimates indicate that cigarettes are addictive, that past

and future changes significantly impact current consumption.     This evidence is

inconsistent with the hypothesis that cigarette consumers are myopic.      Still,

the estimates may not be fully consistent with rational addiction.      The point

estimates of the discount factor are implausibly low- - the ratio of      to

in Table 3 ranges from .31 to .64.   However, since future prices are not fully

anticipated by consumers, estimates based on the assumption of perfect

foresight overstate the variability of expected future prices.      Due to an

errors-in-variables bias, this leads to an understatement of the effect of

future prices on current consumption.    Therefore, uncertainty about future

prices could explain the implausibly high discount rates implied by our

estimates.

      The future consumption coefficient also may be biased if the future

price or the future excise tax rate is an endogenous variable that depends on

current consumption.   The direction of this bias is not obvious.    On the one

hand, states in which antisinoking sentiment is widespread and current smoking


                                        21
 is relatively low may raise their future excise tax rates in response to the

 antismoking campaign.      On the other hand, states with high levels of current

cigarette consumption may find that future excise tax hikes are attractive

sources of revenue.8

        Chaloupka (1989) provides further evidence in support of a rational

model of cigarette addiction in a micro data set: the second National Health

and Nutrition Examination Survey.         Using measures of cigarette consumption in

three adjacent periods, he fits demand functions similar to those in Table 3.

He reports positive and significant future and past consumption coefficients

and a short-run price elasticity (- .20) that is less than one-half of the

long-run price elasticity of - .45.



VI.    General Model

       This section and the following section extend the theoretical results

from Section II and the empirical results from the previous section by

permitting more interactions between past and current consumption.        The

Becker-Murphy model differs from the model in Section II by allowing current

utility to depend on a "stock" measure of past consumption, S, where S

satisfies the law of motion


(19)                   S÷1 — (1   -
                                      6)S +

and    & measures the depreciation rate on the stock.      Utility in each period

depends on current cigarette consumption, C, and the current stock, S, as in




(20)               Ut —    U(C, S)

                                              22
To save on notation, we ignore the consumption of other goods, Y, and the

unobservable, e .          These variables can be handled exactly as in Section II.

        The first-order condition for consumption in period t is



(21)        U(C, S)                  T(1       -    6)rl          U5(C, S+) —     APt
                           +    r1

where   U   is   the marginal utility of current consumption and                           is the marginal

utility of the stock variable, S (Us <                        0   given harmful addiction).    The

infinite series of future terms results from the effect of current consumption

on the stocks in all future periods.                         These future terms are discounted at the

rate (l - 6) since the future is discounted at the rate                                 and the stock

depreciates at the rate 6.            Using the first-order conditions for C11, C,

and C1, the definition of the stock in equation (20), and assuming the

utility function is quadratic, we get the second-order difference equation


(22)             Ct — OCi +      t+i       + °o +                  + 2-l      +

where

                            —    ••U;(l    -       6)    +




                                 -(SUccIl -             fl(l-6)] +    SUcs)
                       0=

                                 A[l + fl(1-6)2]


                           —     -(1-6)A
                       2




                                                             23
                      — [1   +        -    s)2lUcc   +      ÷ 2(1   -
                                                                        S)Ucs < 0



       This equation is a generalization of equation (6), the equation estimated

in the previous section.         The major difference is that past and future prices

enter now in addition to current price and past and future consumption.

Nevertheless, the basic estimation strategy remains the same.                 Since the

relevant unobservable variables are likely to be correlated over time,

instrumental variables for                and        are required to obtain consistent

estimates of the parameters.         Tax variables and longer lags of the price

variable are logical candidates for instruments.              Additional empirical

leverage is available from the condition that the discount factor, , equals

both the ratio of the coefficient of C1 to that of C1 and the ratio of the

coefficient of t+l to that of

       We can also derive an equation for myopic behavior that is similar to the

myopic demand function in Section III except that now past price also enters

on the right hand side.      Once again, myopic behavior is nested within the

rational behavior: myopic behavior implies zero coefficients in equation (22)

for future price and future consumption.



VII.     Empirical Results for the General Model

        For the estimated version of (22), rational addiction implies positive

coefficients on past and future consumption, positive coefficients on past and

future prices, and a negative coefficient on current price.                 Positive

coefficients on past and future prices may seem odd, given that past and

future consumption are complementary with current consumption when behavior is



                                                24
addictive.    However, controlling for past consumption eliminates the channel

through which past prices affect current consumption.    But the only way that

past consumption stays fixed when past prices are higher would be for another

force to offset higher past prices by raising the past stock of consumption

capital.     Since this higher value of the stock continues into the present

period (reduced only by depreciation), current consumption must be higher when

past prices are higher.    This also explains why past and future prices were

not in the estimating equation of the simple model.     That model implies a

depreciation rate of one, so that any larger past stock is eliminated entirely

by depreciation.

      The estimates of equation (22) in Table 6 use past, present, and future

tax variables as instruments for past and future consumption.     Column 1 uses

state dummy variables for controls, while column 2 uses the state demographic

variables described in previous sections.    The signs on the two consumption

variables and the three price variables conform with theoretical predictions.

Past and future consumption positively impact on current consumption.     Past

and future prices also have positive effects when past and future consumption

are held fixed.    As in previous models, the income effects are positive, and

the smuggling variables continue to be important determinants of state

cigarette sales.    The results for the demographic variables also are quite

similar to those found in previous models: lower levels of education and

higher divorce rates are associated with greater cigarette consumption, while

the fraction of the population that is Mormon continues to have a negative

effect.    The state unemployment rate is essentially unrelated to smoking.

      The estimates in the last three columns of Table 6 impose the

restriction that future price and consumption effects equal the past effects


                                        25
multiplied by the discount factor.    Column 3 imposes a discount factor of .95

and column 5 imposes one of .85.     Similar results were obtained for all other

discount factors that we tried between .7 and .95.     Column 4 uses the state

demographic controls and imposes a discount factor of .9.     None of the

restrictions imposed have a statistically significant effect on the sum of

squared errors, implying that they are valid.

      The different models have similar results that in most ways support

rational addiction.   The sum of the coefficients on past and future

consumption are always less than unity, which indicates stable equilibrium.

In all models, an exogenous force that raises either past or future

consumption would also raise current consumption.     As predicted, past and

future prices have positive coefficients, and current price has a negative

coefficient.   The estimated roots of the difference equation for consumption

(not shown) are always both significantly positive.

      The elasticity estimates in Table 7 imply a greater long-run response to

a permanent price reduction than to a temporary reduction or to a short-run

reduction (compare row I to rows 2,    3, and 6).   However, while almost all the

elasticity estimates have the signs predicted by the addiction model, the

effects of past prices on current consumption are not always significantly

different from zero, and the effects of future prices are essentially zero in

all models.    Although these estimates do not fully support rational addiction,

they are clearly inconsistent with myopic behavior.      Myopia implies zero

coefficients on future consumption and future price.      This hypothesis is

rejected strongly in all models.     In models 1 and 2, where future effects are

estimated independently of past effects, the F-statistics that both future

effects are zero are 18.6 and 21.3, respectively, which reject the hypothesis


                                         26
chat these effects are zero.

      A time-separable demand function for cigarettes implies zero

coefficients for all instrumented future and past effects of consumption and

prices.   It is obvious from looking at the regressions that this hypothesis

too is decisively rejected.    The F-statistics for models 1 and 2 are 615.7 and

799.2, respectively.

      Even though our estimates indicate that the equilibrium aggregate amount

of smoking is stable, unstable steady states may greatly affect the overall

response of cigarette smoking to changes in cigarette prices.     This conclusion

is supported by the evidence that almost all the effect of higher prices on

teenage smoking and more than half the effect on adult smokers are due to a

decline in the number of smokers (Lewit, Coate, and Grossman 1981; Lewit and

Coate 1982).   The possible role of unstable steady states is inferred from the

fact that the large decline in the number of smokers is not due entirely to

heterogeneity in the amount smoked, whereby people who smoke only a few

cigarettes per day stop smoking when cigarette prices increase.    Data from the

second National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey reveal that 60 percent

of persons who had stopped smoking for less than one year smoked at least one

pack of cigarettes per day during the last year in which they smoked.    The

same survey indicates that 68 percent of persons who had stopped smoking for

one or more years smoked at least one pack a day during their period of

maximum consumption.

      Even a modest increase in cigarette prices could induce smokers who

happen to be near unstable steady states to cease (see the analysis in becker

and Murphy 1988).   Those who had been trying to find an easy way to quit would

have an added financial incentive to do so, and others near unstable steady


                                       27
states also might decide to quit.      The existence of unstable steady states

means that some people who smoke a lot will be the "marginal" smokers with

respect to changes in cigarette prices and other variables.



VIII.    Monopoly and Addiction

        Both the demand for cigarettes and the organization of the cigarette

industry have been studied frequently (on the latter, see, for example, 8am

1968; Sumner 1981; Appelbauni 1982; Ceroski 1983; and Porter 1986).        Yet

neither type of study has highlighted the habitual-addictive side of smoking,

even though cigarette smoking has long been recognized as a habit that is

among the most difficult to break.

        The cigarette industry in the U.S.     is highly concentrated.   Two

companies (R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris) account for about 70 percent of

output, and the studies just cited conclude in general that cigarette

companies have significant monopoly power.       The analysis in previous sections

shows that the habitual aspects of cigarette smoking significantly alter

estimates of its response to changes in prices and other variables, and

addiction affects optimal monopoly pricing and other policies.

        To illustrate the relation between pricing and addiction, we consider

monopoly pricing when there are only two periods.        Quantities demanded in each

period are given by the Cobb-Douglas functions10



(23)          q1 —   a1pjElpf

(24)
                      -E   7
              q2 — a2p2 2 q1


where   E1,   C2 > 0, 0 < g < 1, 0   y < 1 with a reinforcing but stable habit and



                                          28
p is the price expected in period 2 by consumers in period 1.                                           Note that the

price elasticities in equations (23) and (24) pertain to the individual firm,

while the estimated price elasticities at sample means in Sections V and VII

pertain to the market.                 Theoretically and empirically, the former elasticities

are larger in absolute value than the latter (for example, Sumner 1981;

Appelbauni 1982).

         The present value of profits over the two periods is (with a zero

interest rate)


(25)                     it   — p1q1 + p2q2         -    c1q1      -   c2q2


where c1 and c2 are the constant costs in each period inclusive of excise

taxes.     Substituting for q1 and q2 gives profits as a function of prices

alone:


                it   —        a1p     lp        +



                              -        lp
                                   c1a1p                 -       c2a2ap2p1p
         The firm chooses p1 and p2 to maximize it.                           The first-order condition for

p1 is



               l-E 1                            -y-l               (1-7) -E  *   g-y(l--y)
(26)                              p1 + c1 — a1          a2p1i           p2 2p2               (p2- c2)



           *
We   hold p2 constant when differentiating with respect to p1 because rational

expectations of p2 are not affected by changes in p1 with these demand

functions.     This reduces to the familiar condition that marginal revenue

equals marginal cost [p1(l
                                           -
                                               l/ei)         —   c1] when either y —     0 (no addictive



                                                                 29
effects of consumption) or when p2         — c2   (competitive pricing in the second

period).    However, marginal revenue is less than marginal cost in period 1           if

   > c2    and if consumption is addictive.        The reason is that profits in

periods 2 are higher when            is larger (p1 is smaller) because an increase in

   raises q2 (when y > 0).      As it were, a monopolist may lower price to get

more consumers "hooked" on the addictive good.          Note that, if the monopolist

can engage in price discrimination, he may have an incentive to offer lower

prices to persons who currently do not consume the good.           This can explain why

cigarette companies distributed free cigarettes on college campuses in the

past.     In effect college students were being offered a zero current price but

a positive future price once they became addicted.

        The right-hand side of equation (26) shows that the optimal marginal

revenue in period 1 is lower relative to marginal cost when the good is more

addictive (the larger is -y), demand in period 2 is stronger (the larger is

a2), demand in period 1 is weaker (the smaller is a1), and when p2 minus c2 is

bigger.    With a sufficiently large positive effect on q2 of a lower p1, a

monopolist might choose a p1 that is less than c1, or a p1 that is in an

inelastic region of demand (e1 < l).h1

        The choice of an optimal p2 depends on whether the monopolist can

precomrnit p2 to consumers in period one.         With precommitment, a decline in p2

stimulates q1 by lowering p2     .     But without precommitment, actual changes in

   do not affect p2   ,   and hence do not affect q1.      Without precommitrnent,

rational consumers simply anticipate that the monopolist chooses p2 to

maximize profits in period 2, given the level at that time of q1          .   With
rational expectations, p — p2 (the optimal p2), and a monopolist who cannot

precominit takes both q1 and p2 as given when choosing p2


                                             30
           The first-order condition for p2 to a monopolist who cannot precommit is


(27)              a2(l-E2)p2q —             a2c2(-e2)p2q
                                           or

                  E2l
(28)




This is the usual condition that marginal revenue equals marginal cost.                        In

particular, a monopolist who cannot precoinmit would never choose p2 in the

inelastic region of the demand curve in period 2                       > 1)     because p2 cannot

influence q1 without precommitment.                   Without going into details of the case

where precomntitment is possible, it should be clear that a precominitted p2

would be below the p2 given by equation (38) because a precommitted lower p2
              *
reduces p2, and hence raises q1 and profits in period 1 (assuming p1 > c1).

           When p2 is not preconunitted, equations (37) and (38) can be substituted

into the first-order condition for p1 to get



                                                                            -   1
(29)              c1   -   a2a'                                        (1
                                                                                El




If   1 <      >1       +   g-y(l   -   -y), which follows if   >   5/4, then an increase in p2
raises p1.'

           This analysis is helpful in understanding the rise in cigarette prices

in recent years.             Much of the drop in demand for cigarettes since 1981

documented by Harris (1987) and others is due to greater information about

health hazards, restrictions imposed on smoking in public places, and the

banning of cigarette advertising on radio and television.                       Equation (29) shows


                                                      31
that p1 increases when demand falls by the same percentage in both periods (a1

and a2 fall by the same percentage); p1 increases even more when future demand

is expected to fall by a larger percentage than current demand.       A rise in p1

with c1 fixed raises profit and profit margin (the difference between price

and average cost) in period 1.

      Several studies have commented about the apparent paradox that cigarette

companies have been posting big profits while smoking is declining, and have

documented the faster rise in cigarette prices than in apparent costs (Harris

1987; Dunkin, Oneal, and Kelly 1988).       Indeed, according to Adler and Freedman

(1990, p. 1),   "..   .One of the great magic tricks of market economics.. .[isj how

to force prices up and increase profits in an industry in which demand falls

by tens of billions of cigarettes each year."       Incorporation of the addictive

aspects of smoking into the analysis resolves this paradox if cigarette

companies have some monopoly power.       Since p1 increases, cigarette companies'

profits rise in the short run precisely because of the decline in smoking.

An event study of the common stock prices of cigarette companies could detect

whether they fell relative to a risk-adjusted index of stock prices as the

price of cigarettes rose during the 1980s.13

      If consumers and producers know that an excise tax on cigarettes will be

imposed next period, and if the cigarette industry were competitive with

constant costs, present prices would not change and future prices would rise

by the size of the tax.      If the industry were oligopolistic but if cigarettes

were not addictive, present prices still would not change, while future prices

would rise by the same percentage as tax-inclusive future costs (with a

constant elasticity of demand).      Since price exceeds costs under monopoly,

future monopolistic prices would rise by a greater amount than the excise tax.


                                           32
The rise in cigarette prices does usually exceed the rise in cigarette taxes,

which is evidence that the industry is not fully competitive (Sumner 1981).

      Incorporation of the addictive aspects of smoking leads to a further

test of whether the cigarette industry is fully competitive.    If smokers are

addicted, and if the industry is oligopolistic, an expected rise in future

costs due to future taxes induces a rise in current prices [if 2' the price

elasticity of demand for one of the oligopolists, in equation (28) exceeds

5/4], even though current demand (q1) falls when future prices are expected to

increase.   A higher federal excise tax on cigarettes was widely expected to go

into effect at the beginning of 1983.    cigarette prices increased sharply not

only in 1983 but also prior to the tax increase during 1982.    The price

increase in 1982 has been taken as evidence that "the tax increase served as a

focal point [or coordinating device] for an oligopolistic price increase"

(Harris 1987, p. 101).   That is   possible, but an increase in 1982 would have

occurred even if cigarette producers had no such coordinating problems.     An

oligopolistic producer of an addictive good would raise prices prior to an

anticipated increase in the tax on his product.




                                        33
                                    FOOTNOTES

      Funding for this research was supported by a grant from the Bradley

Foundation to the Center for the Study of the Economy and the State of the

University of Chicago.   We are indebted to the participants in seminars at the

University of Chicago, Columbia University, Harvard University, the University

of Kentucky, and the Federal Trade Commission for helpful comments and

suggestions.   We wish to thank Frank Chaloupka, Brooks Pierce, and Robert

Tamura for research assistance.    This paper has not undergone the review

accorded official NBER publications; in particular, it has not been submitted

for approval by the Board of Directors.


      'State-specific education and divorce measures were available for the

Census of Population years of 1950, 1960, 1970, and 1980; and state-specific

religion measures were available for the years 1952, 1971, and 1980.    Values

for other years were computed using state-specific exponential growth rates.

Hence, differences in education, divorce, or religion are almost fully

"explained" by the state and time variables.    The algorithm also had to be

applied to estimate the unemployment rate during the early years of the time

series, and it is highly collinear with the set of state and time dummies.

      21n the regressions in columns 3 and 4, the first observation on the

dependent variable pertains to 1956 or to the second year in which both

consumption and price are reported, and the last observation pertains to 1984.

Fewer than 102 observations are lost because 65 of 1,581 cases have missing

data in the regressions in columns 1 and 2, while 58 of 1,479 cases have

missing data in the regressions in columns 3 and 4.   Nine states have missing

sales in 1955 and other years.    Two of these states, Alaska and Hawaii, also



                                       F- 1
have missing prices.     For these two states price is missing every year that

sales are missing and in the first year in which sales are reported.

Consequently, the number of cases with missing data falls by 7 rather than by

9 when one lag and lead of price are included in the regressions.

      3Another bias arises because the dependent variable pertains to

purchases rather than to consumption.     If cigarettes can be stored, current

purchases will rise in response to an increase in future or past price.         This

causes an underestimation of the absolute values of the future and past price

coefficients.     Thus, the negative and significant cross price effects in

columns 3 and 4 may be even larger and more significant than they appear.          To

the extent that cigarettes spoil if they are stored for a period as long as a

year, the bias just discussed is not important.

      4The F tests are performed by estimating regressions with and without

past and future price using 1,421 observations in each case.

      5According to the solution of the second-order difference equation (6)

or (22), consumption at any point in time depends on the current value and on

..U past and future values of a given exogenous variable [see equation (10)).

Clearly, not all these variables can be used to predict Ci and

Therefore, both these variables are regressed on                      and X (a

vector of the additional exogenous variables at time t).       This procedure is

followed because the set of exogenous variables should not vary among reduced

form equations.    Note that no past prices of C1          j   > 1) appear in the

reduced form regression for Ctl, and no future prices of C÷1               i   > 1)

appear in the reduced form regression for

      6The residuals from several of the models in Table 3 were examined for

autocorrelation.    The algorithm assumed a common time-series error structure


                                        F-2
among states, and no autocorrelatiorts for lag lengths greater than 10.         The

first ten autocorrelation coefficients were obtained and were used to compute

a variance-cOVariance matrix of regression coefficients (var) of the form


                           var —   (s)•l   'V('Z)1,

where V is the variance-covariance matrix of the disturbance term and




The last equation specifies a matrix of the predicted values of the endogenous

variables (Y) and exogenous variables (X1) in the structural demand function

for current consumption.     Standard errors of regression coefficients based on

this algorithm (available on request) were very similar to those that did not

correct for autocorrelation.       In most cases the corrected standard error was

smaller than the corresponding uncorrected standard error.         The same comment

applies to the estimates in Table 6.       The regression residuals also were

examined for cross-sectional heteroscedasticity due to averaging over an

unequal number of people in each state.         This analysis suggested that there

were no efficiency gains to weighting by the square root of the state

population.

         7The above computations assume that consumption this period, last

period, and next period are approximately equal.

         8Note that a Cranger (1969) causality test of the relationship between

cigarette consumption and the excise tax is not helpful in the context of our

model.    Suppose that the current tax rate was regressed on the lagged tax rate

and on lagged consumption.     Significant lagged consumption coefficients would




                                          F-3
not necessarily indicate causality from consumption to the tax because lagged

consumption should respond to the current tax given rational addiction.

      9Frank Chaloupka kindly supplied us with the above estimates.

      '°These demand functions have constant price elasticities, while the

demand functions estimated in Sections V and VII have constant slopes.       We use

the constant elasticity form in this section for analytical convenience and

indicate how our conclusions would differ if the demand functions were linear.

      "Of course, we assume that the demand function for current consumption

has a constant price elasticity.      In this context the constant value could be

smaller than one.   More generally, if the demand function did not have a

constant elasticity, the monopolist might choose to operate in the inelastic

segment of it.

      '2The term (l   -   -i) takes on a maximum value of 1/4 when -y equals 1/2.

Since g is less than one, the condition in the text is sufficient but not

necessary.

      '3Most of the results just obtained hold in certain cases with linear

demand functions.   In particular, price could rise in period 1 in response to

parallel downward shifts in the demand functions in both periods.       The results

in this section suggest that it may not be entirely appropriate to treat price

as an exogenous variable in fitting cigarette demand functions for reasons

other than those mentioned in Section V and note 9.      We reemphasize, however,

that market demand functions are estimated in Sections V and VII, while the

demand functions discussed in this section pertain to individual firms.

Moreover, in the context of a non-addictive model, Porter (1986) reports

little difference between cigarette market demand functions that treat price

as exogenous and demand functions that treat price as endogenous.


                                         F-4
                                           REFERENCES

Adler, Stephen J., and Freedman, Alix M.               "Tobacco Suit Exposes Ways Cigarette

         Firms Keep the Profits Fat."           Wall Street Journal, March 5, 1990,              1.


Appelbaum, Elie.          "The Estimation of the Degree of Oligopoly Power."               Journal

         of Econometrics, 19, No. 2/3 (August 1982), 287—299.

Sam, Joe S.      Industrial Organization.           Second Edition.          New York: Wiley, 1968.

Baltagi, Badi H., and Levin, Dan.           "Estimating Dynamic Demand for Cigarettes

         Using Panel Data: The Effects of Bootlegging, Taxation and Advertising

         Reconsidered."      Review of Economics and Statistics, 68, No. 1 (February

         1986), 148—155.

Becker, Gary S., and Murphy, Kevin M.            "A Theory of Rational Addiction."              Journal

         of Political Economy, 96, No. 4 (August 1988), 675—700.

Boyer, Marcel.       "A Habit Forming Optimal Growth Model."                 Internacona1 Economic

         Review, 19, No. 3 (October 1978), 585—609.

Boyer,     Marcel.        "Rational    Demand    and    Expenditures         Patterns   under     Habit

         Formation."      Journal of Economic Theory, 31, No. 1 (October 1983), 27—53.

Chaloupka, Frank.         "Rational Addictive Behavior and Cigarette Smoking." National

         Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, October 1989.

Dunkin, Amy; Oneal, Michael; and Kelly, Kevin.                    "Beyond Marlboro Country."

         Business Week, August 8,       1988, 54—58.

Geroski,     Paul    A.      "Some    Reflections      on   the     Theory     and   Application      of

         Concentration Indices." International Journal of Industrial Organization,

         1 (1983), 79—94.

Cranger,    C.W.J.        "Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric Models and

         Cross—spectral Methods."        Econometrica, 37, No.          3 (July 1969), 424—438.




                                                 R—l
Hansen, Lars Peter.           "Large—Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments

       Estimators."          Econometrica, 50, No. 4 (July 1982), 1029—1054.

Harris, Jeffrey E.           "The 1983 Increase in the Federal Cigarette Excise Tax."

       In Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 1, edited by Lawrence H. Summers.

       Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1987.

lannaccone, Lawrence R.          "Addiction and Satiation."   Economic Letters, 21, No.

       1 (1986), 95—99.

Lewit, Eugene M.; Coate, Douglas; and Grossman, Michael.           "The Effects of

       Government Regulation on Teenage Smoking."         Journal of Law and Economics,

       24, No.    3 (December 1981), 545—569.

Lewit, Eugene M.    ,   and Coate, Douglas.    "The Potential for Using Excise Taxes to

       Reduce Smoking."         Journal of Health Economics, 1, No. 2 (August 1982),

       121—145.

McCalluni,    Bennett   T.   "Topics Concerning the Formulation, Estimation, and Use of

      Macroeconometric Models with Rational Expectations." American Statistical

      Association Proceedings of the Business and Economic Statistics Section

       (1979), 65—72.

Pollak, Robert A.        "Habit Formation and Dynamic Demand Functions."       Journal of

      Political Economy, 78, No. 4, Pt. 1 (July/August 1970), 745—763.

Pollak, Robert A.       "Habit Formation and Long—Run Utility Functions."      Journal of

      Economic Theory, 13, No, (October 1976), 272—297.

Porter, Robert H.        "The Impact of Government Policy on the U.    S. Cigarette

      Industry."        In Empirical Approaches to.Consumer Protection Economics,

      edited by Pauline M. Ippolito and David T. Scheffman.           Washington,

      D.     C.: Federal Trade Commission, 1986.




                                              R—2
Ryder, Han   E., Jr., and Heal, Geoffrey M.     "Optimum Growth with Intertemporally

      Dependent Preferences."     Review of Economic Studies, 40, No. 121 (January

      1973), 1—33.

Spinnewyn, Frans.      "Rational Habit Formation."   European Economic Review, 15,

      No.1 (January 1981), 91—109.

Stigler, George J., and Becker, Gary S.        "De Gustibus Non Est Disputandum.'

      American Economic Review, 67, No. 1 (March 1977), 76—90.

Sumner, Daniel A.      "Measurement of Monopoly Behavior: An Application to the

      Cigarette Industry."     Journal of Political Economy, 89, No. 5 (October

      1981), 1010—1019.

Tobacco Tax Council.     The Tax Burden on Tobacco: Historical Compilation, Volume

      20.    Richmond, Virginia: Tobacco Tax Council, 1986.

Yaari, Menahem E.    "Consistent Utilization of an Exhaustible Resource, or How to

      Eat an Appetite—arousing Cake."      Working Paper, Center for Research on

      Mathematical Economics and Game Theory, Hebrew University, 1977.




                                         R—3
                                        APPENDIX

I.   Data

         Cigarette sales were missing for nine states in the years specified

below.

               Alaska, 1955—1959

               Hawaii, 1955—1960

               California, 1955—1959

               Colorado, 1955—1964

               Maryland, 1955—1958

               Missouri, 1955

               North Carolina, 1955—1970

               Oregon, 1955—1966

               Virginia, 1955—1960

The price of cigarettes was missing for Alaska and Hawaii in each year in

which sales were missing.       In addition, price was not reported for the former

state in 1960 and for the latter state in 1961.

         The state excise tax on a pack of cigarettes is a weighted average of

the tax rates in effect during the fiscal year, where the weights are the

fraction of the year each rate was in effect.          The Tobacco Tax Council gives

the price of cigarettes as of November.          The price used in our regressions in

fiscal year t equals five—sixths of the price in November of year t—1 plus

one—sixth of the price in November of year t, adjusted for changes in the

state excise tax rate during the fiscal year.          In particular, the state excise

tax as of the date of the price was subtracted from the price; the average

price exclusive of tax was computed from the preceding formula; and the

average excise tax was added back to the price.         The algorithm was modified in


                                           A-i
certain years in which price was reported in October.    The price variable

published by the Tobacco Tax Council (1986) excludes municipal excise taxes

imposed on cigarettes by one or more municipalities in certain states.       We

created a state—specific average municipal excise tax rate [the sum of

revenues from municipal cigarette excise taxes for the state as reported by

the Tobacco Tax Council (various years) divided by state cigarettes sales in

packs] and added this variable to the price.    Note that the state excise tax

rate defined in Table 1 and used as an instrumental variable for past and

future consumption in Tables 3 and 6 is inclusive of the average municipal

excise tax rate.

      In every state except Hawaii and New Hampshire, the excise tax on

cigarettes was a specific tax (fixed amount per pack) during our sample

period.   In Hawaii the tax was 40 percent of the wholesale price throughout

the period.     In New Hampshire the tax was 42 percent of retail price until

fiscal 1976.    Equivalent taxes per pack in these two states were computed by

the Tobacco Tax Council.

      Short—distance smuggling or casual bootlegging refers to out—of—state

purchases by residents of a neighboring state with a higher excise tax.        The

short—distance importing and exporting incentive measures are used as separate

regressors because consumption in an importing state (defined as sales plus

imports) depends on the difference between the own state and the out—of—state

price or tax.    Consumption in an exporting state does not depend on this

difference.     Of course, both imports and exports respond to the tax

difference.     Long—distance smuggling or organized bootlegging refers to

systematic attempts to ship cigarettes from North Carolina, Virginia, or

Kentucky to other states.     These cigarettes are sold at the retail prices


                                        A—2
prevailing in the relevant states without paying the excise tax, which is

imposed at the wholesale level.           Consumption in the importing state does not

depend on the difference between that state's tax and the tax in North

Carolina, Virginia, or Kentucky.           Hence, long—distance importing and exporting

incentives can be summarized by a single variable since imports summed over

all states in a given year must equal exports summed over all states in that

year.     Given the definitions of the three smuggling variables in Table 1,

their regression coefficients all should be negative.

        Short distance casual smuggling effects are measured by two variables,

one for imports and one for exports.             The importing variable is


                                sdtimp —
                                             3



where         is the fraction of the population of state i (the higher tax state)

living within 20 miles of state j          (the lower tax state), and T and T are the
cigarette excise tax rates in each state.              The weights are computed from the

1970 Census of Population, and the summation is taken over neighboring states.

The exporting variable is given by


                           sdtexp —       k1t(T_T)(POP/POP)
                                      3




where         is the fraction of the higher taxed state's population living within

20 miles of the exporting state (state i) and P0P denotes the population of

state j   .   The reason that the population ratio is used in the export variable

is that total exports from state i to state j             should depend on the population

of state j     that   lives near state i or P0P, multiplied by            Since the

dependent variable in the regression model is state—specific per capita sales,


                                                 A-3
dependent variable in the regression model is state—specific per capita sales,

the population of state I enters the denominator.       The tax differentials in

the preceding formulas include or exclude municipal excise taxes depending on

the border area at issue.

     The construction of the long distance smuggling variable is based on

several assumptions.    It is assumed that Virginia and North Carolina share the

long distance exporting to all states in the Northeast and Southeast as well

as any state within 500 miles of either.     All Western states within 1,000

miles of Kentucky are assumed to import from Kentucky.       States more than 1,000

miles from Kentucky, Virginia, or North Carolina are assumed to do no long

distance smuggling.    The long distance smuggling variable based on these

assumptions is given by


     2dtaxi   —             (Ti—TKY)            if importing from Kentucky

              —   zNC(Ti_l'Nc) + zVA(Ti_TVA)    if importing from N.C. and Va.

              —   (TKy—Tj)(P0Pj/P0PKy)          for Kentucky

              —                                 for i —   N.C.,   Va.




The weights used for states that import from North Carolina and Virginia are

the shares of value added in the production of cigarettes in these two states

combined accounted for by each one.    That is, ZNC —   value added in N.C./(value
added in N.C. + value added in Va.).    Note that total imports from Kentucky,

North Carolina, or Virginia to state i depend on the population of i which

cancels when imports are expressed on a per capita basis.         If state i's excise

tax was lower than the exporting state's excise tax, which occurred in a few

states prior to fiscal 1967, the tax difference was set equal to zero.

      State—specific money per capita income in fiscal year t is a simple

                                       A-4
average of money per capita income in calendar years t—l and t.          The consumer

price index in fiscal year t, which is not state—specific, is defined in a

similar manner.       Per capita income by state was taken from the Bureau of

Economic Analysis (various years).         Unemployment rates by state were obtained

from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (various years).          The state—specific

education and divorce measures were available for the Census of Population

years of 1950, 1960, 1970, and 1980 (Bureau of the Census 1983).          Values for

other years were computed using state—specific exponential growth trends.

These values were adjusted so that a weighted average of the variable at issue

for an intercensal year was equal to the observed national rate as reported by

the Bureau of the Census (various years).          For example, let     be the

percentage of the population 25 years of age and older with at least a high

school education in the
                              th   state in year t based on the exponential growth

trend.    Define x as

              x   —   Z k.   x.
                      .1




where       is the fraction of the U.S. population aged 25 and older residing in

the       state in year t.        Finally, let y be the observed percentage of the

U.S. population aged 25 and older with at least a high school education in

           Then the adjusted estimate for the
                                                    th   state (yj) is given by
year t.

                       (y/x)x.t.
In the case of the divorce measure (the fraction of women aged 25 through 34

who are divorced), the weight (k) in the first formula pertains to the
                                                                           th     state.
fraction of women aged 25 through 34 in the U.S. who reside in the

The same algorithm also was employed to estimate unemployment rates that were

missing in certain states during the early years of the time series.



                                             A—S
      The religion measures were reported for the years 1952, 1971, and 1980

from surveys conducted by the National Council of the Churches of Christ and

the Glenmary Research Center (Whitman and Trimble 1956; Johnson, Picard, and

Quinn 1974; Quinn et al. 1982).   Values for other years were computed using

the algorithm employed for education and divorce.       Since national measures

were not available for years other than those in which the three surveys were

conducted, a weighted average of the state—specific estimated values could not

be constrained to equal a national figure.



II.    Instruments for Two—Staze Least Squares Models

        The five sets of instruments in the models in Table 3 are as follows.

All models have as instruments year dummy variables, the smuggling measures,

income, current price, and one period lead and lag values of price.       Each

model also has as instruments either state dummy variables or the

socioeconomic variables (education, divorce, religion, and unemployment),

depending on which of these sets of variables was included in the structural

equation in question.    Model 1 in Table 3 has no other instruments.     Model 2

includes the current tax and the one period lag value of the tax.       Model 3 and

5 include the current tax and the one period lead and lag values of the price

and tax.    Model 4 adds the two period lag values of the tax and price to the

additional variables used in models 3 and 5.    The potential number of cases in

a model with one lag and one lead of price as instruments is 1,479 (the 29

years from 1956 through 1984 times 50 states and the District of Columbia).

The corresponding figure in a model with two lags and one lead of price as

instruments is 1,428 (the 28 years from 1957 through 1984 times 50 states and

the District of Columbia).    Missing data (see note 2) reduce the actual number


                                       A—6
of cases to 1,414 in the first model and to 1,370 in the second model.

      The common set of instruments used in all five models in Table 6 is

specified above.   Models 1 and 2 also include the current value of the state

excise tax and the one period lead and lag values of the tax.   Models 3,   4,


and 5 exclude the last two regressors but constrain the coefficients on past

and future price and on past and future consumption.




                                     A—7
                                APPENDIX REFERENCES

Bureau of the Census, U.S. Department of Commerce.      1980 Census of

      Population.     Volume I: Characteristics of the Population.     Chapter B:

      General Population Characteristics.      Part 1: United States Summary.

      Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1983.         (Comparable

      sources used for data from the 1950,      1960, and 1970 Censuses of

      Population.)

Bureau of the Census, U.S. Department of Commerce.       Statistical Abstract of

      the United States.     Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,

      various years.

Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce.       Survey of Current

      Business, various years.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor.       Geographical Profile

      of Employment and Unemployment.     Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government

      Printing Office, various years.

Johnson, Douglas, W.; Picard, Paul R., and Quinn, Bernard.       Churches and

      Church Membership in the United States. 1971.       Washington, D.C.:

      Glenmary Research Center, 1974.

Quinn, Bernard, et al.     Churches and Church Membership in the United States.

      jQ.Q.   Atlanta,   Georgia: Glenntary Research Center, 1982.

Tobacco Tax Council.     Municipal Tax Surveys.   Richmond, Virginia: Tobacco Tax

      Council, various years.

Tobacco Tax Council.     The Tax Burden on Tobacco: Historical Compilation,

      Volume 20.     Richmond, Virgiflia: Tobacco Tax Council, 1986.

Whitman, Lauris B., and Trimble, Glen W.       Churches and Church Membership in

      the United States. 1952.     New York: National Council of the Churches of

      Christ, 1956.


                                         A—8
                                   Table 1


           Definitions, Means, and Standard Deviations of Variables
                         (s.d. — standard deviation)


           Per capita cigarette consumption in packs in fiscal year t, as
           derived from state tax—paid sales (mean — 124.800, s.d. — 31.958)

           Average retail cigarette price per pack in January of fiscal year
           t in 1967 cents (mean — 29.600, s.d. — 3.300)

income     Per capita income on a fiscal year basis, in hundreds of 1967
           dollars (mean — 29.303, s.d. — 8.539)

.dtax      Index which measures the incentives to smuggle cigarettes long
           distance from Kentucky, Virginia, or North Carolina. The index is
           positively related to the difference between the state's excise tax
           and the excise taxes of the exporting states.  See panel B for
           more information on this variable and the following smuggling
           variables (mean — —.400, s.d. — 17.800)

sdtexp      Index which measures short distance (export) smuggling incentives.
           The index is a weighted average of differences between the
           exporting state's excise tax and excise taxes of neighboring
           states, with weights based on border populations (mean — —.800,
           s.d. — 1.800)

sdtimp     Index which measures short distance (import) smuggling incentives
           in a state.  Similar to sdtexp (mean — .500, s.d. — .800)

hs         Percentage of state population ages 25 and over with
           at least a high school education (mean — 52.880, s.d. — 14.850)

divorce    Percentage of state female population aged 25—34
           that are divorced (mean — 4.960, s.d. — 14.850)

unemp      State unemployment rate as a percentage (mean — 5.410,   s.d. —
           2 300)
               .




mormon     Percentage of state population that are Mormon (mean = 2.696, s.d.
           —       10.010)

sobapt     Percentage of state population that are Southern Baptist (mean —
           6,330, s.d. — 9.120)

catholic   Percentage of state population that are Catholic (mean — 18.940,
           s.d. — 13.410)

tax        Sum of state and local excise taxes on cigarettes in 1967 cents
           per pack (mean — 6.400, s.d. — 2.900)
                                           Table 2

                Ordinary Least Squares Regressions, Dependent Variable — C
                (Absolute t-statistics in parentheses, intercepts not shown)
                                                         (3)*           (4)**
                           (l)*           (2)**



                                                         -2.073          -1.949
P
        i                                                (7.89)          (4.30)


                            -3.018         -3.216         -   .626            -   .685
P
    t
                            (15.40)       (13.39)        (1.72)          (1.09)

                                                         -.834           -.809
+i.
 t                                                      (3.05)          (1.72)

                              1.530         1.610         1.620           1.660
Y
    t
                             (8.88)       (13.62)        (9.14)         (13.50)

                                  .366      -   .337      -   .304            -   .314
.Qdtax                        -

                             (7.37)        (9.56)        (5.99)          (8.63)

                             -1.847         1.598        -2.042           1.115
sdtimp
                             (3.60)        (2.60)        (4.03)          (1.80)

                             -6.096        -8.847        -5.964          -8.843
sdtexp
                            (18.00)       (33.80)       (17.20)         (33.10)


hs                                          -   .335                          -   .388
                                           (2.91)                         (3.25)


divorce                                     5.97                          6.17
                                          (14.30)                       (14.20)


mormon                                      -   .443                      -   .441
                                           (8.53)                        (8.25)

                                             .370                           .383
catholic
                                           (8.07)                         (8.05)


sobapt                                          .116                        .118
                                           (1.29)                         (1.26)


unemp                                        .497                           .388
                                           (1.76)                         (1.32)


R-squared                         .909          .724          .917                .730
N                             1,516         1,516         1,421           1,421


*
            Regressors include state and year dummy variables.
**
            Regressors include year dummy variables.
                                        Table 3

                       Two-Stage Least Squares Regressions,
         Dependent Variable — C (Asymptotic t-statistics in parentheses)*

                                    (2)**      (3)**         (4)**      (5)***



                        .424        .375            .443        .480
                      (9.06)      (9.25)       (11.80)       (14.50)     (8.90)

                           .133      .239           .172        .229          .205
                      (2.42)      (5.11)          (3.87)     (5.94)      (3.37)

                      -1.392      -1.229          -1.230       - .981    -1.141
                      (8.96)      (9.16)          (9.17)      (8,44)     (7.29)

                           .831      .753           .741        .607          .595
                      (7.31)      (7.42)          (7.31)      (6.72)     (7.39)

.dtax                  -   .187     - .147          - .161     - .125     - .110
                      (5.40)       (4.78)         (5,26)      (4.46)     (5.32)

sdtimp                -1.342      -1.202          -1.248      -1.075      -   .006
                      (4.78)       (4.65)         (4.83)      (4.57)      (.21)

sdtexp                -3.202       -2.868          -2.897     -2.404     -3.187
                     (11.30)      (11.90)         (12.00)    (11.60)     (8.36)


hs                                                                        -   .162
                                                                         (3.35)

divorce                                                                   2.08
                                                                         (6.82)


mormon                                                                    -
                                                                              . 145
                                                                         (5.21)

catholic                                                                   .126
                                                                         (5.33)


sobapt                                                                     .043
                                                                         (1.20)


unemp                                                                      .046
                                                                          (.39)


R-squared                  .975         .979         .979       .983          .949
N                      1,414          1,414         1,414      1,370      1,414


     *                                                   Intercepts not shown.
          A hat over a variable means it is endogenous.
          Regressors include state and year dummy variables.
          Regressors include year dunimy variables.
                                Table 4

                  Roots of Difference Equation
          (approximate standard errors in parentheses)




Model 1                 .141                      2.218
                       (.062)                     (.224)

Model 2                 .265                      2.405
                       (.056)                     (.254)

Model 3                 .188                      2.069
                       (.052)                     (.162)

Model 4                 .263                      1.822
                       (.049)                     (.114)

Model 5                 .229                      1.976
                       (.074)                     (.201)
                                                 Table 5


              Price Elasticities for Two-Stage Least Squares Models
                    (approximate t-statistics in parentheses)

                            (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)



Long run                -   •743         -
                                             .7i3          -   .757         -   .799         -   .791
                      (13.06)          (12.43)          (12.43)           (10.67)          (11.81)


Ow-n price:
  anticipated               -   .374         -   .363          -   .350         -   .310         -   .341
                       (10.73)          (11.13)            (10.86)          (9.87)           (9.27)



  unanticipated             -   .351         -   .323          -   .318         -   .266         -   .301
                        (9.97)          (10.09)            (10.10)         (9.20)            (8.28)



Future price:

  unanticipated             -   .050         -   .086          -   .060         -   .070         -   .069
                        (2.37)           (4.90)            (3.70)          (5.14)            (3.21)



Past price:

  unanticipated             -   .158         -   .134          -   .154         -   .146         -   .153
                        (8.99)           (8.01)            (9.80)          (9.43)            (8.23)




Short run                   -   .408     -   .440              -   .391         -   360          -   391
                        (9.34)         (9.51)              (9.69)          (8.80)           (7.66)
                                              Table 6

                     General Two-Stage Least Squares Regressions,
            Dependent Variable — C (Asymptotic t-statistics in parentheses)
                                     (7)***       (8)**        (9)***       (l0)**
                         (6)**



                              .495     .505          .417         .470         .441
C
        ,
                         (8.03)      (7.66)       (14.79)      (22.60)      (14.93)

C                          .294        .350             .396      .423            .375
                         (3.99)      (4.59)       (14.79)      (22.60)      (14.93)

                              .613      .758         .662         .890         .694
    t- i
                         (2.83)       (3.57)       (4.01)       (6.74)       (4.00)

                         -1.685       -1.906       -1.697       -1.931       -1,687
Pt                                                (10.40)      (12.30)      (10.37)
                        (10.20)      (11.30)

                              .569      .772         .628         .801         .590
    t
                         (2.53)       (3.58)       (4.01)       (6.74)       (4.00)

                           .502         .274         .480         .215         .474
                         (4.79)       (3.56)       (4.53)       (3.05)       (4.50)

.2dtax                    -   .100     -   .053     -   .072     -   .040     -   .076
                         (3.06)       (3.19)       (2.66)       (2.69)       (2.85)

sdtimp                    -   .976     -   .302     -   .877     - . 337          -   .888
                         (4.30)       (1.74)       (4.07)       (2.11)        (4.14)

sdtexp                   -1.970       -1.491       -1.795       -1.137        -1.798
                         (6.06)       (3.82)       (5.71)       (3.28)        (5.78)

hs                                     -.091                     -.074
                                      (2.69)                    (2.43)

divorce                                 .884                      .650
                                      (3.06)                    (2.47)

mormon                                 -   .057                  -   .040
                                      (2.44)                    (1.87)

catholic                                .045                      .030
                                      (2.17)                    (1.58)

sobapt                                  .011                      .002
                                       (.44)                     (.10)

unemp                                  -   .037                  -   .025
                                       (.46)                     (.36)

R-squared          .986                .978             .986         .981         .986
N — 1,414 all models


             A hat over a variable means it is endogenous.  Intercepts not shown.
             Regressors include state and year dummy variables.
             Regressors include year dummy variables.
                                          Table 7

     Price Elasticities for General Two-Stage Least Squares Models
               (approximate t-statistics in parentheses)

                         (6)              (7)        (8)            (9)            (10)



Long run            -   .565          -   .612       -   .515       -   .533       -   .517
                        (4.30)            (4.87)         (3.29)         (3.02)         (3.28)



Own price:
  anticipated       -   .412          -   .462       -   .420       -   .468       -   .419
                  (11.62)        (12.37)           (11.43)        (12.58)        (11.44)



  unanticipated     -   .422          -   .480       -   .409       -   .461       -   .406
                  (10.45)        (11.39)           (11.61)        (13.25)        (11.58)



Future price:

  unanticipated      .013           .020              .016          -   .007       -   .016
                   (0.44)         (0.77)            (0,61)        (0.38)         (0.62)



Past price:

  unanticipated     -   .077          -   .081       -   .017       -   .008      -    .019
                   (1.98)         (2.09)            (0.61)        (0.38)         (0.62)

                    - . 386           -   .410       -   .465       -   .496       -   .460
                   (5.25)         (4.94)            (5.40)        (5.50)         (5.77)



Short run           -   .402      -   .444           -   .442       -   .478      -    .437
                   (9.02)        (9.75)             (7.71)         (9.11)        (8.24)
