                           NBER WORXING PAPER SERIES




                 LONG RUN POLICY ANALYSIS AND LONG RUN GROWTH




                                 Sergio Rebelo




                             Working Paper No. 3325




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   April 1990




I am indebted to Robert King arid Paul Rosier for their continuous guidance and
encouragement. I also benefitted from the comments and suggestions of Robert
Barro, Marianne Baxter, Monica Hargraves and numerous seminar participants.
Financial support from the Amelia de Melo foundation and the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Growth. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3325
                                        April 1990


                 LONG RUN POLICY ANALYSIS AND LONG RUN GROWTH


                                   ABSTRACT


     The wide cross-country disparity in rates of economic growth is the most
puzzling feature of the development process. This paper describes a class of
models in which this type of heterogeneity in growth experiences can arise as a
result of cross-country differences in government policy. These differences in
policy regimes can also create incentives for labor migration from slow growing
to fast growing countries. In the class of models that we study growth is
endogenous but the technology exhibits constant returns to scale and there is a
steady state path that accords with Kaldor's stylized facts of economic
development. The key to making growth endogenous in the absence of increasing
returns is the presence of a "core" of capital goods that can be produced
without the direct or indirect contribution of factors that cannot be
accumulated, such as land.




                                        Sergio Rebelo
                                        Portuguese Catholic University,
                                        Rochester Center for Economic
                                        Research, and
                                        Northwestern University
                                        J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of
                                        Management
                                        2001 Sheridan Road
                                        Evanston, IL 60208
I. Introduction

One of the most surprising features of the process of economic growth is

the wide cross—country dispersion in average rates of growth. In the

post—war period countries like Japan. Brazil and Cabon saw their level

of per capita Income expand at a fast pace while other nations

experienced no significant change in their standard of living. This

paper studies a class of growth models in which cross—country

differences in economic policy can generate this type of heterogeneity

In growth experiences. In these models certain policy variables, such

as the rate of income tax, affect the economy's rate of expansion

through a simple mechanism: an increase in the Income tax rate

decreases the rate of return to the investment activities of the private

sector and leads to a permonent decline in the rate of capital

accumulation and in the rate of growth.

     The class of economies that we propose in this paper shares with

Romer's (1986) model the property that growth Is endogenous in the sense

that it occurs In the absence of exogenous Increases in productivity

such as those attributed to technical progress In the neoclassical

growth model. But, in contrast with Romer's emphasis on increasing

returns to scale and accelerating growth, the models discussed here

display constant returns to scale technologies and have steady state

growth paths, thus being compatible with the stylized facts of economic

growth described in Kaldor (1961).

     The simplest model within the class that we consider is a
                                                                 2



one—sector economy with standard preferences and a production function

that is linear in the capital stock. This simple model is usually

dismissed as inappropriate to think about growth issues because labor

plays apparently no role In the economy and non—reproducible factors

such as land are not used in production. The analysis undertaken here

of more general models that surpass both of these problems reveals that

the simple linear model is a natural benchmark in terms of thinking

about the growth process and a good representative of the class of

endogenous growth economies that have a convex technology.

     Throughout the paper we will focus on the effects of taxation on

the rate of growth. This focus was chosen because tax policies differ

significantly across countries but also because the effects of taxation

are suggestive of the impact of other government policies, such as those

regarding the protection of property rights. The approach will be

positive rather than normative: we will take as given that there are

differences in public policy across countries and, at least for now,

sidestep the question of whether those different policies can be viewed

as optimal.

     There is a large literature on tax policy issues in the

neoclassical growth model that also concludes that high income tax rates

translate into lower rates of growth.1 But in the neoclassical model

this effect Is too weak to explain the observed cross—country

differences In growth rates. Economic policy can only affect the rate




1Key references in this literature include Krzyzaniak (1967), Sato (1967).
Feldstein (1974). Stiglitz (1978). Becker (1985) and Judd (1985).
                                                                       3



of growth during the transition path toward the steady state, since the

steady state growth rate Is given by the rate of exogenous technical

progress. These transitional effects of economic policy cannot have a

large impact on the rate of growth, given that the rough constancy of

the real interest rate during the last century suggests that

transitional dynamics play a modest role in the growth process (King and

Rebelo (1989)).

     This paper is organized as follows. Section II studies a

two—sector extension of a linear growth model that incorporates

non—reproducible factors in the production process. This model is used

to study the effects of taxation arid the influence of the rate of

savings on the rate of economic growth.

     Section III expands this model to distinguish the role of physical

capital and human capital along the lines suggested by Lucas (1988).

This extended model shows that the feasibility of sustained growth does

not require capital to be produced with a linear technology, as might be

suggested by section II and by the models discussed by Lucas (1988) and

Uzawa    (1965).   All that is required to assure the feasibility of

perpetual growth is the existence of a "core" of capital goods that is

produced with constant returns technologies and without the direct or

indirect use of non—reproducible factors.

        Treating separately the accumulation of physical and human capital

introduces transitional dynamics that are absent in section II. But        the


implications obtained for the effects of taxes and of the savings rate

along the steady state path are basically those of section II. both in
                                                                      4




the case of exogenous a-nd endogenous leisure choice.

      The remainder of section III is devoted to generalizing the model

of section II along two different directions. First, capital goods

produced with non—reproducible factors are introduced in the economy.

Second. the consequences of introducing multiple consumption goods are

examined. The main policy implications derived in section II prove to

be robust to these generalizations.

      Section IV relates the models discussed here to the neoclassical

model and to some of the recent growth literature. A final section

provides some conclusions and outlines directions for future research.




II.     A Basic Endogenous Growth Model

Our point of departure will be an economy in which there are two types

of factors of production: reproducible. which can be accumulated over

time (e.g. physical and human capital), and non-reproducible which are

available in the same quantity In every period (e.g. land). The

quantity of all reproducible factors will be summarized by the capital

good Z, which can be viewed as a composite of various types of physical

and humen capital. Similarly, the fixed amount available of

non—reproducible factors will be sunuuarized by the composite good 1.

      The economy has two sectors of production. The capital sector uses

a fraction (l—+) of the available capital stock to produce Investment

goods        with a technology that is linear in the capital stock:
                                                                    5



             = A
                   Z(l—$).


Capital depreciates at rate 6 and investment is irreversible (IO)2:



                      —
             =
                 It       aZt.


The consumption sector combines the renining capital stock with

non—reproducible factors to produce consumption goods (Ce). Since for

steady state growth to be feasible it   must be possible for both

consumption and capital to grow at constant (but possibly different)

rates, the production function of the consumption industry is assumed to

be Cobb-Douglas:



          C =    B (#tzt)(z T'



This technology permits capital to grow at any rate between A - 6 (the

path of pure accumulation) and —ô (the path along which all production

is consumed). and consumption to grow at a rate proportional to that of

capital: g =
     The economy has a constant population composed by a large number of

identical agents who seek to maximize utility defined as:




2The dot notation is used for the time derivative, so Z =    dZ/dt.
                                                                     6




            U =   f° e'   Cl-c
                                 dt                                  (1).




These preferences imply that the opt1nl growth rate of consumption

      is solely a function of the real interest rate (re):       =

            Since in all the economies considered here the real interest
(r—p)/c,.
rate is constant in the steady state, this ensures that when it is

feasible for consumption to grow at a constant rate it is also optimal

to do so.

     The competitive equilibrium under perfect foresight for all the

economies studied in this paper can be computed as a solution to a

planning problem by exploring the fact that, in the absence of

distortions, the competitive equilibrium is Pareto optimum. Instead of

taking this approach we will study directly the competitive equilibrium

focusing on the conditions that are relevant to determine the growth

rate, since this will be more informative about the economic mechanisms

at work in the model.

     To describe the competitive equilibrium it is necessary to have a

market structure In mind. In this case it is easiest to think of the

economy as having spot nrkets for all goods and factors and one period

credit markets. Firms make their production decisions seeking to

maximize profits while households rent the two factors of production (Z

and 1) to firms and choose their consumption so as to maximize lifetime

utility (1).

    To maximize profits firms have to be indifferent between employing

their marginal unit of capital to produce consumption goods or capital
                                                                                    7


                                a-i
goods. i.e. pA = a B                   where Pt is the relative price of

capital in terms of consumption. Since in the steady state the fraction

of capital devoted to consumption, •. is constant the relative price of

capital declines at the rate g =           (a_l)g.           Given that Pt is not

constant the real interest rate for loans denominated in capital goods

(re) is different from that of consumption—denominated loans (rt).

Since the (net) marginal productivity of capital in the sector that

produces capital goods is constant and equal to A —
                                                                     ö,   equilibrium in

the capital market requires that                = A     —        A standard arbitrage

argument implies that the interest rate for consumption denominated

loans is related to rzt by: r =                     +         The steady state value of
                                              rzt       g•
rct is then given by: r =        A—ó      +
                                              (a—l)g.
       Faced with this interest rate households choose to expand

consumption at rate g =    (r—p)/c.           Substituting rc by its expression,

and using the fact that g =      ag,      yields the steady state value of

Net income measured in terms of consumption goods, which is given by

   =
       C   +     — óZ,   grows at rate:



                          A —         —


               g=ag=a     l—a(1-a)
                                                                                    (2).




       There are three properties of the competitive equilibrium that are

worth noting. First, this economy has no transitional dynamics; it

expands always at rate g• Second, the parameter B and the amount of

land services available in each period (1) are absent from the growth

rate expression. They determine the level of the consumption path but
                                                                     8



not the growth rate, suggesting that countries with different endowments

of natural resources will have different income levels but not different

growth rates. Third. although C and         grow at different rates, their

relative price adjusts in such a menner that the share of investment and

of consumption in output (pI/Y and C/Y) are constant.

        The influence of preferences and technology on the rate of

expansion of this economy is rather intuitive. The rate of growth is

higher the greater the net mrginal product of capital (A—o) and the

elasticity of intertemporal substitution (1/a) and the lower the pure

rate of time preference (p).3

        EquatIon (2) provides no reason to believe that unceasing growth is

more likely than perpetual regression, whether the economy grows or

regresses depends on whether A—o—p is positive or negative. However,

in deriving (2) the irreversible nature of investments in Z was ignored.

This Irreversibility implies that the lowest feasible growth rate of

output is —cxô. which corresponds to the path in which investment is

zero. When the value of g implied by (2) is lower than —aâ the

economy reverts to a corner solution In which investment is zero and the




31n order for lifetime utility (U in (1)) to be finite it    is
                                                             necessary
that p > a(1-a)(A—ö) to ensure that the growth rate of momentary
utility. (l-.a)g. [s lower than the discount rate, p.     If (l—o)g0     p
there is a set of feasible paths among which households are indifferent
because they all yield infinite utility. The requirement p >
a(1_a)(A_ö) is also necessary and sufficient for the transversality
condition associated with the households' maximization problem to hold.
In all the other models studied in this paper this type of condition.
although not stated explicitly In the text, is implicitly assumed to
hold.
                                                                  '9



growth rate is _aóz.



Long Run Effects of Taxation

To illustrate the effects of taxation on this model, we consider the

introduction of two proportional taxes, one on consumption at rate

and the other on investment at rate T1. The analysis will be undertaken

in a closed economy context, but it is valid in a world of open

economies connected by international capital markets if all countries

follow the "worldwide tax system".4

     Government revenue, measured in terms of' the consumption good. is

                       +        To isolate the effects of taxation from
given by: T =   TCt
those of government expenditures we assume throughout the paper that

this revenue is used to finance the provision of goods that do not

affect the marginal utility of private consumption or the production

possibilities of the private sector.

     The only equation used to derive (2) affected by the presence of

taxation is the one that determines r which is now given by

                                         The left hand side of this
(I+T1)(l+r) = A +          + Ti(l—oz).
expression represents the opportunity cost of investing one unit of

capital. The right hand side is the result of using that unit of

capital to produce during one period and selling the non—depreciated

capital. The term -rj(l—ä) reflects the investment tax refund



4According to this system investors pay taxes in their own country on
capital income originated abroad but receive credit for any taxes paid
abroad on the same income See Jones and Manuelli (1990) and King and
Rebelo (1990) for discussions of the effects of ta.xation in open
economies.
                                                                    10




associated with that sale.

     The growth rate of income is In this case:


                                    —   5—p
          g =   max [a
                               a              —aS]                 (3),
                         1 —       (1)

where the possibility of a corner solution in which the non—negativity

restriction on investment is binding and, hence.     =     is   made

explicit. Expression (3) shows that the influence of an Increase in -r.

on the growth rate is the same as that of a decrease in A: a higher

Investment tax rate leads to a lower growth rate in economies with

strictly positive investment levels. In contrast, permanent changes in

T have effects that are similar to changes in B, they do not affect the

rate of growth but solely the level of the consumption path. A

consumption tax does not distort the only decision made by agents in

this economy, the decision of consuming now versus later, and so it Is

equivalent to a lump sum tax. Since a proportional tax on (gross)

income amounts to taxing consumption and Investment at the same rate, an

increase In the income tax rate induces a decrease In the rate of growth

of this economy.5




is is also the mechanism at work in Boyd and Prescott (1985). In their
economy the production technology is linear so an increase in the income ta
rate acts as a displacement to the technology, leading to a decrease in the
rate of growth.
                                                                    11




Growth and the Savings Rate

In Solow's (1956) original version of the neoclassical growth model, the

savings rate (s) was fixed at an exogenous level. In that context.

Solow concluded that the savings rate determines only the steady state

levels of the different variables but not their growth rates. In his

model, although the speed of convergence toward the steady state depends

on s, the steady state growth rate is exogenous and all s does is

determine the capital—labor ratio.

     The simple model just described can be used to illustrate that this

result is an artifact of the exogenous nature of steady state growth in

the neoclassical model. Suppose that the savings rate, defined as the

fraction of net savings devoted to net investment, is exogenously fixed

at the level s   0,   rather than being chosen to nximize (1). This

                              Following the same steps as before the steady
implies that Z =   sY/p.
state growth rate can be computed as,



                   (A —   b)s
          g=a a+(l—a)s

This expression implies that higher savings rates lead to higher growth

rates, which accords with the positive correlation of these two

variables in the data (see Romer (1987)). The concept of savings

employed here is. however, broader than usual since Z represents a

composite of physical and hunn capital and hence s is the fraction of

total resources devoted to both of these accumulation activities. In

order to study the effects of changes in the savings rate defined in a
                                                                      12



stricter sense that only encompasses physical capital accumulation it is

necessary to distinguish between these two types of accumulation. This

is one of the objectives of the next section.



A Linear Endogenous Growth Model

Our basic model can be simplified further by assuming that cx=l and B=A.

This generates a one sector economy with a linear production function

   = AZ       This linear model in which everything is reproducible

captures the essential features of the class of endogenous growth models

with a convex technology. It points to the same growth rate

determinants and to the same policy implications as the model that we

just described. It also captures the main qualitative features of the

economies studied in the next section in which physical and hun.n

capital are treated separately.




III.      Extensions of the Basic Model

This section seeks to Investigate whether the properties described In

section II hold more generally by extending that model in several

directions: first, the composite capital good Z is disaggregated into

physical and hunn capital and the resulting economy is studied for the

cases of exogenous and endogenous labor supply; second, capital goods



6Th1 simple linear economy resembles models discussed in Knight
(1935,1944) and Hagen (1942) in which "everything is capital" In the
sense that all factors of production can be accumulated. Models similar
to this one have also been employed by McFadden (1967). Benveniste
(1976) and Eaton (1981).
                                                                           13



produced    with non—reproducible factors are incorporated in the model;

finally, multiple consumption goods are introduced. To simplify the

exposition each of these aspects is considered separately.




111.1.      Disaggregating Z into      Physical ai Hun (pi tal
A natural   direction along which the basic model can be expanded is to

disaggregate the composite capital Z into one type of physical and one

type of human   capital.   To study such a model without burdening the

discussion with too much notation it is convenient to assume that

consumption and investment goods are produced in the same sector.

Introducing a separate consumption sector as in section II would not

give rise to any substantive changes in the properties discussed below.

     As before the economy is populated by a constant number of

identical agents with preferences described by (1). Production takes

place according to a Cobb-Douglas production function which combines a

fraction       of the stock of physical capital with NH efficiency units

of labor, which are the result of              hours of work undertaken by an

individual with       units of   humen capital7:


                                  =
                                      Ct
                                           +                               (4)


Physical capital depreciates at rate 6 and investment is irreversible




7See Martins (1987) for an analysis of growth models with different
definitions of efficiency units of labor.
                                                                   14




(IO):


             =     — oK                                            (5).




Human capital. which is embodied In each worker, depreciates at rate i5

and can be produced by combining physical capital (K(1-+) units) with
                         S
efficiency units of labor.                 one unit of time In each
                             Each worker has

period and consumes an exogenously specified number L of leisure hours.

The remaining (l—L-N) hours are devoted to accumulation of human

capital generating (l—L—N)Ht efficiency units of labor:




             =
                 A2[Kt(l—#t)]'   [(l_L_N)H3 —   ôll                (6).




The technology described by equations (4)—(6) is similar to the one

adopted by Lucas (1988, section 4) with two main differences: there are

no externalities and physical capital Is used in the production of human

capital.

     In specifying this technology we made three assumptions that make

It possible to solve in closed form for the steady state growth rate:




8The embodiedment assumption plays a key role in the analysis.   It
implies that two agents with the same level of human capital, H. who
work for N hours generate 2NH units of labor In efficiency units. With
disembodied human capital each worker would be able to use the other's
human capital and the number of efficiency units that would result from
their collaboration would be 4NH. In the economy described in this
section this would introduce increasing returns to scale and hence a
competitive equilibrium would not exist: production and accumulation of
skills would take place in an economy—wide coalition.
                                                                 15




the two production functions were chosen to be Cobb—Douglas and K and H

were assumed to depreciate at the same rate 5. The Appendix

demonstrates that the properties emphasized below continue to hold when

the production functions are neoclassical with positive cross—partial

derivatives and the two depreciation rates are different.

     Equations (4)—(6) imply that in the steady state C, K. 1 and

all grow at the same rate. There is a continuum of values for this

comon growth rate that can be sustained with this technology.9 This

makes clear that in order for endogenous steady state growth to be

feasible the technology to produce capital does not need to be linear

but only constant returns to scale, i.e. linearly homogeneous. The

reason why the production function of the capital sector in section II

had to be linear was that linearly homogeneous functions of a single

variable are linear.

     To describe the perfect foresight competitive equilibrium It is

convenient to think of households as operating directly the economys

technology.10 Efficient production decisions are characterized by two

conditions. The first one is static in the sense that it regards the

optimal allocation of the existing stock of physical capital and the



9The range of sustainable rates. of growth is harder to compute than in
section II because it Is determined both by the equations that describe
technology and by those that characterize efficient production plans (see
equations (7)—(12)). This range is. however, analogous to that of the basic
model: the economy can sustain any growth rate between the steady state
interest rate r, described in (13), and —5.

°See King and Rebelo (1990) for a discussion of a decentralization scheme in
which households decide how much to accumulate of physical and human capital
while firms undertake production by renting both labor and capital from
households.
                                                                    16




available efficiency units of labor across the two activities. In an

efficient allocation the marginal product of physical and human capital

measured In terms of units of physical capital has to be equated in the

two sectors, that is:



                                                                    (7)
(l_r)Aj(#KY (NH) =


-   Aj(#K)'      (NH)' =                                            (8).




where       is the relative value of the human capital in terms of physical

capital. Eliminating        from (7) and (8) yields a familiar requirement

of efficiency in production: the marginal rate of transformation must be

equated in the two sectors. With Cobb—Douglas production functions this

amounts to the following relation between the capital—labor intensities

in the two sectors:




             _____ _____ — ______       (l-#)K
              (1—i') NH — (l—) (1—L—N)H


        The second efficiency condition is dynamic in nature and concerns

the decision of investing in physical capital versus in human capital.

Having a new unit of physical capital available is worth its net

marginal product in the production sector:



                                  (NH)' —   6
             r =   (l—1)Aj(+K)                                      (10).
                                                                                17




An alternative to investing in one more unit              of   capital Is to accumulate

     units   of    hunn capital which yields a net return expressed In terms

of physical capital goods equal to:




             r = pA2[(l_$)K]' k(l—L—N)H]' — a +                                 (11).


At the optimum the rate of return from both activities must be the same

so r =   r.       Since equations (7) and (8) imply that              Is constant In

the steady state (given that K/H is also constant), the steady state

version of the condition rt =       r           has a very simple form:




                        ______     =       A2
                                                    (l—)K                       (12).
             (1—r)Aj
                         NH                        (l—L—N)H


Equations (9) and (12) can be solved for the capital—labor intensities

in the two sectors. Once these are determined the value of

                   can be used in (10) to determine the steady state real

interest rate which depends on a geometric average of the two level

parameters in the production functions



             r =   4AA"(1—L)1"         5                                        (13),




where u = (l—f3)/(l—P+i) and p             is   a strictly positive function of 'r and

3. The geometric average weight, v, is lower than 1/2 when the share of

physical capital in the production of human capital (1—a) is snaller
                                                                        'S




than    the    share of labor in the production of physical capital (i).

        Given the real interest rate the optin.l growth rate of consumption
is       =    (r—p)/ci.   Since along the steady state path I. K. and El all

grow at the same rate as consumption, the growth rate of net national

income, defined as           =
                                 C   +     —           is   given by:



                                 U   1—v       1—i'   — 6 —
                            'P A1 A2 (l—L)
                g =   max
                                      a                           —5]      (14).
                 y


This expression, which makes explicit the possibility of a corner

solution with zero investment, is analogous to (2) (for the case of

a=l).

        The properties of the steady state growth path are very similar to

those suggested by section II; when the economy is not at a corner

solution with zero investment the rate of growth depends on A1 and A2

and the irreversible nature of investment (in both K and H) sets a lower

bound to the growth rate.1'

        One interesting new property is that the rate of growth is

increasing in the total number of hours worked (both in the output

sector and in the accumulation of human capital). that is, the model

predicts that economies with hard—working agents will grow faster.




As is shown in proposition 2 of the Appendix, in an extension of this model
in which consumption is produced in a separate sector with a Cobb—Douglas
technology that combines physical. huin capital, and non—reproducible
resources, the steady state growth rate is independent of the level of
non—reproducible resources and of the level parameter in the consumption
production function. These properties also accord with the findings of
section II.
                                                                         19



     In   contrast with the model of section II. this economy has

transitional dynamics. After solving for the factor intensities in both

industries and determining the steady state growth rate, equations (6)

and (9) can be used to determine the steady state ratio of physical to

hunn capital, k =      K/H. If    the initial capital stocks are not in the

proportion k there will be a period in which physical and huin capital

expand at different rates.'2



Long Run Effects of Taxation

As In the basic economy of section II a consumption tax is equivalent to

a lump sum tax and an increase in the rate of income tax Induces a

decline in the rate of growth. This effect of taxation is, however.

weaker than in the model of section II. Income taxation makes the

private sector decrease the capital—labor ratio in both sectors of

activities, substituting away from the input whose production Is taxed

(physical capital). As a result the steady state value of the after tax

real interest rate Is equal to
                                              u ui—v
                                     r = (1—T) 4A1A2 (l—L)
                                                             1—v—
                                                                    6 and so the

impact of T.   the   income tax rate, on the steady state growth rate is

smaller than in section II. being weaker the closer v is to zero. If

the shift to more hunn capital intensive technologies did not take

place the after tax steady state real interest rate would be r =

(lT)AAV(lL)l 6 and the impact of taxation on growth would be
similar to that   of   section II. This would also be the case if both




12See King and Rebelo (1986) for a discussion of these dynamics and
Barro (1989) for an investigation of their empirical implications.
                                                                       20




production of output and of human capital were included in       the tax base

since there would be no scope for adjusting factor intensities.

        The model proposed by Lucas (1988, section 4) is, abstracting from

the human capital externality, a limit case of this economy in which

physical capital is not used in the production of human capital so          that


f3=l.    In this limit case u = 0   and 4, =   1   so both the real interest

rate and the rate of growth are Independent of A1 and of the rate of

income tax. This Independence is due to the fact that when J3 is one the

rate of return to investment in human capital (r in equation (11))           is


constant and equal to (A2—o)(l—L). In an efficient production plan the

capital—labor Intensity in the output sector (K/NH) is chosen so that

the rate of return to physical capital accumulation, which coincides

with the real Interest rate (r in (10)). is also (A2—O)(1L). For

this reason taxing income In the Lucas (1988, section 4) economy changes

the factor Intensity In the output sector and in the economy as a whole

but has no impact on the steady state real interest rate and growth
        13
rate.

        In our economy income taxes affect the steady state real wage rate

(per efficiency unit of labor) which Is given by:




               =     [(l—r)A1]1                                        (15),
                     [A2( 1-L)f




 13Th1s would not be true, however, if the production of human capital were
 included In the definition of the tax base. In that case taxing income acts
 like a change in both A1 and A2 affecting the growth rate.
                                                                      21




where p is a strictly positive function of the shares i' and f3 and ji =

(l—'r)/(1—13+v).   The elasticity of the wage rate with respect to the tax

wedge, (l—T). is equal to l+j.. The first component of this elasticity

reflects the direct impact of income taxes on the wage rate: workers

only receive a fraction (l—T) of the marginal product of labor. The

second component. associated with the exponent i,    involves   the

consequences of the shift to more labor intensive technology on the

marginal product of labor. Both of these effects imply that economies

with a high income tax rate have lower after—tax wages than economies

with low taxes. This difference in wage rates creates a tendency for

workers of slow growing (high tax) economies to migrate to high growth

(low tax) countries regardless of their level of education. These

implications for migration are similar but not identical to those

emphasized in Lucas (1988). In Lucas's model workers of poor economies

tend to migrate to rich ones because the presence of an externality in

the production of output implies that, all else equal, richer economies

have higher wages.



Growth and the Savings Rate

This model can be used to investigate the relation between the growth

rate of output (narrowly defined by excluding human capital

accumulation) and the rate of savings, defined as the fraction of net


output devoted to net investment in physical capital (s=K/Y).          When

the share parameters in the two production functions are identical (P=)

and there is no depreciation this relation can be expressed in closed
                                                                         22




analytical form:


                              1 -2r
               —    [AIA2 k    (l—L)]s
                                     —1
                   A2k   (l-L) + A1sk



where k is the capital—labor ratio in both sectors of activity which is

a function of A1, A2, arid i.         The Appendix shows that the positive

association between the rate of growth and the rate of savings (narrowly

defined) suggested by this particular case Is a general implication of

the model.




111.2.     Endogenous Leisure (loice

To make leisure endogenous In the model just examined in a manner

consistent with steady state growth preferences have to be such that

each individual chooses a constant rate of expansion of consumption and

constant allocations of time between work (Ne). leisure (Lv), and

accumulation of skills (l—N—L) when faced with a constant real wage

(per efficiency unit of labor) and a constant real interest rate. There

are two classes of time—separable preferences for which this Is the

case.

        In the first class momentary utility takes the form u(C.LH).

where u(.) has the standard properties (it is concave and twice

continuously differentiable) and Is homogeneous of degree b. This type

of momentary utility can be viewed as a formalization of Beckers (1965)

concept of household production function. Preferences of this form have
                                                                                   23



been employed in the labor literature, namely by Heckman (1976), to

rationalize the small response of the number of hours devoted to work in

the market to the observed secular increase in real wages.

           The consistency of these preferences with steady state growth is

clear from the efficiency condition for leisure which, using the

homogeneity of u(.). can be written as:




               D2u(C/Ht.L) =         wDi u(Ct/H.L)

In the steady state both CVH and w (the real wage rate per
efficiency unit) are constant, implying a constant value for L.

       The steady state real interest rate, which is given by

r =   4,   A         —   5, is determined by the same type of production
efficiency requirements that underlie (13). The absence of the term

(l_L)1V in the interest rate expression is due to the dependence of

utility on leisure in efficiency units (LH). which implies that an

extra unit of human capital augments the productivity of the entire time

endowment, not just that of the time that is devoted to work. (l—L).

It is easy to show that the optimal growth rate of consumption is

related to the real interest rate by                  =
                                                          (r   —
                                                                   p)/(1—b) and that the
steady state growth rate for this economy is given by:



                                 U    1—u   — 6 — p
                    = maX    4' A1 A2
               gy                    1—b              -6].




           All the properties emphasized in section II hold for this model.
                                                                       24




In particular a consumPtion tax has     no effects on the rate of growth

despite labor being endogenous. This results from a combination of two

factors: (i) the real interest rate is independent of preferences and.

(ii) the growth rate of the nrginal      utility of   consumption is

independent of the consumption—leisure mix chosen by the economy because

u(.) is homogeneous.

      A second class of momentary utility functions consistent with

steady state growth is derived in King. Plosser and Rebelo (1988) and

takes the form:



                        log(C) +   vi(L)     if a = 1


           u(CL) =
                          1-a   v2(L)        ifO<a<lora>l.


While with the Becker—Heckman preferences the steady state real interest

rate Is dictated solely by technology, with this utility function it

depends as well on preference parameters. The reason for this is        clear

from the expression for the rate of return to huirn capital

accumulation




           r =    pA2[(1_#)K]'P[(l_Nt)Ht]I(l_Lt)
                                                         -   + ;iiq.

In   this equation the term (1—L) reflects the fact that an increase in

     will augment the productivity of hours worked in both sectors but
                                                                     25



will not enhance the marginal utility of leisure. Since L depends on

preferences between consumption and leisure the real interest rate

depends not only on technology but also on parameters of the utility

function. This complicates the computation of the steady state to the

point where it is difficult to characterize its properties analytically.

Numerical simulations conducted for a wide spectrum of parameter values

indicate that taxing income continues to have a negative effect on the

rate of growth.

     It can be shown analytically that with these preferences a

consumption tax is equivalent to a lump sum tax in the steady state.

The same cancelation of income and substitution effects that assures

that preferences are consistent with steady state growth implies that

taxing consumption induces no change in the economy's growth rate.




111.3.   capital Coods Produced with Non—reproducible Factors

In all the economies examined until now non—reproducible factors have

been ruled out from the production of capital. Perpetual growth can.

however, be consistent with the presence of capital goods produced with

non—reproducible factors. This can be Illustrated by incorporating a

second capital good, denoted by S. in the model of section II so that
                                                                      -
the technology of the economy is:



               =
          Ct
               =                                   1fl2   -
                                                              5s5t
                                                                         26




             =                   —
                                     ozzt.


The variables #ct •st'       and       represent fractions of the various

resources allocated to the different activities. The technology used to

produce the capital good St was assumed to be Cobb—Douglas so that it is

feasible to have both St and Z growing at constant (but possibly

different) rates. The growth rate of capital, which can be determined

as in section II, is:


                                          —
                         (l—i12)(A —
             = rix   [                                  , -6].
                         (l—T12)_(la)Cat(l12)2l]


Net income measured in terms of the consumption good is given by Y =          C
+      +         where Pt and        are, respectively, the relative prices of

Z and S with respect to consumption. The growth rate of             is


proportional to that of Z: g =           [aj+a2rij/(l-ri2)]      As in section


II. this economy has no transitional dynamics, it always grows at the

steady state growth rate

     This economy has two familiar properties. First, its rate of

growth is an increasing function of A but does not depend on B1. B2,          and

1. Second, although the production of C, Z and S measured In physical

units expand at different rates, the relative prices evolve In such a

mimer that the share of the production value of each of these goods           in

'( Is constant. The policy Implications derived in section II follow

 from the first of these properties.
                                                                   27



      This model shows that in order for endogenous growth to be feasible

all that is necessary is that there be a "core" of capital goods that is

produced without the direct or Indirect contribution of non—reproducible

factors. Provided this "core" of capital goods exists endogenous growth

is compatible with the presence of consumption and capital goods

produced with non—reproducible factors In the absence of Increasing

returns to scale.

     In general, taxing the production of capital goods that are not In

the "core" has no effects on the growth rate. This should not be

surprising since the Introduction of this type of capital goods amounts

to specifying a more complex technology to produce consumption goods and

we have seen that taxing consumption induces no growth effects.




111.4.   Multiple Consumption Goods

The introduction of more than one consumption good leaves the properties

of the models we examined virtually unchanged, but It implies that some

restrictions across parameters of preferences and technology have to be

satisfied in order for steady state growth to be optimal. To Illustrate

this suppose that a second consumption good is introduced in the model

of section II. The two consumption goods. C1 and C2. are produced with

the following- technologies:




     C1 =                               C2t =   B2(,2Z)a2E(1_4)TJa2
                                                                      28




where 1t' 2t and '' represent
                              fractions of the various factors. As in

the previous models, these fractions are constant in the steady state.

The law of motion for capital is:




         = A   Z(l-i-+2) - ozzt


The conditions under which steady state growth is optil can be

determined by examining some of the equations that characterize the

perfect foresight competitive equilibrium.

       If q is the relative price of C1 in terms of C2. firms allocate

the capital good so as to equate the mrginal product of capital in the

two consumption sectors




          ajBj(ltZt)1 l(4lT)lat =


This   efficiency condition implies that along a steady state path

changes at rate q =
                       (a2_aI)g.
       Households choose their consumption path so that the nrginal rate

of substitution between the two goods equals their relative price:



                          =



Representing the elasticity of the nrginal utility of consumption of
good I (u1) with respect to good J by    a. this   condition can be

expressed in terms of growth rates as:
                                                                    29




               g +        012 c2
                                     =    + °21       +a

Given that the steady state growth rates of consumption are g = a1g

and g =
      C2
            a2gZ   .   this   implies that:



                               =
           a1(l+a11—a21)           a2(l+c—c.i12)                    (17).



     Assuming that this requirement holds, the steady state growth rate

of output expressed in terms of C1 can be computed following the same

steps as in section 11



                                   A-óZ -p
           gy =nx [a1                              ,—a16z ].
                              1-a1-a11a1—a12a2



     It is easy to verify that this economy has the properties stressed

in section II and hence shares the same policy implications. The steady

state path is in this case not as interesting, since there is no reason

why restrictions such as (17) should hold. This path still captures,

however, some of the properties that are present when (17) or its

equivalent do not hold and hence the fraction of resources allocated to

the production of the different consumption goods varies over time.
                                                                       30



IV.   Perpetual Crowth and Non—reproducible Factors

The class of models described in the previous section can be related to

the neoclassical growth model and to some of the recent growth

literature by considering a one—sector model In which output is produced

according to a Cobb—Douglas technology that combines capital (Kr). labor

      and non—reproducible factors (1)14.    In this economy the law of
()
motion for capital is:




              = A   K 2 .f3 —      - aK.      a1. a2. a3   0.   6>0.




The equation for the growth rate of capital shows that that under the

standard assumption of constant returns to scale (a1+a2+a3 =     1)
perpetual growth is unfeasible whenever       and I are required to produce

output (a2>O, a3>O):



                     = A      f2      -          -   6                 (18).
                                          C/Ks


Even if all the resources are devoted to capital accumulation, so that

C = 0.   the presence of decreasing returns to the only factor of

production that can be accumulated.         implies that the growth rate of

capital has to converge to zero.




14Replaclng the Cobb—Douglas technology with a neoclassical production
function would Imply no substantive changes in the discussion that
follows.
                                                                         31




The Neoclassical Model

In the neoclassical model the assumption of constant returns to scale to

production is maintained but non—reproducible factors are ignored (a3=O,

aj+cz2=l). As discussed In Lucas (1988. section 2), this model is

generally made consistent with perpetual growth by making the production

function time dependent: '' = A K'' (NX)Tat where X grows at rate

        and Is often taken to represent the effects of technological

progress. With this technology it is possible for output, investment

and consumption to grow at rate             The steady state of the model is

fairly uninteresting since its growth rate is determined by a single

aspect of the technology, the growth rate of exogenous technical

progress g. Given that g is also the only sustainable growth rate for

consumption, the steady state real interest rate has to be such that

households choose to expand consumption at this rate. With the

preferences described in (1) the steady state real Interest rate is: r

=   a      +   p.   This shows that In the steady state of the neoclassical

model the growth rate is determined entirely by technology and only the

real interest rate depends on preferences. In contrast, in the

endogenous growth models that we discussed the growth rate is always a

function of preferences and technology, while it is the real interest

rate that in some models (e.g. section 111.1) depends only on

technology. This symmetry underlies the different steady state effects

of taxation that are obtained in these two classes of models. Policies

that lead to a lower steady state real interest rate lead to growth

effects In endogenous growth models but only generate level effects
                                                                  32




(e.g. changes in the capital—labor ratio) in the neoclassical model.



Endogenous Growth with Constant Returns

As we have seen in the previous sections sustained growth can be made

compatible with technologies that display constant returns to scale by

assuming that there are constant returns to the factor that can be

accumulated (aj=l. a2=a3=0). This seems to imply that both labor and

non—reproducible factors are not used in production but we have seen

that     can be re—interpreted as being a composite of hunn and physical

capital (which we called Z in section II) and that in multi—sector

models non—reproducible factors can be given a productive role.

       In a one sector model non—reproducible factors can only enter the

production function if they are non—essential to production. This idea

was explored by Jones and ManuellI (1990) who studied models with

technologies of the type: '' =        + BK'T.
       Both the Jones—Manuelli technologies and those described here

involve restrictions on the role that non—reproducible factors can play

in production. These restrictions accord with the view, often implicit

in historical accounts of the development process. that non—reproducible

factors are not a key determinant of long run growth (see. for Instance,

Maddison (1982), pages 46—48).
                                                                  33



Endogenous Growth with Increasing Returns

Equation (18) makes clear that if non—reproducible factors are essential

to production, so that a3>O. making sustained growth feasible in the

absence of exogenous productivity increases, which implies that a1l,

means assuming that the technology displays increasing returns to scale

(aj+a3>l). In multi—capital models it is only when we require that

non—reproducible factors be indispensable to the production of all

capital goods in the economy that we need increasing returns to scale to

make perpetual growth feasible. Growth models with technologies that

display increasing returns to scale were proposed by Romer (1986) who

introduced increasing returns in the form of an externality to maintain

the existence of a competitive equilibrium.




V.   Conclusion

This paper describes a class of endogenous growth models that have

constant returns to scale technologies. This class of models is

attractive because it is consistent with Kaldor's (1961) stylized facts

of economic growth and can potentially rationalize the existence of

permanent cross—country differences in growth rates as being, at least

partly, a result of differences in government policy.

     While this paper does not resolve the issue of whether the type of

increasing returns and externalities proposed by Romer (1986) are the

key to understanding the growth process, it provides two reasons to

re—evaluate the role that these features play In growth models. First.
                                                                   34



the models discussed here meke clear that increasing returns and

externalities   are not necessary to generate endogenous growth. As long

as there is a "core" of capital goods whose production does not involve

non—reproducible factors. endogenous growth is compatible with

production technologies that exhibit constant returns to scale. Second.

in one of the economies that we studied (section 111.1) the same type of

phenomenon that motivated Lucas (1988) to introduce an externality in

his model——the tendency for labor (but not capital) to migrate across

countries in search for higher remuneration——arises despite the absence

of externalities.

     All the models studied in this paper have the implication that the

growth rate should be low in countries with high income tax rates and

poor property rights enforcement. In a study of 47 countries in the

post—war period. Kormendi and Meguire (1986) found that the rate of

growth of CDP per capita was, in fact, positively correlated with a

proxy for the degree of protection of property rights (Gastil's (1987)

civil liberty index). Using the Summers and Heston (1988) data set

Barro (1989) found a negative relation between growth rates and the

share of government consumption in GD?. This is also consistent with

our predictions if we view the government share as a proxy for the rate

of income tax.

     While these empirical findings are suggestive, much more empirical

work is necessary to determine whether actual cross—country differences

in policy regimes are large enough to give rise to the cross—sectional

variance in growth rates that is observed.
                                                                     35



     A first step in this process is to study the effects of public

policy in economies that are calibrated to reproduce the values of the

"great ratios" which appear to be constant in the long run (the labor

share, the capital—output ratio, the real interest rate. etc.). This

analysis, which [s undertaken in King and Rebelo (1990), reveals that

small differences in policy regimes can easily mean   the   difference

between growth and stagnation.
                                                              36



                         REFERENCES



Barro. Robert "Economic Growth in a Cross—Section of
Countries." working paper No. 3120, NBER working paper   series.
September 1989.

Becker. Gary "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," Economic
Journal. 1965, 75: 493—517.

Becker, Robert. "Capital Income Taxation and Perfect
Foresight," Journal of Public Economics, 1985 26: 147—167.

Benveniste, Lawrence M.. "A Complete Characterization of
Efficiency for a General Capital Accumulation Model." Journal.
of Economic Theory. 12, 325—337. 1976.

Boyd, John and Edward Prescott. "Dynamic Coalitions. Firm Size
and Growth," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, November
1985.

Castil, R.D. Freedom in the World, Greenwood Press. Westport
CT, 1987.

Eaton. Jonathan "Fiscal Policy. Inflation and the Accumulation
of Risky Capital," Review of Economic Studies. 1981. 48:
435-445.

Feldstein. Martin "Incidence of a Capital Income Tax in a
Growing Economy with Variable Savings Rate," Reutew of Economic
Studies. 1974, 504-513.

Hagen, Everett "Capital Theory In a System With No Agents Fixed
In Quantity." Journal of Political Economy. 1942. 50: 973—859.

Hecknn, James. "A Life—Cycle Model of Economics, Learning and
Consumption." Journal of Political Economy. 1976. 84: Sll-S43.

Jones, Larry and Rodolfo Manuelli. "A Convex Model of
Equilibrium Growth," working paper No. 3241, NBER working paper
series, January 1990.

Judd, Kenneth L.. "Redistributive Taxation in a Simple Perfect
Foresight Model," Journal of Public Economics, 1985 28:59—83

Kaldor. Nicholas "Capital Accumulation and Economic Growth," in
Lutz and Hague (eds.) The Theory of Capital, St. Martin's
Press, New York, 1961.
                                                                 37


King, Robert C. and Sergio Rebelo, "Business Cycles with
Endogenous Growth,", unpublished. University of Rochester,
 1986.

King. Robert C. and Sergio Rebeio. "Public Policy and Economic
Growth: Developing Neoclassical Implications," unpublished,
University of Rochester, 1990.

King, Robert C. and Sergio Rebelo. "Transitional Dynamics and
Economic Growth in the Basic Neoclassical Model." working paper
No. 3185, NBER working paper series, 1989.

King, Robert, Charles Plosser and Sergio Rebelo,"Production.
Crowth and Business Cycles: I. The Basic Neoclassical Model,"
JournaL of Monetary Economics. 1988, 2: 195-232.

Knight. Frank "The Ricardian Theory of Production and
Distribution," Canz2dtan Journal of Economics and Poltttcat
Sctence, 1935, 1: 3—25 and 171-196.

Knight, Frank "Diminishing Returns from Investment," Journal.,   of
Pottticat Economy. March 1944, 52: 26-47.

Kormendi, Roger and Philip Meguire "Cross—country Evidence on
the Macroeconomic Hypothesis Relating to Economic Growth,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, 1986, 16: 141—163.

Krzyzaniak, Marion "The Long Run Burden of a General Tax on
Profits in a Neoclassical World," FLnmce Pubttque. 1967, 22:
472—91.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. "On the Mechanics of Economic
Development," Journal of Monetary Economics, July 1988, 22:
3—42.

Maddison, Angus Phases of Capitalistic Deuetopnertt, Oxford
University Press, New York, 1982.

Martins, Ana P. "Hummn Capital and Economic Growth,"
unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia University, 1987.

McFadden, De.niel "The Evaluation of Development Programmes,"
Review of Economic Studtes, 1967, 34: 25—50.

Romer, Paul. "Increasing Returns and Long Run Growth," Journal
of Political Economy October 1986. 94: 1002—1037.
Romer, Paul, "Crazy Explanations for the Productivity
Slowdown," NBE.R Macroeconomics AnnuaL 1987, The MIT Press,
Cambridge, 1987.
                                                                     38


Sato.    Kazuo "Taxation and   Neoclassical   Growth." Ftnonce
Publ t   que. 1967. : 346—367.
Solow. Robert M. "A Contribution to the Theory of Economic
Growth," Quarterly Journctt of Econosntcs, February 1956, 70:
65-94.

Stiglitz. Joseph .E. "Notes on State Taxes. Redistribution and
the Concept of Balanced Growth Path Incidence." Journal of
Political. Economy. 1978. 86, S137—S150.

Summers. Robert and Alan Heston "A New Set of International
Comparisons of Real Product and Price Levels: Estintes for 130
Countries," The Reutew of Income and WeaLth, 34, March 1988.
1-25.

Uzawa, Hirofumi "0ptin1 Technical Change in an         Aggregative
Model of Economic Growth." Irtterrzattortat Economtc Reuteu,,
January     1965.
                                                                    39

                              APPENDIX


     This appendix outlines the proofs of three propositions that
characterize the effects of taxation and the influence of the
savings rate on the rate of growth for a more general version of the
model described in section 111.1. In this version of the model the
rates of depreciation for physical and human capital are allowed to
be different (they will be denoted by    and 6h' respectively) and
the Cobb—Douglas technologies are replaced by neoclassical
production functions.'5 The production function of the output
sector [s denoted by A1F(.) and that of the human capital sector by
A2G(.). We assume that D12F(.)>O and


     The variables R and Rh represent the capital—labor ratio
respectively in the output and human capital industry, while p is
the fraction of physical capital employed in the output sector.

     We will study the effects of linear transformations of the
production functions since these are equivalent to the effects of
taxation, given the assumption that the tax revenue is used in
activities that do not affect the marginal productivity or utility
of private agents.



Proposition 1: In the model of section 111.1 the steady state
growth rate is an increasing function of A1 and A2 and a decreasing
function of L when the economy is not at a corner solution with zero
investment.


Proof: The objective is to show that (i)   dg/dA1>O and   (ii)
dg/dA2>O.

     When the level of investment is strictly positive, the steady
state is characterized by the following equations:




15A neoclassical production function is constant returns to scale, concave,
twice continuously differentiable, satisfies the Inada conditions, and
specifies that each production factor is essential In production.

'61n this appendix we will use D1F(.) to denote the Ith partial
derivative of F(.) and D1F(.) to denote the ljth second partial
derivative.
                                                                 40



          DF(R y.1) -— DC(Rh.l)
           1            1                                   Al
          D2F(R.1)     D2C(Rh.l)
                                            -              (A.2)
         A1D1F(R.1) - 6k = A2D2G(Rh.l)(l_L)

                                          —
                  AD1F(R .1) — 6k
                                                           (A.3)

                                 -       — C/K              (A.4)
         g =     AF(l.l/R)+
             =   A2F(R ,l)(l-L—N) - 6h                      (A.5)


                     •( l—L—N)
                                                            (A.6)
         RyIRh =      N   (l-)
This system is block—recursive; equations (A.l)-(A.2) determine R
and Rh which, together with (A.3) determine      Properties (i) and
(ii) follow from computing dg,,/dA and dg/dA2 by totally
differentiating (A.l)—(A.3). Notice that non—leisure time, (1—L).
enters (A.l)—(A.3) exactly in the same way as A2 so that increases
in L will lead to lower rates of growth.




Proposition 2:  If the model just described is modified by the
introduction of a separate consumption sector as in section II.
linear transforntions of the production function of the consumption
sector do not affect the steady state growth rate.


Proof: To separate the production of consumption from that of
physical capital the equation of motion for physical capital has to
be replaced by:


             =                       -
                 AiF(K'NtH)              ökKt.
Accumulation of huimu capital takes place according to:


             =                       -
                 A2Ct.NhtHt)
A production function for the consumption sector has to be added:
                                                                               41



                                            W         ()   1G)
                                  = B                            1•W2
          C   =
                  M(KCt.NCtHCt.T)                (NH) i
The adding—up restrictions for this economy are:

          Kyt +K +KCt =Kt
                   tit
          N
            yt
               +Nht +Nct +L1.
The equations that characterize the steady state are (A.1). (A.2),
(A.5), (A.6) and:

                    A1D 1F(R .1) —         — p
              —                                                         A7
          g— l—(1+u2)(l—a)
              =                   -                                     (A.8),
                  A1F(1.1/R)
          D 1F(R .1)         D M(K .N H .1)
                              1   C   CC
                         =                                              (A9)
          D2F(R. 1)          D2M(R.NCHC.T)

The steady state growth rate is independent of B since this
parameter is absent from the system of equations just described.
Hence, linear transformations of the consumption technology M(.) do
not affect the steady state rate of growth.



Proposition 3: In the model of section 111.1. an increases in the

                                                 induces an increase In the
savings rate, defined as s =          pKh"I.
rate of growth, g. provided that output net of depreciation.
Yt_ökKt. is strictly positive.



Proof: When the savings rate is exogenous g Is determined by a
system of equations that is comprised by:

          g = s [A1F(l.1/R) -                                           (A.lO)

and by (A.l). (A.2). (A.5) and (A.6). As before, R and Rh are
determined by (A.l) and (A.2) and hence are independent of the rate
of savings. The fact that dg/ds)O If Yt_ökKt>O can then be
established by differentiating (A.5). (A.6) and (A.lO) with respect
to •, N and s.
