                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      CAPITAL FLIGHT AND TAX COMPETITION:
                  ARE THERE VIABLE SOLUTIONS TO BOTH PROBLEMS?




                               Alberto Giovanninj

                              James R. Hines, Jr.




                             Working Paper No. 3333




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   April 1990




We are grateful to Julian Alworth, David Bradford,   Roger Cordon, Glenn Hubbard,
Mauro Mare, Cohn Mayer, Gilbert Metcalf, and Anne    Sibert for helpful comments
on an earlier draft. This paper is part of NBER's    research program in
Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the    authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3333
                                        April 1990


                      CAPITAL FLIGHT AND TAX COMPETITION:
                  ARE THERE VIABLE SOLUTIONS TO BOTH PROBLEMS?


                                    ABSTRACT




     This paper discusses a model corporate tax system based on the
application of the residence principle. This tax system, while preserving
national sovereignties, minimizes the distortions froa international capital
mobility. The paper is motivated by an analysis of European capital income
tax systems, and of the distortions they might give rise to as obstacles to
international capital flows diminish. The alternative system we analyze has
two main properties: it exploits the territoriality of law enforcement, and
allows countries to set the corporate tax rate - and the extent of double
taxation of corporate income - independently from their partners. The paper
concludes with some suggestive evidence of the potential revenue effects among
European countries of this tax system.




     Alberto Giovannini                James R. Hines, Jr.
     622 Uris Hall                     Robertson Hall
     Craduae School of Business        Woodrow Wilson School
     Columbia University               Princeton University
     New York. NY 10027                Princeton, NJ 08544
 1.   Introduction

       The history of European capital taxation is a history of 12 disparate

 systems, competing for revenue not only with each other but also     -   and
 sometimes dramatically -   with   their own taxpayers. With the imminent arrival
 of 1992 the fiscal landscape will change
                                             significantly: if current capital tax

 systems are left untouched, European govermments are likely to find it very

 hard to collect revenue from internationally.mobile
                                                        capital. Indeed, Europe
 may transform itself into a single (large) tax haven.

       In this paper we perform an exercise in applied positive economics: we

 design a model of residence-based corporate taxation that, while
                                                                     preserving
national tax sovereignties, minimizes the distortions arising from

 international capital mobility. This type of exercise is in our view

especially useful because in the current debates over tax reform in
                                                                          Europe
there is much confusion between administrative
                                                  problems and political

constraints.1 Analysis of models of taxation like ours can help clarify where

administrative issues end and political issues begin.

      To motivate our study, we begin in section 2 with a look at the data on

revenue from capital income taxes and a brief discussion of the role of the

history of capital taxation in shaping the fiscal institutions and
                                                                       private

practices that are visible today. After listing in section 3 the      (often

unintended) distortionary incentives embodied in current tax treatments of

international income, we analyze in section 4.1 a plan for a system of

corporate income taxation that is consistent with the goal of minimizing the

distortions arising from the international mobility of capital. The plan is a

inspired by the full application of the residence principle of taxation of


      1For analyses of administrative problems associated with current tax systems
and proposed reforms, see the discussion in Tanzf. and Eovenberg (1989) and
Schlesinger (1989).
                                                 4




international   capital income. The plan is further discussed in sections 4.2

and 4.3.




2. Capital income tax revenue: International comparisons and their
    interpretation.

     Table 1 reports the revenue from capital incom, taxes in the 12 EC

countries and in the United States, for the year 1987. These revenues include

those of the central government and of state and local governments. Capital

income taxes are defined as the sum of corporate income taxes of taxes on

capital gains to individuals and, when available, any other taxes on capital

income accrued to individuals,2 plus taxes on net wealth, property.

inheritance and gifts, and financial transactions (vealth taxei in the OECD

classification). The latter have been included since they might stand for

taxes on certain types of capital income that are difficult to estimate in

practice such as the value of owner-occupied housing (hence authorities use

wealth as a basis to compute the tax due). The numbers in parentheses contain

the same computations when wealth taxes are excluded. The revenues from

capital income are reported as a fraction of total income taxes (excluding

wealth), total tax revenue, and gross domestic product, respectively.

      The table reveals a number of important facts. As a percent of GDP,

capital incom, taxes ars relatively low in Europe, despite the fact that the

ratio of taxes to CDP is higher in the EC than in the United States (40.62

percent versus 30 percent in 1987). This ii further highlighted by Figure 1,

reporting the revenue from (the two definitions of) capital income taxes as

percent of GDP. The ratio of capital income taxes to CDP is equal to 6.81


        For example, in the case of Belgium, the pricompte inusobilier and the
pricompte iiobilier have been added.

                                       2
percent in the US, but only 5.16 on average in the 12 members of the EC.

Excluding Luxembourg and the UK, the only two countries with a ratio of

capital income taxes to GDP higher than the US, the European average falls to

4.21 percent. Among the countries with less capital income tax revenues than

the US (and Luxembourg and the UK), Belgium and the Netherlands both exceed

5.5 percent of GDP, Denmark France and Italy are in the "middle tier" from 4

to 5 percent, while Portugal, Spain, Ireland, Greece and, surprisingly, the

Federal Republic of Germany are all below 4 percent.

      Since in the United States property taxes are an important source of

revenue to local authorities, we repeat the calculations subtracting all

wealth taxes (results in parentheses). In this case the ratio of capital

income taxes to GDP decreases to 3.75 percent in the United States, and to

3.32 in the EC12. The average for the EC excluding the UK and Luxembourg is

only 2.8 percent of CDP. The distribution of the revenue across EC countries

(also reported in figure 1 in the black histogram) broadly resembles the one

obtained by including wealth taxes.

      The first column of the table reports the ratio of capital income taxes

to total income taxes. It shows that the menu of taxes on income is not

uniform across the EC12 countries. Capital income taxes account for as much

as 66 percent of income taxes (31 percent when wealth taxes are excluded) in

the United Kingdom, as little as 17 percent of income taxes in Denmark. The

second column, reporting capital income taxes as a fraction of total tax

revenue,   highlights the important role of taxes on goods and services in

European countries: in the US the fraction of capital income taxes to total

tax revenue is almost twice as large as in Europe.

      Figures 2 and 3 show the historical trends in capital income tax


                                        3
 revenue, and in the revenue from corporate income and capital gains taxes,

respectively. The difference between the UK and Luxembourg and the other

European partners is highlighted by the plots of both the average across the

12 EC countries and the one excluding the UK and Luxembourg. Both figures

indicate the presence of a positive but small trend in Europe and wide

fluctuations in the United States, even though, on average froii 1965 to 1987,

the U.S. revenue from capital income taxes exceeds that in Europe. When

wealth and property taxes are included, we find that th. revenue in the US

starts as high as 8 percent of GDP to drop to 5 percent of CDP in 1983 and end

at roughly 7 percent of GDP. In Europe, there is a stable and small growth

from 4 percent in 1965 to 5 percent in 1987. Corporate income taxes and

capital gains taxes (in figure 3) start in the US at 4.5 percent in 1965,

relative to just 2 percent in Europe. The figure shows that the fluctuation

of capital income tax revenue in the U.S. is due to the flucuation of

corporate tax revenue, while property taxes and wealth taxes are, as a percent

of GDP. relatively stable over the sample.

      In summary, the data presented in this section suggest that    the    revenue

from capital income or wealth taxes is, and has been, significantly lower in

Europe than in the United States. In countries like West Germany, the revenue

from capital income taxes is only a fraction of that in the US.     Of course,
the revenue from capital income taxes is the product of average tax rates

times the assessed tax bases. The lower European numbers could be either due

to lower effective rates, or to lower assessed base,, or to both. Except for

specific cases like Luxembourg - whose economy relies heavily on the business

of financial intermediaries, and whose high revenue from capital income taxes

is due mostly to the high fraction of capital income in total income    -   the

                                      4
data we present cannot, by itself, tell us what exactly determines these

differences.

     Knowledge of the political preferences of European governments can,

however, help to interpret the evidence. Socialist and socialdemocratjc

ideologies that influenced economic policymaking in Europe after the second

world war should have favored heavier taxation of capital income than would

U.S. administrations. It seems safe to rule out explanations of lower

European capital income taxes based solely on the political inclinations of

governments facing the same elasticities of capital income to taxes. This

leaves us with two alternatives:



     a) Effective tax rates are high but assessed bases are low because of

higher avoidance or evasion than in the U.S.

     b) Both effective rates and assessed bases are low because the high

elasticities force governments to keep rates low, both to ensure some tax

revenue collections and to prevent large distortions.



     Cases (a) and (b) both point to the following, related, phenomena:



     • In Europe the costs of administering or enforcing capital income taxes

are higher than in the United States (this might explain the data for Greece,

Spain, Portugal and Ireland);



     • In Europe the elasticities of capital income tax bases to tax rates

are higher than in the United States.




                                        5
       These phenomena find a likely explanation both in the geographical

structure of European countries and in the historical experience of capital

income taxation on the two     continents.      Consider the geographical constraints

first: the fraction of population living close to national borders is much

higher in Europe as a whole than in the U.S. European residents are thus more

aware of the potential for tax     avoidance    offered by international

transactions. Furthermore,       the   cost of exporting capital abroad, both legally

and illegally, are likely to be lower in Europe, since proximity increases the

frequency and the ease of border crossings and lowers the probability of

detection.

        The historical experience provides additional potential explanation for

the apparently higher elasticity of capital flows to capital income taxes in

Europe.3 The financial burden of World War I was proportionately much higher

in Europe than in the United States, because of the difference in the size of

the   war effort. As a result, government indebtedness grew so much in Europe

that in the immediate postwar period a large fraction of the public opinion.

including leaders of the middle class liberal parties, favored extraordinary

taxation of capital -     a capital levy - to restore the public finances.

       Capital levies have been fiercely debated in the United Kingdom and

France, and were actually imposed, with mixed success, in Italy, Germany,

Austria, Hungary,   and   Czechoslovakia. There is to date     no systematic study of


       3We do not exaimin. carefully th. historical American experience with
capital taxation. In the more restricted realm of corporate taxation, Auerbach
and Potsrba (1987) find that secular declines in th. shar. of corporate in
overall taxation over th. period 1959-1985 were more du. to changes in corporate
profitability than to statutory tax changes, suggesting in fact that the U.S.
corporate incom, tax base responds inelastically to tax changes.

      4See Eichengreen (1989).

                                            6
the effects of these capital levies on international capital flows, and the

way the private sector attempted to avoid these extraordinary taxes, in part

because good data on balance-of-payments transactions in the capital account

are very difficult to obtain. Indirect evidence together with descriptive

accounts, however, suggest that capital flight in response to the announcement

of the capital levies could have been significant.5

     The rearmament further increased the fiscal burden on capital income.

These demands were met by higher taxes in most countries and by new capital

levies in Italy (1937 and 1938) and in Hungary (1938). Furthermore, in other

countries capital levies were contemplated but not implemented.6

     Finally, the two world wars had additional, and more dramatic,

differential effects on private wealth: they were fought on European soil, not

in North America. European savers had to bear extraordinary taxes not only

from their governments, but also from by the armies of occupation; they had to

escape political persecutions and deportation; and they suffered directly from

the deterioration and the destruction of their investments in physical

capital.

     In conclusion, the geography of the European continent, the two world

wars and the extraordinary taxes that they brought along, are likely to have



     5Giovannini (1988) argues that a large fraction of the dramatic devaluation
of the lira in 1919 and 1920 could be explained as a reaction to the announcement
of the levy. Italian observers of the time suggest that the greatest effect of
the levy was capital flight to countries like Switzerland.

     6See Hicks et al. (1941). There are, of course, many ways to tax capital
in place other than through explicit capital levies. For example, raising the
rate of tax on sales or on value added serves in part as a capital levy. (Though
a VAT that is constant over time does not tax capital, and for that reason VATs
are not included in capital income taxes in table I and in figures 1-3.) We do
not include in our calculations these and certain other taxes the incidence of
which may be partly on owners of capital.

                                        7
left profound markings on the attitudes of savers toward tax authorities.

They suggest the presence of higher responsiveness of European savers to

current or anticipated taxes on capital income, and explain their demand for

privacy, and the attendant success of European tax havens. At the same time,

the evolution of national tax systems also reflects the recent history.

National tax systems are characterized by provisions designed to avoid double

taxation, and tax authorities have created a number of bilateral tax treaties

designed to grant reciprocal advantages in the imposition of withholding taxes

on interest and dividend payments. Yet, as we show in th. following section.

in view of substantial international capital mobility, th. current regime is

characterized by almost nonexistent cooperation among tax authorities, and in

fact, by its very nature, it exerts on them strong pressures to compete with

each other.



3. Capital Income Taxes in Europe

     In this section we briefly sketch the current regime of taxation of

capital income, paying special attention to the treatment of foreign-source

income. The purpose of this exercise is to highlight th. way the current

regime introduces distortions in the allocation of international investment

and in the level of taxation.



3.1 Corporats Taxes

3.1.1 Tax Rates

     The countries of Europe currently tax corporate incom, at different

rates; Table 2 summarizes the statutory corporate income tax rates in the 12

EC countries. The tabl. suggests that ther. is considerable variation in


                                      8
these rates; the differences in corporate income bases, discussed below,

further complicate the analysis of investment incentives in different European

countries.

     An interesting phenomenon observed in the recent past is the weak

tendency of corporate tax rates to converge. In 1977 the average corporate

rate in the EC12 was 43 percent, while the standard deviation of corporate

rates was 8 percent. In 1989 the average rate was 40 percent, and the

standard deviation 6.5 percent. This convergence towards lower rates is in

the direction advocated by the 1975 draft directive on corporate income taxes

(a directive that was not passed by the European Parliament), and might also

have been prompted by the worldwide tendency towards reduction in corporate

rates, documented, for example, by Whalley (1989).



3.1.2 Tax Bases

     Prior to taxing income governments must define it, but all governments

face the difficulty that there is seldom such thing as well-defined annual

corporate income, even by their own national accounting standards. In

addition, accounting methods all differ.

     The most important differences arise in the depreciation of capital

expenditures for tax purposes. Table 3 reports differences among EC countries

in depreciation practices for fixed investments. As the table indicates,

there is considerable variation among countries in the acceptability of

declining-balance depreciation methods (generally more favorable for

investors) in place of straight-line methods. In addition, there is

considerable variation even within countries but especially between them in

the depreciable lifetimes of new investments, differences that are not easy to


                                       9
summarize in simple tables.7 Some of these differences reflect variation    in

nominal interest rates (depreciation allowances are seldom indexed), and some

may be related to historical differences in usable capital lifetimes, but more

generally they reflect differing desires on the part of central governments      to


encourage investment through tax incentives.

     Other differences in tax bases have more obscur, origins. EC countries

differ in the number of years tax losses can be carried forward and back, in

the treatment of inventory gains and losses, and in th. rules that govern

transactions between related parties.' There are also very substantial

discrepancies in th. treatment of foreign exchange gains and losses, the most

important turning on distinctions between short-term and long-term, and

realization and accrual. Again, the choice of tax bas. definition reflects

partly the historical experience of a government and partly a contemporaneous

decision of which activities to encourage and which to discourage.

     There are three types of problems created by the failure of governments

to harmonize their concepts of tax basis. The first is straightforward: base

differences encourage tax-avoiding behavior that may be inefficient.

Countries offering accelerated depreciation of new investment expenditures

attract investment capital away from countries that do not. Differences in

effective tax rates on new investments summarize these incentives.'

     The second problem concerns the coordination of tax systems for taxing

international income. For example, when British multinationals claim foreign



     7Devereux and Pearson (1989) and Tanzi and Bovenberg (1989) offer some
summary statistics on asset lifetimes in EC countries.

     'Se. Kuip.r (1988) for a brief summary of som. of the important differences.

     'Se., for example. King and Fullerton (1984).

                                       10
tax credits for taxes paid by their French subsidiaries to the French

government, it   is   necessary for those companies to establish exactly how much

income they earned in France, when it was earned, what French taxes were paid

on that income, and when it was paid. The mechanics of this computation

typically affect the attractiveness of real and financial decisions of the

French (and other) subsidiaries. Unusual incentives typically emerge due to

the differences between home-definition and host-definition taxable income.10

     The third problem stems from the inability of governments to coordinate

intermediate charges between multinational parent companies and their related

affiliates; the partial solutions that governments adopt create incentives for

firms to respond inefficiently to national tax differences. Enforcement of

transfer-pricing regulations is often imperfect; cognizant governments have

introduced ad hoc measures in response. This phenomenon is particularly acute

in the cases of cross-border charges for intangible goods such as patent

royalties and interest charges, but is not limited to these; if the post-1992

regime in Europe in fact involves porous and unmonitored borders between

countries, then international transactions between related parties will offer

opportunities for tax arbitrage.



3.1.3 Measures to Avoid Double      Taxation
     Table 4 reports th. tax     treatment   of intercompany dividends from domestic

sources: all countries hay, provisions to avoid double taxation of group

income. The treatment of income from the same firms'        foreign   subsidiaries is,



     10problems also arise if home governments explicitly accord foreign
investments ungenerous tax basis treatment, as is standard. See Hines (1988a,
1989) for details of the likely impact of this aspect of the U.S. system on
international investment incentives.

                                          11
however, quite different.

     Table 5, reporting the treatment of income from foreign subsidiaries,

shows that all countries except France follow the worldwide (or residence)

principle. This is in accordance with the OECD Model Double Taxation

Convention (1977). which aims at achieving a sort of 'capital export

neutrality.' Since foreign income becomes taxable both by the authorities of

the host country (where th. income is produced), and by the authorities of the

country of residence of the parent company (or th. individual owner), taxes

paid to foreign authorities are credited against domestic taxes by most

countries that follow the residence principle.

     In practice, foreign taxes are credited by computing domestic taxes owed

on foreign-source income grossed up by foreign taxes, and then subtracting

foreign taxes paid. In some countries, like th. F.R. of Germany and Ireland,

investors have the option of deducting from taxable incom, foreign taxes paid.

      Double taxation relief can take other forms. Som. of th. countries

applying the residence principle allow exemptions of special kinds of foreign-

source income. In Belgium, if a foreign corporation is a 'permanent

investrsent of a domestic corporation, 95 percent of its dividend income is

exempted from the Belgian tax.11 In the Netherlands, dividends of companies

that qualify for the 'Participation exemption"2 are exempted from Dutch

taxes: this rule extends the treatment of group income to foreign-source

income.

      Th. application of the residence principle, however, is subject to two



           This proportion is 90 percent if the Belgian parent company is a holding
company.
     12
           See   Table 3.

                                          12
important exceptions:



             Countries impose a limitation on foreign tax credits. The

             calculation of tax credit limitations varies significantly

             across European countries. In Belgium, the foreign tax

             credit for "nonpermanent" investments is 15 percent. In

             Denmark, the limit is either 50 percent of the Danish income

             tax attributable to the net income of the foreign affiliate

             (in the case where the parent is jointly taxed with the

             subsidiary) or the equivalent of the Danish tax rate applied

             to foreign income (in the case where the parent is not

             jointly taxed with the subsidiary). In Germany the tax

             credit is 36 percent of the foreign income. In Greece and

             Spain the limitation is based on the domestic corporate tax

             rate. In Luxembourg, any foreign taxes in excess of the

             domestic rate are deductible as expenses. As a rule of

             thumb, the limitation is normally equal to the domestic tax

             rate applied to foreign-source income. It is justified by

             governments' reluctance to subsidize foreign investments by

             domestic residents, by paying their foreign taxes in excess

             of the domestic rate applied to foreign-source income. The
                                                                     -
             limitation has two effects:    (a) whenever investors

             accumulate excess tax credits (foreign taxes paid exceed the

             credit limitation)'3 income from domestic and foreign



     13
          And whenever these credits cannot be offset against future or current
taxes.

                                       13
            investments is taxed at different rates (domestic and

            foreign investments end up being taxed at the domestic and

            foreign tax rates, respectively); (b) whenever excess

            credits in some countries1' can be offset against excess

            limitations in other countries, the allocation of foreign

            investments among high- and low-income-tax countries can

            also be distorted.



            The concept of foreign-source income differs from the one used in

            the computation of the corporate income tax. Most countries

            require that domestic taxes be levied when the dividends are paid

            by the foreign subsidiary to the parent company, and not when the

            dividend income is produced. Hence, the deferral of dividend

            payments amounts to a deferral of the payment of domestic taxes,

            while foreign taxes are regularly paid as income is produced.

            Deferral   when allowed -   defeats   the main purpose of the

            worldwide principle: foreign subsidiaries pay only the foreign

            tax as long as dividends are not repatriated.




     For these reasons, the treatments of foreign subsidiaries' incomes differ

significantly from those of domestic subsidiaries. Thes. differences affect

corporate financial policies, the cost of capital, and investment decisions.

Deferral and the tax credit limitation are the two features that, despite the



     " In  the United Kingdom, however, the tax credit limitations are based on
averaging within countries, but not across countries. Sea Alworth (1988).

                                        14
formal adoption by most EC countries of the residence principle, make the

current regime look more like a regime of territorial taxation.

    As long as corporate income is taxed in the location in which earned, and

tax rates differ, then corporations have incentives to manipulate the prices

they use to record international transactions. In particular, firms can be

expected to declare that income was earned in low-tax locations rather than

high-tax locations. Two problems result. The first Is that European

governments as   a   whole fail to collect the taxes they would otherwise be due

on income truly earned in Europe. Those taxes actually collected may accrue

to the "wrong governments, that is, tax havens rather than the governments in

whose country income actually was earned.

     The second problem is that the course of facilitating transfer price

manipulation can involve resource misallocation by firms attempting to cover

trails of fictitious trades. This problem already faces European tax systems.

It is, however, likely to grow in magnitude as cross-border trades become

easier with the removal of customs barriers.

     One manifestation of this problem is very real yet generally ignored in

analyses of the inefficiencies that accompany current European tax systems.

As just mentioned, the treatment of transfers of intangible goods like patents

is especially problematic: intangibles typically have unique features that

make thea hard to price on a world market and difficult to value even within a

firm.'5   The nature of regulation seems to be that governments are able only

in extreme cases to enforce their arm's-length pricing legislation.

     As a result, most governments have adopted rule-of-thumb requirements



     '5flines (1988b) suggests a new method of appropriately valuing intangible
goods provided by affiliates of the same firm.

                                          15
for allocating some intangible costs and profits. But rules like the one

applied by the U.S. -   according to which U.S. multinationals with foreign
sales are not allowed to deduct 100% of their research and development costs

against domestic-source income - end up discouraging productive activities

like research and development. This occurs because foreign governments, in

turn, donot permit their resident U.S. -owned subsidiaries to deduct the

remaining part of the research and development expenditures.

     International differences in taxation also create incentives to locate

productive and financial activities in low-tax countries. This encourages

national governments to lower their taxation of internationally-mobile capital

in order to attract it from abroad. Indeed, countries can attract foreign

capital by subsidizing foreign residents' tax avoidanc. and tax evasion. In

equilibrium this process leads to undertaxation of capital income.'6



3.2 The Integration of Corporate and Individual Taxes

    Table 6 illustrates the taxation of corporate income accruing to

individual shareholders, in the form of dividends and capital gains. As far

as dividend taxation is concerned, countries adopting the classical system tax

income both at the firm level and at the individual level. Countries adopting

the split race system tax distributed profits at a lower rate than

undistributed profits. Finally, countries adopting the imputation system

provide individuals with credits for the taxes paid by the corporations they

own. The tabl. shows that, even though many countries provide some credit for

corporate taxes paid by firms, perfect integration between individual and



     '6For formal elaborations of this process see Giovannini (1989) and Razin
and Sadka (1989).

                                       16
corporate taxes is not achieved. Capital gains receive preferential tax

treatment   at the individual level in almost all countries.

     The treatment of corporate income from abroad accruing to individuals,

however, is again different. In this case governments are unwilling to grant

credits for taxes paid to foreign governments by corporations owned by

domestic residents. This reluctance stems in part from the reporting burden

that crediting would impose on corporations. If individuals were eligible for

credits on the taxes paid by the corporations whose shares they own, then it

would be necessary for those corporations to calculate the appropriate

credits, since individuals do not have access to firms' detailed financial and

tax records. But given the current hodgepodge of national accounting rules,

European corporations would have to compute credits with 12 different methods

to accommodate just European shareholders' needs; many more such calculations

would be necessary throughout the world. Instead European governments deny

individuals the credit, thereby making multiple complicated calculations

unnecessary, and discouraging (relative to a credit system) individual

ownership of foreign shares.

     The absence of perfect international integration of individual and

corporate taxes would induce, in the current regime, an additional distortion,

even if the worldwide principle were perfectly applied at the corporation

level. Multinational corporations would have the incentive to locate their

parent companies in low-tax countries in order to minimize double-taxation of

their own shareholders. In this case the location of investments by

corporations would not be affected by differences in tax rates, but tax

revenues would be affected, compelling governments to rely on alternative

sources of funds.


                                        17
3.3 Withholding Taxes

     Withholding taxes are the most typical sign of the inefficiencies of the

current tax regime. They are levied at different rates by the source country,

depending on the country of residence of the payees, and on the nature of the

investment income (see tables 7 and 8). Withholding taxes arose in part due

to governments' (in some cases well grounded) lack of faith in their own

ability to enforce their domestic tax laws against clever international

avoidance and capital flight; by taxing capital income as it leaves the

country, governments feel that they limit their exposur. to avoidance. The

lack of uniformity of withholding taxes across European countries is due to a

number of bilateral tax treaties, whereby countries grant reciprocal lowering

of rates. Differences in tax rates then lead, naturally, to their own

distortions in the pattern and magnitude of captial flows.

     Withholding taxes are often fully credited by domestic tax authorities,

since strictly speaking they represent th. obligation of the payee and not the

payer, the payer being merely the withholding agent.'7



3.4 Summary

     This   brief description of European tax systems suggests a general

conclusion: there is a wide gap between the general tax principles that most

countries agree with, and the imperfection of day-to-day practice. This gap

is mostly due to the lack of cooperation among tax   authorities,   as well as to


     17And hence the name withholding taxes. Part of the idea behind the design
of such taxes is to maximize the available foreign tax credit, which is obtained
by making the payee liable for the tax, whil, enforcing the tax in the payer's
country, which is obtained by making the payer responsible for withholding the
taxes.

                                        18
inconsistencies in the tax systems that slowly evolve behind the rapidly

changing international, financial markets. In particular, three main points

stand out:



        •    Countries rely on territorial taxation and withholding taxes in

             order to insure some tax revenue in the presence of high

             international capital mobility. In particular, the corporation

             tax is the typical territorial tax, and, in the presence of

             integration between corporate and individual income taxes, it

             works as a withholding tax on individual incomes. This situation

             has evolved partly because of the remarkable absence of

             cooperation among tax authorities in industrialized countries,

             mirrored by strategic use of bank secrecy laws to attract foreign

             tax   evaders.


        •    The application of the worldwide principle at the firm    and   at the

             Individual level is ineffective in the presence of deferral, tax-

             credit limitations, and imperfect integration of corporate and

             individual income taxes. This gives rise to distortions in the

             geographical allocation of investment.



        •    The increased integration of goods and assets markets increases

             the difficulties in administering such a system, which requires a

             determination of the territorial distribution of income produced

             by multinational corporations.




                                       19
4. Reforming Capital Income Taxes

     The advent of 1992 will be accompanied by a number of contemplated and

proposed reforms in European practices of taxing capital income. It appears

that the various reform movements draw their impetus from two sources. As the

argument in section 3 illustrates, those who seek efficiency in the taxation

of capital income have every reason to be dissatisfied with current practices,

and while these inefficiencies are not new1 the general spirit of reform and

agreed goal of intra-European efficiency in 1992 offer the opportunity to

repair a system long in need of fixing. The second source concerns the

harmonization of value-added taxes in view of the elimination of border

controls. In the absence of these controls 1992 is likely to represent a

watershed in tax arbitrage unless new measures ar. taken.

     The European Commission as long ago as 1975 proposed a scheme of

corporate tax harmonization throughout Europa that envisioned uniform tax

rates and integration of corporate and personal taxes. More recently, the

Commission in 1988 prepared an "avant project" for a draft directive to

harmonize definitions of tax bases for corporate income. Both proposals have

attractive features, though the first foundered in practice on its implied

reduction in overall tax revenue and the removal of countries' abilities to

set tax rates at whatever level they choose. In the absence of coordinated

actions such as those potentially provided by the Commission, the EC countries

find themselves engaging in de facto uncoordinated harmonization via corporate

tax reductions. The question facing Europe, then, is whether there is an

efficient and acceptable coordinated alternative.

    There are several alternatives on the table. After reviewing many of the

possible tax arrangements, Devereux and Pearson (1989) argue in favor of


                                      20
corporate taxation on the basis of residence of parent companies, or, failing

that, corporate taxation at source.'6 McLure (1989) reviews the experience of

unitary state-level corporate income taxation within the United States, and

while careful not to offer unitary taxation as a panacea for Europe. at the

same time urges its consideration as an alternative to other schemes that fail

to address more directly problems related to cross-border trade after 1992.

Tanzi and 8ovenberg (1989) favor harmonization of tax bases around an agreed

reasonable standard, along with at least partial uniformity in statutory tax

rates. Musgrave (1987) and Cnossen (1989) also recommend base harmonization

and rate equalization in view of firms' abilities to transfer profits to low-

tax jurisdictions; in addition, Musgrave favors harmonization on the grouds of

interjurisdictional   equity, while Cnossen fears the alternative of

intergovernmental tax competition.

     Any proposal for reform must confront the reality that raising revenue

distorts resource allocation. The direction of reform consistent with the

goals of recent EC proposals is one that minimizes revenue loss over the

transition, preserves the double taxation of corporate income, offers

incentives that are as efficient as possible, and at the same time permits a

wide degree of national tax soverignty. We analyze one such scheme: a plan

providing for international corporate taxation under the residence principle

and with no deferraL In particular, we consider a system in which each


     '6They describe altogether seven different approaches to reforming European
corporate taxation, including taxation on the basis of shareholder residence.
The method they choose to implement residence-based taxation is, as they note,
administratively cumbersome and they reject it partly on that basis (and also
because they feel it too greatly reduces national soverignty). Another serious
problem with the scheme they describe is that European firms would continue to
face incentives to invest (and reinvest) in low-tax European locations, since
their tax accounts are settled only upon payment of dividends from corporations
to their shareholders.

                                        21
country collects tax revenue on the corporate income earned by its individual

residents. The system is effective if the definition of this income is

harmonized among states of Europe and if the appropriate coordinating

practices are adopted. Fortunately, many of the necessary apparatuses are

similar if not identical to those already contemplated.



4.1 A Xod.1 Corporate Tax            System


   1.   Corporate      tax   rates
           • Under this plan corporations would be taxed throughout Europe at a

uniform   high rate, such as 50%. Taxes would be du. on a territorial basis, to

the government of the country where earned. There would be no distinction for

the purposes of this tax between a local branch of a foreign coporation and a

separately incorporated entity.
           -   A separate system of country-specific rebates would apply to owners

of corporate shares. Individual governments would set their own tax rates on

corporate income, subject to the constraint that every country's rate must be

less than the overall European rate (50% in the previous example). Owners of

corporations would receive rebates from their home governments for the

difference between 50% and their local rate.



   2.   Tax basis
           • The definition of taxable corporate income would be for each

country the outcome of mutual agreement. The presumption is uniformity of tax

basis according to Haig-Simons principles as practically implementable.

Hence, corporations investing in plant and equipment would deduct from their


                                                  22
taxable income depreciation allowances that reflect (as closely as possible)

actual capital lifetimes and decay patterns. Expenditures on research and

development and on advertizing would be deductible quickly, but in a manner

consistent with the capital nature of these investments. Inventories would be

treated for tax purposes in LIFO fashion and indexed for inflation.

International transactions between related parties would be recorded at arm's-

length prices.

         -   Host governments would be permitted to subsidize firms, industries,

and particular industries (such as investments in new structures or in

research and development), but the subsidy would be includable in the tax

base. Thus if the UK government were to offer a 5% investment incentive for

new manufacturing structures, the total value of the incentive payment (since

it is a part of before-tax profits) would be taxable at the overall European

rate (e.g., 50%). Subsidies could of course take the indirect form that

governments collect taxes at rates lower than the European rate; those

subsidizing governments would then be responsible to make up the difference

between what all European firms must pay (e.g., 50% of profits, inclusive of

subsidies) and the taxes they collect from the firms they subsidize.



   3. Measures to avoid double taxation

         -
             Foreign   income within Europe would be exempt from direct corporate

taxation by the country     of   corporate residence. The profits of a French

subsidiary of an Italian parent company would be taxed at the corporate level

only once, by the government of France; there would be no additional tax due

to Italy. Of course, if the shareholders of the parent company were Italian,

then they would be eligible for rebates from Italy as described in section


                                           23
one.

         -
             Foreign income outside of Europe would be taxed at the full 50%
rate, but a credit allowed for foreign income taxes paid directly by European

owners or indirectly by their subsidiaries. The credit would be subject to a

limitation represented by the 50% rate applied to extra-EC income.



   4. Corporate/personal integration

         • Corporate income would be attributed to individual shareholders

without deferral, and therefore subject (potentially) to taxation at the

individual level and the corporate level. Governments would have great

flexibility in choosing the rate of personal and corporate taxation, subject

only to the restriction that the rate of residence-basis corporate taxation

not exceed the European maximum     (e.g.,    50%).

         -   Individuals   would receive rebates from their home governments equal

to the difference between the taxes paid by the corporations they own     and   the

individuals' national tax rate on cor....rate income. It would be incumbent on

individuals to file for their own rebates; this process is facilitated by

vouchers provided for shareholders at yearend by corporations.



   5. Withholding taxes

             Governments would not be permitted to impose withholding taxes on

corporate financial flows between European countries.



   6. A clearing system

         • A clearing system would be established to reallocate corporate

income taxes from source countries to the countries of shareholder residence.


                                             24
For example, suppose that the corporate tax rate in Denmark is 30%, and

consider the case of a Greek company 50% owned by Greek citizens and 50% by

Danish citizens, earning profits of 200 in Greece. The firm pays 100 in taxes

to the Greek government, and the Danish shareholders receive 20 (200x0.5x(0.5-

0.3)] in rebates from the government of Denmark. The clearing system then

reallocates 50% of the tax revenue collected by the Greek government to the

Danish government. The clearing mechanism can be based on corporate records,

and can use the vouchers submitted by individuals to their national

governments as an indirect check and a mechanism to identify non-compliance.

Notice that this type of clearing system would be much less burdensome than

the one envisioned for value-added taxes by the Cockfield plan (draft

directives presented in August 1987), which required a record for every

transaction subject to the tax. Under this plan, there is a set of records

for every corporation annual income statement: the whole system of tax

clearing is unlikely to exceed, every year, a few hundred thousand entries.

         -   There are several alternative modes of operation for the tax

clearing system, each of them consistent with its general purpose. The system

could be either destination-based or source-based. In the former case

countries compute the difference between rebates paid and taxes received, thus

obtaining the net credit position vis-a-vis the clearing fund. In the latter

case corporations provide information to their tax authorities about their

foreign ownership during the tax year, thus enabling tax authorities to

compute their net debit position vis-a-vis the clearing fund. The two systems

could of course work in parallel.

         -   The clearing system would be likely to face severe demands from

stocks that are heavily traded. There are a few methods that might be used to


                                        25
handle multiple short-term ownership of stocks during reporting periods. One

method would require individuals who file for rebates to declare the dates of

their ownership and prorate corporate tax payments during, say, that quarter.

Alternatively, governments could establish de minimis rules for ownership -

stocks must be held for whole quarters in order for owners to be eligible for

rebates, for example. The da ininimus approach purchases administrative

simplicity at the expense of "throwing sand in the gears" of financial markets

by locking investors into their stocks in order to get rebates; but a number

of commentors have recently proposed such measures in order to reduce

volatility in stock markets.'9 Alternatively, tax payments could be assigned

to particular (quarterly) dates and the owners on these dates; while such an

approach is likely to create short-term clienteles for stock ownership in low-

tax countries, the problem seems unlikely to be any more severe than the

rather mild problem that already exists with stock ownership on dividend days.

            -   The clearing system would retain source taxation of corporate

income earned by non-Europeans. Suppose an American company owns an Italian

subsidiary that in turn has a 100%-owned second-tier French subsidiary, and

the French subsidiary earns 150 in profits; which government would collect the

75 in tax revenue? It is envisioned that the tax revenue would be divided

according to arm's-length principles, but these are subject to agreement.



   7.     Openness to other governments

                Whenever an "ideal" system of international taxation is considered,

it is necessary to tackle the issues raised by its adoption only by a limited

group of countries, while in the rest of the      world   tax havens and other


        19See, for example, Summers and Summers (1989).

                                           26
loopholes survive. We envision a structure in which only the rules that do

not require changes in foreign laws are extended to the rest of the world.

This system maintains the general regime currently in place: foreign tax

credits and tax-credit limitations would be applied using the 50% rate and

foreign corporations are taxed at the 50% rate on the income they produce in

Europe. However, foreign source income produced in the rest of the world

would be taxable when produced and not only when remitted (deferral is

eliminated).

           At the same time, every country willing to join this system would

be allowed to do so. In other words, it should be possible to extend the

exemption of income produced by investors residing in a country, in exchange

for the same privilege allowed on income produced by investments in that

country that are owned by domestic residents, and the application of the 50%

rate and the system of clearing and rebates.



     Figures 4 and 5 illustrate the practical working of this system. Figure

4 shows an example of a structure of cross-country investments owned both by

corporations and individuals. The source of income is the corporation in

country A. That corporation is taxed at the 50% rate, and pays after tax

profits to a corporation In B, and to direct owners in A and B. The

corporation in B is in turn owned by country B's residents and by residents in

country C. The calculation of tax rebates is performed by computing the

difference between the taxes paid by the corporation in A pro-rated to the

individual owner, and the taxes owed (obtained by applying the tax rate in the

country of residence). Since the corporation in B is exempted from taxes on

income received from the corporation in A, indirect ownership shares are


                                      27
computed by multiplying the shares of wonership in the various corporations in

the chain. Hence the residents of C, owning 40% of the corporation in B which

owns 25% of the corporation in A, end up owning (0.4)x(0.25) —      0.10   of the

corporation in A. Hence the tax payments to country A attributable to country

C's residents are 5 (50% of 10% of the total profits of the corporation in A),

and th& calculation of the rebate follows directly.



4.2 Why residence-based taxation of international corporate income?

     The scheme described in section 5.1 permits European governments to tax

twice the returns to corporate capital investments: once at the corporate

level, and a second time at the individual level. What could possibly be the

rationale for such a system?

     It is not our intention to consider carefully the full range of questions

raised by the taxation of corporate income. These questions include issues of

whether and to what degree the corporate income tax really is a tax, by whom

the burden of the tax is borne, what distributional effects the tax has, what

are its effects on incentives to invest, and what is the likely magnitude of

its efficiency cost.2°

     Instead, we start from the observation that every European country taxes

the income of its resident corporations. These taxes serve the function o(

taxing the saving of individual residents, if they own   domestic   corporations,

and also taxing foreign residents on their shares of corporate ownership. The



     2OtJhile an exhaustive list of references on these and related questions
would fill a paper rather than a footnote, recent contributions to understanding
these questions include Auerbach (1979, 1983), Auerbach and Hines (1988),
Bradford (1981), Cravelle and Kotlikoff (1989), Harberger (1962), King (1977),
Krzyzaniak and Musgrave (1963), McLure (1979), Sinn (1988), and Stiglitz (1973,
1976).

                                       28
scheme described in section 4.1 satisfies the first of these functions, and

not the second: in return for excluding foreign-owned corporations from the

tax base, home governments would tax the foreign earnings of their domestic

residents.

     Classical public finance theory offers two governing principles of tax

design: taxation according to ability to pay, and taxation according to

benefits received.21 The first concept views taxation as the government's

primary redistributive instrument and may justify progressive taxation, while

in the second governments act as might firms that sell public goods and may or

may not be consistent with taxes falling more heavily on the rich. In

addition to these general goals of the tax system, it is necessary to

incorporate the incentive effects of tax rates and tax enforcement;

governments that raise tax revenues with anything other than lump-sum

instruments distort the economy. The existence of these distortions need not

change the goals of taxation, though it must change their implementation.

     On what basis, then, do governments justify their corporate taxes? The

corporate tax imposed at source is sometimes viewed as a benefit tax.22

Corporations use resources in the jursidictions in which they have profitable

operations; their profits may arise in part from the characteristics of those

locations. Since government activities constitute important attributes of a

location, and governments make (costly) expenditures on intermediate goods

like roads and port facilities, the corporate tax is, in this framework, fair

exchange for the profit opportunities provided to corporations without charge

by the government.


      21See, for example, Musgrave (1959).

      22See, for example, the arguments surveyed in Musgrave and Musgrave (1972).

                                        29
     This benefit tax interpretation of corporate income taxation is, however,

troubling in its implication that in the absence of corporate taxation

countries would prefer that corporations not locate business operations within

their boundaries. What, after all, is the social cost of corporate business

activity? While externalities no doubt limit the attractiveness of hosting

some businesses, the benefits of employment, indirect and wage tax revenue,

and raising the general level of economic activity impel most governments to

welcome new corporations, even if they need to offer generous tax holidays to

do so.23

     The benefit interpretation of the corporate income tax further requires a

specification of why only incorporated businesses are subject to this tax.

The benefit of incorporation is, of course, the limited liability that

corporate shareholders enjoy. This is a crucial aspect of certain businesses.

But incorporation is not particularly costly to governments, or at least the

cost of providing it is certainly not equal to 35% of annual corporate

profits.

     One might argue that the benefit principle underlies corporate taxation

even though governments can provide incorporation at relatively little cost:

corporations earn profits through operations they could not undertake without

limited liability, and governments in providing that opportunity are entitled

to some of its rents. This argument, which is not compelling even in a

domestic context, offers little support for systems of source-based

international corporate taxation. Since multinational firms can in many cases

choose their own countries of residence, the benefit of country-specific



     23Consider, for example, the tax holiday (until the year 2000) offered by
the government of Ireland to all new manufacturing firms.

                                      30
incorporation per se is limited to the difference in profitability with the

next most desirable corporate home. This is unlikely to represent 35% of

profits.

     Taxation according to ability to pay offers weaker support for source-

based corporate taxation. This application of the ability to pay principle

requires that the incidence of corporate taxation falls on high-income

individuals. Without evaluating the merits of this empirical argument,

accepting it is only the first step in evaluating international source-based

corporate taxation as a redistributive tax. Do tax collections from

foreigners further the redistributive goals of a national tax system? A

positive conclusion would take the usual understanding of redistributive

taxation far beyond its boundaries. If redistribution is understood

literally, then residence-based corporate taxation is clearly more consistent

with this goal. Source-based taxation of foreigners looks much more like rent

extraction than redistribution; in contrast, the proposed system redistributes

income only among the residents of the country.

     There remains another possibility: that the corporate income tax

satisfies neither principle, but instead represents a compromise to the

practical reality of the excess burden of taxes. Given the efficiency cost of

tax collections, the corporate tax may offer an attractive method of raising

(at least some) revenue. But there is no agreement on this view, either. In

particular this view does not explain why corporate income should be taxed

differently than noncorporate business income, and if corporate income is to

be taxed, why it is not better to offer corporations efficient investment

incentives with a cash-flow tax instead of a classical income tax.

     The efficiency argument for corporate income taxation relies on the


                                      31
existence of some form of rents to incorporation. Certain businesses earn

pure profits, of course, and these businesses if large may require the

liability protection available to corporations. By taxing the rents

governments avail themselves of distortion-free tax revenue.

        The corporate income tax typically does not, however, tax only pure

rents. Corporate taxes discourage investment by taxing incomes without

allowance for the opportunity cost of equity capital; for equity-financed

investments this lowers the after-tax rate of return on new investments. By

contrast, the cash-flow tax represents an alternative scheme that taxes only

pure rents.2 Under this system the tax base is corporate profits calculated

as cash-flows; firms deduct 100% of their investment expenditures immediately,

but are not allowed deductions for interest payments or dividends. It is

straightforward to show that the cash-flow tax does not discourage investment;

the base of the tax in present value is simply abnormal returns earned in the

corporate sector. These abnormal returns are rents to incorporation, and by

taxing them the government obtains a fraction r of them in revenue. From the

standpoint of efficiency this tax may be very attractive indeed.23 The flip

side of its efficiency is, however, that the cash-flow tax may not raise very

much in revenue.

        The attractive features of the cash-flow tax illustrate a limitation at

the same time. If the cash-flow tax really taxes only rents, then its optimal

level presumably is 100%, or nearly so. But as the tax rate approaches 100%

one would hardly expect very many businesses to stay incorporated, or many new

firms    to   incorporate. Put differently, the benefits of incorporation are


        24For a recent description and analysis of this tax see King (1987).

        25As for example Hubbard (1989) has argued before a wide audience.

                                          32
limited. These benefits may, however, be related to firm size: the larger is

the firm, the greater the monitoring costs of each owner and the more

(potentially) costly the unlimited liability of individual owners. Larger and

more profitable firms might therefore be willing to endure higher corporate

taxes in return for the corporate protection. Hence the taxation of corporate

income may offer just the kind of differentiation that optimal tax theory

recommends.

     The plan we describe contains a number of features that are consistent

with the efficiency goals of current national tax efforts while at the same

time preserving, and even, in some instances, reinvigorating, the national

sovereignty of some tax systems that are drained by competitive pressures

currently. Corporate taxation on the basis of residence of ownership rather

than location of income immediately removes tax incentives to locate business

in one European country versus another. It also removes the incentive to

claim that income was earned in European locations in which it was not; since

tax rates are the same whether income was earned in Germany or in Luxembourg,

firms have no incentives to misrepresent the prices at which international

transactions take place. Naturally, there will still be ordinary business

reasons to locate plants in particular places. And one of the factors

affecting such decisions will be the (pra-tax) wages firms are required to pay

indigenots labor, wages that may be influenced by local income tax policies.

Other goverr.ment policies such as expenditures on complementary goods are

likely to affect the desirability of various locations, but not to distort

location decisions any more than subsidies that governments are free to make




                                      33
would distort them.26

     Furthermore, if governments set tax rates independently in a residence-

based corporate tax system like the one we describe, the distortions arising

from non-cooperative policies are likely to be much smaller than those in a

system -   like   the present one -   of   source-based taxation. In the latter

system, the high responsiveness of the tax base to the tax rate, due to

international capital mobility and the opportunity to shelter income by

exporting capital, forces governments to set tax rates that are too low. In

the former case, by contrast, the distortion arises from the effect of these

taxes on the rate of interest prevailing in the system, and on investments.

But these effects, which depend on the elasticity of saving to the rate of

interest, are likely to be very small.27

     There is a separate issue concerning the common level of the "fictitous"

European corporate tax rate, which was set at 50% in the exposition of the

scheme in section 4.1. In practice governments might want to set this rate at

a level higher or lower than 50%. This common rate represents the tax rate

that non-European corporations must pay; setting a high rate yields one-time

revenue from their capital already in place, making high rates potentially

attractive to European governments. This revenue comes, however, at the cost




     26Cersovitz (1987) analyzes the incentives governments face currently to tax
subsidize foreign investors only with indirect and possibly inefficient means,
in order to exploit the foreign tax credit mechanism. This type of consideration
lead Tanzi and Bovenberg (1989) to argue that tax harmonization should be
accompanied by restrictions on government expenditure levels and patterns. An
efficient alternative is residence-based corporate taxation.

     27See Giovannini (1989) for an elaboration of this argument.

                                             34
of possibly discouraging new investments from non-European sources.28 in

addition, the managers of European corporations are likely to be disquieted by

high "fictitious" rates, since the differences between the common rate and

national rates represent distributions to shareholders that corporate managers

might not otherwise choose to make.29

     The choice of 'ficticious" tax rate might also depend on the proclivity

of European taxpayers to evade taxes on their capital income earned within

Europe. One method of doing so currently is for individuals simply not to

declare income from their ownership of shares of corporations based in foreign

countries; the magnitude of this type of evasion is unknown.3° Under the

system described in section 4.1, individuals would of course still be able to

evade taxes in this way, but their inclination to do so would diminish sharply

since they lose the rebate to which they would otherwise be entitled. Hence

individuals purchase anonymity in their foreign holdings at prices that rise

with the "fictitious" tax rate, and governments, which cannot in any case

eradicate tax evasion, would at least be able to tax it by imposing high


     28Governinents might want to adjust the common "fictitious" tax rate over
time, and they could do so, subject to the restiction that the common rate exceed
the highest national tax rate. This restriction could prove to be important.
since as Cordon (1986) argues, the optimal tax rate on foreign direct investment
is zero for a small country. Europe is not small, but could in some instances
face very elastic foreign investment schedules. Another important feature of
the "fictitious" tax rate is that it represents the foreign tax credit limit for
European corporations investing outside of Europe; the choice of appropriate
limit may be complicated by the circumstances of individual firms and the
bilateral nature of relations between home and host countries.

     29T desirability of forced distributions depends on what firms would do
with undistributed cash. For the view that internal funds stimulate corporate
investment, see Fazzari et al. (1988) and Hoshi et al. (1990).        For a more
sanguine view of the likely uses of free corporate cash flow, see Jensen (1986).


     "See OECD (1987) for a general discussion of issues and practices related
to international tax evasion.

                                        35
common rates.



4.3 Revenue Effects

     The plan described in section 4.1 removes countries' abilities to tax

directly the corporate income earned within their borders by firms owned by

nondoinestic Europeans. This represents a significant break from the current

practice and potentially a serious stumbling block for governments inclined to

do exactly that. It is worth considering, then, the consequences of this

limitation along three lines: what are the efficiency consequences, the

distributional consequences, and the implications for national sovereignty

that would ensue from the scheme.

     Efficiency and distribution are linked by the allocational consequences.

The scheme retains the current double taxation of corporate income, so that

old capital already in place can be expected to generate rents that

governments will continue to capture.

     A more fundamental question is whether location-specific rents that

accrue to individuals from ownership of corporate shares represent a

sufficient basis for double taxation of corporate income throughout Europe.

Indeed, under the proposed plan the application of the same corporate rate to

distributed and undistributed profits could, in the absence of corrections in

tax rates, result in heavier taxation of corporate profits. This induces two

effects: on one side a generalized tendency towards bond financing on the part

of firms, and on the other side increased pressure on governments to compete

for corporate ownership by lowering the corporate tax rate, that is,

decreasing the extent of double taxation of corporate income. Put concretely,

would the emergence of a European haven for corporate ownership -   say if the

                                        36
UK declared corporate income to be untaxed at the individual level - undermine

the system by concentrating all corporate ownership in Britain? Such an

outcome appears unlikely. As it currently stands individuals within countries

face different marginal tax rates on different investments, and yet one never

observes anything like the kind of tax clienteles that a tax-arbitrage story

would predict.31 Diversification and possibly the existence of heterogeneous

expectations are forces that consistently overwhelm pure tax considerations

for all but very specialized financial instruments. As long as individuals

have strong desires to hold corporate shares, the government can successfully

exploit their demands with corporate taxes.

     The plan envisions that governments would voluntarily forego their rights

to retain corporate tax revenue from foreign shareholders; is this a

politically viable scenario? It should be recalled, of course, that

governments simultaneously obtain the right to tax in full their own citizens'

nondomestic corporate income, a right not currently enjoyed. Furthermore,

governments as a whole are likely to enrich themselves from this scheme since

taxes are less distortionary and the current pressure to lower capital tax

rates is likely to abate significantly. Covernments can still, if they want,

encourage investment or employment through direct subsidies (though some of

the subsidy is lost to foreign tax authorities). But nonetheless the plan

requires governments to relinquish a power they hold currently. Their

willingness to do so would seem to depend on the relative benefits and costs.

     The important positions of foreign multinationals in some European



     See for example the evidence presented in Feldstein (1976); while he finds
individual tax rates to influence the types of assets individuals hold, a great
deal of the variation in individual portfolios is unexplainable just on the basis
of taxes.

                                       37
economies makes the benefits and the costs of tax system reform potentially

quite large. Table 9 presents some indicators of the extent to which host

countries are currently affected by the multinationals of other European

countries. Belgium, France, Greece, Ireland (and presumably Spain) owe more

than 20% of their employment in manufacturing to foreign multinationals

(though not all of the employing firms are European). These governments as

well as others might be concerned about any reforms that could reduce their

abilities to use various tax incentives to attract and retain investment from

abroad. Alternatively, these governments might welcome reforms along the

lines of the tax system described in section 4.1, since greater capital

mobility might promise additional investment and employment even in the

absence of costly incentives.

     Table 10 presents a rough picture of government tax revenue exposures

under the reform presented in section 4.1. Absent all the allocational

effects that would be likely to ensue from the tax change, the treasuries of

governments that are currently capital exporters to the rest of Europe would

be likely to benefit in the reform relative to other EC members, while capital

importers would lose revenue. Examination of what figures are available in

Table 10 suggest that the gainers would be Germany, the Netherlands, and the

United Kingdom; the losers would be France, Italy, and Spain.32 One way to

reconcile all parties to the reform would be, therefore, a system of

reallocating some of corporate tax revenue in early years to those countries

that sustain revenue losses from the switchover; alternatively, the capital-

importing EC states could be assigned greater-than-source-basis shares of the


     32Available sketchy evidence suggests that the other EC countries, Belgium,
Greece, Ireland, and Portugal, are all net capital importers from the EC as well
and therefore likely to lose revenue.

                                       38
non-EC corporate tax revenue collected by member states.

     There remains the potentially dangerous problem posed by tax competition

among EC members: what happens to this system under unbridled competition or

even secession from the system? This issue turns on governments' abilities to

enforce the true concept of individual residence. As long as every European

owner of capital cannot declare the lowest-tax jurisdiction to be his home,

then countries can compete for their residence in the same way that they do

now: by offering the most attractive package of taxes and benefits. Under

residence-based capital taxation there is no inconsistency between the

interests of different governments, and all could ultimately share the benefit

of more efficient allocation of capital.




                                      39
                                  References

Alworth, J. (1988) The Finance. Investment and Taxation Decisions of
Multinationals, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Auerbach, A. (1979) "Share Valuation and Corporate Equity Policy," Journal of
Public Economics, 11, 291.305.

Auerbach, A. (1983) "Corporate Taxation in the United States," Brookings
Paoers in Economic Activity. 2, 451-513.

Auerbach, A. and J. Hines (1988) "Investment Tax Incentives and Frequent Tax
Reforms," American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 78, 211-216.

Auerbach, A. and J. Poterba (1987) "Why Have Corporate Tax Revenues Declined?"
in Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 1, ed. L. Summers, Cambridge: MIT Press.

Bradford, D. (1981) "The Incidence and Allocation Effects of a Tax on
Corporate Distributions", Journal of Public Economics, 15. 1-22.

Cnossen, S. (1989) "On the Direction of Tax Harmonization in the European
Community", mimeo, Erasmus University.

Deverewc, M. and M. Pearson (1989) "Harmonizing Corporate Taxes in the
European Community," mimeo, Institute for Fiscal Studies, London.

Dunning, J. and J. Cantwell (1987) Directory of Statistics of International
Investment and Production, New York: New York University Press.

Eichengreen, B. (1989) "The Capital Levy in Theory   and   Practice", miiseo,
University of California, Berkeley.

Fazzari, S., R.G. Hubbard, and B. Petersen (1988) "Investment and Finance
Reconsidered", Brookings Pacers on Economic Activity, 141-195.

Feldstein, ?1.S. (1976) "Personal Taxation and Portfolio Composition: An
Econometric Analysis", Econpmetricp, 44, 631-650.

Cersovitz, M. (1987) "The Effect of Domestic Taxes on Private Foreign
Investment", in The Theory of Taxation for Developing Countries, ed. D.
Newbery and N. Stern, New York: Oxford University Press.

Ciovannini, A. (1988) "Capital Controls and Public Finance: The Experience in
Italy." in Hi2h Public Debt: The Italian Experience, ed. F. Giavazzi and L.
Spavanta, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988.

Ciovannini, A. (1989) "Capital Taxation", Economic Policy, Vol. 9, 345.386.

Cordon, R.H. (1986) "Taxation of Investment and Savings in a World Economy",
American Economic Review, 76, 1086-1102.



                                      40
Cravelle, J.G. and L.J. Kotlikoff (1989) "The Incidence and Efficiency Costs
of Corporate Taxation When Corporate and Noncorporate Firms Produce the Same
Good," Journal of Political Economy, 97, 749-780.

Harberger, A. (1962) "The Incidence of the Corporate Income Tax," Journal of
Political Economy, 70, 215-40.

Hicks, J.R., U.K. Hicks, and L. Rostas (1941) The Taxation of War Wealth,
London: Oxford University Press.

Hines, J. (1988a) "Taxation and U.S. Multinational Investment," in Tax Policy
and the Economy, Vol. 2, ed. L. Summers, Cambridge: MIT Press.

Hines, J. (l988b) "Multinational Transfer Pricing and Its Tax Consequences:
Where the Profits Are", snimeo, Princeton University.

Hines, J. (1989) "Credit and Deferral As International Investment Incentives",
mimeo, Princeton University.

Hoshi, T., A. Kashyap, and D. Scharfstein (1990) "Corporate Structure,
Liquidity, and Investment: Evidence from Japanese Industrial Groups", mimeo,
MIT.

Hubbard, R.G. (1989) "Tax Corporate Cash Flow, Not Income", Wall Street
Journal, February 16.

Jensen, M.C. (1986) "Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and
Takeovers", American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 76, 323-329.

King, M. (1977) Public Policy and the Corporation, London: Chapman and Hall.

King, M. (1987) "The Cash Flow Corporate Income Tax," in The Effects of
Taxation on Capital Accumulation, ed. M. Feldstein, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

King, K. and D. Fullerton (1984) The Taxation of Income from Capital, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.


,
Krzyzaniak, M. and R.A. Musgrave (1963) The Shifting of the Corporation Income
     Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Kuiper, W. (1988) "EC Commission Proposes a Directive on the Harmonization of
Rules for the Determination of Taxable Profits of Enterprises", European
Taxation, 28, 319-329.

McLure, C. (1979) Must Corporate Income Be Taxed Twice?, Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution.

McLure, C. (1989) "Some Lessons from the U.S. Experience", Eurooean Taxation.
29, 243-250.



                                      41
Musgrave, P.B. (1987) "InterJurisdictional Coordination of Taxes on Capital
Income", in Tax Coordination in the European Community, ed. S. Cnossen,
Deventer: Kluwer.

Musgrave, P.B. and R.A. Musgrave (1972) "Inter-Nation Equity", in Modern
Fiscal Issues, ed. R. Bird and J. Head, Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Musgrave, R.A. (1959) The Theory of Public Finance, New York: McGraw-Hill.

OECD (1977) Model Double Taxation Convention on Income and Capital, Paris:
OECD.

OECD (1987) International Tax Avoidance and Evasion, Paris: OECD.

OECD (1989) OECD Tax Revenue Statistics, Paris: OECD.

Price Waterhouse (1989) CorDorate Taxes - A Worldwide Summary and Individual
Taxes - A Worldwide Summary, New York: Price Waterhouse.

Razin, A. and E. Sadka (1989) "International Tax Competition and Gains from
Tax Harmonization", NBER Working Paper No. 3152.

Schlesinger, H. (1989) "Capital Outflow and Taxation - The Case of the Federal
Republic of Germany", mimeo, Deutsche Bundesbank, December.

Seligman, E.R.A. (1969) Studies in Public Finance, New York: MAcmillan, 1925
(reprinted by Augustus Kelley, New York).

Sinn, H.W. (1988) "The Vanishing Harberger Triangle", mimeo, University of
Munich.

Stiglitz, i.E. (1973) "Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy and the Cost of
Capital", Journal of Public Economics, 2, 1-34.

Stiglitz, J.E. (1976) "The Corporate Tax", Journal of Public Economics, 5,
303- 11.


Summers, L.H. and V.P. Summers (1989) "When Financial Markets Work Too Well: A
Cautious Case For a Securities Transactions Tax", Journal of Financial
Services Research, 3, 261-286.

Tanzi, V. and A.L. Bovenberg (1989) "Is There a Need for Harmonizing Capital
Income Taxes Within EC Countries?" mimeo, International Monetary Fund.

Whalley, J. (1989) "Foreign Responses to US Tax Reform", mimeo, University of
Western Ontario.




                                      42
</ref_section>
                    Figure 1:
rllhe Revei 1 ue from  Capital Income rilaxes
          10
                                                     —
                                                     —




                                                          total
                                                         w.   taxes
ft        8
(   •)
    0
          6
    C
    I-)
          4
               Ir                             I JR
                        I   I)   NJ 11i   I
                                      Figure 2:
         Capital Income Taxes in Europe and the US
     9




     :7S
a-
0
0
0
C
LI

a                                              EC12 less UK and LUX
     f




     0     I      I      I      I      I       I      I      I             I
          1965          1975          1981           1983          1985          1987
                 1970          1980           1982          1984          1986

                                             Year




                          Figure 3:
         Capital Gains and Corporate Income Taxes
                             in Europe and the US



a-
0
0
 0
 C
 V
 U
 V
 a




                 1970          1980           1982          1984          1986


                                             Year
                                              FIGURE 4


             Country A                        Country B                          Country C
       (30% Corporate Tax Rate)          (20% Corporate Tax Rato)            (40% Corporate Tax Rate)




                               25%




                                                        60%
   Individual Residents of A                                                  Individual Residents of C




                                           Individual Residents of B




                                         FIGURE 5:
                                  Calculation of Rebates

Country A's Residents Country B's Residents Country C's Residents
(30% Corporate Tax Rate)          (20% Corporate Tax Rate)             (40% Corporate Tax Rate)

 Corporation paid 25                 (Oeiers of Ba Corp.)               Corporation paid 5
 They owe 15                                                            They owe 4
                                     Corporation paid 7.5
 Rebate = 10                         They owe 3                         Rebate = 1
                                     Rebate = 4.5

                                     (O'eners of As Corp.)
                                     Corporation paid 12.5
                                     They owe 5
                                     Rebate = 7.5

  Notes:    The corporation In A has earned 100.
            The corporation in B is exempted for income from A.
                                      Table 1:

                 The Revenue from Capital Income Taxes, 1987




Country                          Revenue from Capital Income Taxes
                                           As Percent of:


                 Income Taxes             Total Tax Revenue            GDP


Belgium           34.4 (29.1)                 13.5 (11.4)            6.2 (5.3)

Denmark           17.0   (8.0)                    9.56 (4.5)         5.0 (2.3)

France            55.4 (29.1)                    10.0   (5.2)        4.5 (2.3)

Germany           24.2 (14.7)                     8.2   (5.0)        3.1 (1.9)

Greece            40.8 (25.9)                     7.0   (4.1)        2.6 (1.7)

Ireland           20.6   (9.0)                    7.8   (3.4)        3.1 (1.4)

Italy             37.2 (30.0)                    13.4 (10.6)         4.9 (3.9)

Luxembourg        56.5 (40.4)                 23.9 (17.1)        10.5 (7.5)

Netherlands       44.7 (31.4)                    12.2   (8.6)        5.9 (4.1)

Portugal          58.4 (48.0)                 11.3      (9.3)        3.6 (2.9)

Spain             35.2 (22.7)                 10.4      (6.7)        3.4 (2.2)

United Kingdom    66.3 (30.7)                 24.7 (11.4)            9.2 (4.3)



EC Average        40.9 (26.6)                 12.7 (8.1)             5.2 (3.3)



United States     51.3 (28.2)                 22.7 (12.5)            6.8 (3.8)


Source: Authors' calculations based on data in OECD (1989).

Note: Figures in parentheses represent calculations in which capital
       tax revenues exclude revenues from wealth taxes.
                                  Table 2:

                    Statutory Corporate Tac Rates, 1989
                                (in percent)


                          Central        Central and
                        Government      Local Government J,J


                             43                43
Belgium

Denmark                      50                50

France                       39                39


Germany                   56/36/ 21          62/45/ 21

Greece                       35 J              35 21

Ireland                      10 fJ             10 fj

                             36                46
Italy

Luxembourg                   37 J              43

Netherlands                  35                35

                           36.5                40
Portugal

Spain                        35                 36 ./

United Kingdom               35                 35



Source: Tanzi and Bovenberg (1989).

j/ Net rates.
21 Split rate system: first rate applies to retained earnings, second rate
      to distributed earnings.
./ Rate for industrial companies quoted on the Athens Stock Exchange.
tJ Rate for industrial companies, to remain into effect until the end of the
      year 2000. The standard rate for other companies is 43 percent.
./ Including a 2 percent surcharge (deductible) for the employment fund.
j Includes the surcharge for the chamber of commerce.
                                       rabie 3:

              Depreciation tethods Currently Applied by EC Countries



                       STRAIGHT'LLNE                     DECLINING-BALANCE


                       allowed for all assets            allowed for all assets
                                                         purchased after 1 January
                                                         1977 (maxjmujs rate tvie
                                                         the straight-line rate)

Dectmark               normally applied to               normally applied to
                       buildings and                     other fixed assets
                       Intangible property               (on a pool basis)

France                 normal method                 optional for most assets
                                                     (except for buildirgs -
                                                     other than hotels
                                                     automobiles, telephones
                                                     and typewriters)

Germany                allowed for all assets        not available for buiLir;s
(Fed.Rep.)                                           (unless specifically
                                                     elected by the "Bauherr')
                                                     and for Intangible assets.
                                                     if available, the maximum
                                                     rate is three times the
                                                     straight-line rate with a
                                                     maximuja of 30%

Greece                 normal method                 not available

Ireland'              normal method for              normal method for other
                      buildings                      fixed assets

Italy                 normal method                  not available

Luxembourg            allowed for all assets         not allowed for buildirgs
                                                     and intangible property
Netherlands           allowed for all assets         allowed for all assets
                                                     except buildings other than
                                                     hotels

Portugal              allowed for all assets         allowed, subject, however
                                                     to the approval of the
                                                     tax authority

Spain                 allowed for all ass.ts         only allowed for certain
                                                     new, qualifying assets

::ed Kingdom2         available for buildings        available for plant,
                                                     machinery and patents


Source: Kuiper (1988).




         Intangible assets are depreciable in Ireland.

                           £llowance is available for capital expenditure on
