                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            HEALTH, CHILDREN, AND ELDERLY LIVING ARRANGEMENTS: A
    MULTIPERIOD-MULTINOMIAL PROBIT MODEL WITH UNOBSERVED HETEROGENEITY AND
                            AUTOCORRELATED ERRORS




                              Axel Boersch-Supan
                            Vassilis   Hajivassiliou

                             Laurence J. Kotlikoff

                                John N. Morris




                            Working Paper No. 3343




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   April 1990




This research was supported by the National Institute on Aging, grant no. 3 P01
AG 05842. Dan Nash and Gerald Schehl provided valuable research assistance.
This paper is part of NBER's research program in Aging. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Econoaic
Research.
                                      NBER Working Paper #3343
                                      April 1990


           HEALTH, CHILDREN, AND ELDERLY LIVING ARRANGEMENTS: A
    MULTIPERIOD-MULTINOMIAL PROBIT MODEL WITH UNOBSERVED HETEROGENEITY
                         AND AUTOCORRELATED ERRORS


                                 ABSTRACT


This paper develops a general multiperiod-multinomial probit model for
panel data to estimate the living arrangements of the elderly. The model
has the following features:

(a) In each period choices do not necessarily obey the assumption of
    independence of irrelevant alternatives.

(b) Unobserved person-specific attributes are treated as random effects.
    These random effects may also be correlated across alternatives.

(c) In addition, unobserved choice-specific utility components may persist
    over some time, creating an autoregressive and/or heteroscedastic error
    structure.

The model is estimated by simulating the choice probabilities in the
likelihood function. We examine several variants of the specification of
the correlation structure and investigate the extent the biases created by
ignoring intertemporal correlations.




   Axol Boersch-Supan                 Vassilis Hajivassiliou
   University of Mannheim             Cowles Foundation, Yale University
   Postfach 10 34 62                  Department of Economics
   Gebaude A5,6                       Box 2125 Yale Station
   6800 Mannheim I                    New Haven, CT 06520
   GERMANY

   Laurence J. Kotlikoff              John N. Morris
   Boston University and              Hebrew Rehabilitation Center for the
   NBER                               Aged
   1050 Massachusetts Avenue          1200 Centre Street
   Cambridge, MA 02138                Boston, MA 02131
                                 -1-


1. INTRODUCTION

     Decisions by the elderly with respect to their living arrangements

(e.g. living alone, living with children, or living in s nursing home)

seem best modelled ss a discrete choice problem in which the elderly view

certain choices as closer substitutes than others. For example, living

with children may more closely substitute for living independently than

living in an institution. Unobserved determinanta of living arrangements

at a point in time are, therefore, quite likely to be correlated. In the

parlance of discrete choice models this meana, that the assumption of inde-

pendence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA) will be violated. Indeed, a num-

ber of recent studies of living arrangements of the elderly document the

violation of hA.1

     In addition to relaxing the IIA assumption of no intratemporal cor-

relation between unobserved determinants of competing living arrangements,

one should also relax the assumption of no intertemporal correlation of

such determinants. The assumption of no intertemporal correlation un-

derlies most studies of living arrangements, particularly those estimated

with cross-section data. While cross section variation in household char-

acteristics can provide important insights into the determinants of living

arrangements2, the living arrangement decision is clearly an intertemporal

choice and a potentially complicated one at that. Because of moving and

associated transactions costs, elderly households may stay longer in in-

appropriate living arrangements than they would absent such costs. In

turn, households may prospectively move into an institution "before it is

too late to cope with this change". That is, households may be subatan-

tially out of long-run equilibrium if a cross-section survey interviews

them shortly before or after a move. Moreover, persona may acquire a taste

for certain types of living arrangements. Such habit formation introduces
state dependence. Ideally, therefore, living arrangement choicea ahould be

eatimated with panel data, with an appropriate econometric specification of

incertemporal linkages.

     These intertemporal linkages include two components. The first com-

ponent is the linkage through unobserved person-specific attributes, i.e.,

unobserved heterogeneity through time-invariant error components. An im-

portant example is health status, information on which is often missing or

unsatisfactory in household surveys. Health status varies over time, but

has an important person-specific, time-invariant component that influences

housing and living arrangement choices of the elderly. Panel data discrete

choice models that capture unobserved heterogeneity include Chamberlain's

(1984) conditional fixed effects estimator and one-factor random effect

models, such as those proposed by McFadden (1984, p.1434).

     However, not all intertemporal correlation patterns in unobservables

can be captured by time-invariant error components. A second error com-

ponent should, therefore, be included to control for time-varying dis-

turbances, e.g. , an autoregressive error structure. Examples of the source

of error components that taper off over time are the above-mentioned cases

of prospective moves and habit formation. Similar effects on the error

structure arise when an elderly person, due to unmeasured transactions

costs, stays longer in a dwelling than he/she would in the absence of such

coats.

     Ellwood and Kane (1988) and Edrach-Supan (1988) apply simple models to

capture dynamic features of the observed data. Ellwood and Kane (1988)

employ an exponential hazard model, while BOrsch-Supan (1988) uses a vari-

ety of simple Markov transition models. Neither approach captures both un-

observed heterogeneity and autoregressive errors. In addition, living ar-

rangement choices are multinomial by nature, ruling out univariate hazard
models. Bdrsch-Supan, Kotlikoff and Morris (1989) also fail to deal fully

with heterogeneous snd autoregressive unobservables. Their study attempts

to finesse these concerns by describing the multinomial-multiperiod choice

process as one lsrge discrete choice among all possible outcomes. By in-

voking the IIA-aasumption, a small subset of choices is sufficient to

identify the relevant parameters. This approach, that converts the problem

of repeated intertemporal choices to a static problem of choosing, ex-ante,

the time path of living arrangements is easily criticized both because of

the IIA-asaumption and the presumption that individuals decide in advance

their future living arrangements.

     While researchers have recognized the need to estimate choice models

with unobserved determinants that are correlated across alternatives and

over time, they have been daunted by the high dimensional integration of

the associated likelihood functions. This paper uses a new simulation

method developed in BOrsch-Supan and Hajivasailiou (1990) to estimate the

likelihood functions of living arrangement choice models that range, in

their error structure, from the very simple to the highly complex. Com-

pared with previous simulation estimators derived by McFadden (1989) and

Fakes and Pollard (1989), the new method is capable of dealing with complex

error structures with substantially less computation. The Barach-Supan-

Hajivaaailiou method builds on recent progress in Monte-Carlo integration

techniques by Ceweke (1989) and Hajivassiliou and McFadden (1990). It

represents a revival of the Lerman and Manski (1981) procedure of approxi-

mating the likelihood function by simulated choice probabilities overcoming

its computational disadvantages.

     The following section, 2, develops the general structure of the choice

probability integrals and spells out alternative correlation structures.

Section 3 presents the estimation procedure, termed simulated maximum
                                           -4-

likelihood (SML). Section 4 describes our data, and Section 5 reports

results. Section 6 concludes with a summary of major findings.



2. ECONOMETRIC SPECIFICATIONS OF ALTERNATIVE ERROR PROCESSES

     Let I be the number of discrete choices in each time period, and T be

the number of waves in the panel data. The space of possible outcomes is

the set of 1T different choice sequences (it), tl, . . ,T.            To structure this

discrete choice problem, we assume that in each period choices are made ac-

cording to the random utility maximization hypothesis, i.e. ,2

     i is chosen <—> u is maximal element in (ujt                  j—l, .   . ,t),   (I)

where the utility of choice i in period t is the sum of a deterministic

utility component             v(Xt,$), which depends on the vector of observable

variables           and a parameter vector fi    to   be estimated, and a random utili-

ty component cit

            —
                v(XB)       + c.                                                     (2)

We model the deterministic utility component, v(Xt,/3), as simply the

linear combination Xfl.3

     Since the optimal choice delivers maximum utility, it is not the util-

ity level of the maximal choice, but rather the differences in utility

levels between the best choice and any other choice that is relevant for

the elderly's decision. The probability of a choice sequence (it) can,

therefore, be expressed as integrsls over the differences of the unobserved

utility components relative to the chosen alternative. Define

            —                 for   i—it, 'it.                                       (3)

These D —       (1-1)   x T error differences are stacked in the vector w and have

a joint cumulative distribution function F.

     For alternative i to be chosen, the error differences can be at most

as large as the differences in the deterministic utility components. The
                                          -3-
areas of integration are therefore

    A(i)=)
                     -            S
                                      XiJ3-Xjd3     )   for ji                    (4)

and the probability of choice sequence (it) is


    PNi&I(X&;/3,F) =

                                      x   ..   .x                        dF(w).
          J                                             J                         (5)
   (wl   c A(i1)Ii=l. .I,j'i1}                  jT Aj(iT)til. .I,jiT)



    Unless the joint cumulative distribution function F and the ares of

integration     =
                    A(i1)   x .   ..x   Aj(iT) are particularly benign, the in-

tegral in (5) will not have a closed form. Closed-form solutions exist if

F is a member of the family of generalized extreme-value (CEV) distribu-

tions, e.g., the cross-sectional multinomial logit (MNL) or nested multi-

nomial logit (NMNL) models, contributing to the popularity of these speci-

fications. Closed-form solutions also exist if these models are combined

with a one-factor random effect that is again extreme-value distributed

(e.g., McFadden, 1984).

     CEV-type models have the disadvantage of relatively rigid correlation

structures. They cannot embed the more general intertemporal correlation

patterns exposited in the introduction. Concentrating on the first two mo-

ments, we assume a multivariate normal distribution of the              in (3),

characterized by a covariance matrix M which has (D+l) x D/2 -          1 sig-

nificant elements: the correlations among the wt and the variances except

one in order to scale the parameter vector j3 in the deterministic utility

components v(X,j3). This count represents many more covariance parameters

than CEV-type models can handle. Moreover, our specification of M is not

constrained by hierarchical structures as is the case in the class of

nested multinomial logit (NMNL) models.
                                        -6-


     We estimate this multiperiod-multinomial probit model with different

specifications of the covariance matrix M.

(A) The simplest specification M=I yields a pooled cross-sectional probit
    model that is subject to the independence of irrelevant alternatives
    (hA) restriction and ignores all intertemporal linkages. The D—(I-l)
    x T dimensional integral of the choice probabilities factors into D
    one-dimensional integrals.

There are several waya to introduce intertemporal linkages:

(B) A random-effect structure is imposed by specifying

              it = ai    + lI,t,            i.i.d. ,   i=l, .1-1.
                                                            .




    This yields a blockdiagonal equi-correlation structure of M with (I-I)
    parsmeters a(a) in M which need to be estimated. This structure allows
    for a factorization of the integral in (5) in 1-1 T-dimensional blocks
    which, in turn, can be reduced to one dimension because of the one-
    factor structure.

(C) An autoregressive error structure can be incorporated by specifying

                    =               +
                                        i'j,           i.i.d. ,   i=l, . 1-1.
                                                                      .




    Again, this yields a blockdiagonal structure of H where each block has
    the familisr structure of an AR(l) process. 1-1 parameters p in H
    have to be estimsted.



      6it —   i
(D) The lest two error structures can also be combined by specifying

                  + 7it' 'lit —    Pi•'li   tl +                  i.i.d. ,

    This amounts to overlaying the equi-corrrelation structure with the
                                                                             1=1,..   1-1.


    AR(l) structure. It should be noted that a(a) and       are separately
    identified only if p<l.


We now drop the hA assumption. There are several distinct possibilities,

depending on the intertemporal error specification.


(E) Starting again with (A) and ignoring any intertemporal structure, the
    simplest possibility is to assume that the     t are uncorrelated across
    t but have correlations across i which are coistant over time. With
    the proper reordering of the elements in the stacked vector w, a simple
    blockdiagonal structure of H emerges with T*(Il)dimensional blocks.
    In this case (1-2) variances and (I-l)*(I-2)/2 covariances can be
    identified.

(F) This specification can be overlayed with the random effects specifica-
    tion. This destroys the blockdiagonality although the one-factor
   structure allows a reduction of the dimensionality of the integral in
   (5) . (1-1) variances of the random effects       can be identified in
   addition to the parameters in specification CE). Rather than allowing
   inter-alternative correlation in the w (specification Fl), it is
   also possible to make the random effect a correlated (specification
   F2) -


(C) Alternatively, specification (E) cen be overlayed with an autoregres-
   sive error structure by specifying

              —              +            corr(vitvjs)wij if s=t, else 0.

   The 'j   are correlated across alternatives, but uncorrelated across
   period. The familiar structure of sn AR(l) process is additively
   overlayed with the blockdiagonal structure of specification (E) .        I-I
   additional parameters    in N have to be estimated.

(H) Finally, all three features - - interalternative-correlation, random ef-
    fects, and autoregressive errors -- can be combined. The resulting er-
    ror process is

              —
                  Qi +
       Ci,t
                         li,c =   Pi1,tl ÷                 i—l,.. I-I,

                                            if tøs    end cov(aaj)= cjj
       with corr(v tVj,s)=O
                                            if t—s
                                   tJjj

    which implies

                                    +
                                                j(l-pi2)   .J(l-2)
       cov(Eitcjs)                                                   Wjj


    This model encompasses all preceding specifications as special cases.
    Again, all parameters are identified if p<1, i—I, . .1-1, although, in
    practice, the identification of thia general specification may become
    shaky when there is only a small number of sufficiently long spells in
    different choices -




3. ESTIMATION PROCEDURE: SIMULATED MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD

     The likelihood function corresponding to the general multiperiod-
multinomial choice problem is the product of the choice probabilities (5):

                   N
     L(fl,M) —     'r    P((itn)I(Xit,n);$M)
                                                                            (6)
                  n=l


where the index n denotes an observation in a sample of N individuals, and

the c.d.f. F in (5) is assumed to be multivariate normal and characterized

by the covariance matrix N. Estimating the parameters in (6) is a forai-
                                    -8-

dable task because it requires, in the most general case, for each observa-

tion and each iteration in the maximization process an evaluation of the

D=(Il)*T dimensional integral in (5).

     One may be tempted to accept the efficiency losses due to an incorrect

specification of the error structure and simply ignore the correlations

that make the integral in (5) so hard to solve. However, unlike the linear

model, an incorrect specification of the covariance matrix of the errors M

biases not only the standard errors of the estimated coefficients, but also

the structural coefficients fi   themselves.   The linear case is very special

in isolating specification errors away from .

     Numerical integration of the integral in (5) is computationally in-

feasible since the number of operations increases with the power of D, the

dimension of M. Approximation methods, such as the Clark-approximation

(Daganzo, 1981) or its variant proposed by Langdon (1984), are tractable --

their   number of operations increases quadratically with D -            but   they

remain unsatisfactory since their relatively large bias cannot be control-

led by increasing the number of observations. Rather, we simulate the

choice probabilities P((itn)I(XitnHfl,M) by drawing pseudo-random

realizations from the underlying error process.

     The most straightforward simulation method is to simulate the choice

probabilities P((itn}I(Xitn);p,M) by observed frequencies (Lerman and

Manski, 1981):

     P(ltn) —    Ntn(i)/Ntn,                                                          (7)

where Ntn denotes the number of draws or replications for individual n at

period t, and

     Ntn() — count( uitn is msximsl in (ujtn I j—1,     .   . ,t}   ).                (8)
                                           -9-

One then maximizes the simulated likelihood function


              —
                    NT
                    it   - It
                   n—I t=l
                                  Nyji)/Njy                                 (9)



However, in order to obtain reasonably accurate estimates (7) of small

choice probabilities, a very large number of draws is required. That

results in unacceptably long computer runs.

     We exploit instead en algorithm proposed by Ceweke (1989) which was

originally designed to compute random varistes from a multivariste trun-

cated normal distribution. This slgorithm is very quick and depends con-

tinuously on the parameters fi and N. One concern is that it fails to

deliver unbiased multivsriate truncated normal variates.4 However, as

Borsch-Supan and Hajivassiliou (1990) show, the algorithm can be used to

derive unbiased estimates of the choice probabilities. We sketch this

method in the remainder of this section.

     Univariste truncsted normal variates can be drsw-n according to s

strsightforward application of the integral transform theorem: Let u be a

draw from a univariate standard uniform distribution, uc[O,l]. Then

     e -     G(u)    =   1[ ((a)-(a)).u + (a)    ]                       (10)
is distributed N(0,1) s.t.                             a univariste trun-

cated normal distribution is


                  'Z(z) -       t(a)
     G(z) —                            ,                                   (11)
                  (s) - '1(b)

where '1 denotes the univariate normal cumulative distribution function.

Note that e is a continuously differentiable function of the truncation pa-

rameters a and b. This continuity is essential for computational ef-

fic iency.

     In the multivsriate case, let L be the lower diagonal Cholesky factor
                                         - 10 -

of    the covariance matrix M of the unobserved utility differences v in (3)


        L'L'—M .                                                           (12)
Then draw sequentially a vector of 0(I-l)*T univsriste truncated normal

variates

       e —    N(0,I)       s.t. a S L.e s ,                                (13)
where the 0-dimensional vector a is defined by equation (4):

              —
                  X1fi-X1$       for i—it, "c-                             (14)

Because L is triangular, the restrictions in (13) are recursive. (For

notational simplicity, e and a are in the sequel aimply indexed by

i—I       0):

       e1 —       N(0,l)
       s.t. a1 s l11.e1                       <—>      a1/111     S e1 S

       e2 —       N(0,l)
       st. a2 S l21.e1 + 122•e2 S             C—> (a2-121.e1)/122 S e2 S   (15)

       etc.

Hence, each e, i—I,.. ,D, can be drawn using the univariate formula (10).

Finally, define

       w — Le       .
                                                                           (16)
Then (12) implies that w has covariance matrix H and is subject to

       aLeS <—>                  aSwS                                      (17)

as required.

       The probability for a choice sequence ttn1 of obaervation n is the

probability that w falls in the interval given by (4), which is the prob-

ability that e falls in the interval given by (13), i.e.,
                                                 - 11         -




    P((i))           Prob( a1/111                e1       )
                                                                                        (18)
                        Prob((a2-121.e1)/122 S e2 S                   I
                                                                          e1)

For a draw of a 0-dimensional vector of truncated normal variatea

er(erl      erD) according to (15), this probability is simulated by

     Pr((it&) —         (1     -

                           I       -
                                       tfla2-l21•er1)/l22)        )                     (19)

and the choice probability is approximated by the average over R

replications of (19):

                    1     R ,.
     PUit&)     — -   X PrUitn))                      .                                 (20)
                  R r—l.


Bdrsch-Supan and Hajivassiliou (1990) prove that P is an unbissed estimator

of P in spite of the failure of the Geweke algorithm to provide unbiased

expected values of e and w.

     Like the univsriate case, the generated draws as well as the resulting

simulated probability of a choice sequence depend continuously and differ-

entiably on the parameters $                in   the truncation vector a and the covariance

matrix H. Hence, conventional numerical methods such as one of the con-

jugate gradient methods or qusdratic hillclimbing can be used to solve the

first order conditions for maximizing the simulated likelihood function


                N         R
            —                                                                           (21)
                n—l r—1
                                       Pr({itn))      .




This differs from the frequency simulator (7) that generates a dis-

continuous objective function with the associated numerical problems.

     Moreover, as described by Borsch-Supan and Hajivassiliou (1990), the

choice probabilities are well approximated by (20) even for a small number

of replications, independent of the true choice probabilities. This is in
                                  - 12   -




remarkable contrast to the Lerman/Manski ftequency simulatot that requires

that the number of teplications be inversely related to the true choice

probabilities. The Lerman/Manski. simulator thus requires a very large num-

ber of replications for small choice probabilities.

     Finally it should be noted that the computational effort in the

simulation increases nearly linearly with the dimensionality of the in-

tegral in (5), D=(I-l)*T, since most computer time is involved in generat-

ing the univariate truncated normal draws.5 For reliable results it is

crucial to compute the cumulative normal distribution function and its in-

verse with high accuracy. The near-linearity permits applications to large

choice sets with a large number of panel waves.



     4. DATA, VARIABLE DEFINITIONS, AND BASIC SAMPLE CHARACTERISTICS

     The paper employs data from the Survey of the Elderly collected by the

Hebrew Rehabilitation Center for the Aged (HRCA). This survey is part of

an ongoing panel survey of elderly in Massachusetts that began in 1982.

Initially, the sample consisted of 4040 elderly, aged60 and above. In ad-

dition to the baseline interview in 1982, reinterviews were conducted in

1984, 1985, 1986, and 1987. The sample is stratified and consists of two

populations. The first population represents about 70 percent of the

sample and was drawit from a random selection of communities in Massa-

chusetts. This first subsample ia in itself highly stratified to produce

an overrepresentation of the very old. The second population that com-

prises the remaining 30 percent is drawn from elderly participants of the

27 Massachusetts home health care corporations. In the second population

the older old are also overrepresented. The sample selection criteria,

sampling procedures and exposure rates are described in more detail in

Morris et.al. (1987) and Kotlikoff and Morris (1987).
                                   - 13   -




     In   addition to basic demographic information collected in the baseline

interview, each wave of the HRCA panel contains questions about the elder-

ly's current marital status, living arrangements, income, and number and

proximity of their children. The surveys pay particular attention to

health status, recording the presence and severity of diagnosed conditions

and determining an array of functional (dis-)abilities.

     Table 1 presents the age distribution of the elderly at baseline in

1982. The average age is 78.5, 78 percent are age 75 or more, and 20 per-

cent are age 85 or more. Among the U.S. noninstitutionalized population

aged 60 and over, 27.9 percent are age 75 or more, while only 5.5 percent

are over age 85. The overrepresentation of the oldest old in our sample is

indicated by the impressive number of 8 centenarians in our sample! Be-

cause the sample overrepresents the very old, it is also characterized by a

very large proportion of women. In 1982, 68.7 percent of the interviewed

elderly were female; by 1986, this percentage had risen to 70.7 percent.

     The lower part of Table 1 provides information about family rela-

tionships and the isolation of some of the elderly. In 1982, 32.9 percent

of the elderly in the HRCA baseline sample were married and 55.0 percent

were widowed. Four years later, 26.7 percent of the surviving elderly were

married and 61.4 percent were widowed. As of 1986, 41.4 percent of the

elderly report no children, 15.2 one, 17.8 two, 12.7 three, and 12.8 per-

cent four or more children. Because the elderly in the sample are quite

old, some of their children are elderly themselves, and some children may

even have died earlier than their parents. A total 47.0 percent of the

elderly have siblings who are still alive; 25.5 percent of all elderly

report that they have no relatives alive at all; and 39.3 percent report

that they have no friends.

     Average yearly income of the elderly rises between 1984 and 1986 from
                                  - 1_4 -


$8,750 to $10500. This 20 percent increase is larger than the concomitant

growth in average income for the general population which was only 13.2

percent. It is interesting to note that elderly without children have a

significantly lower income ($7,500) than elderly with at least one child

($9,500) in 1984, although in 1986, this difference becomes smaller

($9,700 as opposed to $10,750).

     One of the major strengths of the HRCA survey is its detailed informa-

tion on the health status of the elderly. Three kinds of health measures

are reported: a subjective health index, an array of diagnosed conditions,

and an array of functional ability measures. The subjective health index

(STJBJ) is coded "excellent" (1), "good" (2), "fair" (3), or "poor" (4).

The presence and severity of seven chronic illnesses are reported: cancer,

mental illness, diabetes, stroke, heart disease, hypertension, and

arthritis. Each of these illnesses are scored as: "not present" (0),

"present but does not cause limitation" (1), and "present and causes

limitation" (2). We condense this information in a summary measure,

ILLSTJM, the (unweighted) sum of all seven scores. Five measure-s of func-

tional ability are used: the distance an elderly person can walk or wheel,

whether an elderly person can take medication, can attend to his/her per-

sonal care, can prepare his/her own meals, and can do normal housework.

The first measure is scored from 0 to 5, representing mobility from "can

walk more than half mile" down to "confined to bed". The other measures

can attain five values, representing "could do on own", "needs some help

sometimes", "needs some help often", "needs considerable help", and "cannot

do at all" with associated scores from 0 to 4. Similar to the chronic

illnesses, we condense these indicators in a simple summary measures of

functional ability, ADLSTJM, the (unweighted) sum of all five scores.

     Barsch-Supan, Kotlikoff and Morris (1989) discuss more sophisticated
                                      - 15   -




measures, rhe correlation among the several measures of health sratus, and

their relative performance in predicting living arrangements. While the

subjective health rating performs poorly and is barely correlated with the

measures of functional ability and diagnosed conditions, ILLSUM and ADLSUM

are ss good in predicting living arrangement choices as more sophisticted

suismsry measures of health status.

     Although the 1982 sample did not include institutionalized elderly,

subsequent surveys have followed the elderly as they moved, including moves

into and out of nursing homes. The type of institution was carefully re-

corded in the survey instrument. In addition, in each wave the non-

institutionalized elderly were asked who else was living in their home.

This provides the opportunity to estimate a quite general model of living

arrangement choice including the process of institutionalization, having

conditioned on not being institutionalized at the time of the first inter-

view. In the longitudinal analysis we distinguish three categories of

living arrangements:


     (1) Indemendent living mrrsnsements: the elderly's household does not
contain any other person besides the elderly individual and his/her spouse,
if the elderly individual is married and his/her spouse lives with him/her.

     (2) Shared living mrrsngements: the elderly's household contains at
least one other adult person beside the elderly individual and his/her
spouse. In most cmses, the household contains only the elderly, his/her
spouse, and the immediate family of one of his or her children, including s
child-in-law. Less frequently, the household also contains other related
or unrelated persons.

     (3) Institutional living arrangements: This category includes elderly
who are living on a permanent basis in a health-care facility.


     The institutional living arrangements category comprises the entire

spectrum ranging from hospitals and nursing homes to congregate housing and

boarding houses. Living arrsngements are reported as of the dsy of the in-

terview - -   therefore,   temporary nursing home stays are not recorded unless
                                 - 16   -




they happen to be at the time of interview. Rather, moat nuraing home
staya in our data aet repreaent permanent living arrangemenra.6 It ia im-

portant to keep this in mind when comparing the frequency and risk of

institutionalization in this paper with numbers in studies that focus on

short-term nursing home stays.

     Table 2 presents the distributions of living arrangements in the five

waves of the HRCA panel. The frequencies in this table are strictly cross-

sectional and are based on all elderly who were living at the time of each

cross-section and for whom living arrangements were known.

     Moat remarkable is the decreasing, but very high proportion of elderly

living independently in spite of the very old age of most of the elderly in

the sample. Approximately one out of every six elderly shares a household

with his or her own children, whereas very few elderly share a household

with distantly-related or unrelated persons. The dramatic increase over

time in the proportion of institutionalized living arrangements reflects

two effects that must be carefully distinguished. Institutionalization in-

creases because the sample ages and health deteriorates as is obvious from

Table 2. This effect is confounded by the way the sample was drawn. In

1982, the sample is non-institutionalized by design. Only a few elderly

happened to become institutionalized between the time of the sample design

and the actual interview. Four years later, more than one fifth of the

surviving elderly live in an institution, almost all in a nursing home. As

of 1986, very few elderly live in the "new" forms of elderly housing, such

as congregate housing or continuing care retirement communities.

     Table 3 examines the temporal evolution of living arrangements. It

enumerates all living arrangement sequences that are observed among the

1196 elderly whose living arrangements could be ascertained from 1982

through 1986. A little less than half (47.8 percent) of the elderly
                                 - 17   -




maintain the aame living arrangement from 1982 through 1986. Another 21.0
percent died before 1986 without an obaerved living arrangement tranaition.

Thia atability confirma the results by Borsch-Supan (1988) and Ellwood and

Kane (1988). About 40 percent of the aampled elderly lived independently

from 1982 through 1986. Another 15.6 percent remained independent until

they died prior to 1986. Another 24.6 percent lived for at least some time

with their children, and 21.1 percent experienced at least one stay in an

institution. The most frequently observed transition is from living inde-

pendently to being institutionalized. These sequences are observed for

42.4 percent of all elderly who change their living arrangement at least

once. Only 13.7 percent change from living independently to living with

their children. Most other sequences are very rare.



     S. ESTIMATION RESULTS

     For the longitudinal econometric analysis, we extract a small working

sample of 314 elderly who were interviewed in all five waves, whose living

arrangements could be ascertained in all five waves, and who have reliable

data on all covariates in all five waves. This results in a sample biased

toward the more healthy elderly. While we have not done so here, the

econometric model can easily be extended to accommodate sample truncation

due to exogenous factors, most importantly death and health-related in-

ability to conduct an interview. Table 4 presents a description of the

variables employed and the usual sample statistics of this subsample.

     The presentation of results is organized according to four inter-

temporal specifications (pooled cross-sections, random effects, autoregres-

sive errors, and random effects plus autoregressive errors) and two or

three specifications of correlation pattern across alternatives (the HA

assumption; correlation between random effects, if applicable; and the full
                                   - 18   -




MN? model) .   Three replications (draws) were used to simulate the choice

probabilities entering the loglikelihood function. Using fewer replica-

tions produces less reliable results, but increasing the number of replica-

tion up to nine as we did for the final estimate does not change results in

any substantive way.

     The goodness-of-fit in the various specifications is examined in Table

5. This table reports the value of the simulated loglikelihood function at

estimated parameter values and the pseudo-R2 associated with this

loglikelihood value.7 The cross-sectional estimates yield a pseudo-R2 of

more than 40 percent, a satisfactory fit for this kind of data. However,

introducing random effects in order to account for unobserved time-

invariant characteristics dramatically increases the fit. If shocks are

allowed to taper off in a first order autoregressive process rather than to

persist in form of a random effect, the fit is even better. Finally, the

tombination of random effects and the AR(l) structure yields significantly

better results than if either specification is employed separately.8

Clearly, the unobaerved utilities of this model include both time-invariant

and time-varying components.

      Correlation across alternatives is also present. The full multinomial

probit specifications (rightmost numbers in Table 5, denoted by "MN?") fare

everywhere significantly better than the models that obey the hA assump-

tion (leftmost numbers in Table 5, denoted by "ITA"). Inter-alternative

correlation appears to work through the contemporary error components rath-

er than through the random effects, as can be seen by comparing the numbers

below "RE-Corr" with those below "MNP".

      Detailed estimation results follow in Tables 6 through 9. These four

tables correspond to the four intertemporal specifications (pooled cross-

sections, random effects, autoregressive errors, and random effects plus
                                   - 19   -




autoregressive   errors)   The two or three panels in each table pertain to

the correlation pattern across alternatives: the leftmost panel relate to

the hA assumption, the rightmost panel to a full MNP model. In the models

with random effects, the middle panel reports on the estimation with corre-

lated random effects. For each variable we measure (1) the relative in-

fluence on the likelihood of living alone relative to the likelihood of

becoming institutionalized (e.g., ACEI), and (2) the relative influence on

the likelihood of living with others relative to the likelihood of becoming

institutionalized (e.g., ACE2).

     We first comment on the cross-sectional results, Table 6. Four vari-

ables describe the influence of demographic characteristics on the living

arrangement choices of the elderly person. Age oer ae decreases both the

likelihood of living alone and of living with othera relative to the

likelihood of becoming institutionalized, holding all other variables con-

stant, particularly health. Female elderly are more likely to live alone.

The number of children considerably increases the likelihood of a shared

living arrangement. These results are as expected. A surprising result,

however, is the insignificance of the indicator variable for being married.

     Three variables measure health. While neither the subjective health

rating (denoted by "SUBJ") nor the score of diagnosed conditions (denoted

by "ILLSUN") predict living arrangement choces very well, the score of

functional ability (denoted by "ADLSUM") is by far the most significant

variable. The performance of the functional ability index confirms the

results of most health-oriented studies of institutionalization.9 The poor

performance of subjective health ratings in predicting living arrangement

choices is perhaps not so surprising given that this variable exhibits, on

average, very little change over time, iii spite of distinct changes over

time in average functional ability scores (see Table 4).
                                 - 20   -




     The results reveal a significant income effect. The higher the income

of the elderly person, the less likely they are to be institutionalized.

The direction of the income effect is in line with most previous atudiea,

although many studies fail to measure this income effect with much preci-

sion.10 It is quite difficult to construct a variable measuring the rela-

tive costs of ambulatory and institutional care for the included Massachu-

setts communities. Hence, there are no prices included in our estimation.

     In the right panel of Table 6, two contemporary covariance terms are

estimated. The hA-assumption of the left panel is clearly rejected as can

be seen by the large difference in the loglikelihood values. The un-

observed component in the utility of living independently exhibits sig-

nificantly less variation than in the utility of the other two choices.

Note that the t-statics are measured around the null hypotheses a(v)=l,

corr(vLi)O for i"j, and relate to the following reparametrized values:

the t-statistic of a(v) refers to exp(u(v)), and the t-statistic of

corr(vw) refers to (exP(corr(vi.wj))-l)/(exP(corr(vv))+l). This

parametrization implicitly imposes the inequalities            and

tcorr(v.u)Il.
     The coefficient estimates remain qualitatively unchanged when the hA-

assumption is dropped in favor of a cross-sectional, multinomial probit

analysis. However, some coefficients change their relative numerical mag-

nitudea. The income effect, to take just one example, is strengthened rel-

ative to the influence of the measure of functional ability.

     We now put the panel structure into place. Introduction of random ef-

fects (see Table 7) dramatically raises the pseudo-R2 to almost 60 percent.

Some of the time-invariant characteristics become less significant, while

the time-varying variables come out much stronger. Such an effect might

be expected because the time-varying variables have falsely captured some
                                     - 21   -




effects   in each cross-section that are now attributed to the random ef-

fects. Note that time-invariant characteristics are identified in the ran-

dom effects model as opposed to a fixed effects specification.

     In Table 8, autoregressive error components link the different waves

instead of random effects. Finally, Table 9 reports on the full model,

where the random effects are augmented by two mutoregressive error com-

ponents. The autocorrelation coefficients               are highly significant, and

they drastically reduce the significance of the random effect terms in the

combined specification, Table 9. However, they do not replace the random

effects. While they are close to one, the large t-stacistica imply that

they are significantly different from one. In addition, the likelihood

ratio statistic shows a significant difference between the specification in

Table 9 with those in Tables 7 and 8. We conclude that the unobserved

utilities determining living arrangements of the elderly include both time-

invariant and time-varying components. The panel is too short, however, to

precisely separate the two error structures as is evident by the high stan-

dard errors of the random effect terms at the bottom of Table 9.

     The demographic, health, and income variables are remarkably stable

across the different specifications of the covariance matrix, in spite of

their different fits in terms of achieved likelihood values and quite dif-

ferent numerical values of covariance elements. This stability pertains

both to alternative intertemporal and inter-alternative correlation pat-

terns. The likelihood of living independently decreases dramatically with

age, even after correcting for the decline in health and functional

ability, as measured by the variables "ADLSUM" and "ILLSUM". The gender

gap --    elderly   men are more likely to live in institutions, elderly women

are more likely to live independently -         - is   evident across all specifica-

tions. As opposed to other studies, elderly women are also more likely to
                                   - 22   -




live   with children.11 The larger the number of living children, the more

probable is living together with one of them.

       Among the health varimbles, the simple functional ability index

employed in this paper performs best. It is the most significant variable

in the model. In the presence of this variable, subjective health ratings

have no predictive power whatsoever. The simple index of diagnosed condi-

tions is weakly significant, but a more detailed analysis of the included

illnesses may produce better results.

       Finally, economics does matter. The income effect is measured pre-

cisely and robustly across all specifications. It is slightly un-

derestimated in cross-sectional analysis, and slightly overestimated in the

pure random effects modelJ2 Those elderly with higher incomes choose in-

stitutions less frequently. Gauged by this willingness to spend income not

to enter an institution, institutions appear to be an inferior living ar-

rangement. The elderly's income may be spent on ambulatory care, thereby

making living independently feasible in spite of declining functional

ability. The ability to buy ambulatory services out of the elderly's in-

come may also increase the likelihood of living with children rather than

becoming institutionalized because these services substitute some of the

burden that otherwise rests solely on the children. In addition, income

may be spent on avoiding institutionalization by making transfer payments

to children so that the children ate more willing to take in their

parents.13 The results also suggest that increasing income of the elderly

does not raise their probability of living alone relative to the probabil-

ity of living with their children.



       6. CONCLUDING REMARKS

       The simulated likelihood method works well and requires a very small
                                 - 23   -




number of replications. It easily accommodates highly complex error struc-

tures snd can handle different error structures without major programming

effort.

     Two main conclusions follow from the estimation results. First, a

careful specification of the temporal error process dramatically improves

the fit. It also appears that ignoring intertemporal linkages does bias

some estimation results numerically, although the different specifications

produce qualitatively similar coefficients of the substantive parameters.

     Second, living arrangements choices are predominantly governed by

functional ability, and, to a lesser degree (but still statistically snd

numerically significant) by age. The income effect is measured precisely

and robustly. Institutions are an inferior living arrangement as measured

by the willingness to spend income not to enter an institution. A somewhat

surprising result is that changes in marital status do not appear to matter

a great deal. The only supply factor that is included in our analysis, the

number of living children, is, as can be expected, a significant factor for

choosing shared living arrsngements.

     There are several weak points in the statistical analysis. The

autoregressive specification "solves" the initial value problem by invoking

a stecionarity assumption. This is unsatisfactory, particularly with a

short panel, such as in this application. It is possible to estimate a

simple non-parametric specification of the initial value distribution, al-

though in practice, the random effects should capture a great deal of these

effects.

     The sample is selective because it includes only survivors. Whether

this ssmple selection is innocent in the sense of not biasing the estimsted

coefficients remain to be studied. There is no problem if the choice of a

living arrangement leaves mortality and morbidity probabilities unaffected.
                                   - 24   -




If,   however, mortaliry and morbidity are, ceteris paribus, higher in nurs-

ing homes (e.g., because of inferior rreatment), there is a serious sample

selection problem.

      Our panel of five wsves is short. The identification difficulties ap-

parent in Table 9 are indicative of this short psnel length. However, the

dramatic differences in goodness-of-fit indicate that, even in a short

panel, the rewards for controlling for intertemporel linkages are quite

sizesble.
                                              - 25   -




         FOOTNOTES

1..   Examples are quoted in Borsch-Supan, 1986.

2. Including some rule to break ties.

3. Kit is a row vector, while fi   is   a column vector.

4. This was pointed out first by Paul Ruud.

5. The matrix multiplications and the Cholesky-decomposition in (12) re-

      quire operations that are of higher order. However, the generation of

      random numbers takes more computing time than these matrix operations

      even for reasonably large dimensions.

6. Carber (1988) presents evidence on the distribution of lengths of stay

      in a nursing home.

7. The pseudo-R2 is defined as l-(sctual likelihood)/(likelihood at zero

      coefficients and identity covariance matrix).

8. Significance as measured by the likelihood ratio statistic.

9. See Csrber, 1988, for a survey of health-oriented studies of in-

      stitutionalization.

10. See Borsch-Supan, Kotlikoff, and Morris, 1989, for a survey.

11. 8Orsch-Supan, Kotlikoff, and Morris, 1989, report the opposite for the

      same basic data set, but a much less selected sample.

12. These differences are not statistically significant.

13. See Kotlikoff and Morris (1988) on this "bribery" hypothesis.
                                  - 26   -




REFERENCES

Borsch-Supan, A., 1986, Household Formstion, Housing Prices, and Public
     Policy Impacts, Journal of Public Economics 25.

Bdrsch-Supan, A., 1988, Elderly Americans: A Dynamic Analysis of Household
     Dissolution and Living Arrangement Transitions, Paper presented at The
     Conference on Issues in the Economics of Aging, Phoenix, AZ.

BBrsch-Supan, A. ,Kotlikoff, L. , and Morris, J. , 1989, "The Dynamics of
     Living Arrangements of the Elderly: Health and Family Support." Na-
     tional Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper

Bdrsch-Supan, A. , and Hajivassiliou, V.' 1990, "Smooth Unbiased Multi-
     variate Probability Simulators for Limited Dependent Variable Models"
     Cowles Foundation Working Paper, Yale University.

Chamberlain, C. ,1984, Panel Data, in: Zvi Criliches and Michael D. In-
     triligator (eds.), Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 2, Amsterdam: North
     Holland.

Daganzo, C., 1981, Multinomial Probit, New York: Academic Press.

Ellwood, D.T. ,and Kane, T.J., 1988, The American Way of Aging: An Event
     History Analysis, Paper presented at The Conference on Issues in the
     Economics of Aging, Phoenix, AZ.

Carber, A.M. ,1988, Predicting Nursing Home Utilization Among the High-Risk
     Elderly, Paper presented at The Conference on Issues in the Economics
     of Aging, Phoenix, AZ.

Ceweke, J. ,1989, Efficient Simulation from the Mutlivsriate Normal Distri-
     bution Subject to Linear Inequality Constraints and the Evaluation of
     Constraint Probabilities, Duke University Working Paper.

Hsjivassiliou, V., and McFadden, D. , 1990, The Method of Simulated Scores
     for the Estimation of LDV Models: With An Application to the Problem
     of External Debt Crises, Discussion Paper, Yale University.

Kotlikoff, L.J. ,and Morris,J. , 1987, How Much Care Do the Aged Receive
     from their Children? A Bimodal Picture of Contact and Assistance, NBER
     Working Paper No. 2391.

Kotlikoff, L.J. ,and Morris,J. , 1988, Why Don't the Elderly Live With their
     Children? A New Look, Paper presented st The Conference on Issues in
     the Economics of Aging, Phoenix, AZ.

Langdon, M.C. , 1984, Methods of Determining Choice Probability in Utility
     Maximising Multiple Alternative Models, Transportation Research B 18.

Lerman, S. ,and Msnski, C., 1981, On the Use of Simulated Frequencies to
     Approximate Choice Probabilities, in: Manski, C. , and McFadden, D.
     Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric Applications,
     Cambridge, Mass.: MIT-Press.
                                 - 27   -




McFadden, D. 1984, Qualitative Response Models, in: Z. Griliches and N.
     Intriligator, Handbook of Econometrics, Amsterdam: North Holland.

McFadden, D. ,1989, A Method of Simulated Moments for Estimation of Dis-
     crete Response Models Without Numerical Integration, Econometrica 57.

Morris, John M. , Claire E. Gutkin, Clarence C. Sherwood, and Ellen
     Bernstein. 1987. "Interest in Long Term Care Insurance." Final
     Report in connection with HCFA Cooperative Agreement no. 18-C-98375/l,
     June.

Pakes, A., and Pollard, D., 1989, Simulation and the Asymptotics of op-
     timization Estimators, Econometrica 57.
     Table 1: DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS


(1) ACE DISTRIBUTION AT BASELINE 1982


               60+          65+      70+           75+           80+          85+          90+          95+         100+
Count          212          233      231           985        826             400          150           32           8
Percent        6.9          7.6      7.5          32.0       26.8            13.0          4.9          1.0         0.3



(2) MARITAL STATUS

                            1982                      1984               1985                    1986                 1987

Married                     32.9                      29.3               28.6                    26.7
Widowed                     55.0                      58.8               59.4                    61.4
Never Married                8.2                       8.1                   8.2                  8.3
Divorced/Sep.                3.9                       3.7                   3.7                  3.6



(3) NUMBER OF CHILDREN IN 1986

NUMBER OF CHILDREN:

                0           1         2           3          4           5            6            7           8+
Count        1275       468         549       392        189            87           51           31           35
Percent      41.4      15.2        17.8      12.7        6.1           2.8          1.7          1.0          1.1



(4) ISOLATED ELDERLY


Percentage of Elderly in 1986 without .

                                      Children               Any                                 Any Relatives
  Children      Siblings           or Siblings           Relatives             Friends            or Friends

   41.4              53.0                  31.2              25.5                   39.3                24.5



Source: MACA Survey of the Elderly, Working Sample of 3077 Elderly
               Table 2: LIVING ARRANGEMENTS OF THE ELDERLY
                              (Percentages)

                                              1982   1984    1985    1986    1987



IndeDendent Livine Arrangements:
Alone:                                        56.8   51.2    50.5    46.4
with Spouse:                                  18.5   14.0    11.9    10.8

Total:                                        75.3   65.2    62.4    57.2


Shared LivinE Arranaements:

Alone With Kids:                              16.6   17.4    15.7    13.7
with Spouse and Kids:                          1.4    1.7     1.8     1.8
Other Relatives or
Nonrelacives Present:                         5.9     5.9     5.7     5.1

Total:                                        23.9   25.0    23.2    20.6


Institutional Livine Arrangements:

Convent, Rectory, CCRC,
Congregate Housing, or Retirement Hoae:       0.0     0.2     0.7     0.6
Foster Home, Community or Domestic Care:      0.0     0.2     0.2     0.3
Nursing Home (ICF):                           0.2     5.4     8.0    11.6
Nursing Home (SNF):                           0.0     2.9     3.5     7.0
Rest Home (level IV):                         0.0     0.4     0.7     1.3
Hotel, Boarding or Rooming House: -           0.6     0.3     0.3     0.2
Hospital:                                     0.0     0.4     1.1     1.2

Total:                                         0.8    9.8    14.5    22.2


Number of Observations:                       3070   2965    1130    2331


Source:   HRCA Survey of the Elderly (cross-sectional subsamples of elderly with
completed   interviews)
      Table 3: LIVING ARRANGEMENT SEQUENCES 1982. 1984. 1985. 1986


Sequence       1111   IIIC   1110   IIIN   hID    lId       11CC   IICN   1101

Count           474     17      6     40      3         1      8      2      2
Percent       39.63   1.42   0.50   3.34   0.25   0.08      0.67   0.17   0.17

Sequence       1100   lION   IINI   IINN   hIND   IIDD      ICII   ICIN   ICCC

Count             1      3      1     42      1    110         1      1     20
Percent        0.08   0.25   0.08   3.51   0.08   9.20      0.08   0.08   1.67

Sequence       ICCN   ICOO   ICNN   ICDD   lOll   1010      IOCN   1001   1000

Count             2      1      4      6      1         1      1      3      6
Percent        0.17   0.08   0.33   0.50   0.08   0.08      0.08   0.25   0.50

Sequence       IONN   IODD   INCC   INNO   INNN   INND      INDD   IDDD   CIII

Count             2      4      1      1     47         2     26     74      3
Percent        0.17   0.33   0.08   0.08   3.93   0.17      2.17   6.19   0.25

Sequence       CIIC   CIlO   CIDD   CCII   CCCI   CCCC      CCCO   CCCN   CCCD

Count             1      1      1      6      6     87         4     18      1
Percent        0.08   0.08   0.08   0.50   0.50   7.27      0.33   1.51   0.08

Sequence       CCNN   CCDD   CODD   CNII   CNNN   CNDD      CDDD 0111     OINN
Count             8     36      1      1     12         7     11      6      1
Percent        0.67   3.01   0.08   0.08   1.00   0.59      0.92   0.50   0.08

Sequence       OCCC   OCCN   OCNN   OCDD   OOIN   OOCI      00CC   OOCO   OOCN
Count             2      1      2      1      1         2      1     11      2
Percent        0.17   0.08   0.17   0.08   0.08   0.17      0.08   0.92   0.17

Sequence       0000   000N   OONI   OONN   000D   ONNN ONDD        ODDD   NIlI
Count             7      1      1      6      9         4      3      7      1
Percent        0.59   0.08   0.08   0.50   0.75   0.33      0.25   0.59   0.08

Sequence       NICC   NICN   NIDD   NCNN   NNNN

Count             1      1      1      1      4
Percent        0.08   0.08   0.08   0.08   0.33


Source: HRCA Survey of the Elderly (1196 Elderly, excludes elderly not interviewe
or without ascertained living arrangement in at least one wave)

Notes: Living Arrangements are denoted by:
          ILives Independently, CLives with Children, 0=Lives with Other
       Relatives or Nonrelatives, N—Lives in Nursing Home, D=Dead.
      Table 4: VARIABLE DEFINITIONS AND STATISTICS IN LONGITUDINAL SUBSAMPLE




DEPENDENT VARIABLE:

                                                      Sample    Frequency
Choice    Definition                          1982   1984      1985 1986     1987


1         Independent Living Arrangements     .790   .742      .732   .697   .643

2         Shared Living Arrangements          .210   .229      .220   .236   .223

3         Institutional Living Arrangements   .000   .029      .048   .067   .134


Number of Observations:                        314    314       314    314    314




                                                       Sample Average
Variable Definition                           1982   1984   1985   1986      1987



AGE         age of elderly person             78.2   80.2      81.2   82.2   83.2

FEMALE      1 if female,                      0.85   0.85      0.85   0.85   0.85
            0 if male

KIDS        number of living children         2.31   2.31      2.31   2.31   2.31
MARRIED     1. if married                     .178   .134      .121   .115   .105
            0 if widowed or not married

SUM         subjective health rating          2.74   2.65      2.60   2.64   2.65
ADLSUM      score of functional disability    5.25   5.75      5.82   6.27   7.38

ILLSUM      score of diagnosed conditiona     3.47   3.40      3.70   3.98   4.12
INCOME      real annual income                6.10   6.18      6.27   6.85   7.19
            (in $1000 1987)



Note: Each explanatory variable is interacted with choice I (—living indepen-
      dently) and choice 2 (—living with children or others) while choice 3
      (—living in an institution) is the base category.
Table 5: ESTIMATION RESULTS: GOODNESS OF FIT
   (Loglikelihood values, pseudo-Ri in parentheses)



Pooled Cross-Sections it =

   hA                               MNP

 -996.46                           -957.94
 (0.422)                           (0.445)



Random Effects Included jt =              +

   hA             RE-Corr           MNP

 -715.70         -711.79           -671.93
 (0.585)         (0.587)           (0.610)



First Order Autoreeressive Errors Included

   hA                               MNP
                                                   =
                                                       rjt-i   +




 -673.72                           -652.74
 (0.609)                           (0.622)



Random Effects and First Order Autorearessjve Errors Included:

             + tlit,   Pli,t =   i'i,t-i      +


   hA             RE-Corr           MNP

 -648.07         -647.60           -632.45
 (0.624)         (0.625)           (0.633)




...   Three different specifications of correlations across
      alternatives are employed, denoted by:

      hA:         Independence of irrelevant alternatives imposed
                  i.e.,

      RE-Corr: Random effects correlated
                  i.e., o(ma)O a(v1v)=O.
      MNP:        Unobserved time-specific utility components correlated
                  i.e., a(w1v)O. a(mm)=O.
        Table 6: POOLED CROSS-SECTIONAL PROBIT ESTIMATES

                 Error structure: Cit =


                 LIA (Soecification A)     PIMP (SDecification E)


Variable            Estimate      t-stat     Estimate     t-stat


ACE1                 - .0319      -2.64       - .0234     -2.87
ACE2                 - .0169      -1.39       - .0159     -1.87

FEMALE1                .4490       1.81        .3687       1.72
FEMALE2                .4163       1.56        .3102       1.38

KIDS1                  .0447        .99        .0624       1.54
KIDS2                  .1325       2.86        .1258       2.86

MARRIEDI               .4243       1.21        .1870         .66
MARRIED2             - .3468       - .92      - .3640     -1.20

SUSJ1                  .1263       1.08        .0843         .81
SUBJ2                - .0658       - .54      - .0333      - .29

ADLSUM1              - .2343      12.58       - .1769     10.08
ADLSUM2              - .1239      -6.61       - .1132     -5.22

ILLSUM1              - .0256       - .66      - .0242       - .68
ILLSUM2              - .0195       - .48      - .0139       - .36

INCOME1                .0788       2.45         .0809      2.61
INCOME2                .0922       2.86         .0905      2.92

CONSTANTI            5.5292        4.92       4.1058        5.65
CONSTANT2            2.7875        2.45       2.5686        3.26




                     1.0000        (fix)        .2834      -2.36
stddev(1)
                      .0000        (fix)        .4465       1.72
corr(i'1 ,L92)




loglik                          -996.46                  -957.88
loglik a zero                  -1724.82                 -1724.82
pseudo-R                         42.23%                   44.46%

noba                               1570                     1570




Qtt In this and the following tables, the t-statistics of
      the eLements of the covariance matrix refer to the re-
      parametrized estimated values. They are evaluated
      around zero for correlations and around one for standard
         deviations.
                 Table 7: RANDOM EFFECTS PROBIT MODEL

                 Error Structure:      =
                                            a     +



                 hA (Spec. B)          RE-Corr (Spec. Fl)             MNP (Spec.     F2)


Variable      Estimate       t-stat    Estimate t-stat                Estimate t-stat


AGE1             - .0570     -2.64         - .0604        -3.05        - .0643     -3.50
AGE2             - .0307     -1.22         - .0311        -1.40        - .0360     -1.79

FEMALEI           .5597       1.38          .4370          1.11         .7641       2.21
FEMALE2          1.0004       1.82         1.2543          2.37         .8631       2.16

KIDS1             .0329         .38            .0094            .12     .0586         .78
KIDS2             .2235       2.16             .2036       2.24         .1398       1.73

MARRIED1          .6279       1.29             .5589       1.20         .3121         .73
MARRIED2          .2165         .38            .1706            .31    - .1039       - .22

SUBJI             .0889         .50            .1023            .60     .0521         .33
SUBJ2            - .1938     -1.00         - .2192        -1.18        - .0756       - .46

ADLSUM1          - .2985    -11.28         -.2850         -11.05       - .2472    -10.12
ADLSUM2          - .1824     -6.24         -.1716         -6.04        - .1981     -7.17

ILLSUM1          - .0905      -1.53        - .0977        -1.73        - .0900      -1.66
ILLSUM2          -.0743      -1.10         - .0741        -1.16        - .0704      -1.23

INCOME1           .1190        2.28            .1149       2.30         .0988        2.29
INCOME2           .1361        2.59            .1328       2.64         .1074        2.47

CONSTANT1        9.2564       4.71         9.3513           5.12       8.9092        5.21
CONSTANT2        3.9987        1.75        3.4848           1.68       5.2459        2.78




stddev(v1)       1.0000       (f ix)       1:0000          (fix)        .5833       -2.79
corr(v1,,2)       .0000       (fix)         .0000          (fix)        .7485        4.81

stddev(a1)       1.1305        1.03         .9650           -   .29     .7386       -2.21
stddev(a2)       1.9847        7.93        1.7468           5.23       1.1366         .71
corr(a1,a2)       .0000       (fix)        -   .5495       -3.18        .0000       (fix)




loglik                      -717.79                     -711.79                   -671.93
loglik at zero             -1724.82                    -1724.82                  -1724.82
pseudo-R2                    58.38%                      58.73%                    61.04%

nobs                           1570                   '     1570                     1570
           Table 8: PRO8IT MODEL WITH AUTOREGRESSIVE ERRORS

                 Error Structure: Ejt —
                                          piEi,tl +
                 hA (Seciflcation C)         MNP (SDecification C)


Variable           Estimate t-.                Estimate t-stat


AGE1               - .0458     -3.23            - .0368     -2.51
AGE2               - .0237     -1.63            - .0033      - .1.6

FEMALE1             .2286         .91            .4414       1.79
FEMALE2             .6579       2.27             .6295       1.56

KIDS1               .0176         .34            .0541        .97
KIDS2               .1351       2.50             .1801       2.50

MARRIED1            .1352         .44            .2048        .66
MARRIED2           - .1184      - .35           - .3845      - .93

SUZJ1              - .0166      - .12            .0100        .08
SUBJ2              - .1266     -1.03            - .1055      - .72

ADLSUMI            - .1972    -11.06            - .1953     -8.15
ADLSUM2            - .1419     -7.83            - .1286     -4.92

ILLSUM1            -.0464      -1.18            - .0300      - .70
ILLSUM2            - .0511     -1.24            - .0285      - .55

INCOME1             .0635       2.06             .0910       2.36
INCOME2             .0694       2.25             .1007       2.58

CONSTANT1          7.2253       5.66            5.6732       4.08
CONSTANT2          3.6772       2.79             .8886         .45




                   1.0000      (fix)              .2678     -3.27
stddev(v1)
                    .0000       (fix)             .0137        .08
corr(w1,t.'2)

                    .9278      1.0.40             .9065      7.53
p1
                    .8059      15.56              .8668     19.13
°2



 loglik                       -673.73                      -652.74
                                                          -1724.82
 loglik a zero               -1724.82
                                                            62.16%
 pseudo-R                      60.94%

 nobs                            1570                         1570
        Table 9: RANDOM EFFECTS PROBIT MODEL WITH AUTOREGRESSIVE ERRORS

                 Error Structure:               °. +               =
                                                                       ii,-i         +


                  hA     (Spec. D)        RE-Corr (Spec. Hi)            MNP (Spec. H2)


Variable         Estimate t-stat           Estimate t-stat             Estimate t-stat


AGE1              -   .0646      -3.96      -   .0644     -3.74          -   .0513       -3.60
AGE2              -   .0421      -2.32      -   .0424     -2.25          -   .0279       -1.43

FEMALE1               .6071       1.80          .6237      1.84              .5791         1.90
FEMALE2               .9769       2.41          .9257      2.24              .7492         1.62

KIDS1                 .0469        .66          .0500        .71             .0465             .79
KIDS2                 .1554       1.96          .1534      1.94              .1666         1.99

MARRIED1           .1969           .50       .1960           .49          .2004                .57
MARRIED2          -.1502          -.34      -.1549         -.35          -.3729            -.83

SUBJ1              .0461           .32       .0421           .29             .1059             .79
SUBJ2             -.0724          -.47      -.0683         -.44          -.0450            -.28

ADLSUM1           -   .2358     -10.01      -   .2356     -10.09         -   .2201       -10.50
ADLSUM2           -   .1811      -7.27      -
                                                .1826      -7.29         -   .1612        -6.35

ILLSUM1           -   .0848      -1.67      -
                                                .0843     -1.67          -   .0864        -1.89
ILLSUM2           -   .0694      -1.26      -   .0703     -1.28          -   .0718        -1.28

INCOME1               .0866       2.11          .0869      2.06              .0892         2.23
INCOME2               .0943       2.29          .0942      2.22              .0987         2.44

CONSTANT1         8.9868          6.30      8.9608         5.88          7.2120            5.59
CONSTANT2         5.2089          3.25      5.3660         3.21          3.3559            1.92




stddev(v1)        1.0000         (fix)      1.0000         (fix)             .0278        -3.77
corr(v1,v2)           .0000      (fix)          .0000      (fix)         -   .3898        -2.59

stddev(1)             .0027       -.14          .1288     -1.98              .0022         -   .16
stddev(a2)        1.0582           .34      1.0239           .13             .0054         -   .16
corr(a1,2)            .0000      (fix)      1.0000           .05             .0000        (fix)

p1                    .9499       7.87          .9571      6.87              .9865         2.75
p2                    .6692       7.67          .6946      7.08              .8719        20.54




loglik                         -648.07                   -647.60                      -632,45
loglik at zero                -1724.82                  -1724.82                     -1724.82
pseudo-R2                       62.43%                    62.46%                       63.33%

nobs                              1,570                    1570                            1570
            Table 10: COVARIANCE MATRIX OF RANDOM UTILITY TERN IN SPECIFICATION H

            Error Structure:                      °i +
                                                                     i•'i,t-1 + 'i,t'                i1., .

            where                                        if ts
                                                         if ts             and cov(a1a) Ejj

            implying


            cov(Eitej)                     6 + 1(ts)
                                                             j(l-p)        .)(12) uj.                i,jl,.. ,11.
                                                                     I -
                                                                           pp

            t=          1                     2                      3                        4                      5
        +
sjji—l                  2     3       1       2     3        1       2       3        1       2     3         1      2     3

    1           .03 - .08    .0       .03 - .07     .0       .03 - .06      .0        .03 -.05      .0       .03 -   .04 .0
12          - .08 4.17       .0   -   .08 3.64     .0    -   .08 3.17     .0     -    .07 2.76     .0    -   .07 2.41     .0
    3           .0      .0 2.0        .0      .0 1.0         .0      .0 1.0           .0      .0 1.0         .0      .0 1.0

    1           .03 -.08 .0           .03 -.08      .0       .03 - .07      .0        .03 -.06 .0   .03 - .05  .0
2 2         -   .07 3.64 .0       -   .08 4.17      .0   -   .08 3.64 .0         -    .08 3.17 .0 - .07 2.76 .0
    3           .0   .0 1.0           .0      .0 2.0         .0      .0 1.0           .0   .0 1.0   .0    .0 1.0

  1             .03 - .08    .0     .03 - .08  .0            .03 -.08 .0              .03 -   .07   .0       .03 -   .06   .0
3 2 I       - .06 3.17       .0   - .07 3.64 .0          -   .08 4.17 .0         - .08 3.64         .0   - .08 3.17        .0
    3   I
                .0      .0 1.0      .0    .0 1.0             .0      .0 2.0           .0      .0 1.0         .0      .0 1.0

    1           .03 - .07    .0       .03 - .08 .0           .03 -.08 .0              .03 -   .08   .0       .03 - .07     .0
4   2I      - .05 2.76       .0 - .06 3.17 .0            -   .07 3.64 .0         - .08 4.17 .0 - .08              3.64     .0
    3           .0      .0 1.0        .0      .0 1.0         .0   .0 1.0              .0      .0 2.0         .0      .0 1.0

  1           .03 - .07    .0 .03 - .07 .0 .03 - .08 .0                               .03 - .08     .0       .03 -.08 .0
5 2 I       - .04 2.41 .0 - .05 2.76 .0 - .06 3.17 .0                             -   .07 3.64 .0        -   .08 4.17 .0
  3 I         .0    .0 1.0    .0    .0 1.0 .0    .0 1.0                               .0   .0 1.0            .0   .0 2.0
