                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  HOMEWORK IN MACROECONOMICS I: BASIC THEORY




                                 Jess Benhabib

                               Richard Rogerson

                                Randall Wright




                         Working Paper No. 3344 Part I




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  April 1990




We thank seminar participants at Northwestern, Stanford, Penn, UCLA, Berkeley,
San Diego, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis for their input into
earlier work (Benhabib, Rogerson and Wright 1988) that gave rise to this paper.
We acknowledge financial support from NSF grants SES-8704680 and SES-882l225,
as well as technical support from the C.V. Starr Center for Applied Economics
at New York University and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. This paper
is part of NEER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #3344 Part I
                                         April 1990


                  HOMEWORK IN MACROECONOMICS I: BASIC THEORY


                                    ABSTRACT

This paper argues that the home, or nonmarket, sector is empirically large,
whether measured in terms of the time devoted to household production
activities or in terms of the value of home produced output. We also argue
that there may be a good deal of substitutability between the market and
nonmarket sectors, and that this may be an important missing element in
existing macroeconomic models. We pursue this within a framework that labor
economists have studied for some time.         Symmetrically with the market,
household production uses labor and capital to produce a nonmarket
consumption good according to a possibly stochastic technology. We show any
model with home production is observationally equivalent to another model
without home production, but with different preferences.       However, for a
given set of preferences,  incorporating household production can
dramatically change the nature and the interpretation of several
macroeconomic phenomena. As an example, we show that it is possible to have
involuntary unemployment and normal leisure at the same time in models
with home production, something that cannot arise in models without it. As
another example, we discuss how home production affects the interpretation
of models with consumer durables.




Jess Benhabib             Richard Rogerson               Randall Wright
New York University       Graduate School of Business    UPENN and
Department of Economics   Stanford University            Hoover Institution
269 Mercer St, 7th Floor Stanford, CA 94305              Stanford University
New York, NY 10003                                       Stanford, CA 94305
I. Introduction


     A standard assumption in many models of the labor market, and

especially aggregate (macroeconomic) models, is that time has exactly two

uses: market work and leisure.' This implies that individuals who do not

work in the market, for whatever reason, must be enjoying leisure — which is

patently false, as any homemaker could attest.      The figures in Table 1,

derived from Hill's (1985) analysis of the Michigan Time Use Survey,

indicate that an average household consisting of a married couple spends

about 57 hours per week in market work and 49 hours working in the home. As

a fraction of "discretionary time" (market work plus homework plus leisure),

market work amounts to 33 percent, while homework is only slightly less, at

28 percent. Notice also that leisure is roughly the same for married males

and females, despite large differences in amount of market work.




                             Table 1: Time Use


           Activity
                        Married Male MarrLed Female MarrLed Couple
           (hrs/wk)

          Market work       40.18          16.73         56.91
          Home work         14.25          34.85         49.10
          Leisure           33.37          34.48         67.85
          Sleep and other   80.20          81.94        162.14




     Complementary to these, data are studies that have attempted to measure

the value of home produced output.        Hawrylyshyn (1976), for example,
estimates that the output of the household sector corresponding only to

married women amounts to approximately 35% of measured GNP.      Cronau (1980)


'An obvious exception is the extremely useful -literature on job search; we
simply have nothing to say about the search model in this paper.



                                    -1-
estimates that the value of home production associated only with married

women in 1973 can exceed 70% of a family's market income after taxes. These

figures do not include the contributions of unmarried individuals or married

males.   Several researchers, including Nordhaus and Tobin (1972), Zolotas

(1981), Fraumeni and Jorgenson (1987), and Eisner (1988, 1989), have studied

the issue of modifying the existing National Income and Product Accounts to

include household production (as well as a variety of other factors).

Eisner (1988) provides an excellent summary of this literature, and reports

a range of estimates for the value of home production relative to measured

GNP of 20 - 50 percent.

      Although the exact size of the household sector is difficult to

measure, even a conservative estimate of 35% of measured GNP is a large

amount of economic activity to ignore. By way of comparison, manufacturing

output is only about 40% of GNP, and yet the manufacturing sector is heavily

studied by macroeconomists. As an alternative comparison, consumption in

the standard National Income and Product Accounts is approximately 70% of

output (this figure counts expenditures on durables as investment rather

than consumption, and excludes the public and foreign sectors). Therefore,

by ignoring the consumption of home produced output, macroeconomists are

excluding a category of consumption that is half as big as the one that they

are including!

      These facts lead us to conclude that home production is an empirically

significant entity at the aggregate level, whether we measure it in terms of

its labor input or its output.2 In light of this, why is it conspicuously

absent from existing macroeconomic models? One possible conjecture is that,

although the home sector is large, its behavior is approximately independent


2
    Greenwood and Herkovitz (1990) argue that the home sector also uses a
large amount of physical capital.


                                     -2-
of the market sector. The data in Table 2, also from Hill (1985), suggest

this conjecture is mistaken.       The fact that individuals employed in the

market sector spend much less time working in the home leads us to believe

that there is, in fact, substantial substitutability between market and

nonznarket activity.     Notice, in particular, that individuals who are not

employed in the market sector do enjoy more leisure, on average, but the

difference in leisure is much less than the difference in time spent in

market work.



                         Table 2: Time Use and Employment


                               Married Male          Married Female
           Activity         Full Time     Not       Full Time     Not
           (hrs/wk)
                            Employed   Employed     Employed   Employed
          Market work     48.62          6.60         39.08      3.22
          Home work       12.70         20.01         24.58     40.90
          Leisure         29.23         51.24         27.95     38.27
          Sleep and other 77.45         89.34         76.39     85.61




     Additional evidence on the substitutability between market and home

production is provided by Rios-Rull's (1988) analysis of the Panel Study of

Income Dynamics.       He calculates hours of market and home work for a

subsample of individuals in five wage groups, and some results from his

study are shown in Table 33 The important feature of these data is the way

that individuals substitute between time in the market and in home

production as the wage varies; for example, notice that especially for the



3The wage groups (in 1969 dollars) were:

               l—[0,2), 2—[2,2.8), 3—[2.8,3.8), 4—[3.8,5.3), 5—[5.3,).

Note that because his subsample excluded individuals who did not report
positive hours in the market for at least four years, these numbers are not
comparable to those in the previous tables.


                                       -3-
upper wage groups, total work is roughly the same despite significant
differences in the allocation of time to the two types of work. All of this

taken together indicates that the home sector is not only large, but that

there is a good deal of substitutability between it and the market.



                         Table 3: Time Use and Wages


                                                   Wage Group
          Group Averages
          (work — hrs/wk)         1          2         3        4       5

         Hourly wage             1.48       2.37      3.28   4.46      7.24
         Years of education     11.18 11.97 12.73 13.00 14.30
         Market work            21.38 29.92 34.52 36.92 38.63
         Home work              12.46 11.19           8.94      6.73   5.02
         Total work             33.85 41.12 43.46 43.65 43.65



     The above evidence suggests that household production could be an

important missing element in existing models of the aggregate economy. Our

goal is to explore this possibility.         Following Gronau (1977, 1985), we

adopt a version of Becker's (1965) model in which each household has a home

production function with time and (possibly) capital as inputs, and a

nonmarket consumption good as output.       Introducing this simple additional

element into standard models will turn out to have fairly dramatic

implications, in a variety of contexts.4

     In this paper, we start by exploring some basic theoretical issues. We

prove that any model with household production has a reduced form that is


   There has been some previous analyses of the implications of home
production for macroeconomics, including Benhabib, Rogerson and Wright
(1988), Rios-Rull (1988), and Greenwood and Herkovitz (1990). Becker's
(1988) address to the American Economic Association also argues that home
production is an important missing element in macroeconomics, although he
stresses family behavior, while the focus in this paper is on the
implications for standard macroeconomic variables, and we do not look at
issues such as marriage, divorce, fertility, etc.



                                      -4-
observationally equivalent to another model, without home production, but

with agents having different preferences.     Thus, it is always possible to

replicate the behavior generated by the home production economy for market

employment, market consumption, and so on, with an economy that has no home

production sector, if preferences can be chosen arbitrarily. However, for a

given set of preferences, the addition of household production can matter a

lot.    As an example, home production is incorporated into an economy with

random layoffs resulting from nonconvexities, and we show how this affects

the nature and interpretation of unemployment. One result is that we can

have involuntary unemployment in reasonable specifications of this model, in

contrast to models without home production where involuntary unemployment

arises if and only if leisure is an inferior good (in a particular sense).

We also discuss how home production affects the interpretation of recent

empirical models that include consumer durables.

       The project is organized as follows. In the next section, we introduce

the basic assumptions and notation, discuss the mapping described above

between models with and without home production, and work out some

illustrative examples. In Section III, we show the basic points in these

examples are fairly general.     In Section IV, we discuss the economy with

involuntary unemployment, while in Section V, we pursue dynamic issues,

including consumer durables. Some conclusions are contained in Section VI.

The basic message is that explicitly recognizing norimarket economic activity

changes qualitatively the way we think about a number of topics related to

market activity.     In a companion paper — 8enhabib, Rogerson and Wright

(1990) — we introduce home production into the stochastic growth model, or

real business cycle model, in order to study how it affects the nature of

aggregate fluctuations quantitatively.




                                      -5-
II. The Basic Framework


       We start with an underlying von Neumann -                     Morgenstern utility function,
U — U(c ,c ,h,h), defined over four objects: consumption of a market good

(cm), consumption of a home produced or nonmarket good (c), hours of work

in the market sector (h), and hours of work in the home or nonmarket sector

(h).5 What makes this a model with home production is the assumption that

c and h are nontradable.              In particular, we impose the home production

constraint, cn     g(h),       where g() is the home production function. This

leads to the following decision problem


                   max U(cUI,c n,hUI
                                   ,h n)
                                                                                              (2.1)
                   St C
                          UI
                               x +   wh
                                          UI
                                               ,   cn         g(hn), and hn +h
                                                                            ni
                                                                                  H


(ignoring nonnegativity constraints on Cj and h) where w is the real wage,

x is exogenous endowment income, and H is the total endowment of time.6

       Assume U(.) is strictly monotonically increasing in consumption and

decreasing in labor, and that IJ(.) and g(•) are continuous.                            Then we can

substitute the home production constraint into the utility function and

maximize with respect to homework, taking as given the values of the market

variables, to define the following function:



              V(c ,h ) — max U(c ,g(h ),h ,h ]
                                in                  n inn           St hnE[O,H-h in].         (2.2)
                               hn



   special case is when market and home variables are perfect substitutes,
say U — u(c +c ,h+h); we would not want to assume this in general.

6
    According to Poj.lack and Wachter (1975), the "fundamental assumption" of
the home production model is the imposition of the home production
constraint, in addition to the standard budget constraint and the constraint
that total time use cannot exceed the time endowment.



                                                        -6-
Additionally, as long as either U(.) or g() is strictly concave, we can

define the homework function h —
                                                   h(c,h)          to be the unique solution to the

maximization problem in (2.2), and the home consumption function by c —

c(cm ,hin) — goh(cm,hm).
    Substituting this into the underlying utility function, we have



                           V(c h ) — U[c ,c(c ,h ),h ,h(c mm
                                 mm              m mm in  ,h )).                                             (2.3)

One can think of V(.) as a reduced form utility function, defined over

market quantities only.                  The following result demonstrates that V(.)

inherits some basic properties of U(), so that it in fact describes a well

behaved preference ordering over c and h.7


Theorem 1: If U(.) and g(.) are continuous, strictly monotonic, and concave,

then V(.) is continuous, strictly monotonic, and concave. If either IJ(.) or

g(.) is strictly concave, then V(.) is strictly concave.


Proof: First, if U(.) and g(.) are continuous then so are V(.) and h(S), by

the Theorem of the Maximum. Now choose                             >        and        <        and define        —
                                                              in       in         in       in                 n
h(,) and h —               h(,i).            Then we have


                       V(,) —

                                   > U[cin ,g( n),iinn
                                                    ,h ] — V(c              mm
                                                                             ,h ).


Hence, V is monotonic. To check concavity, choose Ae(O,l), and let c —

+ (l-A) in
             ,   hin   —
                           in
                                + (l-X)iin   ,   and   hn —    n    + (l-X)n      .    Then we have




  Given differentiability, some of the results in this theorem can be
derived in an alternative way. For example, using the Envelope Theorem, we
have V1 —    and V2 —
          U1          U3, establishing mortotonicity immediately.


                                                        -7-
                V(c,h) —       U[c.g(h),hh]
                               U(c,g()+(l-A)g(h),h,h)

                                                           +   (l-A)U(,g(i)$,ij
                           —   AV(in ,in)   +            ,i ).
                                                 (l-X)V(mm

Hence, V is concave.           Furthermore, if either U(.) or g(.) is strictly

concave, then one of the inequalities will be strict, so V(.) will be

strictly concave. U



       The above discussion implies that decision problem (2.1) generates the
same values of c and h as the problem without home production,
                 in        m


                        max V(c h ) St
                                      mm         C
                                                     in
                                                          x   + wh
                                                                     in
                                                                          ,   hin    H.           (2.4)


This   is an important point.          For example, consider a representative agent

economy with home production function g(h) and aggregate market production

function f(h). Its competitive equilibrium is characterized as the unique

solution to the social planning problem



                 max W —   tJ[x+f(hin ),g(hn ) hinn
                                                 ,h )          st h +h
                                                                              m n    H            (2.5)


(again ignoring non-negativity constraints).                   The solution to (2.5) yields

the same values for h and c as the solution to
                      in         in



                       max W —        V(x+f(hin).,hisJ St hin                 H.                  (2.6)


The economy with home production is therefore observationally equivalent to

another economy, with no home production, but with different preferences.

       Hence, there is a sense in which adding a home sector does not add to

the set of outcomes that were possible without it.                                  One might conclude,


                                                -8-
therefore, that the practice of ignoring noninarket activity involves no loss

in generality.    Yet it is precisely because preferences would have to be

different if home production was excluded that it turns out to be such a

useful concept for understanding and interpreting economic phenomena.      An

obvious point is that it would be a mistake to interpret leisure as H-h, as

specified in the reduced form, since in fact H-h -h is the correct measure
                                                  m n
of leisure (and h may not be constant). A more subtle point is that the

reduced form utility function is actually the offspring of an underlying

utility function combined with a home production function, and this can lead

to agents acting as if they had preferences quite different from their true

preferences.

      One important example of this principle is the following: the fact that

leisure defined by H-h-h is a normal good according to the underlying

preference structure does not imply that leisure defined by H-h is normal

according to the reduced form structure. In other words, in contrast to the

properties discussed in Theorem 1, a property of U(.) that does not carry

over to V(.) is the wealth effect. Several interesting economic issues are

known to hinge on this wealth effect.8 By including home production, we are

able to account for agents acting as if leisure is inferior, without

violating the reasonable intuition or the long run evidence that it is

normal. Even if the sign of the wealth effect is not necessarily reversed,

we demonstrate in the next section that, under reasonable conditions, it is

necessarily reduced.    Hence, a model with home production can display a

labor supply elasticity that would be difficult to generate using an

empirically reasonable model in which home production is absent.


8
    Examples include some perhaps surprising results, such as the effect of
asymmetric information in implicit contract theory (see, e.g., Cooper 1987),
or the issue of whether unemployment is voluntary or involuntary in a large
class of models (see. e.g., Rogerson and Wright 1988, or Section IV below).


                                     -9-
     A second example of the principle is this: once we recognize that home

production is important, we are forced to conclude that preferences defined

over market variables should not be stationary, non-stochastic, functions.

Consider the home production function g(h) —         sG(h),    where s   iS a
stochastic innovation to the household technology. The reduced form utility

function then becomes


             V(cm'm
                 h s )   — max U[c ,s G(h ),h ,h 3
                                  m n n m n          St h +h    H.       (2.7)
                            h
                                                         m n
                             n

Preferences over c and hm as represented by V(.) now depend on S. Hence,

it can appear in the reduced form economy as if there is a stochastic shock

in the utility function, even though true preferences are stable.
Similarly, to the extent that innovations to the home technology are

accumulating over time, it will appear in the reduced form that there is

trend drift in preferences, even if U(S) is stationary.

     A third example is this: to the extent that relative productivity

changes in the market and nonxnarket sectors matter for the short run

allocation of time, the observed relation between measured productivity and

employment hours can be severely affected. Let        and s be shocks to the

market and home technologies.9 When s is relatively high, labor will flow

into the market so that productivity and real wages (correctly measured)

will rise along with market hours; thus, s shocks trace out a "labor
                                          m
supply" curve for the economy. On the other hand, when S is relatively

high, labor will flow into the nonmarket sector, raising productivity and

real wages as market employment falls; thus, s shocks trace out a "labor

demand" curve for the economy.    As long as both shocks are important at


  It is certainly the case that innovations to home and market technologies
are not perfectly synchronized (think of the introductions of micro
computers and microwave ovens).



                                    -10-
different points in time, a scatter plot between market hours and

productivity (or real wages) need not show any discernible pattern.       By

incorporating nonmarket activity, it evidently becomes possible in principle

to reconcile the lack of empirical correlation between employment and

productivity (or real wages) with theories based on technology shocks)0

        To be clear, our intention is not to show that adding home production

generates outcomes that were not possible without it; that would be a futile

task.     Our intention is to show that adding home production allows us to

organize and intepret observations in a useful way.     Macroeconomics is an

empirical discipline, with the goals of accounting for existing regularities

and helping to predict the consequences of changes in the underlying

environment.      As Becker (l9xx, p. 5) writes, "The assumption of stable

preferences provides a stable foundation for generating predictions about

responses to various changes, and prevents the analyst from succumbing to

the temptation of simply postulating the required shift in preferences to

'explain' all apparent contradictions to his predictions." However, as he

also points out, "The preferences that are assumed to be stable do not refer

to market goods and services, like oranges, automobiles, or medical care,

but to the underlying objects of choice that are produced by each household


10
     The lack of a strong correlation in the data between hours and
productivity or wages over the cycle is, of course, a classic conundrum for
macroeconomists;   see Ceary and Kennan (l98x) or Christiano and
Eichenbauin,(l988) for up to date discussions and references.    Of course,
another way to reconcile theory and evidence is to include shocks to the
marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure (which is
exactly what Bencivenga (1988) does, and is also pretty close to the
solution suggested by Christiano and Eichenbaum, who attempt to measure
these shocks using government spending under the assumption that an increase
in public consumption raises marginal utility of private consumption. This
is another example of the principle that the equilibrium of a home
production economy can always be replicated by a model in which home
production is absent, if we are given enough latitude to play with
preferences.     We discuss this further in Benhabib, Rogerson and Wright
(1990).




                                      -11-
using market goods and services, their own time, and other inputs.           These

underlying preferences are defined over fundamental aspects of life ...        that
do not always bear a stable relation to market goods and services."

     Before proceeding to general issues, we close this section with some

illustrative examples. We begin by defining preferences by


                      U —   ln(C) + A.ln(H-h -h) + Bh,                         (2.8)



where A > B   0, and C is a composite consumption good given by


                                    e      e/e .
                              C —Ia c + a c I                                  (2.9)
                                 mm nnj
The composite good is defined by means of a fairly flexible CES aggregator,

with constant elasticity of substitution l/(l-e). On the other hand, market

and nonmarket work are perfect substitutes if B — 0, whereas if B >       0,    then

for a given amount of total work and consumption the agent would rather work

in the market than at home.       One can show that leisure, given by L —

         is necessarily a normal good for this class of preferences.12 For
Hhmhn
now we also assume home production is linear, g(h ) — s h which will allow
                                                      n     nn
us to easily derive closed form solutions.

     First, consider the case of e — 0,          so that (2.9) in fact defines a

Cobb-Douglas function, and the elasticity of substitution between c and c
                                                                        in         n
is unity. Assuming an interior solution, the homework function is

                                             a
                       hii —h(cin h)—
                                  in
                                      ——(H-h).
                                      A+a             in
                                                 n


11
   These examples are of particular interest, given the specifications in our
quantitative analysis in Benhabib, Rogerson and Wright (1990).

     the next section we prove that if the utility function is separable in
consumption and hours, as (2.8) is, then leisure must be normal.


                                      -12-
Substituting this into (2.8), the reduced form utility function becomes

(after a linear transformation)



                      V — a ln(c ) + (A+a )ln(H-h ) + Bh                           (2.10)
                           in   m        n       m      in
                                                                 .




In    this case, home production adds nothing to the model, in the sense that

if we had ignored it, or simply set c and h equal to constants in (2.8),

then except for the constants in (2.10), nothing would have changed! To get

any real effects with this specification, we therefore need to assume an

elasticity of substitution different from unity.

       Consider the case where c and c are perfect substitutes, e — 1                 and
                               in     n
assume for ease of notation that a — a — H — 1.                      Assuming an interior
                                 n    in


solution,   the homework function in this case is


                                                s (1-hm)-Ac 15
                           hn —h(c,h).-
                                    in
                                    in
                                        n
                                                   s(l+A)
Substituting this into (2.8), the reduced form utility function now becomes

(after a linear transformation)



                          mm
                     V(c ,h ) —   (l+A).ln[cinn
                                             +s (1-h     )] + Bh
                                                        in        in
                                                                       .
                                                                                   (2.11)

If B — 0,   then (2.11) is of the special "zero wealth effect" class, V(c,h)
—
    v1[c+v2(l-h)],   where v1 and v2 are increasing, concave functions; if B >

0, on the other hand, then leisure is actually inferior according to the

reduced form utility function, even though it is normal according to the

underlying utility function.13


13Let h(x) solve the labor supply problem, maximize V(c,h) subject to c —            x +
wh.  The standard result is that h'(x) is proportional to t — wV11 +      so
                                                                     V12.
that leisure is normal if and only if tj < 0.  If V —                 +
                                                                 vi[c15+v2(lh)1     Rh15,
we have      —
                 -Bv/v;   hence, the wealth effect for this class of utility


                                         -13-
     To see how this might be important for macroeconomics, consider the

following "pseudo-dynamic" representative agent problem


                           max E V   U(cmt,cnt,hmt,hnt
                           stc1st_rts mt
                                       F(hmt)

                             cnt_rts nt
                                      G(hnt)

where E(O,l), and r > 1 represents exogenous technological growth common to

the two sectors.14 In order to capture a long run stylized fact of actual

economies, we impose the condition that market hours do not grow or shrink

on average along a balanced growth path. This means that if th              are

constant over time then h   will be constant, too, which means wealth and
                         mt
substitution effects must cancel each other.          In economies without home

production, this means the utility function must be from either the class


                                         Cl - P

                           u(c,h)—
                             mm                   .v(h)
                                                     m
                                         I-P


withp>Oandp,'l,       or


                           u(cmm
                              ,h )   — ln(cm) + v(hm),


where in either case v(.) is concave (see King, Plosser and Rebello 1987 for

a proof).

     Suppose that we also insist that h be constant along a balanced growth



functions depends exclusively on the sign of B.


14
   The model is "pseudo-dynamic" in that there is no capital formulation, and
so it really reduces to a sequence of static economies (we introduce capital
in Section V. but for present purposes, the simpler structure will suffice).



                                      -14-
path in the home production economy. One specification that satisfies this

criterion is easily seen to be;



                                 1                            l/e
                U— [cbLlb1'                  e
                                     C_Iace+acl  andL—H-h-h
                       l-r             imm   nnj         in n


As a special case, consider U —            ln(cm+cn) +       A.ln(H-h inn
                                                                       -h )   and   linear home

production, for which we have already derived the reduced form in (2.11).

Thus, this home production model is observationally equivalent to a model

without home production and the zero wealth effect utility function



                         V(c,h) —
                                          in[c +       rts(Hht)].                        (2.12)



These preferences imply potentially large intratemporal substitution
effects (in addition to the intertemporal substitution effects that would be

present if we included capital) despite of the fact that hmt does not change

on average along the growth path)5

          To illustrate things further, consider the market technology f(.) —

s    h9    .   Then it is straightforward to check that the equilibrium allocation
nit mt

involves:


                                     9s —  1
                                                                    1
                             hmt — __!!19
                                    S
                                                      h +h ——
                                                      nit    flt
                                     nt                             1+A


Total work is constant, while the mix of hours between the home and market

fluctuates according to the ratio                           with an elasticity 11(1-0). It

is also straightforward to show that the marginal product of labor in the


15
     One way to interpret this result is to note that the term rt               inside   of the
square brackets in (2.12) acts to increase the reduced form's marginal
utility of leisure at the same rate as the marginal product of market labor,
keeping the value of h that equates the two constant on average.




                                               -15-
market is proportional in equilibrium to s, the nonmarket shock, and so

productivity is necessarily negatively related to employment.         Also,

instantaneous utility in equilibrium is (a linear function of) in(s), and

hence it too is negatively related to employment. While this example is

obviously simplistic in its functional form as well as its neglect for

important factors such as capital, it does demonstrate how introducing home

production can have some rather dramatic effects.




                                    -16-
                                  16
III. More General Results


        In this section, we derive some more general results concerning the
                                                                                                        way
home production affects the mapping between the underlying utility function

U(.) and the reduced form utility function V(.). We concentrate on the case

of perfect substitutes up to a linear perturbation,


                                U —               +h ) + Ac +
                                       u(cin+cn,hinn                         Bh
                                                           in                  in

where A and B are constants. This is not the most general case, of
                                                                   course,
but it does deliver some sharp predictions.                                  The interpretation of the
linear terms is that A > 0 (B > 0) means that market consumption (market

employment) is superior to its nonmarket alternative. We allow for general

technology specifications, g(h) —               sC(h)          and f(h) —               sF(h).
        As a special case of problem (2.5), the unique competitive equilibrium

in the representative agent version of this model has first order conditions


                                                                         +   B —    0
                            SF'(h)[u1(.)+AJ +                 u2()
                            sG'(h)u1(.) +            u2(.)
                                                               —   0.

Notice A or B > 0 implies f' —            sF'   <    sG'      — g'   ,    and the marginal product is
lower in the home than the market. Differentiating, we have



                                                                                             vim
                                                ds
                                                     In
                                                          -                     ds
                                                                                    n
                                                                                         -         dx
                                                              u1G'+Gvi



where      —                     —
                                      g'u11+u12, and D is a matrix given by:
                            r
               f'u11+u12,


16
     This section contains some messy derivations, designed to show our earlier
discussion is fairly general; readers not interested in these details can
skip to the section on unemployment with no loss in continuity.



                                                -17-
                   (u1+A)f"+f' 2u11+2f'u12+u22            f'g'u11;(f'+g')u12+u22
           D —
                    f' g' u11+(f' +g' )u12+u22            u1g"+g' u11+2g u12+u22



The determinant of D is positive:


       IDI —                                        +
                  (A+u1)f"(g'2u1+2g'U12+U22)                 (u11u22-u12)(f'-g')2

                          +                                      > 0.
                              u1g"(f'2u1+2f'u12±u22)

     Using Cramer's rule and simplifying, the pure wealth effect in general

equilibrium on market hours is


                      IDIahm/ax —   - u1g +         (g'-f')(u11u22-u12).
                                                                                     2



With perfect substitutes (A — B —          0),   we have g' —           f'   ,       and the second term

vanishes     in this case, the condition for h to decrease with x is the
                                                                in


standard (from models without home production) normal leisure condition, ,

— f'u11 + u12 < 0.       If A, B >   0,    however, then g' >           f'       •       and the second term

is positive; in this case, hours worked in the market may actually increase

with x, even if ,i <      o.      A symmetric result holds for homework,



                       D13h/3x —    - (u1+A)f'7          -
                                                              (g'-f')(u11u22-u2),

and these can be combined to yield the effect on total leisure, L —                                 1-hinn
                                                                                                        -h



                              IDIaL/ax —   u1g' (u1+A)r,.
                                                     -




If , r           < 0 then leisure is unambiguously normal, even though h can


       that linear home production implies the first term vanishes; therefore
h increases with x if and only If g' > f'.




                                             -18-
increase with x.   In particular, u12 — 0 always implies 3L/3x <                  0.

     We can also derive the effects of changes in the productivity

parameters, s and s .
             m     n
                           For   example,


                    3h/8s — - QIDI               1+A)F
                                                         +   F•3h/8x

where Q —
            u1g'+g'2u11+2gu12+u22
                                          < 0.   The first term in this expression is

the unambiguously positive substitution effect, while the second term is the

wealth effect derived above.         Finally, we can consider balanced technical

progress by setting Sm   —   5   —   s.    Then, assuming A —
                                                                     u12
                                                                           —   0 to reduce the
notation, it turns out that



             öh/8s — IDI
                             1usF'G'' + (F+C)8h/8x           +
                                                                 1D11(G'-F')u1u22.

The key point here is that the third term is negative. Thus, in order to
have h constant in response to balanced changes in technology, we do not

need the wealth and substitution effects to cancel out, and we could easily

have 3h /8x > 0.
       m




                                             -19-
IV. Unemployment

      In the previous sections, the competitive equilibrium involves everyone

receiving exactly the same allocation. All agents spend the same amount of

time in market work, and all agents spend the same amount of time in home

work. There are a number of ways to amend the basic model to account for

the fact that not all agents work in the market, and still maintain the

tractability of a representative agent framework (e.g., any of a variety of

fixed costs or other nonconvexities associated with market work could be

modeled).     For simplicity, we will assume directly that time allocated to

the market can take on only two values, 0 or h, where without loss in
generality we set h — 1           (renorrnalizing the total time endowment, H, if

necessary).     This is the indivisible labor assumption studied in Rogerson

(1984, 1988), and subsequently employed in equilibrium macroeconomics by

Hansen (1985), Greenwood and Huffman (1987), Hansen and Sargent (1988), Cho

and Rogerson (1988), Christiano and Eichenbaum (1988), Cooley and Hansen

(1989), and others.18

      In nonconvex economies like this, it can be efficient to randomize the

allocation. The relevant social planning problem is to choose a             probability
of employment for the representative agent,           ,   and a consumption - homework

package for both the employed and unemployed. Let c3 and h be consumption

of the market good and hours of nonmarket work by an agent working j units

of time in the market, j — 0 or 1. Then the planning problem is


                 max J[cl,g(hl),1,h1J +         (1-)U(c0,g(h0),O,h°]
                                                                                  (4.1)
                 St   c1   +   (1-,)c0   x +   f()   and 0      I,

18See Prescott     (1986) and Lucas (1987) for general discussions of the
indivisible labor model in macroeconomics.



                                           -20-
also subject to nonnegativity)9 As always, we have substituted the home

production constraints directly into the objective function. However, since

individuals not employed in the market can still enjoy consumption of c,

there is a single constraint concerning the market good.                      For robust
specifications we can have           < 1, and we assume this is the case in what

follows. The fraction (l-ç) of agents will be called unemployed (although

they may well be working at home).

       Let A be the multiplier on the resource constraint in (4.1). Then the

first order conditions are as follows:



         U[c1,g(h'),l,h1] -    U[c0,g(h0),O,h0] +     A[f'()-c1+c°] —0             (4.2)


         1J2[c1,g(h1),l,h1]g'(h) +                            — 0
                                          U4(c1,g(h1),l,h1]                        (4.3)


         U2(c,g(h),0,h°]g'(h) + U4[c,g(h),O,h°] — 0                                (4.4)

               1      1    1        — 0
         U1(cg(h),l,hJ -        A                                                  (4.5)


         U1[c0,g(h0),0,h°J - A — 0                                                 (4.6)


         x +   f(,)   -               —   0.                                       (4.7)


These have straightforward interpretations. For example, let gj() indicate

that the home production function is being evaluated at h, and let

indicate that the utility function is being evaluated at [c,g(h),j,h], j
—    0 or 1.       Then (4.3) and (4.4) imply g —       uii4,       so that the marginal

product in home production is equated to the marginal rate of substitution


19
     The solution to problem (4.1) is the optimal randomized allocation, which
can be decentralized in a variety of ways. For example, Shell and Wright
(1989) show formally how to support the the planner's randomized allocation
as a standard competitive equilibrium with extrinsic uncertainty represented
by "sunspots' (there is no home production in that construction, but it is
clear how to extend the results to include it).


                                               -21-
for both unemployed and employed workers.

     Equations (4.5) and (4.6) imply the efficient risk sharing condition,

equating the marginal utilities of the market good between employed and

unemployed agents:


                   —                              —                        —   (4.8)
                       U1[c1,g(h1),l,h1]               U1[c°,g(h°),O,h°)

In general, of course, (4.8) says nothing about total utility. Let z be the

normalized difference between the total utilities of employed and unemployed

agents: z —    (U1-U°)/A.   Then we define the case of z > 0 to be involuntary

unemployment.      In Rogerson and wright (1988), in a model without home

production, we found z > 0 if and only if a/ax > 0. Further, one can show

that 3q,/3x > 0 implies leisure is an inferior good, in the standard sense,

over some region of commodity space, although not necessarily everywhere;

see, e.g., Greenwood and Huffman (1988). Hence, it is impossible to have

leisure everywhere normal and involuntary unemployment at the same time. We

now show that in the model with home production, we still have z > 0 if and

only if 8/8x > 0, but the relation between this and normal leisure is
          20
broken.

     Begin by differentiating the first order conditions (4.2)-(4.7) and

simplifying, to arrive at




20Note that from (4.2) that we also have


                                Z —   C
                                          1   -    c
                                                      0   -   f   (v).


This tells us that unemployment is involuntary if and only if the difference
in market consumption between employed and unemployed workers exceeds the
marginal product of an employed worker, which in a sense could be
interpreted as saying that the employed are being paid "too much."             This
result is true in models without home production, too, by the way.




                                                  -22-
                      Af"    0          0      0           0      -z         dq'           0

                       o                o                  0          0      dh1           0

                       o     0
                                       Q0
                                               0                      0      dh            0

                       o               0                   0      -l                       0           (49)
                                                                             dc
                       o     0                 0                  -1         dc°           0

                      -z     0         0 -             -l             0     dA            -dx




where we have used the notation


                                     Q. —          +                  +            +
                                            g3U         g2t42             2gjt44

                                       — gU            +
                                                           U1.
Note that Q < 0, while                      could be of either sign in general (one can show

that        < 0 if and only if 8h/3x < 0).                                  In the Appendix, we prove the

following result.



Lemma 1:          —              -      > 0, j — 0,             1.
                      QU1
This lemma is also used in the Appendix to verify that the second order

conditions for problem (4.1) hold; thus, if we let                                     be the determinant of

the square matrix in (4.9), < 0. The next result is then straightforward.


Theorem 2: Unemployment is involuntary if and only if 8/3x > 0.


Proof: Solving (4.9) for 3/3x and simplifying yields


                                            öq,/öx —       -

Now ôcp/öx > 0 if and only if z < 0, which by definition means if and only if

U1 > U°. U




                                                               -23-
      This extends the main result in Rogerson and Wright (1988) to the home

production economy.    However, we now argue that with home production there

is no problem having involuntary unemployment and normal leisure at the same

time.21 We make this point by way of an example, using the utility function


                      Uv(c+c)+v(h+h)+Ac+Bh.
                         1 m n 2 n m   m  m                                     (4.10)


Again, the interpretation is that agents prefer market to home produced

consumption if A > 0, and prefer market work to homework if B > 0. As shown

in the previous section, such utility functions always entail normal leisure

                                                          although at the same time,
in the sense that öL/ôx > 0, where L —         lhmhn
they potentially allow 3h/3x > 0.

      For utility function (4.10), the efficient risk sharing condition (4.8)

implies that employed and unemployed agents enjoy the same total
consumption, c1 + c1 — c° + C° — c, although the employed get more of the

market good and the unemployed get more of the home produced good. Suppose

g is linear, C   — B•h;    then the efficient hours conditions,              — B for j

—   0 or 1, imply that the employed and unemployed also work the same number

of total hours, 1 + h1 —   h°.   Hence, we have



                            U1 - U0 —   A(c1-c°)   + B.




       the special case of perfect substitutes and linear home production, one
can show that employed and unemployed agents always get the same total
consumption and hours,

                      cm1 +cn1 —c0m +cn0 and l+h1n —h0n
In this case we can have normal leisure and tJ1 —         U°.   However, when the home
technology is strictly concave perfect substitutes normal leisure and
involuntary unemployment are not all possible at the same time. Thus, we
need to assume less than perfect substitutes to get involuntary unemployment
and normal leisure in the general case.



                                        -24-
As long as either A or B is strictly positive, U1 > U0.       Therefore it is

possible to have involuntary unemployment simultaneously with normal
leisure, at least if is linear.     If g" < 0, then one can show that the

employed end up working fewer hours in the home but more hours in total,

l+h1 > h > h1. Nevertheless, simply by continuity, with g" < 0 it is still

possible to have involuntary unemployment simultaneously with normal
leisure. In summary, we have:



Theorem 3: In the home production economy, involuntary unemployment does not

imply inferior leisure.



     We think that this result is important.     It applies to not only the

representative agent model with indivisible labor, but also to a variety of

other models with random layoffs and efficient risk sharing. These include

the standard Azariadis (1975) implicit contract model and versions of the

Feldstein (1976) temporary layoff model of unemployment insurance (see

Burdett and Wright 1989 for a discussion of these approaches). One reason

such theories seem to have fallen into disfavor recently is that users were

uncomfortable with the implication that laid off workers were happier than

their employed colleagues, given normal leisure (see, e.g., the discussion

in Rosen's 1985). Now it is obvious that these models should not be used to

explain all types of unemployment, as they abstract from many relevant

considerations for some types, such as frictional unemployment. Yet they do

seem to be quite satisfactory for the analysis of other types, such as

temporary layoff unemployment. It is perhaps comforting that versions that

explicitly incorporate home production do allow the coexistence of efficient

risk sharing, normal leisure, and involuntary unemployment.

     To close this section, we briefly discuss how heterogeneity might enter

the picture. Suppose individual types are indexed by i, and that

                                    -25-
                 U1_v(c+c)+v(h+h)+Alc
                     1 m n   2 m n    m+B'hm

Market labor is still indivisible, but now individuals also differ in terms

of their productivities. say h and h hours of type i's time in the two

sectors yield h — whm efficiency units in the market and hi —         in the

home.   The efficient allocation now determines a probability of employment

in the market sector     for each type. Any type with A1, P > 0 and h1 — 0

is involuntarily unemployed, at least if g" is close to 0, as shown above.

However, if         is small, we expect there will be lots of type i workers

unemployed. At the same time, A1, B1 < 0 implies individual i would rather

stay home, but if          is large, the efficient allocation will have him

working in the market with positive probability. The point is that in a

cross section it will be easy to find some agents not working in the market

who wish they were, and at the same time, some who are employed but in a

sense wish they were at home.




                                     -26-
V. Dynamics



      In this section we move to a genuinely dynamic formulation, in order to

illustrate some other implications of home production. Consider the problem



                     max E
                                       tU(cmtcnthmthnt)

                      s.t. c
                                 mt
                                       — s
                                           mt F(hnit
                                                   ,kmt) -   i   t

                             c         —
                                           sG(h,k)
                                                                                 (5.1)
                             h +hnt H
                                 nit


                             kmt +knt kt
                             k+i —         (l.8)k +

where kj is capital in sector j, k is total capital, i is investment, and

SE(O,l) is the depreciation rate.22 The constraints hold at every date t.

The maximization is over time paths nit
                                    {c ,c
                                        nt ,h
                                            nit,hnt,knit
                                                       ,k nt
                                                           ,i t), given
processes for the shocks (S                      ) and initial conditions.
                                       nit,snt

      Suppose that we are given Ic
                                nit
                                    ,h ,knitknt) and we are asked to choose
                                     nit
a path for homework (h} to solve


22
     We have set this up as an optimal growth problem, but of course the
solution can be supported as a competitive equilibrium. We could have also
illustrated essentially the same points with a single consumer decision
problem.   Also notice that although capital is an input into household
production, we have assumed that it is produced exclusively in the market.
Finally, we have assumed that capital can be freely moved between sectors.
However, exactly the same message goes through if we alternatively assume
two separate laws of motion,

            k        — (1-6 )k    + i              and knt+l — (1-5n)knt + int
              mt+l         ni nit     nit



wherei
    nit
        +int —i t


                                                   -27-
                        max E0

                        s.t.h
                            nt
                               H-h nit
                                   forailt.

The first order conditions for this problem are sGi — -U4/U2 for all t and

for all realizations of (s,s). This implies that, for all t, the
instantaneous homework function is given by


                                   h — h(c,h,k,s).
Notice h() does not depend on                        or s, or on t, or on variables at dates

other than t.          In the obvious way, we also have the instantaneous home

consumption function,


                                   c
                                       nt —c(cnit,hnit,knt,snt ),

and the reduced form instantaneous utility function,



                                 mm nn
                             V(c h ,k ,s ) — IJ[c
                                                in
                                                   ,c(.),hm,h(•fl.



     We now have an equivalent alternative formulation of (5.1), in which we

choose (C         ,hnit,knit
                          ,k ,i
            nit              nt )t to solve


                       max
                                       fltV(cmthmtkntsnt)

                        s.t. c
                                 nit
                                       —    s
                                             nit
                                                   F(hnit
                                                        ,kmt)   -i   t


                               h H
                                 nit


                               kmt +knt kt
                                        —
                                                (18)k    + i.


In this problem, the home production variables                           cn and h do not appear at

                                                       -28-
all, although k and s do.23 We interpret this by saying that the dynamic

home production model is equivalent to a model without home production, but

with different preferences, as well as a consumer durable good k. This is

the natural extension of the static results in Section II.

       For example, consider the utility function U —                 ln(C) + Aln(L), where C
—    C(c,c)   and L —                  Although it is obviously not possible to find

an explicit solution for reduced form preferences, in general, it is

possible for the following special cases.


Case i: C — c                                     — a k + a h (linear borne
                m + c (perfect substitutes) and c
                                                n                     On ln
production).        In this case, the reduced form utility function is (after a

linear transformation)



                              V —   inic
                                      m       On
                                             + a k + a (1-h
                                                           1    m)


Case ii: C —   ala
               mm                                   n On ln
                         (Cobb-Douglas) and c — a k + a h .                In   this case,



                      V —   a.].n(c)    + (la+A).ln[a0k + a1(lh)].

               a 1-a
Case iii: C — c c    and c —
                    mn          n
                                       k'7
                                         h l-'7 .
                                        nn          In   this case,


              V —   a.ln(c)   + (l-a),7.ln(k) + [(l-a)(l-'7)+A].ln(l-h).



       The striking feature that emerges from the above examples is that one

underlying utility function, U —              ln(C) + Aln(L), can give rise to such
different reduced forms. In case i, the three commodities C, k, and i-h

are perfect substitutes, while in case iii, V is additively separable.


23
     Again, we are assuming capital can be moved freely between the two sectors
at t, but a similar result follows if we assume the two capital stocks
evolve separately, as in the previous footnote.


                                                -29-
Applied researchers are typically concerned with the choice of functional

forms, including such issues as separability between variables or groups of

variables.     As shown by these examples, however, the assumption of

separability in the true underlying preferences may or may not carry over to

the reduced form that one takes to the data.      In particular, we note that

with this structure it is apparently difficult to obtain a reduced form in

which C and k enter as perfect substitutes, but separable from h, a

specification that is often used in empirical studies of durable goods and

intertemporal consumption decisions.        More generally, we note that the

traditional distinction in economics between preferences and technology has

become somewhat blurred here.

     Eichenbauin and Hansen (1990) provide an interesting recent contribution

to the literature on durables and intertemporal consumption.       They posit

preferences over consumption services, defined as flows derived from stocks

of durable goods.      Our framework is a special case of theirs in that

consumers here have exactly two choices: purchase consumption services c

directly from the market, or receive services c from the stock of home
                                              n
capital.     However, the salient element of our approach, which is missing

from Eichenbauxu and Hansen's, is the time allocation decision (i.e., the

choice of hm and h ).      The use of time intuitively seems essential to
                  n
producing a service flow from home capital or durables.          Furthermore,

modeling the allocation of time explicitly has many other implications, as

we have attempted to demonstrate. It is hoped that future work in the area

may benefit from some of these results.




                                     -30-
VI. Conclusion



     In this paper we have explored some implications of introducing home

production into simple economic models.      One result is that there is a

mapping between models with home production and those without home

production but with different preferences, with the property that the

implications of the two models for market variables are identical. However,

for fixed preferences the model with home production can generate very

different implications.   Further, the model without home production might

require properties, such as nonnormal leisure, time varying utility, etc.,

that ex ante we may not be willing to entertain. If macroeconomics (or any

other applied field) is to be an empirical science, research must ultimately

proceed to functional forms, or at least to restrictions that specify

certain classes of functional forms and parameters.     One way to interpret

our claim for the usefulness of including a nonmarket sector in models of

market activity is that recognizing home production leads us to examine

functional form and parameter issues in a new light.     We think that this

will have important implications for our ability to understand and interpret

empirical observations in macroeconomics, and in other areas.




                                    -31-
                                  Appendix


Proof of Lemma 1: We make use of the following inequality:


      U11(U22U44-U4) - U12(U12U44-U14U42) + U14(U12U24-U14U22) < 0         (A.l)



This can be verified by noting expression in question equals the determinant

of the Hessian matrix of U U(CCnhmhn) where h is fixed, which is a

concave function. Now expanding      (ignoring the subscript j), we have



       —
           gU2U1 + g2(U U22-U2) + (U11U44-U4) + 2g'(U11U24-U12U14)

       —
           g"U2U11 + [g' (U11U22-U2)5 -   (U11U44U4)5]

              + 2g' {(U11U22-U2Y(U11U44-U14Y5 + (U11U24U12U14)]


after "completing the square." Since the first two terms are positive, it

show the last term is, too. Suppose not; then


               (u11u22-u2y5(u11u44-U14Y5 < -
                                                (U11U24-U12U14).

But squaring both sides and simplifying contradicts (A.l).         Hence, I' > 0,

and this completes the proof. U



Second order Conditions: We check the second order conditions for problem

 (4.1). Let Hk be the bordered Hessian matrix formed by deleting all but the

last and the first k rows and columns the square matrix in (4.9).           For a

maximum, the determinants of these matrices must alternate in sign, starting

with 1H21 > 0 (see, e.g., Takayama 1985). After a little algebra (rather a

lot, actually), we find




                                     -32-
                                 -          > o,
                        1H21         Q1z2

                               — - Q0Q1z2 < o,
                        1H31

                               — - Q0(f"Q1+z2W1) >       0,
                        1H41

                        1H51 —   -            - Xf"[qQ1*0+(1-q,)Q0W1] < 0


using W0,    >    0,   as shown in Lemma 1. In particular,          —
                                                                        1H51
                                                                               <   0,   as used

in Theorem 2. •




                                              -33-
                                 References



Azariadis (1975)   "Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria,"
Journal of Political Economy 83 (December), 1183-1202.

Becker, G.S. (1965) "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," Economic Journal
75, 493-517.

Becker, C.S. (l9xx) The Economic Approach to Human Behavior.

Becker, G.S. (1988) "Family Economics and Macro Behavior," American Economic
Review 78 (March), 1-13.

Benhabib, J., R. Rogerson and R. Wright (1988) "Home Production and
Aggregate Fluctuations," presented at the Northwestern University Summer
Workshop in Macroeconomics, Evanston, Illinois, August 1988.

Benhabib, J., R. Rogerson and R. Wright (1990) "Homework in Macroeconomics
II: Aggregate Fluctuations," manuscript, Stanford University.

Bencivenga, V. (1988) "An Econometric Study of Hours and Output Variation
with Preference Shocks," manuscript, University of Western Ontario.

Burdett, K. and R. Wright (1989) Unemployment Insurance and Short-Time
Compensation: The Effects on Layoffs, Wages and Hours per Worker," Journal
of Political Economy (December).

Christiano, L. and Eichenbauxn, M. (1988) "Is Theory Really Ahead of
Measurement? Current Real Business Cycle Theories and Aggregate Labor Market
Fluctuations," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Working Paper 412 and
NBER Working Paper 2700.

Cho, J. and R. Rogerson (1988), "Family Labor Supply and Aggregate
Fluctuations," Journal of Monetary Economics 21, 233-245.

Cooley, T. and C. Hansen (1989) "The Inflation Tax in a Real Business Cycle
Model," American Economic Review 79 (September), 733-748.

Cooper, R. (1987) Wage and Employment Patterns in Labor Contracts:
Microfoundations and  Macroeconomic Implications, Harwood  Academic
Publishers, New York.

Eichenbaum, M. and L.P. Hansen (1990) "Estimating Models with Intertemporal
Substitution Using Aggregate Data," Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics 8, 53-69.

Eisner, R. (1988) "Extended Accounts for National Income and Product,"
Journal of Economic Literature 26, 1611-1684.

Eisner, R. (1989) The Total Income System of Accounts, University of Chicago
Press.

Feldstein (1976) "Temporary Layoffs in the Theory of Unemployment," Journal
of Political Economy 84 (October), 937-957.


                                    -34-
Frauineni, B. and D. Jorgenson (1980) "The Role of Capital in U.S. Economic
Growth 1948-1976," in Capital, Efficiency and Growth, edited by G. von
Fustenberg, Cambridge.

Ceary, P. and J. Kennan (198x) Journal of Political Economy.

Greenwood, J. and G. Huffman (1988) "A Dynamic Equilibrium Model of
Inflation and Unemployment," Journal of Monetary Economics 19, 203-228.

Greenwood, J. and G. Huffman, (1989) "On Modeling the Natural Rate of
Unemployment with Indivisible Hours," Canadian Journal of Economics 21
(August), 587-609.

Greenwood, 3. and Herkovitz, Z. (1990) "Home Production," manuscript.

Gronau, R. (1977) "Leisure, Home Production and Work — The Theory of the
Allocation of Time Revisited," Journal of Political Economy 85, 1099-1123.

Gronau, R. (1980) "Home Production — A Forgotten Industry," Review of
Economics and Statistics 62, 408-415.

Gronau, R. (1985) "Home Production — A Survey," Handbook of Labor Economics.

Hansen, G. (1985) "Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle," Journal of
Monetary Economics 16. 309-325.

Hansen, C., and T. Sargent (1988) "Straight Time and Overtime in
Equilibrium," Journal of Monetary Economics.

Hawrylyshyn, 0. (1976) "The Value of Household Services: A survey of
Empirical Estimates," The Review of Income and Wealth 22, 101-131.

Hill, M. (1985) "Patterns of Time Use," in Time, Goods and Well-Being,
edited by F.J. Juster and F.P. Stafford, University of Michigan.

King, R., C. Plosser and S. Rebello (1987) "Production, Growth and
Cycles: Technical Appendix," manuscript, University of Rochester.

King, R., C. Plosser and S. Rebello (1988) "Production, Growth and Cycles I.
The Basic Neoclassical Model," Journal of Monetary Economics 21, 195-232.

Lucas, R. Models of Business Cycles, Basil Blackwell, 1987.

Nordhaus, W. and J. Tobin (1972) Economic Growth, New York: NBER.

Pollack, R. and M. Wachter (1975) "Home Production," Journal of Political
Economy.

Prescott, B. "Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement," Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneaplois Quarterly Review Fall 1986, 9-22.

Rios-Rull, 3.-V. (1988) "Working in the Market, Home Production and the
Acquisition of Skills: A General Equilibrium Approach," Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis Working Paper.

Rogerson, R. (1984) "Topics in the Theory of Labor Markets," unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation, University of Minnesota.

                                    -35-
Rogerson, R. (1988) "Indivisible Labor, Lotteries and Equilibrium," Journal
of Monetary Economics 21 (January), 3-17.

Rogerson, R. and R. wright, (1988) "Involuntary Unemployment in Economies
with Efficient Risk Sharing," Journal of Monetary Economics 22 (November),
501-515.

Rosen, S. (1985) "Implicit Contract Theory: A Survey," Journal of Economic
Literature 23 (September), 1144-1175.

Shell, K. and R. wright (1989) "Indivisibilities, Lotteries, and Sunspot
Equilibrium," manuscript, Cornell University and University of Pennsylvania.

Takayama, A., Mathematical Economics, The Dryden Press, Illinois, 1974.

Zolotas, X. (1981) Economic Growth and Declining Social Welfare, Bank of
Greece, Athens.




                                    -36-
                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            HOMEWORK IN MACROECONOMICS II: AGGREGATE FLUCTUATIONS




                                 Jess Berthabib

                               Richard Rogerson

                                Randall Wright




                        Working Paper No. 3344 Part II




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  April 1990




This paper is a major revision of Benhabib, Rogerson and Wright (1988). We
thank seminar participants at Northwestern, Stanford, Penn, Berkeley, UCLA, San
Diego, Rochester, and the Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis and San
Francisco for their input, as well as Ellen MeGratten for the use of her
computer programs. We acknowledge financial support from NSF grants SES-
8704690 and SES-8821225, as well as technical support from the C.V. Starr
Center for Applied Economics at New York University, the Hoover Institution at
Stanford, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. This paper is part of
NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #3344 Part II
                                         April 1990

            HOMEWORK IN MACROECONOMICS II: AGGREGATE FLUCTUATIONS


                                     ABSTRACT

This paper explores the implications of including home, or nonmarket,
production in an otherwise standard model of cyclical fluctuations. In
particular, we generalize the stochastic growth model, or the real business
cycle model, to include a household sector using the basic framework that
labor economists have studied for some time. Symmetrically with the market
sector, the household sector uses labor and capital to produce output
according to a stochastic technology.      We calibrate the model based on
microeconomic evidence and long run considerations, simulate it, and examine
its statistical properties. Our finding is that introducing home production
significantly improves the quantitative, performance of the standard model
along several dimensions simultaneously. It also implies a very different
interpretation of the nature of aggregate fluctuations.




Jess Benhabib              Richard Rogerson               Randall Wright
New York University        Graduate School of Business    UPENN and
Department of Economics    Stanford University            Hoover Institution
269 Mercer St, 7th Floor   Stanford, CA 94305             Stanford University
New York, NY 10003                                        Stanford, CA 94305
I. Introduction



     This project explores the implications of including home, or rtonmarket,

production in an otherwise standard model of aggregate fluctuations.        In

Benhabib, Rogerson and Wright (1990), we demonstrated that the household

sector is large, whether measured in terms of the time allocated to home

production activities or in terms of the estimated value of home produced

output. We also argued that there may be a good deal of substitutability

between the market and nonmarket sectors, and that this may be an important

missing element in existing macroeconomic models.      By way of some simple
examples and comparative static analysis, we showed how home production can

have important implications for the nature and interpretation of several

macroeconomic phenomena. The goal in this paper is to pursue the argument

further, qualitatively and quantitatively, by incorporating home production

explicitly into the stochastic growth model, and comparing the results with

both existing business cycle models and the actual data.

     We use a framework that labor economists have studied for some time.1

Symmetrically with market production, household production uses labor and

capital as inputs to produce output according to a stochastic technology.

We expect, a priori, that this would affect market activity for fairly

obvious reasons. To the extent that individuals are willing to substitute

between the market        and household    sectors,   relative productivity

differentials between the two induce volatility in market variables over

time. When productivity in the market is relatively low, for example, we



1
  The primary reference on household prod,iction is Becker (1965), and some
of the ideas developed here are also iscussed— at a general level in Becker
(1988). The particular formalization we use follows Cronau (1977, 1985);
many details are explored at length in our companion paper (Benhabib,
Rogers on and Wright 1990).



                                      1
expect that the economy will allocate fewer hours to production in the

market sector and concentrate instead on household activity.        It follows

that in a model with household production, fluctuations in aggregate market

variables will depend on the occurrence of relative productivity shocks, and

not just absolute shocks, as is typical in existing macroeconomic models.2

Moreover, the size of fluctuations in market quantities will depend on the

degree to which agents are willing to substitute between home produced and

market produced goods, and not just the degree to which they are willing to

substitute between time and goods at different dates, as in existing models.

       In order to examine these effects quantitatively in a controlled

setting, we introduce household production into what is currently the
standard paradigm in macroeconomics —      the stochastic growth model, or the
real business cycle model.3 To facilitate comparison with the existing

literature, we stay as close to it as possible in our basic specification

and functional forms.     We also choose parameter values based on the same

principles that earlier studies have adopted; when additional parameters are

introduced, we appeal to additional microeconomic evidence and steady state

considerations to tie them down.      The essential departure in our economy

from the standard model is that, instead of dividing time between leisure



2
    Notable exceptions would include any models built around sectoral shifts.

  Diverse opinions from Prescott (1986) to Blanchard and Fisher (1989) agree
that this is the standard model, although there is much disagreement as to
just how much can be explained without adding various complications. There
is also disagreement on many technical or methodological details, such as
detrending, estimation, etc. Our general message, however, is meant to be
independent of technical details, and independent of whether or not market
failures, government policies, monetary factors, information processing
problems, frictional unemployment, or other complications are empirically
important.  Our position is that introducing home production will likely
have important effects in any reasonably specified model of macroeconomic
activity.




                                       2
and market labor, agents have to allocate total hours between leisure, work

in the market, and homework. This simple elaboration turns out to have a

significant quantitative impact, and also leads to a novel interpretation of

several important macroeconomic phenomena.

     It has already been established that even very simple versions of the

real business cycle model, as described in Hansen (1985), Prescott (1986),

Plosser (1989), or King and Plosser (1989), for example, do surprisingly

well at accounting for certain salient aspects of the data.                Using

functional forms and parameter values that conform to microeconomic studies

and long run observations, it accounts for a sizeable fraction of observed

fluctuations in macroeconomic variables at cyclical frequencies given

reasonable estimates of the actual process of technological change.

Further, the model predicts phenomena such as the fact that consumption will

be less volatile and investment more volatile than output, as observed not

only in the postwar U.S. data, but also across many countries and time

periods (see, e.g., Bacus and Kehoe 1989).     Nevertheless, it is apparent

that the standard model does not do as well along some dimensions as it does

along others.

     We identify the following problems with the standard real business

cycle model:


     1. output fluctuates too little;

     2. relative to output, labor hours fluctuate too little;

     3. relative to output, consumption fluctuates too little;

     4. relative to output, investment fluctuates too much;

     5. productivity's correlation with output or hours is far too high;

     6. labor hours used to produce consumption goods are countercyclical.


We note that these have been recognized by practitioners of the model in the



                                        3
past, with the exception of problem 6; we will argue below, however, that it

is central to understanding the nature of the other problems. Also, various

extensions of the basic framework are known to ameliorate some of these

problems when looked at in isolation. We demonstrate that introducing home

production can improve the performance of the model along all of these

dimensions simultaneously.4

     In Section II we introduce the basic, one sector, stochastic growth

model, and also present a simple way of disaggregating it into a two sector

model.    This allows us to keep track of the hours allocated to the

production of consumption goods and the hours allocated to the production of

investment goods separately, which provides much insight into the workings

of the model.     In Section III we discuss calibration, including some

empirical issues that have typically not come up in this literature, such as

the elasticity of substitution between home and market produced consumption

goods as well as the correlation between innovations to the home and market

technologies.   In Section IV we analyze the results.     Basically, we find

that a model with home production is superior to one without it along every

dimension that we consider. In Section V we discuss the sensitivity of our

results to parameter choices, and present some general concluding remarks.

     In view of the size of the housho].d sector, it seems natural to

investigate its impact in macroeconomic models.     Our finding is that it

definitely improves the quantitative performance of the standard real



  There are, of course, some other problems with the standard model, such as
its failure to account for the observed equity premium, or for certain
nominal phenomena, about which we believe that home production will have
little to contribute; therefore, we do not discuss them in this paper. One
additional area where home production does seem to be important is in
modeling investment in consumer durables over the cycle, as documented by
the recent work of Greenwood and }ierkovitz (1990).  They do a good job of
discussing that issue, so we basically ignore it, and concentrate instead on
some of the other issues.



                                     4
business cycle model.     Furthermore, including home production does not

require a radical departure from the basic framework, nor does it require a

substantial increase in complexity, either conceptually or computationally.

Therefore, based on several criteria, our conclusion is that home production

should be part of the standard business cycle model.




                                     5
II. The Basic Node].




       An appropriate starting point is the standard stochastic growth model.5

There is a representative agent, with preferences over stochastic sequences

of consumption and labor hours (c,h) described by



                                E   tu(ch)

where u(.) is increasing in ct and decreasing in h, E denotes the
expectation, and fiE(O,l) is the discount factor. The agent has one unit of

time to divide between leisure and labor each period. Labor and capital are

used to produce output according to a (possibly time dependent) constant

returns to scale technology, subject to a stochastic shock at each date,
   —
       sf(h,k).        Capital evolves according to k÷1 —
                                                            (l6)k   + i, where

   is investment and 6E(O,l) the depreciation rate, and the shock s evolves

according to a law of motion to be described fully below.           Feasibility

requires c +           '   h   1, and nonnegativity, for all t. The initial

conditions (k0,s0) are given.

       Our immediate goal is to extend this model to include household, or

nonmarket, variables. We begin by generalizing preferences as follows,


                           E
                 -              fltU(ct,ct,ht,ht),




  Although we will extend the standard real business cycle model to include
home production, we ignore many of the interesting extensions that have
already been studied elsewhere, including non-time-separable utility,
time-to-build investment, variable capital utilization rates, inventories,
indivisible labor, signal extraction problems, heterogeneity, government
spending, taxation, imperfect competition, and a foreign sector.    It may
well be interesting to reconsider some of these issues in the context of
models with an explicit home production sector.



                                       6
where c is consumption of the market good, c is consumption of the

nonmarket good, h          is time devoted to market work, and h        is time devoted
                      mt                                           nt
to home work, at date t.         The function U(.) is increasing in its first two

arguments, and decreasing in the last two.           The market technology is now

written yt — smtt  mt,kmt), where hmt and kmt are hours and capital in
                f (h
market production, while the nonxnarket technology is c —

where h       and k        are hours and capital in home production.          Both are
         nt        nt
assumed to display constant returns to scale.           Feasibility requires k +

     k, where k is now the total capital stock, plus cmt + t Yt h +
        1, and nonnegativity, for all t.        Total capital evolves according to

k+i —    (l6)k +            the shocks St and s evolve according to a process to

be described below, and the initial conditions are given.

     Notice that in this specification capital is assumed to be freely

mobile between the home and market sectors. By way of contrast, one could

imagine a model where capital in a given sector cannot be transformed once

it is in place. Theoretically these two cases are polar extremes. From a

practical perspective, however, the difference is not substantial in the

present context. Given depreciation, by choosing to not replace worn out

capital in one sector and putting all new investment in the other, the

economy can reallocate a considerable amount of capital across sectors

without actually moving the stuff that is already in place.                     In the

simulations conducted in this paper, only infrequently does any capital

physically move between sectors, and even then, the amount that does move is

quite small (rarely more than one half of one percent of the stock in the

declining sector). Since at least a small amount of capital probably can be

easily reallocated between the market and nonmarket sectors in the real

world, we believe that the capital mobility issue is simply not of substance




                                            7
        6
here.

        To close this section, we point out that although the models presented

above ostensibly have only one market sector —        i.e.,   they produce a single

market output         that can be used either as consumption or capital —      they
can always be interpreted as special cases of more general two sector

models. Given constant returns, there is a natural and very simple way to

disaggregate.7       Suppose there are separate technologies used to produce

consumption and investment goods,



                                 cmt —s ct(h ct
                                             ,kCt)

                                      sjt#(hjt,ki),

where hj kj and              denote labor, capital and the technology shock in

sector j, j — c or i.       If the functional forms and shocks are identical,
     —      (.) and s —    s,   then efficiency dictates that the capital-labor

ratios will be the same in the two sectors. Thus, in order to produce twice

as much of the consumption good as the investment good, for example, the

consumption sector will simply use twice as much of each input.

     Let       —
                   c/y denote the fraction of output that goes to consumption,
and suppose we have the path of total hours, h, in the standard one sector



6
  Also notice that in this specification capital is produced exclusively in
the market sector, even though it is used as an input to both the home and
market technologies. In the context of most physical capital and even much
human capital, this is probably reasonable. However, for some other forms
of capital, perhaps especially some forms of human capital, this seems to be
a strong restriction, and it may be worth pursuing models in which it is
relaxed.


  We do not claim that there are no other multisector models that aggregate
up to these one sector models, only that the disaggregation procedure to be
presented here is a useful one.




                                         8
economy. Then we can immediately disaggregate by setting       —
                                                                   rh and h.
—
    (1r)h.    Similarly, let     —
                                     c/y   and suppose we have the path of

market hours, h, in the home production economy. Then we can disaggregate

                —                —
by setting          thmt   and
                                     (lLt)htm    The same procedures can be

applied to capital.   Disaggregating in this way does not affect aggregate

market variables: keeping track of the inputs used to produce goods for

consumption purposes and for investment purposes cannot change market

output, consumption, investment, or total inputs.       What it can do is
generate paths for the sectoral utilization of labor and capital. Below we

will use this to analyze how and why the model without home production has

trouble accounting for some observations, including some observations that

appear on the surface to be unrelated to sectoral phenomena.




                                      9
III. Calibration



       Deterministic steady states for the models described above are fairly

easy to characterize (see Appendix A). However, with the exception of a few

special cases (see, e.g., Long and Plosser 1983), stochastic growth models

with or without home production cannot be solved analytically. In order to

study the cyclical properties of the models we therefore follow an approach

pioneered by Kydland and Prescott (1982), and since adopted by many others.8

This approach consists of choosing functional forms and parameter values

based on micro studies and long run observations, and solving the model

numerically.       The solution procedure used here employs a quadratic

approximation to the planning problem around its (deterministic) steady

state, which can then be solved analytically using standard techniques.9

Statistics will then be computed using data generated by simulating the

approximate model, and compared with the same statistics computed using

actual data.

       The functional forms typically employed in the previous literature

(i.e., in real business cycle models without home production) are as
follows.    Preferences are described by a constant relative risk aversion

utility function of a consumption-leisure composite,




8
    Examples include Kydland (1984), Hansen (1985), Hansen and Sargent (1988),
Kydland and Prescott (1988a) King, Plosser and Rebello (1988), Plosser
(1989), Christiano (1988), Christiano and Eichenbaum (1988), Cho and
Rogerson (1988), Cooley and Hansen (1989), Greenwood, Herkovitz and Huffman
(1988), Bacus, Kehoe and Kydland (1989), McGratten (1988), and Rotemberg and
Woodford (1990).


  An alternative procedure is to solve the original planning problem using
numerical methods; the results of Christiano (1986) or Danthine, Donaldson
and Mehra (1989) suggest that these two procedures will yield very similar
results for the models studied in this paper.




                                       10
                                     1cb1.ht )l.b]
                                                                  1
                         u(c,h) —
                                                l-r


The market technology is given by a Cobb-Douglas production function



                               f h k            rtk$hD


where r, if greater than 1, yields exogenous technological growth.                       The

shock to technology evolves according to s —                          + Et, where pE(O,l) and

     is i.i.d. normal. Much has been written on these choices (see Prescott

1986 or King, Plosser and Rebello 1988, e.g.), and will not be repeated

here.     However, we note that this specification implies labor's share of

aggregate income is constant and that hours devoted to market work are

independent of the real wage along a balanced growth path, two properties

that seem to characterize the data.1°

        We would like to preserve the above structure as much as possible, not

only for the fundamental reasons that led previous researchers to adopt such

a specification, but also to facilitate comparison with their results. We

therefore assume preferences are described by



                                                [CbL1-b]' - 1
                    U(cmt,cnt,h
                              mt ,h
                                 nt        )
                                                      l-r

where L — 1-h            is leisure, and
      t         mt-hnt

                                                            l/e
                                —
                                    [act   + (la)cet]


10
   If r — 1 this economy does not grow, but settles down to a steady state,
in the long run. If r — 1 this specification implies that hours devoted to
market work are independent of the real wage in steady state.




                                           11
is a CES aggregator over market and nonmarket consumption. The elasticity

of substitution, which measures the degree to which agents are willing to

substitute between cm and c, is given by l/(l-e).            Thus, e — 1 implies
                                                   al-a.is a Cobb-Douglas
perfect substitutes, while e — 0 implies that C — CC

function.

     Some of the preference parameters are fairly easy to tie down.          The

discount factor fi   is   set to .99. With the interpretation of a period in the

model as corresponding to one quarter of a year, this implies a real annual

interest rate in steady state of 4 percent.            A review of the evidence

concerning risk aversion leads to the conclusion that the preference

parameter r is likely between 1 and 2 (see Prescott 1986). However, Hansen

(1986) has found that within this and even a larger range, the value of r

did not have a significant impact on the nature of cyclical fluctuations for

models without home production. Thus, as in much of the literature we set r
— 1, which implies that the momentary utility function can be written


                             U —             + (l-b)ln(L).
                                   b.ln(C)

However, like Hansen (1986), we did experiment with different values of risk

aversion, and the results of changes in r as well as all of the other

parameters are reported in Appendix B.

     The parameters a and b are chosen so that the steady state of the model

yields values for market work and homework that correspond to averages found

in the data. Using the Michigan Time Use Survey, we compute market work and



11
   In contrast to consumption, we assume that work in the market and work in
the home are perfect substitutes. This simplifies some technical aspects of
the solution procedure, and also gives rise to an easily interpreted notion
of leisure, L — 1-h -h
                     m n


                                         12
homework for an average household consisting of a married couple as

fractions of discretionary time.       Our definition of discretionary time

includes market work plus homework plus leisure, all of which are measured

directly by the time use survey (see Hill 1985).        The main component not

included in this definition is "personal care" which consists mainly of

sleep.   The results of these calculations are h — .33 and h — .28.12

Although these numbers are probably quite accurate, the main results
discussed here actually change little when the assumed steady state values

of h and hn are varied over a considerable range (see Appendix B).      In any

case, note that choosing hm and hn is equivalent to choosing a and b, as

there is a unique choice of a and b that implies the model generates given

values for h and h in steady state (see Appendix A for details).

     The remaining preference parameter is the substitution elasticity.

Although we are not aware of any direct estimate of e in the literature,

there is some evidence that is suggestive.         First, a recent paper by
Eichenbauzn and Hansen (1990) uses aggregate data to estimate a model in

which individuals value both the services of market consumption goods and

the flow of services from consumer durables, where the latter is akin to

output from a home production process that uses capital (measured by
durables) but no labor.     Although their results are sensitive to various

assumptions, for one set of findings they report there is "very little

evidence against the hypothesis that the services from durable and

non-durable goods are perfect substitutes" (p. 63).        This would suggest



12
   We disagree with the assumption of Greenwood and Herkovitz (1990) that all
nonniarket time should be interpreted as home production. This leads them to
set hours of home work to .67 and leisure to zero, contradicting the direct
measures in the time use data.      In our opinion, the standard approach of
dividing time into L + h    should be replaced by L +hm + hii and not hm + hn
                        m




                                       13
setting e near 1, although again, because their framework does not

explicitly include time as an input to home production, this estimate might

be regarded tentatively.

      Cross sectional data can also provide some information. Consider a

static model, in which each individual i has preferences described by



                                   ln(C) + vi(lhihj),

                                       e   l/e
where C —                 + (la.)c.J               with a an individual specific constant
                 lajcei
distributed across the population. The function v(.) may also vary across

agents. Suppose that all agents have the same home production technology,
     —
         B.hi,   but that agent i faces an individual specific market wage, w.

Then it is straightforward to show that the solution to the utility
maximization problem for i implies



                 ln(h./h.) —               ln(B)   -
                                                       — ln(v) + — ln((la.)/a]
                              —        + a1ln(w1) +
                                  a0


The interpretation of the above equation is that it represents the                average

time allocation decision as a function of the long run                  wage.

     Using the pooled data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics described

in Rios-Rull (1988), we estimate the above equation and derive an implied
value of e —      0.6,    somewhat lower than the value implied by Eichenbaum and

Hansen's (1990) results.13 In some sense the two methods that were employed



13
   We consider this estimate highly preliminary, for a variety of reasons.
For one thing, his sample selection criterion severely under reports low
wage workers (presumably with very low ratios of market to home hours). As
a rough correction, we either adjusted home hours for the two lowest wage
groups so that their total work is the same as the other groups, or we
simply ignored the lowest wage groups.    Either method results in a point

                                                    14
are polar extremes — the first uses aggregate data and abstracts from the

time allocation decision, whereas the second uses micro data and abstracts

from savings and capital. Both are obviously crude measures, although they

are not uninformative. We emphasize the need for further empirical work

along these lines, but for the time being we simply use the mean value of

these two numbers, e —   .8,   as our base case for the simulations reported in

the next section (Appendix B illustrates how variations in this important

parameter matter).

     We now describe the structure of technology. As in most of the studies

with which we want to compare results, we set 6 — .025, implying an annual

depreciation rate of 10 percent.             We assume Cobb-Douglas production

functions in both sectors,


                                f(h,k) —     rtkOh9

                                g(hk) —      rtkh1
For the simulations reported in the next section, we abstract from exogenous

growth by setting r — 1, so that the economy ends up fluctuating around some

constant steady state level in the long run. As Hansen (1986) has shown for

the standard model, incorporating a geometric trend by setting r > 1 does

not affect the economy's cyclical properties, and since these are the

properties that we focus on here, we simply set that trend to zero.

     Since 1- equals labor's share of total market income in equilibrium,

we have a direct measure of this parameter from the national income



estimate of about e —    .6.   Note that the data are pooled by wage interval,
and we use the average of the logs of the interval endpoints as the
independent variable. The lower endpoint is set at $1.00 and the upper
endpoint at $8.00 (in 1969 dollars).




                                        15
accounts, which leads us to set 9 —       .36.14 Unfortunately, there is no direct
measure of labor's share in the noninarket sector, and hence             cannot be

found in an analogous manner. However, it can be determined indirectly by

examining the deterministic steady state of the system.           Given values for

h, h, ,     6   and 9, as discussed above, steady state depends only on t       (as
shown in Appendix A, the parameters e, a and b matter only inasmuch as they

influence h and h ,
          m      n
                       while   the other parameters such as r do not matter at

all for the steady state).       Our strategy is to choose r to match certain

aspects of the steady state to averages found in the postwar U.S. data.

     Focusing first on consumption, it seems reasonable to insist that c/y

lie between .70 and .75 in steady state (total consumption averages about 75

percent of GNP in the postwar data, excluding the foreign and government

sectors; but including expenditures on consumer durables in investment

rather consumption reduces this number to closer to 70 percent). As shown

in Table 1, for this to be true i must be considerably less than 0, say

     .10 as compared to 9 —    .36,   consistent with the idea that much homework,

like child care, is extremely labor intensive. We choose a value of t — .08

as our base case for the simulations in the next section, which implies ely
— .71, and at the same time, dy — .26.               The latter ratio is within,

although at the low end of, the range of estimates reviewed by Eisner

(1988), which puts it between .20 and .50.



14
   The literature is not unanimous in this choice. Depending on how certain
aspects of the data are interpreted, measurement of labor's share can dome
out to be anywhere from .57 to .75 (see Christiano 1988; note that no matter
how it is measured, 9 is approximately constant over time). Prescott (1986)
argues for 1-9 — .64, greater than the conventional wisdom of .70, because
he wants to include a measure of the service flow from consumer durables in
GNP; but our model suggests that such a measure might better be included as
home and not market production. We use 9 — .36 here in order to facilitate
comparison with some existing studies, although this and potentially several
other parameters may ultimately need to be to revised.




                                           16
     As table 1 shows, larger values of                             increase dy at the expense of

decreasing cm/y. It seems preferable to match the market consumption ratio,

for at least three reasons: (1) we have less confidence in estimates of dy

than of c/y; (2) the model abstracts from some important considerations

that would tend to increase the size of the home sector, such as taxation on

market activity; and (3) since our goal is ultimately to demonstrate that

including household production makes a difference, we do not want it to

appear as if we have biased things in our favor by having too generous an

amount of home production.                    Table 1 also indicates that the steady state

ratio of market capital to (quarterly) output is about 10, consistent with

the evidence, and that when r — .08, 12 percent of all capital is in the

home sector in steady state, which is reasonable if we interpret home
                                                                     15
capital as household equipment and furniture.

      It remains to describe the stochastic structure. The technology shock

in the market — the so-called the "Solow residual" — can be more or less

accurately estimated from the aggregate data. For example, Prescott (1986)

                                          — p s                   fits well with p — .95, and E mt
finds the process s
                             mt+1            mmt +           mt                  m
i.i.d. normal with a standard deviation of approximately a — .007 (the mean

of         is normalized to i-p , so that the unconditional mean of s mt is one).
     mt                        in


Obviously, less is known about the shock to the home technology.                                    One

natural starting point is to assume that it too follows a process of the

form s
          nt-f].
                   —     s
                       ptint +   E
                                     nt
                                          , where   E
                                                        nt
                                                             is   i.i.d. normal with mean i-p and a

standard deviation a .                      Thus,   we need to determine p ,           an   ,   and the
                    n                                                              n
correlation between                   and £nt• We simply set p —
                                                                              n—   p — .95      and a —



   Greenwood and Herkovitz (1990) choose to interpret home capital as all
durable goods (including the housing stock and automobiles), which implies a
greater fraction of total capital is in the home sector, and hence a larger
value of r is required in order to match the data.




                                                             17
a —
 In
         a — .007 for much of what follows.            However, the basic message is

affected    little by variations in these parameters, with one important

exception discussed at length below (the productivity statistics).

       This leaves the correlation between the two shocks, which we denote by

-y —   corr(e,c).   We know of no independent estimate of this parameter. Our

guess is that y is certainly positive, but that it is also certainly less

than unity (sometimes technological innovations affect productivity mainly

in the market, like microcomputers, and sometimes they affect productivity

mainly in the home, like microwave ovens). Smaller values of -y imply more

frequent relative productivity differentials between the two sectors, and

therefore more frequent opportunities for short run substitution between the

market and the home. Intuitively, then, the smaller is -y the greater is the

extent to which home production should affect the cyclical behavior of the

system.     We somewhat arbitrarily choose -y — 2/3 as the base case for the

simulations reported below, although the basic results would not be affected

very much if we were to choose -y —       1/2    or 3/4, for example.

       We end this section by pointing out that the standard model can always

be nested in the home production model by forcing hnt to be zero in steady

state.     This approach does not seem appealing, since the data indicate

is nearly as large as h, on average. However, the standard model can also

be nested by setting e —      — 0, independent of the average size of h. In

Benhabib, Rogerson and Wright (1990), we prove the following result: the

home production economy with U —         ln(C) + Aln(l-h..h), where C is the CES
aggregator defined above and e —          — 0, generates exactly the same paths for

all of the market variables as a model with no home production and

preferences given by



                        V(c in,h in)   — ln(cin)   + B.ln(l-h ).
                                                             m.




                                            18
This is, of course, precisely the specification used in the standard model

without home production.

     Thus, a value of e or             somewhat different from 0 is required to

generate predictions that are different from those of the standard model.

In fact, as r   is   increased from from q — 0 to the value of ,   — .08 discussed

above, as long as e remains near 0 we found that simulations of the home

production economy were still extremely close to the standard model. Hence,

one way to interpret a model without an explicit description of household

production is that it contains the home sector implicitly, but either

assumes that h is very small on average or that e is close to zero.




                                            19
IV. Results



        As is standard in this literature, our approach is to compare certain

statistics computed from simulations of the models with those computed from

actual post war U.S. time series.            We are primarily interested in
fluctuations of the data around some smooth trend, and therefore, as in much

(but not all) previous work in the area we detrend by taking logarithms and

applying the Hodrick-Prescott (1980) filter to all series before computing

any statistics. Table 2a summarizes the behavior of five key macroeconomic

variables, c — market consumption, i — investment,      hm — market   hours, k —
           in

capital, and p — average productivity (p —
                                             y/h), in   terms of two statistics

for each series x: the standard deviation of x relative to the standard

deviation of output, and the correlation of x with output.        The data are

quarterly for the period 1954.1 — 1988.2, and the standard deviation of GNP

over this period is 1.74 percent.16



16
   Several comments are in order concerning these numbers, which have been
taken from Kydland and Prescott (1989), unless otherwise noted.         The
consumption series corresponds to expenditures on nondurables and services
only. We added consumer durables to the investment series, and the result
is a standard deviation of i relative to y of 2.82, lower than the
Kydland-Prescott number of 3.17. Prescott (1986) also reports the standard
deviation of i for several disaggregated categories of investment; for i —
fixed  investment, nonresidential investment, equipment, structures, and
inventories, we have std(i)/std(y) — 3.01, 2.95, 2.61, 3.41, and 5.09.
Eichenbawn and Christiano (1988) use a comprehensive measure including
government investment, which yields 2.38, a number even lower than ours.
The hours series is from the household survey, which is probably better than
the establishment survey in capturing hours worked (rather than hours paid
for). Using the establishment survey produces a standard deviation of hours
relative to output of .97 and a correlation of hours with output of .88;
this also affects the productivity calculations, resulting in a standard
deviation relative to output of .48 and a correlation with output of .31.
In either case, there is reason to believe that if a more appropriate
quality weighted measure of hours were available the standard deviation of
hours would be somewhat lower and that of productivity somewhat higher (see
Kydland and Prescott 1988b). The statistics on capital are from Cooley and
Hansen (1989), and include nonresidential structures, equipment, residential
structures, and government capital.



                                      20
     Table 2b provides a summary of the properties of the standard model

without home production using the parameter values described in the previous

section (these numbers are averages over 50 simulations of 143 periods

each). The results are the same as those reported by Hansen (1985) for his

base economy except that socie new statistics have been added, corresponding

to the disaggregated employment variables hct and hj discussed in Section

II. Many authors have commented on how well this simple and abstract model

captures several important aspects of the actual data, and we concur. For

instance, it replicates the stylized fact that investment is more volatile

than output and consumption is less volatile than output, and at least for

some of the variables, the correlatiøns with output are quite reasonable.

Nevertheless, as promised in the introduction, we wish to draw attention to

several dimensions along which there appears to be significant room for

improvement.

     First, observe that the model economy is not as volatile as the actual

economy: the model has a standard deviation of output equal to only 1.29

percent, compared to the actual 1.74 observed in the data. Of course, this

can be improved by increasing the variance of the technology shock, but this

raises the question, why measure the Solow residuals in the first place? In

any case, independently of the overall volatility of the model, consumption

is not volatile enough and investment is too volatile relative to output.

Because output is the sum of consumption and investment and all three are

highly correlated, the standard deviation of y is essentially a weighted

average of the standard deviations of c and i; hence, insufficient

volatility in consumption and excess volatility in investment relative to

output tend to go together. A further difficulty is that total market hours

do not fluctuate enough in the model, which predicts a standard deviation of

h that is only half as great as that of output. Further still, observe



                                     21
 that although the correlations between output and most of the other

 variables are reasonable, the correlation between output and productivity is

 significantly off target when compared to the actual data.

         We note that these problems are fairly well known, and also, that

various embellishments of the basic framework have been shown to help each

of them in isolation. There is, however, a feature of the model that is not

well understood, but which is intimately related.     This is that the model

implies an almost perfect negative correlation between output and the hours

allocated to the production of consumption goods:   corr(y,h) — - .98.     Some

additional results (not shown in the table) are that          is also highly

negatively corrclated with h, and a fortiori, hj. These predictions fly

in the face of the conventional wisdom concerning actual business cycles,

which is that various sectors tend to move up and down together)7

Furthermore, the following theorem indicates that these predictions are not

only independent of parameter values, but that they are robust in the sense

that they will hold for any specification of the standard model consistent

with the growth observations discussed earlier.



Theorem 1: Consider the model without home production, where preferences and

technology are from the class that implies labor's share is constant and
                                                                            h
is independent of the real wage in steady state or along a balanced growth



17
   Actually, economists often define the cycle as the recurrent comovement of
the outputs of various market sectors (see Lucas 1976, e.g.); but we doubt
if anyone would argue empirically that the inputs of the various sectors
move out of phase.        Without attempting to catalogue various sectors as
consumption or investment, there is no major sector of the U.S. economy that
is   known tohave countercyclical employment (see Murphy, Schleifer and
Vishny 1989).  Using data provided by Donna Costello from five countries
each disaggregated into five sectors, we examined the correlations with
output of each sector's hours, and the cross correlations between sectoral
hours.      Almost all of these correlations were positive, and none were
significantly negative.



                                       22
path. In this model, h and h are negatively correlated.


Proof: The class of preferences that satisfy the hypothesis of the theorem

is the following: either



                          u(ch) —
                                     [c/(l.r)].v(h)
withrOandr,al, or

                          u(c,h) —   ln(c)      + v(h),


where in either case v(.) is a concave function (see King, Plosser and

Rebello 1987 for a proof).       Consider the second case (the first case is

similar). At each point in time, the standard efficiency condition equating

the marginal rate of substitution with the marginal product of labor in the

production of consumption goods reduces to ccv' (he) —            Multiplying
                                                          MPL.
both sides by            we arrive at:


                                              MPL •h
                                                   ct
                              hv' (he) —


The   right   hand side is labor's share of output in the consumption sector,

which will be constant by assumption. Hence, as long as v(.) is (strictly)

concave, an increase in total hours h must be accompanied by a (strict)

decline in h
               Ct   .




Corollary: Since h and h are negatively correlated, so are         and



      We point out that the above results will only be reinforced if labor's

share is countercyclical rather than constant (in the actual data it is

approximately constant over the cycle, as well as in the long run, but


                                         23
 perhaps slightly countercyclical). We would also like to emphasize that our

 proof does not restrict the technologies in the investment and
                                                                      consumption
 sectors to be the same or subject to the same shock.
                                                              Hence, moving to a
 more general two sector model will not overturn it.        The best one can do
 within the standard model is to make v(.) linear, in which case the theorem

 clearly implies that hours in the consumption sector will be      constant over
 the cycle.    The indivisible labor economy studied by Rogerson (1984, 1988)

 and Hansen (1985) is observationally equivalent     to an economy with a linear

 utility of leisure. In that economy, although the two labor inputs hct and

 hj do not move together, at least they do not move in opposite directions
 over the cycle.18

       The intuition for these results is         quite simple.    Basically, a
 specification that implies hours do not change over time along a balanced

growth path also implies individuals never supply more labor in order to

produce more output for immediate        consumption (a result of wealth and
substitution effects that cancel).           In particular, in a model that is
otherwise standard except that it ignores capital (i.e., it sets 9 —
                                                                             0),
employment is const, and consumption fluctuates one-for-one with the
technology shock.     Even though agents have the opportunity to work harder

when productivity is high in order to increase consumption even further,

they choose not to; they simply never work more if the only reward is
increased contemporaneous     consumption.       When capital accumulation is
re-introduced, labor does vary with          productivity due to intertemporal
substitution opportunities; but it is still the case that individuals do not

work more to increase current
                                  consumption. In fact, since consumption now


18
     In a different but similar
                                  structure, Long and Plosser (1983) obtain the
result that employment hours in each sector of a multisector model is
constant.



                                        24
moves less than one-for-one with output, individuals spend less time in the

production of consumption goods when productivity is high, and the increase

in total hours of employment all goes to the production of capital goods.

      We therefore have the following (somewhat bizarre) characterization of

business cycles in the standard model: good times are periods when resources

flow from the production of consumption goods to the production of
investment goods.    But even if one discounts this prediction       say, by
arguing that the standard growth model is "really" only a one sector model —

we   think that it is useful to focus on the behavior of h
                                                              Ct because it
provides considerable insight into other, perhaps less controversial,
issues.    For instance, the fact that consumptio-i is too smooth and

investment too volatile relative to output, in the standard model, is   easy

to understand given that labor is being moved out of the production of

consumption goods and into the production of investment goods as the cycle

moves from trough to peak.    Similarly, the fact that total hours are too

smooth relative to output is easy to understand given that hct is
countercyclical; if h                           h. rose the sum h would
                   ct did not decrease whenever it               t
be more volatile. Furthermore, if h could be increased during upswings

without decreasing hj total output would also be more volatile.

     What is needed is a mechanism that leads to hours in the consumption

sector responding positively to an increase in market productivity.         The

addition of a home production sector provides exactly this mechanism.        In

addition to the standard motive for increasing labor hours when market

productivity is high (i.e., the motive to accumulate capital), in the home

production economy there is an additional motive to simultaneously

substitute market for home produced consumption. The latter effect involves

the transfer of hours from the home into the market consumption sector

during upswings in the business cycle, and thereby could produce a


                                     25
procyclical pattern to        The addition of a household sector implies that

upswings in aggregate market activity may turn out to correspond to periods

when labor flows from the home into all market sectors, rather than periods

when labor flows from the consumption into the investment sector.         This

intuition provides us with the qualitative impact of adding home production;

the question is now one of quantitative importance.

      Table 2c reports the results for simulations of the home production

economy using the parameter values discussed in Section III.       Compared to

the standard model, the volatility of investment relative to output has

decreased, while that of consumption has increased.        Additionally, the

variability of market hours relati,re to output is greater than in the

standard model (and probably about as great as we would want it, given the

data may be biased towards volatility due to the fact that hours are not

quality weighted; see Kydland and Prescott 1988b).      Output is also more

volatile in the home production economy, with a standard deviation virtually

the same as the U.S. data.19 These improvements can be interpreted in light

of the fact that h is procyclical in the home production economy, although

not overwhelmingly so. As shown in Appendix B, the correlation between
                                                                          hct
and     is somewhat sensitive to the choices of parameters. However, we see

that as long as it is even slightly positive, the model improves along
several dimensions at once.

      The only prediction of the standard model that seems to be closer to

the actual data is the volatility of productivity; but it misses   so badly on



19
   There are some subtle points to be noted here. For example, although
market consumption is more volatile here than in the standard model, it is
really the composite good C that consumers care about, and that is actually
quite smooth.   Similarly, hours in home production act something like a
buffer against volatility in market labor, so that leisure L is quite
smooth, too. Hence, although market activity in the home production economy
is apparently more volatile, agents in the model actually don't mind.



                                     26
the correlation between Pt and y that getting the standard deviation right

seems to be of little consolation.         Further, not only does the standard

model predict corr(py) — .99, it also predicts corr(p,h) — .99                (not

shown in the table). Christiano and Eichenbauxn (1988), McCallum (1989), and

others harshly criticize this prediction. In the aggregate U.S. data,

and Pt are in fact negatively correlated, as shown in Figure la, which plots

percentage deviations (after detrending) in h versus p.2° For comparison,

the data generated by the standard model are plotted in Figure lb. To say

that these pictures are different would be a serious understatement.            Of

course, there are several problems with the data, and correcting for

measurement error suggests the true correlation may actually be positive,

perhaps even as high as .44 (see Christiano and Eichenbaum's Table A.3).

But even under the most favorable assumptions, it is certainly not .99.

      The feature of the standard model responsible for this inconsistency

with the data is that it is driven by a single shock to technology (i.e., it

is a "one index" model), which implies a very tight relation between

productivity and output or productivity and hours. Loosely speaking, shocks

to technology shift labor demand and trace out a stable labor supply curve.21

The home production economy with only a single shock to the market
technology —   i.e.,   with var(c) — 0 —   also   traces out a stable labor supply



20
   The true relation between employment hours and productivity, or hours and
the real wage, is an issue with a long history, and we will not attempt to
provide references here. We do point out that in our model p is the average
product, but this is proportional to the marginal product, which equals the
real wage, given a Cobb-Douglas specification.   It is generally a bad idea
to make inferences about the marginal product from wage data constructed by
dividing compensation by hours worked, due to well known biases resulting
from long term employment contracts (see Wright 1988 for a recent
discussion).

21
     This is only approximately true, since capital is also varying somewhat
over time.



                                       27
curve, as shown in Figure ic. Notice, however, that this curve is much more

elastic than the one in Figure lb. In contrast to the standard model, which

relies exclusively on intertemporal substitution between work at different

dates, the home production model also includes intratemporal substitution

between market work and homework.       By including innovations to the home

technology that are less than perfectly correlated with those in the market

we add a different shock. In fact, the home production economy with only a

shock to the home sector —    i.e.,   with var(€) — 0 — traces out a stable

labor demand curve (again loosely speaking), as shown in Figure ld.22

       When both shocks are present, the net effect is as depicted in Figure

le. The correlation between hmt and Pt in this case is .49, which is much

better than the standard model, although perhaps still high.    However, for

obvious reasons this statistic is going to be sensitive to the relative size

of the two shocks. Increasing var(e) from .001 to .01 but keeping var(e)

as well as all of the other parameters constant, the correlation between h
                                                                             mt
and Pt is reduced to .08, which is well within the acceptable range. Other

statistics for this parameterization are shown in Table 2d.      Notice that

std(p)/std(y) and corr(y,p) are also quite close to the data in this
case, although market consumption has become somewhat too volatile.

      Counter to the conclusion of Christiano and Eichenbaum (1988), we

conclude that there is no problem, in theory, accounting for productivity or



22
     Clearly, similar shocks to labor supply could be  generated by assuming
that preferences vary over time, which is exactly what is done in Bencivenga
(1988), and essentially the solution proposed by Christiano and Eichenbauzn
(1988), where it is suggested that changes in government spending be used to
measure shifts in the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and
leisure.   This is, in fact, a reflection of the   general result proved in
Benhabib, Rogerson and Wright (1990), that any economy with home production
is observationally equivalent to another economy without home production but
with different preferences (and in this case, time varying preferences).
The point is that for given preferences the introduction of home production
can make a difference for market variables.



                                      28
real wage observations using models driven exclusLvely by technology shocks.

They argued that this would not be possible, and, therefore, that business

cycle theories based on technological change were in need of a serious

reconsideration.   It is true, of course, that our explanation would be more

complete if we had more precise measures of certain key paraneters, but this

only leads us to conclude that there is a great need for better measurement

in this area. This is similar to the conclusions of Prescott (1986), and

again counter to the conclusions of Christiano and Eichenbaum.




                                     29
V. Discussion



       Our reading of the results contained in the previous section is that

the existence of a household sector can have a large effect on the behavior

of aggregate market variables. In particular, home production improves the

standard model's performance along each of the six dimensions outlined in

the introduction. It is natural to inquire how sensitive these results are

to the particular values of the parameters that we chose, especially since

some of them are not especially well measured. Obviously parameter values

do matter somewhat; for instance, as we alluded to earlier, a value for e

near 0 simply reproduces the statistics of the standard model. In Appendix

B we report the effects of changes in the parameters, in a region around our

base case, on six statistics corresponding to the six dimensions discussed

above (the standard deviation of output, and of consumption, investment, and

hours relative to output, plus the correlations with output of p and of h).

These results are intuitive and easily interpreted; hence, we leave their

analysis to the reader.23

       Basically, our finding is that home production matters a lot. The fact

that the household sector is large is incontrovertible. In light of this,

we view models without home production as having made the implicit

assumption that the willingness and/or the incentive of individuals to

substitute between market and nonxnarket activity is small, which is not

necessarily consistent with the evidence. The fact that available evidence

on some important variables is imperfect only leads us to conclude that


23
    For example, increasing e and reducing -y respectively raises agents'
willingness and incentive to substitute between the market and nonznarket
sectors, which leads to a greater impact of home production. If e gets too
low or -y too high, we approach the standard model; if e gets too high or '
too   low, the effects discussed above become exaggerated.



                                       30
future research ought to subject parameters such as the elasticity of

substitution and technological progress in the nonmarket sector to the same

level of analysis that has been afforded other variables, such as the

coefficient of risk aversion and the Solow residual for the market sector.

If theory predicted that the choice of these parameters was of minor

importance then their values would not be of much interest               to

macroeconomists; but this is not what theory predicts.




                                     31
                                    Appendix A


     Here we analyze the deterministic steady state, and demonstrate how the

parameters a and b are chosen.         Begin by setting the shocks to their

unconditional means, Sm —   s — 1,   and substituting the constraints into the

utility function to yield the objective function




The first order conditions for maximizing this objective are



          U1(t)f1(t) + U3(t) — 0                                         (A.l)


          U2(t)g1(t) + U4(t) — 0                                         (A.2)


          U1(t)f2(t) + (l-6)U1(t) —    U1(t4-l)                          (A.3)


          U2(t)g2(t) + (l-6)U1(t) —     U1(t+l)                          (A.4)



where the notation F(t) indicates that a function F(.) is being evaluated at

arguments as of date t. In the steady state, of course, these arguments do

not depend on time.

     We are given values for the parameters fi,    6, 9 and j, plus the steady
state time allocation h* and h*.      Using the functional forms described in

the text, (A.3) immediately implies 9(k/h)9 —         fl-l+8,   and this can be

solved for k*. The first order conditions also imply the following relation

between the capital labor ratios in the market and household,



                            k         v(l-9)
                                               k
                             m"1m     8(l-)


which can be solved for k* given the solution for k*. Now c* —     g(h*,k*)   and


                                       A. 1
c
 *    — f(h
            * * - i*             *      **
                       where i — 6(k ÷k ).     Notice
            mm,k )     ,
                                     m n                that we have solved for the
 in


steady
                                *     ***
            state allocation (c m,cnh inn
                                      ,h )     without using the instantaneous
utility function at all. The strategy is to now determine the parameters a

and b of this function so that this solution satisfies the marginal

conditions (A.l) and (A.2).          In fact, the ratio of these conditions is
        —            since   U3 — U4 for the preference structure assumed in the

text.       This condition is independent of b and can be solved for a unique

value of a. Then (A.l) or (A.2) can be solved for a unique value of b. The

elasticity parameter e affects the implied values of a and b, but none of

the observable variables, while the risk aversion parameter r does not

affect the steady state at all.




                                         A.2
                               Appendix B



a) The effect of changing e on six key statistics


                              std(x)/std(y)               corr(yx)
    e       std(y)
                       x—i        x—cIn       x—hm    x—hc      x—p
   0.6       1.52      2.82        .36         .60    - .39      .94

   0.7       1.58      2.79        .42         .66    - .15      .88

   0.8       1.70      2.68        .52         .77      .16      .74

   0.9       2.02      2.64        .67         .91     .36       .42

   1.0       2.89      3.10        .90        1.14     .43      - .33




b) The effect of changing y On SiX   key statistics

                              std(x)/std(y)              corr(y,x)
    y      std(y)
                      x—i        x—cm         x—hin   x—h c     x—p
   1/3      2.00      2.38         .59         .85     .50       .62


   1/2      1.88      2.53         .53         .81     .34       .68


   2/3      1.70      2.68         .52         .77     .16       .74


   3/4      1.62      2.85         .48         .71    - .05      .79

  1.0       1.27      3.41         .26        .47     - .90     1.00




                                   8.1
c) The effect of changing h on six key statistics



                              std(x)/std(y)                 corr(y,x)
   h       std(y)
                      x—i         x—cin       x—hin   x —hc        x— p

   .23       1.90     2.67         .53         .82        .21       .69


   .28       1.79      2.68        .53         .79        .19       .71


   .33       1.70     2.68         .52         .77        .16       .74

   .38       1.62     2.68         .52         .74        .13       .76

   .43       1.55     2.67         .51         .72        .10       .78




d) The effect of changing h on six key statistics


                              std(x)/std(y)                corr(y,x)
   h       std(y)
                      x—i        x—cin        x—hin   x   —hc      x—     p

   .13      1.52      2.92         .43         .68    - .08         .85


   .18      1.58      2.84         .47         .72        .04       .81


   .23      1.64      2.76         .50         .75        .11       .77

   .28      1.70      2.68         .52         .77        .16       .74

   .33      1.74      2.61         .54         .78        .20       .71




                                   B. 2
e) The effect of changing 9 on six key statistics


                              std(x)/std(y)               corr(y,x)
    9       std(y)
                       x—i        x—cin       x—hin   x—hC       x—p
   .28       1.92      2.88        .57         .76     .36        .76

   .32       1.80      2.77        .54         .77     .26        .75


   .36       1.70      2.68        .52         .77     .16        .74


   .40       1.60      2.60        .50         .77     .07        .73

   .44       1.51      2.53        .49         .77    - .02       .72




f) The effect of changing t   on six key statistics


   i        std(y)
                       x—i
                              std(x)/std(y)

                                 x—cin
                                                         corr(y,x)

                                              x—hin   x—hC      x—p
   0         1.52      3.39        .41        .75     - .14       .73

   .04      1.60       3.02        .46        .76      .02        .73

  .08       1.70       2.68        .52        .77      .16       .74

  .12       1.80       2.39        .58        .77      .28       .75

  .16       1.90      2.14         .64        .77      .38       .77




                                   B.3
g) The effect of changing r on six key statistics


                                  std(x)/std(y)                        corr(y,x)
       r     std(y)
                       x—     i      x—c     in
                                                  x   —h    in
                                                                 x   —hC      x    —
                                                                                        p

      0.5    1.83      3.03            .42            .81        - .02            .68


      1.0    1.70      2.68            .52            .77            .16          .74


      1.5    1.63      2.52            .59            .74            .24          .76


      2.0    1.60      2.43            .64            .73            .27          .78

  •
      2.5    1.58      2.37            .67            .72            .29          .79




h) The effect of changing a on six key statistics



                                  std(x)/std(y)                        corr(y,x)
       a     std(y)
                       x—i           x—cin        x-h       m
                                                                 x—hC         x—p
      .005   1.21      2.68            .52            .77            .16          .74


      .006   1.45      2.68            .52            .77            .16          .74


      .007   1.70      2.68            .52            .77            .16          .74


  .008       1.94      2.68            .52            .77            .16          .74


  .009       2.18      2.68            .52            .77            .16          .74




                                        B.4
i) The effect   of changing a on six key statistics


                                std(x)/std(y)                 corr(y,x)
    a       std(y)
     In
                        x—i        x—cin        x—hin      x —hC     x—p
  . 005         1.16    2.73         .66         .85        .19       .54

  . 006         1.42    2.71         .57         .79        .16       .66

  . 007         1.70    2.68         .52         .77        .16       .74

  .008          1.98     2.65        .49         .76        .19       .79

  . 009         2.27     2.62        .47         .75        .23       .83




j) The effect of changing a      on six key   statistics


                                std(x)/std(y)                 corr(y,x)
    a       std(y)
                         x—i        x—cIn       x—hIfl     x —hC     x—p
  . 005         1.76     2.60        .46         .75        .27       .85

  . 006         1.74     2.64        .49         .75        .20       .80


  .007          ],.70    2.68        .52         .77        .16       .74


  . 008         1.66     2.71        .56         .79        .16       .67


  .009          1.64     2.73        .62         .82        .17       .60




                                    B.5
k) The effect of changing p on six key statistics


                              std(x)/std(y)             corr(y,x)
   pin     std(y)
                      x—i         x—cin       x—hin   x —hC      x—p
   .00      1.53      2.32         .62         .92     .52       .41

   .50      1.49      2.49         .57         .87     .37       .52

   .90      1.67      2.68         .51         .77     .16       .72

   .95       1.70     2.68         .52         .77     .16       .74

   .99       1.70     2.71         .54         .79     .17       .73




1) The effect of changing p on six key statistics


                              std(x)/std(y)              corr(y,x)
    p       std(y)
                      K—i         XC     m
                                              x—hm    x —h
                                                             C
                                                                 x—p
   .00       2.00      2.53        .64         .81     .44       .84


   .50       1.92      2.67        .62         .79     .31       .85


   .90       1.73      2.80        .57         .76     .12       .78

   .95       1.70      2.68        .52         .77     .16       .74

   .99       1.68      2.44        .48         .78     .32       .67




                                    B.6
                                    References

Bacus, D. and P. Kehoe (1989) "International Evidence on the Historical
Properties of Business Cycles," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Working
Paper 402R.

Bacus, D. and P. Kehoe and F. Kydland (1989) "International Trade and the
Business Cycle," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Working Paper 426.

Becker, G.S. (1965) "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," Economic Journal
75, 493-517.

Becker, G.S. (1988) "Family Economics and Macro Behavior," American Economic
Review 78 (March), 1-13.
Bencivenga, V. (1988) "An Econometric Study of Hours and Output Variation
with Preference Shocks," manuscript, University of Western Ontario.

Benhabib, J.,    R. Rogerson and R. Wright (1988) "Home Production and
Aggregate Fluctuations," paper presented to the Northwestern University
Summer Workshop on Macroeconomics, Evanston, Ill.inois, August 1988.

Benhabib, J., R. Rogerson and R. Wright (1990) "Homework in Macroeconomics
I: Basic Theory," manuscript.

Blanchard, 0. and S. Fisher (1989) Lectures in Macroeconomics.

Christiano, L. (1986) "On the Accuracy of Linear Quadratic Approximations:
An Example," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research Paper.

Christiano, L. (1988) "Why Does Inventory Investment Fluctuate So Much?"
Journal   of Monetary Economics   21, 247-280.

Christiano, L. and M. Eichenbaum (1988) "Is Theory Really Ahead of
Measurement? Current Real Business Cycle Theories and Aggregate Labor Market
Fluctuations," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Working Paper 412 and
NBER Working Paper 2700.

Cho, J.     and R. Rogerson (1988) "Family Labor Supply and Aggregate
Fluctuations," Journal   of Monetary Economics 21,      233-245.

Cooley, T. and C. Hansen (1989) "The Inflation Tax in a Real Business
Cycle Model," American   Economic Review 79      (September), 733-748.

Danthine, J.-P., J. Donaldson and R. Mehra (1989) "On Some Computational
Aspects of Equilibrium Business Cycles Theory," Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control 13 (July), 449-470.

Eichenbauzn, M. and L.P. Hansen (1990) "Estimating Models with Intertemporal
Substitution Using     Aggregate Data," Journal         of Business and Economic
Statistics 8, 53-69.

Eisner, R. (1988) "Extended Accounts for National Income and Product,"
Journal of Economic Literature 26, 1611-1684.

Eisner, R. (1989) The Total Income System of Accounts, University of Chicago
Press.


                                         34
Greenwood, J. and Z. Herkovitz (1990) "Home Production" manuscript, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Greenwood, J., Z. Herkovitz and C. Huffman (1988) "Investment, Capacity
Utilization, and the Real Business Cycle," American Economic Review 78
(June), 402-417.

Gronau, R. (1977) "Leisure, Home Production and Work — The Theory of the
Allocation of Time Revisited," Journal of Political Economy 85, 1099-1123.

Gronau, R. (1985) "Home Production — A Survey," in Handbook of Labor
Economics, vol. II, edited by 0. Ashenfelter and R. Layard, North-Holland,
Ama terdam.

Hansen, C. (1985) "Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle," Journal of
Monetary Economics 16, 309-325.

Hansen, C. (1986) "Growth and Fluctuations," manuscript, UCSB.

Hansen, C., and T. Sargent (1988) "Straight Time and Overtime in
Equilibrium," Journal of Monetary Economics.

Hawrylyshyn, 0. (1976) "The Value of Household Services: A survey of
Empirical Estimates," The Review of Income and   Wealth   22, 101-131.

Hill, M. (1985) "Patterns of Time Use," in Time, Goods and Well-Being.
edited by F.T. Juster and F.P. Stafford, University of Michigan.

Hodrick, R. and E. Prescott (1980) "Post War U.S. Business Cycles: An
Empirical Analysis," manuscript, Carnegie-Mellon University.

King, R. and C. Plosser (1989) "Real Business Cycles and the Test of the
Addelmans," manuscript, University of Rochester.

King, R., C. Plosser and S. Rebello (1987) "Production, Growth and
Business Cycles: Technical Appendix," manuscript, University of Rochester.

King, R., C. Plosser and S. Rebello (1988) "Production, Growth and Business
Cycles I. The Basic Neoclassical Model," Journal of Monetary Economics 21,
195-232.

Kydland, F. (1984) "Labor Force Heterogeneity and the Business Cycle,"
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series in Public Policy 21, 173-208.

Kydland, F. and E.       Prescott (1982)   "Time to Build and Aggregate
Fluctuations," Econometrica 50 (November), 1345-1370.

Kydland, F. and E. Prescott (l988a) "The Workweek of Capital and its
Cyclical Implications," Journal of Monetary Economics 21, 343-360.

Kydland, F. and E. Prescott (l988b) "Cyclical Movement of of the Labor Input
and its Real Wage," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Working Paper
413.

Kydland, F. and E. Prescott (1989) "Hours and Employment Variation in
Business Cycle Theory," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Institute

                                      35
for Empirical Macroeconomics Discussion Paper 17.

Long, J. and C. Plosser (1983) "Real Business Cycles," Journal of Political
Economy 91 (February), 36-69.

Lucas,   R.  (1976) "Understanding Business Cycles" Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series in Public Policy 5, 7-29.

McCallum, B. (1989) "Real Business Cycle Models," in R. Barro,   edito, Modern
Business Cycle Theory, Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

McGratten,        E. (1988) "The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Policy in an
Equilibrium Model," manuscript, Stanford University.

Murphy, K., A. Schliefer and R. Vishny (1989). "Building Blocks of Market
Clearing Macroeconomic Models," in 0. Blanchard and S. Fisher, editors, NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 1989, MIT Press, Cambridge.

Plosser,     C.     (1989) "Understanding Real Business Cycles," Journal of
Economic Perspectives 3, 51-77.

Prescott, E. (1986) "Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement," Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneaplois Quarterly Review Fall 1986, 9-22.

Rios-Rull, J. -V. (1988) "Working in the Market, Home Production and the
Acquisition of Skills" A General Equilibrium Approach," Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis Working Paper.

Rogerson, R. (1984) Topics in the Theory of Labor Markets, unpublished   Ph.D.
dissertation, University of Minnesota.
Rogerson, R. (1988) "Indivisible Labor, Lotteries and Equilibrium," Journal
of Monetary Economics 21 (January), 3-16

Rotemberg, J. and M. Woodford (1990), "Oligopolistic Pricing and the Sources
of Business Cycle Fluctuations," manuscript.

Wright, R. (1988) "The Observational Implications of Labor Contracts in a
Dynamic General Equilibrium Model," Journal of Labor Economics 6 (October),
530-551.




                                       36
    2.5

p
        2


    1.5

         1



    0




        —1

    —1.5

        —2


    —2.5
          —4      —3    —2        —1            0         1       2       3           4

                                                                                  h




                                    Standard Model
     2.5 r

p
         2


     1.5

          1•

     0.5

          0•
                                                      1
                                               S..—
    -0.5                                 —S.



        —1


    -I.s




     —2.5                                                             2       3           4
             —4    —3    —2   •
                                   —1.              0         1
                                                                                  h
                        Home Production Model, Both Srocks Positive
    2.5 —                    I

p
          2


    1.5




                   32112                                                           3   4




                         Home Production Model, Large Home Shock
    2 .   5                              I            I                I



          2


     1.5


          1
    0.5
                                                              S.


          0                                                        .



    -0.5                                         S.




      —1



    —1.5                             .



      —2


                                 I           I            I                I   I
    —2.5
              —4   -3        —2          —1           0                1       2   3   4
                         iO7.



.0

     •1



     '7



     '0•




            S   r                        1     V.

                                              1*




.0

     'p



      0




     'C

     'It,           SQ          "p   0   'p        V.
                                               4
      Table 1: The Effect of g oxi Steady State




         dy       c/y         k/y   k/y           km/k

.00      .74      .23     10.26     10.26     1.00
.02      .74      .23     10.57     10.26         .97
.04      .73      .24     10.90     10.26         .94
.06      .72      .25     11.24     10.26         .91
.08      .71      .26     11.60     10.26         .88
.10      .70      .28     11.98     10.26         .86
.12      .69      .30     12.37     10.26         .83
.14      .68      .32     12.77     10.26         .80
.16      .67      .34     13.20     10.26         .78
.18      .66      .37     13.65     10.26         .75
.20      .G5      .40     14.12     10.26         .73




                         37
                                   Table 2


a) U.S. Data: std(y) —    1.74

    x—           c
                     in
                            i    p          k
                                             in
                                                  h
                                                    m


   std(x)       .49       2.82   .52        .38   .86
   std(y)
  cor(x,y)      .76        .96   .51        .28   .86




b) Standard Model: std(y) — 1.29

    x—           cin        i    p          k     h
                                                    in
                                                           h.
                                                            ].
                                                                     h
                                                                      c

   std(x)       .30       3.14   .52        .26   .50    2.66        .25
   std(y)
  cor(x,y)      .90        .99   .99        .05   .98     .98    -   .98




c) Home Production Model: std(y) — 1.71

    x—           c
                     in
                            i     p          k    hin      h.
                                                            I.
                                                                     h
                                                                         C
                                                                               h
                                                                                fl




   std(x)       .51       2.73                    .75    2.40        .59      .70
                                 .39        .23
   s td (y)

  cor(x,y)      .69        .94   .75        .09   .94     .95        .10     - .76




d) Home Production Model With var(€ ) — .01: std(y) — 1.61
                                   n

    x—           cin        i     p          k    hin      h.
                                                            1
                                                                     h
                                                                         c
                                                                               h
                                                                                n

   std(x)       .68       2.82   .48        .24   .84    2.43        .93      .93
   std(y)
  cor(x,y)      .68        .88   .54        .09   .89     .91        .14     - .63




                                       38
