NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LA.BOR MARKET DISTORTIONS AND STRUCTURAL ADJUSTMENTS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

Sebastian Edwards

Alejandra Cox Edwards

Working Paper No. 3346

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1990

This is a revised version of a paper presented at the University of WarwickEconomic Development Institute Conference on "Labor Markets in an Era of
Adjustment" Warwick, August 7-10, 1989. We are grateful to John Knight, Ravi
Kanbur, Miguel Savastano, Ed Buffie, Luis Riveros and the conference
participants for helpful comments. Alejandra C. Edwards acknowledges support
from the California State University.Long Beach Research Office. Sebastian
Edwards acknowledges support from UCLA's Academic Senate and from the NSF.
This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3346
May 1990

LABOR MARKET DISTORTIONS AND STRUCTURAL ADJUSTMENT IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

ABSTRACT

The purpose of this paper is to provide a typology of different

labor market configurations and investigate how two major
structural adjustment policies, namely a trade liberalization
reform and the relaxation of capital controls, affect the level of

aggregate employment and the rate of unemployment. We consider a
number of models starting from the traditional Australian approach.

We then analyze a multiple sectors intertemporal setting and a
model with uncertainty and search. We identify situations under
which structural adjustment results in unemployment.

Sebastian Edwards
Department of Economics

UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90024-1481

Alejandra Cox Edwards
Department of Economics
California State University
Long Beach, CA 90840

1

I. Introduction
Most "official" plans to deal with the debt crisis contemplate

significant economic reforms in the developing countries. In particular, the
Baker plan, the Brady plan, and the programs sponsored by the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank include as one of their key components
significant reforms aimed at opening up these economies to the rest of the

world. In fact, it is not an exaggeration to say that at this time a reform
of their trade regime is one of the most important policy prescriptions being
considered by the authorities of the developing nations.1
A number of observers have noted that in spite of clear theoretical
arguments and of the insistence with which trade liberalization is pushed by

the multilateral agencies, many countries vehemently resist it. How can we
explain this? If trade reform is as desirable as economists have argued, why
do we see so few sustained efforts at opening up the developing countries?
There is no doubt that trade liberalization entails adjustment costs, which

often take the form of increased aggregate unemployment. The question though
is: Why do these costs induce so much resistence? particularly in light of
the expectation of future social benefits. Why does the road to protectionism, which also entails an adjustment process, appear so much smoother?
Surprisingly, most of the policy literature on structural reform and
liberalization of the external sector has tended to sidestep the question of

unemployment.2 Moreover, in those studies that take the simple Heckscher-

recent study by Thomas (1989) shows that the great majority of World
Bank Structural Adjustment Loans (SALs) have had a trade liberalization
component as a condition for releasing funds.
2There are, however, a few exceptions. Krueger (1983), for instance,
discusses the empirical relation between trade orientation and employment in
the long run. The World Bank study directed by Michaely, Choksi and
Papageorgiou (1986) deals with the employment effects of trade reforms,

2

Ohlin model as a benchmark the issue is completely nonexisting. In fact,
according to the simplest textbook approach, in a small developing economy
with capital intensive imports, fully mobile factors of production and
flexible prices, the reduction of import tariffs will have no effect on

total employment even in the short run. In this setup the only labor market
effects of trade liberalization will be a reallocation of labor out of the
importables sector and an increase in the real wage rate.3 In reality,
however, there exist a number of reasons why these textbook condition will
not hold, and why tariff reforms can result in a decline of employment in

the short run. In fact, existing historical evidence suggests that in many
cases trade liberalization reforms have been associated with short-run
increases in unemployment (Edwards 1990).

The Ricardo-Viner model with real wage rigidity provides the simplest
framework for illustrating the possible short run employment consequences of

a tariff reform. In this model capital is, in the short-run, fixed to its
sector of origin; only slowly through time (and possibly via investment) can

capital be reallocated. Contrary to the more traditional textbook case with
full flexibility of prices and resource movements, in this more realistic
setting a tariff reduction can result in a decrease of the eauilibrium real

wsge rate required to maintain full employment. However, if for some reason
the economy's labor market is distorted -- due to a government imposed
minimum wage, or to the existence of indexation clauses -

- there

will be

downward inflexibility of real wages, and the required reduction in the wage

while Edwards (1990) discusses the unemployment ramifications of a cross
section of liberalization attempts.
3This result, of course, is what is predicted by the Stolper-Samuelson
theorem under the (plsusible) assumption that imports are relatively capital
intensive.

rate will not take place. As a result of this rigidity, some fraction of
the labor force will become unemployed.

This paper is motivated by the crucial role that labor markets behavior
may play in determining the success of liberalization policies and provides
a theoretical survey on the ways labor markets can react to structural

adjustment reforms. More specifically, we provide a typology of different
labor market configurations and investigate how two main liberalization
policies - controls -

a

reduction of import tariffs and the relaxation of capital

- will

affect the level of aggregate employment and the rate of

unemployment. Our analysis is based on the exploration of the employment
implications of several models proposed in the literature.4 We start with a
brief discussion of the standard Australian or dependent economy model with
flexible wages and prices, pointing out its deficiencies (Section II). -This
model provides a benchmark case that is then used to discuss different

extensions. In Section III we incorporate labor market distortions in the
form of wage rigidities to the discussion. Here we make a distinction
between economy-wide and sector-specific wage rigidity. The analysis in
this section assumes that capital is sector-specific. In that regard, this
discussion should be interpreted as referring to short-run situations.
Section IV incorporates en intertemporal dimension and deals with both the
employment effects of relaxing capital controls and the employment implica-

tions of anticipated trade liberalization reforms. In Section V we relax
the standard trade theory assumption of a fixed labor supply, and consider a

model with upward-sloping labor supply and queuing. In this section we pay

4We survey and summarize a number of existing models including some we
have used in our previous work such as Edwards (1988, 1990) and Cox-Edwards
(1986).

4

closer attention to the initial labor market conditions of a typical

protected economy. We assume that along with trade protection the economy
is characterized by labor unions or some other institutionalized form of

labor protection.5 Thus, ironically, the factor of production that is supposed to gain from freer trade is actually gaining from trade restrictions.

Needless to say, it is not the entire labor force that benefits from

protectionism but only the more organized sectors. It is perhaps within
this setting that the resistance to trade liberalization can be better

understood. Finally, Section VI contains the concluding remarks.

XI. Tariff Liberalization and
Australian Model

Labor

Market Adlustiient in the Standard

In this section we discuss the way in which a tariff liberalization
reform affects the labor market in the standard Australian model with

flexible prices and no market distortions.6 In the following sections we
will use these results as a benchmark to be compared with those obtained
from alternative specifications of the labor market.
Consider the case of a small country that produces and consumes three
goods --

importables

(M), exportables (X), and nontradables (N).7

5Labor unions have a stronger negotiating power and sometimes even
monopsony power in a closed economy.
6This model has a long tradition in international trade theory. See
the discussion of it in Mussa (1974) and Dornbusch (1974, 1980). Edwards
(1988) provides a diagrammatical discussion of this standard model.
7The distinction between two types of tradable goods (X and M) and
a nontradable good (N) is analytically convenient, and is at the very core
of modern open economy macroeconomics. In practice, however, it is not easy
to determine which goods are actually tradables and which are nontradables.
Indeed, statistics for the vast majority of countries do not make such a
distinction. Although this practical difficulty does not invalidate the
usefulness of the dependent economy model, it does imply that analysts and
policymakers should be particularly careful (and creative) when using this
model. At the simplest level it can be argued that (at least) a large

5

Households consume all three goods and maximize a utility function subject
to a constraint which states that the value of expenditure does not exceed

income. There are a large number of identical producers and perfect
competition prevails in the goods markets. Firms are assumed to maximize
profits subject to existing technology and to the available factors of pro.

duction: labor, capital and natural resources.8 In addition to consumers
and producers, there is a government that imposes a tariff on imports.
Following traditional trade theory it is assumed that the revenue from the

tariff is handed back to consumers in a lump-sum fashion.9 There are no
other taxes and no government spending on goods or services. Finally, we
use the price of exportables as the numeraire.

Denoting the revenue function by R, the expenditure function by E,
the price of nontradables relative to exportables by q, and that of
importables relative to exportables by p. the equilibrium in this simple
economy can be represented by the following set of equations (where a
subindex refers to a partial derivative):

R(1p,q;L,KG) +

(E-R)

10

—

E(l,p,q,U),

(1)

percentage of the services sector of an economy is constituted by nontradables. It is important to note, however, that the importance of this nontradable sector will vary across countries. For instance, some authors have
argued that, strictly speaking, in the case of Uruguay there are no nontradables: at least for Argentinian consumers all Uruguayan goods are tradable.
8Alternatively, we can assume that there are two factors only - and labor - - and that capital is sector specific in the short-run.
In fact this formulation is much simpler than the one used in this section.
On three-factor models of international trade see Learner (1987).

capital

own

9For a model where the government uses tariff proceeds to finance its
see Edwards (l989a).

consumption,

10For a detailed exposition of traditional trade theory using duality
see Dixit and Norman (1980).

6

E —R ,
q

(2)

q

pp*+r,.

(3)

where L, K, and C are labor, capital and natural resources, respective-

ly. r is the specific import tariff, (E-R) are imports, and U is
total utility. Equation (1) is the budget constraint and establishes that
total income - -

stemming from factors' income and government transfers - -

has to equal expenditure. Equation (2) is the nontradables equilibrium
condition, while equation (3) establishes the relation between the domestic

price of importables and the import tariff r.
As in most traditional trade models we assume that factors supplies --

and in particular the supply of labor -- are inelastic.11 The initial labor
market equilibrium is illustrated in Figure 1, where the horizontal axis
measures total labor available in the economy and the vertical axis depicts

the wage rate in terms of exportables. Schedule L, denotes the demand for
labor by the tradable gooda sector and is equal to the horizontal sum of the

demand for labor by the exportables sector, (schedule Lx) and the demand
for labor by the importables sector. Demand for labor by the nontradable

goods sector is shown by schedule LN. The initial equilibrium is characterized by full employment and a wage rate equal to w0. At this position

OTLA labor is used in the production of exportables, LALS labor is
employed in the production of importables, and ONLB labor is used in the
-

production

of nontradables. In what follows we will assume that in the

short-run only labor cart aove across sectors, although in the long-run, all

three factors are assumed to be mobile. However, since our main interest is

11We relax this assumption in Section V where we analyze queuing
models. See also Edwards (1990).

IV

Wugc r;ltc U

14

Or

L

14

Labor

F/&ca 1.—

ON

7

on the short run consequences of structural reform, most of our discussion
will focus on the Ricardo-Viner case with factor specificity.
Consider now a tariff liberalization reform that reduces the import

tariff and, thus, causes a reduction in the domestic price of importables. In
this simple general equilibrium framework this reform will affect a number of

variables including relative prices. With regard to employment, the tariff
reduction will provoke changes in the allocation of labor across sectors.
In order to track down the full effect of the reform on the labor market
it is first necessary to determine the effect of the reduction in tariffs on

the price of nontradable goods. Only then we will be able to know the

direction of the shift of schedule LN in Figure 1. From the manipulation of
equations (l)-(3) it is easy to show that the direction in which the price of
nontradables will change is going to depend on the assumptions made regarding
substitutability in demand and on the magnitude of the income effect.
Assuming that the three goods are gross substitutes in consumption and that
the income effect does not exceed the substitution effect, it can be shown

that as a result of the tariff reform the price of nontradables will fl

relative

to that of exportables: that is dq/dr >

The labor market adjustment process under these assumptions is

illustrated in Figure 2. The reduction in the tariffs will result in a
lower domestic price of importables, generating a downward shift of the

curve (with the L curve constant). The new 14 curve will intersect the
L curve at R. However, since as pointed out above the reduction in the
world price of importables will also result in a decline in the price of

12For a formal and more complete analysis of the effects of tariff
reforms and terms of trade disturbances on the equilibrium real exchange
rate see Edwards and van Wijnbergen (1989).

\/.tc r;i,c I,'

U,

'4,"

WI

U,.

.$
Or

L,

'—4
1.ibor

0,,

8

nontradables (relative to exports), this is not the final equilibrium. As a

consequence of the decline of q, L will shift downward (by less than the
shift in L.r) and the final short-run equilibrium will be achieved at S
with a lower wage rate w1. In this new equilibrium, production of exportables has increased --

with

labor used by this sector increasing by LALQ.

The production of nontradables may either increase or decrease, and

production of importables will fall. In the case depicted in Figure 2,
labor has moved out of the importables sector and into the exportables and
nontradables sectors.

What has happened to factor rewards in the short run? Wages have

declined in terms of exportables (from w0 to w1 in Figure 2). Wages
have also declined in terms of nontradables because the vertical distance
between the

and L, curves is smaller than the reduction in w from

w0 to w1. Wages, however, have increased relative to importables because
the domestic price of these goods has fallen by more than the decline in

wages. In the exportables sector, the real return to the sector specific
factors has increased. However, the real return to these fixed factors in
the importables and nontradables sectors could either increase or decrease.13
In summary, in the standard Ricardo-Viner model with wage flexibility,

the short-run effects on production, prices, and factor rewards of a tariff

liberalization reform will be as follows: (1) production of exporcables

will increase; (2) production of importables will decrease; (3) production of nontradables may increase or decrease; (4) prices of nontradables

will decrease; (5) wages will increase in terms of importables and

13Formally, the real return on the sector specific factors allocated to
the importables sector will decrease in terms of importables and could either
increase or decrease in terms of the other two goods. See Edwards (1988).

9

decrease in terms of exportables and nontradables; (6) the real return to
the sector specific factors allocated to the exportables sector will

increase relative to all goods; (7) the real return to factors specific to
the importables sector will decrease relative to importables but could

increase or decrease relative to the other goods; and (8) the real return
to factors specific to the nontradables sector will increase relative to
nontradable goods but could either increase or decrease relative to the
other two goods.

Until now we have assumed that the main difference between the shortand long-run effects of a trade liberalization is that in the short-run

capital and natural resources are locked into its sector of origin. As time
passes, however, capital will (slowly) move between sectors. To simplify
the exposition, let us assume that the movement of capital does not require

the use of resources. However, the analysis could be modified by introducing a "moving industry", which uses labor and a specific factor, as in Mussa

(1978). The transition period will be characterized by factors moving
between sectors, until the new long-run equilibrium (that is, post trade
liberalization) capital-labor ratios and production levels are attained.
The analysis of the long run equilibrium when the three factors are

mobile can be rather complicated. The reason, of course, is that with three
factors the concept of factor intensities becomes somewhat ambiguous.
However, as Learner (1987) has shown, if we assume that a particular sector

is more intensive in a factor relative to both of the other factors, then

the Stolper-Samuelson theorem will still hold.14 In terms of our
discussion, if we assume that the importables sector is the least labor

formal and detailed discussion of the long run case is given in
Edwards (1990).

10

intensive sector, relative to both capital and natural resources, then we
can conclude that in the long-run real wages will increase, as occurred in
the two-factors case analyzed in Edwards (1988).

Although the dependent economy framework presented here provides a
useful starting point for analyzing the way in which a trade reform affects

the labor market, it has a number of shortcomings. Among these, perhaps the
most important one is the assumption of factor price flexibility. In fact,
in many developing nations there exist some kind of (real) wage rigidity. A
second shortcoming of this model is that it ignores all intertemporal

considerations. In that regard, within this framework it is not possible to
analyze issues related to restrictions to capital movements, or to the way
in which the level of employment reacts to anticipated changes in tariffs.
A third limitation of this standard formulation is that it assumes, within
the tradition of trade theory, that the labor supply is completely inelas-

tic. Finally, the assumption of no-search activities on behalf of workers
is also quite stringent and unrealistic. In the following sections we
present several models that attempt to overcome (some of) these limitations.

11.1 Sector Soecific Human Caoital
So far we have referred to labor as a homogeneous factor. However, for
the type of question we are studying, allowing for differences in general

human capital would not change the results qualitatively. In fact, we could
easily incorporate differences in general human capital by introducing the

distinction between units of labor and number of workers. That is, some
workers would have embodied more units of labor than others. However, if we
assume the existence of sector-specific or industry-specific human capital
(Ci (1962)) our conclusions would be affected because in that case labor
mobility would be costly.

11

One

of

the consequences of a trade liberalization reform is that it

wipes Out entire industries, destroying the value of industry-specific human

capital. This loss of productive factors, in different degrees, has to be
considered as part of the adjustment costs of trade liberalization. In
practice, this cost translates into a type of unemployment that reflects
differences between the market value of a given worker's human capital and
the same worker's perception of what that value is, based on his or her

recent experience and expectations. This type of phenomenon will affect
more seriously the more experienced groups of the labor force.
Moreover, the change in relative prices brought about by a trade
liberalization not only changes the market value of sector-specific human
capital, but also affects the geographical allocation of labor demand.
Mobility costs associated to labor reallocation across areas can thus become
an additional barrier to full employment immediately after a trade reform

takes place. In fact, the labor economics literature has given attention to
this type of adjustment barrier in an effort to explain wage differentials
and unemployment across geographical areas or sectors of economic activity

(see, for example, Topel (1986)). These ideas, although not yet applied to
the question of trade reform, can be very useful in an empirical analysis of
trade liberalization experiences.

III. Wage Rialdities and Labor Market Adlustaent
The discussion in Section II has followed the traditional Australian
model of international trade, which assumes that all factor prices, includ-

ing wages, are perfectly flexible. However, as said before, this is a
simplifying assumption that does not correspond to reality in many developing countries where minimum wage laws or other types of rigidities affect

12

the whole economy or some parts of it.15 In the past ten years or so, a
number of international trade models that assume some type of factor price
rigidity have been developed (see Brecher 1974; Bruce and Purvis 1984).
These models have been useful and have added considerable realism to the
analysis, but moat of them have concentrated on the case in which the economy produces only two goods, and have not addressed specifically the way in

which trade liberalization reforms will affect aggregate employment. This
section extends these results to the three-goods model used in the previous
section and discusses the effects of tariff liberalization under both
economy-wide and sector-specific wage rigidities stemming from exogenously

imposed minimum wages. Again, the analysis concentrates mainly on the
short-run case in which capital and natural resources are locked into their

sector of origin. Although the discussion emphasizes the case of minimum
wages, the analysis is also useful for understanding the effects on employment of other mechanisms widely applied in developing countries, such as
wage indexation arrangements, and disequilibrium real wages set by powerful
labor unions.

111.1 Economy-Wide Wase Rizidities
Consider first the case of an economy-wide minimum wage. In order to
facilitate the diagrammatical exposition, this minimum wage is assumed to be

expressed in terms of our numeraire (exportables))6 The incorporation of
an economy-wide minimum wage into the analysis requires that we modify the

model given by equations (1)-(3) above. Specifically, we now need to define

15For a review of practices used in different countries to determine
minimum wages, see Starr (1981).
16The results presented below are fairly sensitive to this assumption.
Edwards (1990) discusses in detail how using different price indexes to set
the minimum wage will affect the results from the model.

13

a "restricted" revenue function that considers the existence of wage rigidities and initial unemployment such as:17

(W,p,q;V) — max ((S+qS+pS)WL)

(4)

S,L

where W is the minimum wage; L is employment; S1, i — X,M,N,

refers

to output of exportables, importables, and nontradables, respectively; and

V refers to the vector of non-labor (flexible-price) factors of production.
This restricted revenue function can be conveniently written in the
following way:

R —

R(1,p,q,L(1,p,q,W))

(5)

where L( ) is an emDlovment function (see Neary (1985)).
In this case the nontradable market equilibrium condition also has to
incorporate in an explicit way the existence of wage rigidity and of initial

unemployment. This is done by computing the supply of nontradables as the
derivative of the restricted revenue function relative to the price of

nontradables q:

R —E
q

(6)

q

The nature of the initial labor market equilibrium is now captured by

Figure 3 which is similar to Figure 1. Demand for labor by the tradable goods

sectors (LT) is equal to the horizontal sum of the demand for labor by the

exportables sector (Lx)

and the demand for labor by the importables sector

(LH not shown). Demand for labor by the nontradables sector is given by the

schedule. If there is a minimum wage rate equal to ,

unemployment of

magnitude U' will result; the amount of labor demanded by the nontradables
.
17
.
See Neary (1985) for a detailed discussion of the properties of
restricted revenue functions.

\'.Igc rItc U'

UI
I-,.,

ON

Labnr

3

ra,e

rs'

UI

L

I

I

Lbhi

Fsue,e 4

•L

Q$I

-1

ON

14

sector is now determined by the minimum

Figure

1 18
wage and is equal to ONL.

4 shows that when labor is the only mobile factor, and there is

a minimum wage in real terms (expressed in terms of the exportables) a
tariff reduction will result in an increase in the extent of unemployment

which is then given by U',. As shown in the previous section, the reason
for this is the decline in the (real) wage that a trade liberalization will

require in order to maintain the pre-reform level of employment. If, due to
institutional factors, this reduction cannot take place, the adjustment will

occur via quantities and total employment will be reduced. The extent of

the change in employment will in turn depend on: (1) the magnitude of the
(2) the amount by which the price of nontradables goes

tariff reduction;

down; and (3) the employment elasticities in the different sectors.
Formally, the effect of a tariff change on total employment is given by
the expression:

—

+ Lq()

(7)

where L and Lq are the derivatives of the employment function with
respect to the domestic price of importables and the relative price of non-

tradables respectively, and where (dq/d) is the "real exchange rate
effect" of the tariff change. Within our Ricardo-Viner framework with

initial unemployment both L and Lq are positive, indicating that
increases in domestic prices will result in higher employment.19 On the
other hand, as discussed in Section II, under the most plausible set of

18Notice, however, that if the minimum wage is fixed in terms of the
importable good, the tariff reform will not generate any unemployment. This
is because in order for the wage rate to remain constant in terms of M, it
will have to decline in terms of the exportable (see Edwards (1990)).
L9As seen below, in the case of full factor mobility it is rather
difficult to sign these derivatives.

15

assumptions (dq/dr) will be positive, indicating that a tariff increase
(liberalization) will result in a real exchange rate appreciation (deprecia-

tion). Consequently, equation (7) as a whole has a positive sign, implying
that with rigid (real) wages and factor specificity a trade liberalization
reform will result in unemployment.

What will happen in the long-run? In this case all factors will move

across sectors and the interpretation of terms L and Lq in equation (7)
is more complicated and will be related to the direction of the Rybczynski

effects. Formally:
-R

L

LL
-R

L —
RLL

where RLL is the slope of the marginal product of labor schedule and is

negative. RPL and RqL on the other hand, are Rybczynski terms that

capture what will happen to output of M and N (R

and Rq respective-

ly) if there is an increase in the labor force. Their sign is undetermined
a priori and depend on relative factor intensities, which are difficult to
determine in our 3x3 model. However, as Learner (1987) has shown, if
nontradables is the most labor intensive sector capital and with respect to natural resources -

- both

- RqL

with respect to

will be positive.

This means that RpL can be either positive or negative. A necessary (although not sufficient) condition for it to be positive is that importables

is the second most labor intensive sector. If we assume that R

pL

is also

positive, then we will obtain the result in which a tariff liberalization

reduces employment. If, however, importables is the least labor intensive

sector (as measured with respect to both of the other factors) RL will be

16

negative and we can obtain the more standard result where, starting from an
initial condition of unemployment, a trade liberalization reform will
increase total employment in the economy.

111.2 Sector Soecific Waae Rate Riaiditv
In most countries wage rigidity is not generalized, but rather affects

a subgroup of sectors in the economy. In this subsection we will briefly
use our diagrammatic apparatus to analyze two cases where the above-equilibrium wage affects only one sector in the economy.20
Case 1:

Sector-Specific Ware Riziditv With No Unemoloyment

This configuration of the labor market has recently been used by Burda

and Sachs (1987) to analyze the structure of unemployment in Germany. It is
assumed that one sector, say nontradables, is subject to an above-equilibrium wage rate, and that the wage rate in the rest of the economy -called uncovered Sector -

- takes

the

so-

the level required to assure full employ-

ment in the economy as a whole. The initial conditions under these
assumptions are summarized in Figure 5, where

is the minimum wage in

the protected sector (the nontradables sector) and WT is the wage rate in
the uncovered (tradables) sector.

Employment in tradables is equal to the

distance OTA, while employment in nontradables is equal to ONA.
Under these conditions, and assuming that capital and natural resources
are sector-specific, a trade liberalization reform will result in an
increase in the wage gap between the protected and the uncovered sectors, in
a reduction in employment in nontradables and importables and in an increase
in employment and output in exportables (see Figure 6).

20The formal analysis of a sector-specific wage rate rigidity is
somewhat complicated. See the discussion in Edwards (1990).

dJ

WN

V4,r

A

•OJhJ

F/tiIlE 5
w
v4

Wr

17

The main limitation of this approach is, indeed, that it is

characterized by a non-equilibrium wage rate differential (WNWT) that can
only be maintained if there are severe barriers to entry to the protected

sector. Only in this way it can be reconciled having a major distortion in
the labor market, in the form of intersectoral wage differentials, and no

unemployment. An elegant way of solving this problem is by introducing, as
we do below, a Harris-Todaro type of mechanism to generate an equilibrium
wage rate differential.
Case 2:

Sector-Specific Minimum Waees With tinemolovment

Consider now the case where there is a binding minimum wage in the

inmortables sector only. In order to analyze this case, the diagrams used
previously must be somewhat modified. Figure 7 is similar to Figure 5,
except that in Figure 7, total labor used in the importables sector is

measured from the right-hand side origin °M• The wage rate WM is the
minimum wage in the importables sector (say, manufacturing); I is employment in this sector. Curve qq is a rectangular hyperbola known as the
Harris-Todaro locus, along which the following equation is satisfied:

W

LM

W
w
N X1+1J
M'

where U is the equilibrium level of employment. 21

(9)

In the absence of a

minimum wage, equilibrium is attained at point Z. With a minimum wage,

however, the intersection of (L+L) with qq at point S gives the wage
rate in the uncovered (no minimum wage) sectors, employment in each Sector,

is based on Harris and Todaro (1970) and Harberger (1971). For
the use of this framework in the context of a two-sector economy, see
Corden and Findlay (1975) and Neary (1981). The discussion that follows
draws from Edwards (1988).

0

C

Ni

N

+

N

0

N

+

N

Wage rale in imporiabks sector

N

Wage rate in exportabics and nontradables seclors

N

+

r

18

and total unemployment. The distance ORLX
exportables sector; the distance

is

total employment in the

l+LN) is employment in nontradables;

the distance (L.4-L.N)LM is the initial equilibrium level of unemployment;

and the distance OMLL, is employment in the covered sector.22
The short-run (with capital immobile across sectors) effects of a

reduction in the world price of importables are illustrated in Figure 8. As
a result of the decline in the world price of importables, demand for labor

in that sector shifts downward. At the given minimum wage, WM, total
demand for labor in the importables sector will decline. The new demand for
labor in the importables sector (not drawn) will intersect

at A. A

new rectangular hyperbola q'q' passes through this point and labor
demanded by the importables sector is now reduced to
What will happen to wages and employment in the uncovered sectors, and to

unemployment? Under the assumption that the price of nontradables remains
constant, curve (Lx+L.N) remains at its original location, and point B,

given by the intersection of q'q' and (1.fL),

is

the new equilibrium.

This position is characterized by a lower wage and higher employment in the

uncovered sectors. As discussed above, however, the reduction of tariffs will

affect the price of nontradables and (Lx+L) will not remain constant.
Under the assumptions discussed before, the lower tariffs will generate a
reduction in the price of nontradables, which is, however, smaller than the

decline in the price of importables. As a result, in the final short-run

equilibrium, (Lx+LN) will shift downward to (L.x+LN)' (not drawn). The

intersection of (L+LN)' and the q'q' rectangular hyperbola at point C

22There is an important difference between this type
model in which total availability of labor to the economy
models with an upward sloping aggregate supply of labor.
of model, see A. Cox-Edwards (1986), and Section V of this

of minimum wage
is given and
On this last type
paper.

19

is the final equilibrium when capital is locked in its sector of origin.

Under the given assumptions, the post-tariff reduction equilibrium is

characterized by the following: (1) lower employment in the sector covered
by the minimum wage (importables); (2) lower wages in the uncovered
sectors, expressed in terms of exportables; (3) either higher or lower
equilibrium unemployment;

(4) either lower or higher employment in

nontrsdables; and (5) higher employment and production in exportables.23
Not surprisingly, a tariff liberalization in the case of partial minimum
wage coverage generates a different outcome than that obtained in the case of

an economy-wide minimum wage. First, under partial coverage, there is an
increase in production and employment in exportables. Second, employment in
nontradables may also increase. Also, in the short-run, the reduction in
tariffs can result in a decline in the equilibrium level of unemployment in
the case of partial minimum wage coverage, whereas greater unemployment always
results after such a policy in the case of an economy-wide minimum wage. This
illustrates an important finding: in the presence of labor market distortions, trade liberalization policies usually considered to be beneficial may
generate nontrivial (short-run) unemployment problems.

What will happen in the long-run in the presence of this type of

sector-specific minimum wage? In the short-run, after the domestic price of
importables has gone down, the real return to (sector-specific) capital will

be different across sectors. The reduction in tariffs reduces the return to
capital in the importables (manufacturing) sector and increases it in the

exportables and nontradables sectors. Of course, this situation with
23

In

-

this setting, unemployment is given by U —
LM(WM/WNl). Because
declines and W /W
goes up, it is not possible totnow a orion which
way U will go. Tile hnal direction will depend on the elasticities of
demand for labor in each sector.

20

different real returns to capital cannot continue in the long run. As time
goes by, capital will be reallocated, moving out of importables and into the

other sectors. In terms of Figure 8, this means that LM will shift
further downward - -

and

with it the rectangular hyperbola qq -

- while

demand for labor in the uncovered sectors will shift upward. Moreover,
these curves will shift in such a way that the final Outcome will be characterized by a higher equilibrium wage in the absence of wage rigidities.
The final long-run equilibrium will have to satisfy two conditions:
the return to capital will be equalized across sectors and the labor market

will be in equilibrium, in the sense that

—

—

As

capital is reallocated, employment in the importables sector declines and
employment in the exportables and nontradables sectors increases in relation
to the short-run levels depicted in Figure 8. It is not possible, however,
to know a Driori whether wages in the uncovered sectors (nontradables and
exportables) will be higher or lower in the long-run than their initial

levels. This will depend on the elasticities of substitution and on the

relation between the slopes of the LM qq, and (Lx+LN) curves.

IV. The Liberalization of the CaDital Account. Anticiopted Tariffs and
EmDlovIIent

The preceding

framework has ignored intertemporal decisions and, thus,

is unable to handle some important questions related to issues such as the
employment effects of relaxing capital controls, or the employment consequ-

ences of an anticipated change in tariffs. The purpose of this section is
to extend the dependent economy model to an intertemporal setting and to
investigate how the presence of more than one period modifies the results

L,
w.
'a

U

/
/

E

//
I
//
U

U
U

-t

B

WgW
•1

0

(L + L.)'
Labor

F/.u2E 8

ow

21

from the static model analyzed before.

24

V.1 The Intertemooral Deendent Economy Model
The simplest way to incorporate intertemporal aspects is by considering
the existence of two periods -.

the present (period 1) and the future (period

2). If we now want to look at capital account liberalization we must assume
that initially there are capital controls that are reflected in a different-

ial between the domestic real interest rate (r) and the foreign real
interest rate (r*). As before, it is assumed that there are a large number
of producers and (identical) consumers, and that perfect competition

prevails. The labor market is distorted by a minimum wage i,

which we

first assume is in effect in both periods.

In this 2-period model consumers maximize utility subject to their
intertemporal budget constraint, whereas firms maximize profits subject to
the existing constant returns to scale technology, availability of factors

of production, and the predetermined minimum wage. Assuming that the
utility function is time separable, with each subutility function homothetic
and identical, the representative consumer problem can be stated as follows:

max V(u(cN,cX,cM); U(CN,CX,CM)),
subject to:

c +

pcM

+

qc

+

6(Cx+PCM+QCN)

Wealth,

(10)

where now the lower case letters refer to first period variables and the upper

case letters refer to second period variables. The price of exportables has

24The discussion that follows focuses on the role of intertemooral
substitution in consumption. Some macroeconomic models that became popular
in the l970s also emphasized intertemporal substitution in the supply of
labor. However, recent empirical work by Altonji (1982) and Mankiw et al.
(1985) have shown that the type of effect is not empirically relevant.

22

been taken to be the numeraire, (e.g., p —

— 1).

V ia the intertemporal

welfare function; u and U are periods 1 and 2 subutility functions
assumed, as pointed out, to be homothetic and identical.

cM cN (CXCM

and CN) are consumption of X,M and N in period one (two). q and Q,
and p and P are the prices of nontradables and importables relative to
exportables faced by consumers in periods 1 and 2, and are inclusive of the

tariff on H. £ is the domestic discount factor equal to (1+r). Since
there is a tax on foreign borrowing, the domestic real interest rate r is
higher than the world interest rate. The differences between these two rates

is given by the tax (a) on capital movements: r —

r* + a.

Wealth is the discounted sum of consumer's income in both periods.

Income, in turn, is given by: (1) income from labor services; (2) income
from the renting of capital stock, and of natural resources that consumers

own

to

domestic firma; and (3) income obtained from government transfers.

These, in turn, correspond to the government's revenue from tariffs, and
from taxes on capital flows in each period. The solution to the consumers
optimizing problem is conveniently summarized by the following intertemporal
expenditure function:

E —

where w and

II

E(ir(l,p,q),

£*fl(l,p,Q),V).

(11)

are exact price indexes for periods 1 and 2. Under the

assumptions of homotheticicy and separability these price indexes correspond
to unit expenditure functions (Svensson and Razin, 1983; Edwarda and van

Wijnbergen, 1986). Given our assumption of a time separable utility
function, total expenditure in periods 1 and 2 are always substitutes.

As before the producers maximization problem can be summarized with the
aid of restricted revenue functions, which give us the maximum revenue that

23

firms can obtain after making all the optimal decisions in terms of hiring and

production given the distortion in the labor market (see Neary 1985). Denoting

r and R as periods I and 2 restricted revenue functions, we have:
r —

r(l,p,q,1(l,p,q,i))

(12)

R —

R(l,P,Q,L(l,P,Q,))

(13)

and

where 1( )

and

are

L( )

employment functions in periods 1 and 2

The complete model is then given by the following set of equations (where
subindexes refer to partial derivatives with respect to that variable):

r(l,p,q,1(l,p,q,)) + 6R(1,P,Q,L(1,P,Q,))

E(r(1,p,q),5fl(1,P,Q),V)

+ TRANS —

— bCA + 1M1 + 6r2M2

TRANS

(15)

b—*.6
CA — R

-

(16)

flE

(17)

r —E

(18)

q

q

RQ —

(19)

EQ

p..p*+f1; p_p*+r2
—

(E-r);

(14)

H2 —

(20)

(ER)

(21)

Equation (14) is the intertemporal budget constraint and says that the
present value of income (the left hand side) has to equal the present value

of expenditure (the right hand side). TRANS

is

the present value of govern-

ment transfers to the public and is given by equation (15). Here bCA is
the present value of the tax on foreign borrowing, where b is the present

24

value of the tax per unit borrowed and is equal to (6*.5), and CA is the
current account in period 2, which is defined in equation (17) as period 2

income minus expenditure. This means that, since in this model there is no
investment, the current account is equal to savings in each period. Finally,

and 62M2 in equation (15) are revenues from import tariffs;
is the tariff rate in period i, and

are imports in i and are

defined in equation (21) as the excess demand for importables in each

period. Equations (18) and (19) state that the nontradables goods market
has to clear in each period --

these goods, while E

rq

and

are quantities produced of

and EQ are the quantities demanded.

An important characteristic of this model is that there is initial
unemployment. In fact, we can think of Figure 3 in Section III as capturing
the initial conditions prevailing in the labor market in each period.
Notice that, as presented above, the model assumes that the minimum wage

(w) is expressed in terms of the numeraire and is in effect in both
periods. Of course, this need not be the case, and we can easily handle the
case where there is a minimum wage in one period only.
In the rest of this section we will illustrate the functioning of this

model for the case of two liberalization policies: (1) the relaxation of

capital controls and, (2) an anticipated tariff liberalization. In order
to facilitate the discussion, in each case we will make some simplifying
assumptions that will allow us to focus on the problem at hand.

IV.2 Caoital Account Liberalization and Employment
The model presented in equations (14) through (21) is very general and
can be used to analyze how a number of structural adjustment policies will

affect welfare, output and employment. In order to organize the discussion
in this subsection we will focus on the employment effects of reducing

25

capital controls under a set of simplifying assumptions.25 In particular

we

will assume that:

(1) the minimum wage is in effect during period 1 only;26
(2) there are no import tariffs in either period.
Thus, under these simplifying assumptions the only distortions in the economy
under analysis are a minimum wage in period 1 and a tax on foreign

borrowing.

A reduction in the extent of capital controls implies that the domestic

discount factor & increases, moving closer to its international level 6*.
As a result of this the consumption rate of interest Sfl/,r will increase
making current consumption relatively more attractive than future consump-

tion. Thus, households will substitute expenditure into the present. Since
some of this increase in expenditure in period 1 will fall on nontradables

there will be an incipient excess demand for N which will result in an

increase in the price of N in that period (q). This means, then, that
period 1 real exchange rate will experience an equilibrium appreciation as
a result of the liberalization of the capital account (Edwards, 198gb).

This, in turn, will shift the demand for labor in the N sector upward,
generating an increase in emolpvment in oeriod 1. This effect will be
reinforced by the positive welfare effect of reducing the existing
distortion on foreign borrowing.
In a Ricardo-Viner framework with sector specific capital and natural

resources this is the final effect of a capital account reform. However, if
we assume that capital and natural resources can move across sectors we will

in

25The liberalization of capital controls has played an important role

recent reform programs, as those of the Southern Cone of Latin America

and Korea.
26

This assumption is also made by Svensson (1984) in a different
context.

26

have additional indirect effects that will shift further the labor demand

schedules. The direction and magnitude of these induced shifts will depend
on the sign of the Rybczynski effects. If we assume that the nontradable

sector (N) is the most labor intensive of all sectors and that the
importable sector (M) is the least labor intensive, the final effect of a
capital account reform will be an increase in period 1 employment (see

Edwards 1989b, for a formal expression). This labor market adjustment is

captured in Figure 9 where the shift of LN to L is the result of the
(impact) real exchange rate effect of a higher 6, and the shift of

to

are the consequences of the reallocation of the

and of L.r to
cooperative factors.

A very interesting consequence of this analysis is that under our

assumptions the optimal government policy would be to impose a rnfl subsidy
on foreign borrowing. The reason for this result is that, under these
coti4itions, a small subsidy on external borrowing results in higher consump-

tion, and thus employment, in period 1. Since initially employment in this
period was "too low", the small subsidy will tend to correct this

distortion. The magnitude of this subsidy will be given by:
r £ (—i)

lqdb

b*—

+ 5*R L (—s)

H2Ej+flE11Tq() +

LQdb

(22)

£flEflQ()

are the marginal product of labor in periods 1 and 2.

where r2 and

and LQ are the derivatives of each period employment function with
respect to that period's relative price of nontradables and, as before, are
-

equal to:

-r

1 ——-q

r1'

-R

L

Q

——--

Figure 9

w

w

'N

27

RLL

and

r11 are, in turn, the slopes of the marginal product of labor

schedules for N and are negative; rqj and RQL are the Rybczynski terms
that capture what will happen to output of N (rq and RQ) when there is
an increase in labor supply. Under our assumptions of labor intensities

they are positive. Finally (dq/db) and (dQ/db) are the "real exchange"
rate effects of the capital account liberalization and measure the resction

of the equilibrium relative prices of N to a lowering of the tax on
foreign borrowing and are positive (Edwsrds l989b).

IV.3 Anticinated Tariff Reform and Emolovment
The model developed in this section can be used for analyzing how the
expectations or anticipations of a tariff reform --

will

- that

is a reduction in

affect employment in an economy with initial unemployment. As in the

case of capital accOunt liberalization the main channel through which these
anticipations will generate an effect will be the intertemporal substitution

of expenditure and its effects on the real exchange rate. To the extent that
an anticipated tariff reform results in a postponement of current expenditure

we will observe, in the Ricardo-Viner case, a reduction in the price of

nontradables in the current period, q,

and a decline in employment.

Formally, under Ricardo-Viner assumptions of sector-specific capital
and natural resources, the aggregate employment effects of an anticipated
tariff reform are given by:

—

period 1:

period 2:

dL
dr

.2

(23)

(3_)
q dr2

dr2

—

dQ

+ LQ(5)

(24)

dr

These expressions capture several important results. First, as can be
seen from equation (23), a future (anticipated) tariff reform will affect

31

A crucial difference between the current model and that discussed in
Section II is that in this case we will have an equilibrium level of

queuing

unemployment. In equilibrium, the eected wage in the protected segment,
for those who choose to queue, will be equal to the alternative wage in the

free segment. Figure 11 shows the presence of both types of

unemployment.

The presence of wage "protection" results in a very elastic labor

supply to the "protected" sector (M) and a less elastic labor supply to
the rest of the labor market. As a result, the general trend will be for
quasi-voluntary unemployment to fall when labor demand increases in the M
sector and for the free sector wage to increase when labor demand increases

in the N and X sectors.
In what follows we develop a formal model for analyzing the way in
which tariff liberalization will affect unemployment and wages in our

framework with upward sloping supply and queuing. We define

L, Lx and

as the general equilibrium demand functions for labor in the

nontradables, exportables and importables sectors. The aggregate supply of
labor to the economy Ls is a function of (real) wages, and can in fact be
expressed as depending on the wage rate in manufacturing. We call fi

the

proportion of the total labor supply employed in sector M at
WM:

—
(26)

Ls(WM)

The fraction (1-fl) of individuals with supply price lower or equal to

WM have three alternatives:

(a)

to become part of the total supply of

labor to the nonprotected sectors. We assume, however, that in spite of
having jobs in the unprotected sector, this group can still apply to jobs in

sector M and has a probability p of being chosen; (b) spend the
present period queuing, so that the probability of getting a job in sector

32

(c) become voluntarily unemployed with respect

M increases to -yp (p>l);

to sectors N and X and involuntarily unemployed with respect to H.
Assuming risk neutrality and no unemployment compensation, the present
value of the first two slternatives for the marginal worker has to be the

same. There will thus be an equilibrium queuing unemployment level for each
possible value of WM. To simplify the notation, we present here the case
in which all jobs turn over each period. Thus che vslue of (a) is

(lp)WN +

PWM;

the value of (b) is YPWM

and the equilibrium condition

becomes:
(l-P)Wf —

with

(27)

p(-l)W

p—

(28)

v e
+7U +L1,

where

is the number of workers employed in the nontrsdsbles sector, Lx

is the number of workers employed in the exportables sector,

qv is the

level of quasi-voluntary unemployment, e is the level of equilibrium queuing unemployment, and L, is the number of workers employed in the import-

sbles sector. Using the expression ue — Ud/LS(WM)

for the rate of equilib-

rium unemployment, and combining expressions (26), (27) and (28), we find:

ue_fl f

(iJ

(29)

-y

as well as the effective supply of labor to the nonprotected sectors of the
labor market that is equal to:

L(Wf) -

(lfl)Ls(Wf)

-

{- - {i4J]Lw

(30)

28

employment in the first period, when the reform has not taken place yet.
This effect takes place exclusively through the change in period 1 real

exchange rate which is induced by the future tariff reform. Edwards (l989b)
has shown that under plausible assumptions a future tariff liberalization

will result in a real exchange depreciation: that is, dq/dir2 > o.2 Under

Ricardo-Viner assumptions 1q is positive and, thus, dl/dr2 in equation
(23) is also positive.28 This means, then, that a future tariff reform will
result in a decline in today's aggregate employment.
Second, according to equation (24), there will be two channels through
which an anticipated tariff reform will affect period 2 aggregate employ-

ment. The first one, captured by the term

is the direct effect which,

under Ricardo-Vjner assumptions, will be positive. The second channel is
given by the term LQ(dQ/d?2) and operates via changes in the equilibrium
real exchange rate in period 2. Under the most plausible assumptions a
tariff reform will result in a real exchange rate depreciation in the period

when the reform actually takes place; that is (dQ/dr2) > 0. Given that
under Ricardo-Viner assumptions LQ is also positive, expression (24) will
be unambiguously positive. This indicates that, if capital and natural
resources are sector-specific, an anticipated tariff reform will result in
an increase in unemployment in periods 1 and 2.
If instead of a Ricardo-Viner setting we assume that capital and natural
resources can move freely across sectors, the interpretation of equations (23)

27The conditions required for this result are that all goods are
substitutes in consumption and that the income effects do not offset the
substitution effect.

28Remember that 2
respect to the price

is the derivative of the employment function with
In a Ricardo-Viner setting the only

effect of a change in q is a parallel shift in the L. schedule.

29

and (24) will be different. As said before, the signs of 2q snd LQ will
then depend on the Rybczinski terms and, thus, on relative factor intensities.

V. Trade Restrictioms. Labor Market Protection and Elastic Labor SUDDIY
One of the shortcomings of the dependent economy model discussed in the

previous sections is that it assumes an inelastic labor supply. The purpose
of this section is to relax this assumption and to introduce a different type

of involuntary unemployment. Another simplification of the model previously
discussed is the lack of connection between the level of the minimum wage and
the trade orientation of the economy. In this section we assume that there is
some form of institutional wage protection (unions, government, or other) that

becomes stronger in an economy that is more closed to the rest of the world.29
Thus, the minimum wage that prevails for the importables sector tends to be

relatively higher when there are high trade restrictions. In order to maintain our presentation at a simple level, we greatly simplify other aspects of
the problem, concentrating on a one period partial equilibrium representation.
This, however, proves sufficient for our purposes.

Consider, once again, a three-goods economy with exportables (X),

importables (M) and nontradables (N). Contrary to Section II we now assume
that there is a minimum wage that affects only one sector. More specifically,

we assume that the importablea sector (N)

is subject to a minimum wage and

that wages are market determined in the nontradablea (N) and exportables (X)
sectors. In order to simplify the exposition we consider only two factors:

capital and labor. While capital is fixed in its sector of origin in the
short-run, it is perfectly mobile in the long-run.

29Monopaony power will tend to increase in the same way as monopoly
power under trade protection.

30

We relax the assumption that labor supply is inelastic by considering
the existence of a distribution of labor supply prices, and by assuming that

labor force participation is determined by the market wage. Since wages in

the M sector are higher than in the rest of the economy, labor supply to
that sector exceeds demand. We assume for simplicity that firms in the M
sector select the workers they employ randomly (i.e. ,

in

a way that is

uncorrelated with labor supply prices) from the pool of applicants. As a
result, there will be some potential workers that would be willing to take a

"protected" job but are unwilling to settle for a lower wage in the N or X

sectors. This situation is described in Figure 10, where schedule L represents a labor supply derived from a linear distribution of supply wages.

At the minimum wage (WM), employment in M is equal to

< LS(WM). By

assumption, employment in M is a random sample of LS(WM), which in turn
implies that the labor supply to the rest of the labor market (Li) is a

fraction (lL/Ls(WM)) of the original supply Ls. The interaction

between labor demand in X and N, denoted by (L+1) in Figure 10, and
the "residual" labor supply to those sectors will determine the free segment

wage Wf —

WN_WX

and the level of employment in X(Lx) and

Individuals with supply price above Wf and below WM are voluntarily

unemployed with respect to X and N and involuntarily unemployed with
respect to N. We refer to this group as quasi-voluntary
unemoloyed (Uqv ).
___________________________

With

a linear distribution of supply prices, the amount of quasi•voluntary

unemployment is given by:

W •W

qv —

WMW
where

(l-$)La(WH)

(25)

is the smallest reservation wage for which the supply of labor to

the market is positive.

WM

L5

/0

L

LM

ljure II

33

V.1 keductjon in ImDort Tariffs
A reduction in import tariffs implies a decrease

of M falls relative to X. Additionally,

in the domestic price

as discussed in Section II, the

reduction of the import tariffs will have an effect on the relative price of

nontradables: if nontradables are substituted with

ileportables and export-

ables in consumption, the reduction of the tariff will result in a decline

in the price of nontradables30
Assuming, at least for the short-run, that the protected
remains constant, we expect no change in labor force

wage

participation. A

reduction in L - - generated by the reduction in the tariff -.
given Ls(WM) means that the fraction fi

defined

unemployment and signals a lover probability of finding

the quasi-voluntary
a protected job,

triggering a reduction in queuing unemployment31 Thus, labor
free segment will shift downward inducing a reduction

decline in relative prices of noncradab].es (the real

we get an even larger reduction in the nonprotected

a

in (26), falls. In turn,

a reduced fraction of workers employed in H increases

wage rate Wf. If we now consider the reduction in

with

supply to the

in the free sector

Lf induced by the
exchange rate effect),

wage rate tJf

In order to simplify the presentation in the derivations that follow we

will ignore the change in Lf and estimate the impact on e of a change
in fi

induced by a reduction in the extent of trade protection.

pointed out above, a tariff liberalization will result in

our

Since, as

a reduction in fl

analysis will deal with the way in which changes in this

parameter will

30Notice that if trade liberalization
is accompanied by a large amount
of foreign aid or foreign credit capable of
inducing a large income effect,
the impact of the relative price of nontradables
may be positive.
31See Cox-Edwards (1986).

34

affect unemployment and wages in the unprotected sector. Imposing the

equilibrium condition in the free market sectors (X and N), we can find
how the changes in the demand for labor in the protected sector will affect
unemployment and the freely determined wage rate:
e

du

1

WM dW f

W

M

(31)

f
with

+

L(Wf) +
dWf

P

where

Lf —

+ 1_'N'

(C

f -,

kO

f

(32)

)Lf/Wf

Cf is the elasticity of labor supply to the free

sectors of the labor market, and

is the elasticity of labor demand to

the free sectors.

The wage reduction in the non-protected or free sectors (X and N)
induces an increase in labor use in those sectors, but at the same time more

potential workers become quasi-voluntary unemployed. Therefore,

the

immediate effect of trade liberalization is a loss of employment in the
sector; the sector we associate with more "attractive" or

N

"better paid"

jobs. This will increase the level of quasi voluntary snd queuing unemployment and will exert downward pressure on the level of wages as

workers seek

employment in the free segment.
The above discussion assumes that the protected wage segments are

maintained after the trade liberalization. This is not a fully plausible
assumption. In the long run we could indeed expect that trade

liberaliza-

tion would weaken the capability of governments to grant protection to
certain sectors of the labor market, and that wages would come down in line

35

with labor market conditions.32

What will happen if WM is reduced? First,

will increase not only

through the numerator (depending on 17M) but also through the denominator
because aggregate labor force participation will fall with

WM. The

magnitude of this fall will depend on C, the elasticity of labor Supply to
the market. At the same time, the equilibrium level of queuing unemployment

and WM. This, in turn, will affect

will be affected by changes in $

labor supply to the non-protected sector and Wf.
From (29) we have:

ÔWM

dWM

ôWr,

3Wf ÔWM

(33)

where:

M
LWM+LfWf — + (C-7)
CWf

ôWf

M

vi

f

(34)

Combining these expressions we obtain:

—
dWM

L + LL + _ffl( MC)
Wf y-l WfJ
(+)

LWM•$
LMWM•viLfWf

L WM

(-)

[++EL)
WM W LMWM

(34')

(—)

32Notice that here we are assuming that the minimum wage affects the
importable sector and, thus, that its level will be affected by changes in
the tariff. However, as John Knight pointed out to us at the conference,
this does not need to be the case for every country. Indeed, it is possible
that in some countries the exportables sector has a protected labor market.
This, of course, would change our result.

36

—

For the particular case where

0

and

—

- we have

that a

change in WM will affect e in the following way:

_ [{.+ 4[))]

—

(35)

Notice that this expression states that a reduction in WM will generate
two offsetting effects on queuing unemployment. On the one hand, with the

reduction in WM the gains from queuing decrease, but at the same time the

probability of getting a job in the N sector rises. The higher is C,
the more important is the second (positive) effect. In fact, if

(7l)WM

d e

then

dWM

(yl)WM+Wf
We can then state:

e >0 if C—O
1

M'-<O
and for 0 < C < 1

(36)

if C>l

the effect of W on queuing unemployment will depend

on how close WM and Wf are at the initial level of WM. That is, the
expression due/dWM will be positive for a very inelastic labor supply and
will be negative for an elastic labor supply.
In short, the more time we allow for the adjustment of the labor market
(the more elastic is labor supply) ,

the

larger will be the reduction in

induced by a downward adjustment of the protected sector wage rate WM. At
the same time, the level of quasi-voluntary unemployment will fall as the

difference between WM and Wf shortens:
—

dWM

WMWJ

(I - )

- WM

M

C)

—a— 1-fl

>0
—
WM W

(37)

37

Summarizing, a reduction of tariffs that induce a reduction of
employment in the protected sector (importables) will result
quasi-voluntary unemployment, lower free aector wages and

in higher

higher free sector

employment in the short run. In the long run, we assume that the strength
of the wage protection weakens and

WM falls. With the reduction of WM

labor force participation falls, the labor market

tightens, quasi-voluntary

unemployment falls and queuing unemployment ultimately falls
ence between free sector wages and protected

as the differ-

wages disappears. To complete

the previous analysis the effect of trade liberalization

the free segment would have to be included. In this
final result will depend on the factor intensities,

on labor demand in

caae, however, the
on the income elasticity

of demand for nontradables, and on the size of the income effect generated
by the reduction in employment in the importables sector.
In general it is not possible to determine

analytically if the average

level of wages falls or riaea with the trade liberalization
will depend on how distorted the labor market

effort. This

was initially and how we

weight the wage contribution of different groups.

VI. pjicludina Remarks
The purpose of this paper has been to provide

an analytical survey of a

number of international trade models that can deal with the employment

consequences of trade reforms. Within the most basic trade framework
Heckscher-Ohlin model -

-a

--

the

trade liberalization does not generate any em-

ployment problems in a developing nation where

exports are labor intenaive.

In fact this will be the caae independently of whether

wages are flexible or

rigid. We started our discussion with an evaluation of the atandard
dependent economy model. However, contrary to traditional treatments we

38

considered the case where there are three factors of production. This
extension introduced some non-trivial problems since in that case it is not

possible to determine unequivocally factor intensities. In this setting

and

assuming wage flexibility, we showed that the short-run effects on production, prices, and factor rewards of a tariff liberalization
as follows:

(1) production of exportables will increase;

reform will be

(2) production

of importables will decrease; (3) production of nontradables may increase
or decrease; (4) prices of nontradables will decrease;

(5) wages will

increase in terms of importables and decrease in terms of exportables and

nontradables; (6)

the real return to the sector-specific factors allocated

to the exportables sector will increase relative to all goods; (7)

the

real return to factors specific to the importables sector will decrease
relative to importables but could increase or decrease relative to other

goods; and (8)

the real return to factor-specific nontradables sector will

increase relative to nontradable goods but could either increase or decrease

relative to the other two goods. In the long run factor rewards are
equalized across sectors and under the assumption that the importables
sector is the least labor intensive sector, real wages will increase.

The same model indicates that trade liberalization results in

unemployment if wages do not adjust downward. If the wage rigidity is
limited to the importables sector only, there will be equilibrium unemployment initially and a trade liberalization will tend to increase the gap
between wages in the importables and the other sectors, the labor force in
this case will tend to be reallocated between nontradables and exportables.
The effect of trade liberalization on total unemployment is not clear
because there are two forces that affect the equilibrium level of unemploy-

ment in opposite directions. On the one hand the probability of finding a

39

"high wage" job is reduced by the reduction in labor demand in M, but, on
the other hand, the wage in the rest of the labor market falls, reducing the
opportunity cost of unemployment.
The effect of capital account liberalization on the labor market was

studied using an intertemporal framework. Under the assumption that the
economy is distorted by controls to capital mobility and a minimum wage, we
find that the removal of capital controls tends to increase employment in

nontradables through a positive expenditure effect. In a similar framework
we also showed that an anticipated tariff reform can generate a negative
effect on the level of employment.
In the last section we paid closer attention to the starting conditions

of a typical protected economy. We modified the assumption of a given
minimum wage and assumed that the degree of wage distortion in the import-

ables sector was directly related to the degree of trade protection. In
this case, one of the implications of trade reform is the consequent

reduction of the predetermined wage in the importables sector to a level
compatible with market conditions. At the same time, we relax the assumption of a fixed labor supply and thus allow labor force participation to be

a function of wages. We define labor force participation as determined by

all those workers willing to take a job in the high wage sector. In this
context we define quasi-voluntary unemployment as that which is involuntary

with respect to the importables sector, and voluntary with respect to the

rest of the labor market. Under these assumptions, the immediate effect of
a trade liberalization is a decline in the level of employment in the
importables sector, which will increase the level of quasi-voluntary unemployment and will tend to reduce wages in the rest of the economy as some

workers seek employment there. In the long run we expect that trade

40

liberalization would weaken the capability of governments to grant
protection to unions or certain sectors of the labor market, and that wages

would come down in line with labor market conditions. The structure of the
labor market will then change and the difference between protected wages and
free sector wages will tend to disappear, eliminating the distinction
between the two types of unemployment described in the text.
In this framework it is clear that wages in the importables sector

fall, although it is not clear how aggregate average wages behave. However,
it is perhaps in this setting that the opposition to trade liberalization

can be better understood. Labor, which is the factor of production that is
supposed to gain from freer trade is negatively affected in the short run
and the long term gains are hard to perceive when compared to the initially
distorted situation of the economy.

41

References

Altonji, J. 1982.

The Intertemporal Substitution Model of Labor Market

Fluctuations: An Empirical Analysis.' Ratiew of Economic Studies

(November): 507-22.
Brecher, R.A. 1974. 'Minimum Wage Rates and the Theory of International
Trade.' Quarterly Journal of Economics 88 (February): 98-116.
Bruce, N. , and D. Purvis. 1984. "The Specification of Goods and Factor Markets

in Open Economy Macroeconomic Models." In R.W. Jones and PB. Kenen, eds.

Handbook of Internptjpnal Economics. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Burda, M. and J. Sachs. (1987). "Institutional Aspects of Unemployment in
Germany." NBER Working Paper.
Corden, W.M. ,

and R. Findlay. 1975. "Urban Unemployment, Intersectoral Capital

Mobility and Development Policy." Economica 42: 59-78.

__________

and J.P. Neary. 1982. 'Booming Sector and Dc-industrialization in

the Small Open Economy." Economic Journal 92 (December): 825-48.
Cox-Edwards, A. 1986. "Economic Reform, External Shocks, and the Labor Market:
Chile 1974-83." Paper presented at World Bank Conference on Adjustment of
Labor Markets in LDCs to External Shocks. June.

Dixit, A. and V. Norman 1980. Theory of International Trade, Cambridge
University Press.
Dornbusch, R. 1974. "Tariffs and Nontraded Goods." Journal of International
Economics: 177-85.

__________

1980. Oven Economy Macroeconomics. New York: Basic Books.

Edwards, S. 1986a. "Are Devaluations Contractionary?" Review of Economics and
Statistics (August).

42

__________

1986b. "Economic Liberalization and the Real Exchange Rate in

Developing Countries." Paper presented at the Carlos Diaz Alejandro
Memorial Conference, Helsinki, August.

__________

1986c. "The Liberalization of the Current and Capital Accounts of

the Balance of Payments." In A. Choksi and D. Papageorgiou, eds., Economic

Liberalization in Develooinz Countries. Oxford: Blackwell.

_________ 1988. "Terms of Trade, Tariffs and Labor Market Adjustment in
Developing Countries." World Bank Economic Review, 2, 165-85.

_________

1989a. Real Exchanae Rates. Devaluation, and Adiustment. MIT

Press.

__________

1989b. "Tariffs, Capital Controls and Equilibrium Real Exchange

Rates." Canadian Journal of Economics.

_________

1990. "structural Reforms and Labor Market Adjustment." UCLA Dept.

of Economics Working Paper.

_________

and A. Cox-Edwards. 1987. Monetarism and Liberalization: The

Chilean Experiment. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.

__________

and J. Ostry. 1985. "Tariffs, Capital Controls and Real Exchange

Rates: The Case of Wage Rate Resistance." IMF Working Paper.
Edwards, 5., and S. van Wijnbergen. 1986. "The Welfare Effects of Trade and
Capital Market Liberalization." International Economic Review, 27, 141148.

__________ and __________ 1989. "structural Adjustment and Disequilibrium." In
M. Chenery snd TN. Srinivasan, eds., Handbook of Development Economics.

New York: North-Holland.
Harberger, A.C. 1971. "On Measuring the social Opportunity Cost of Labor."
Review 103, no. 6: 559-79.

43

Harris, J., and M.P. Todaro. 1970. "Migration Unemployment and

Development: A

Two Sector Analysis." American Economic Review 60: 126-42.
Jones, R.J. 1971. "A Three Factor Model in Theory, Trade and History." In J.
Bhagwati and others, eds. ,

Trade. a1ance of Payments. and Growth.

Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Komiya, Ryutaro. 1967. "Nontraded Goods and the Pure Theory of International
Trade." International Economic Review 8: 132.51.

Krueger, A. 1983. Trade and Emoloyment in Deve1oina Countries. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Learner, E. 1987. "Paths of Development in the Three-Factors, N-Goods General

Equilibrium Model." Journal of Political Economy, 95•
Mankiw, C., J.- Rotemberg and L. Summers. 1985. "Intertemporal Substitution in

Macroeconomics" Quarterly Journal of Economics 100 (February): 225-53.
Mayer, W. 1974. "Short Run and Long Run Equilibrium for a Small Open

Economy.'

Journal of Political Economy 82, no. 5: 955-67.
Melvin, J. 1968. "Production and Trade with Two Factors and Three Goods."
American Economic Review 58: 1249-68.
Michaely, M. ,

A. Choksi, and D. Papageorgjou. 1986. "The Phasing of a Trade

Liberalization Policy: Preliminary Evidence." Paper presented at annual
meeting of American Economic Association, New Orleans, December.

Mussa, ML. 1974. "Tariffs and Distribution of Income: Importance of Factor
Specificity, Substitutability and Intensity in Short and Long Run." Journal
of Political Economy 82, no. 6: 1191-203.

__________

1978. "Dynamic Adjustment in the Heckscher-Ohljn-Samuelson Model."

Journal of Political Econoffiy: 86, no. 5: 775-91.

_________

1979. "The Two Sectors Model in Terms of its Dual: A Geometric

Exposition." Journal of International Economics (November): 513-26.

44

_________ • 1982.
Bhagwati, ed. ,

Government Policy and the Adjustment Process." In J.

Import

Competition and Response. Chicago: University of

Chicago Press.

__________ • 1986. "The Adjustment Process and the Timing of Trade
Liberalization. In A. Choksi and D. Papageorgiou, eds., Economic
Liberalization in Develooing Countries. Oxford: Blackwell.
Neary, P. 1978a. 'Dynamic Stability and the Theory of Factor-Market
Distortions.' American Economic Review: 671-82.

__________ • 1978b. "Short-Run Capital Specificity and the Pure Theory of
International Trade.' Economic Journal 88: 448-510.

__________

1981. "On the Harris-Todaro Model With Intersectoral Mobility.

Economica 48, no. 191: 219-34.

__________ • 1982. 'Capital Mobility, Wage Stickiness and the Case for
Adjustment Assistance.' In J. Bhagwati, ed. ,

Imoort

Comoetition and

Response. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

__________ • 1985. "International Factor Mobility, Minimum Wage Rates and
Factor Price Equalization: A Synthesis." quarterly Journal of Economics
100 (August): 551-70.
Oi, W. 1962. 'Labor as a Quasi-Fixed Factor." Journal of Political Economy 70,
538-55.

Starr, G. 1981. Minimum Ware Fixina: An International Review of Practices and
Problems. Geneva: International Labor Office.
Svensson, L. 1984. "Oil Prices, Welfare and the Trade Balance." Quarterly
Journal of Economics. 99: 649-72.

_________ and A. Razin. 1983. "The Terms of Trade and the Current Account:
The Harberger-Laursen-Meltzer Effect." Journal of Political Economy. 91:
97-125.

45

Thomas, V. 1989. "Extent of Trade Reforms in the 1980s,° unpublished ins.

Washington, DC: World Bank.
Topel, R. 1986. "Local Labor Markets." Journal of Political Econony.

van Wijnbergen, S. 1986. "Exchange Rate Management and Stabilization Policies
in Developing Countries." In S. Edwards and L. Ahanied, eds., Economic

Adiustment and Exchanee Rates in Developina Countries. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

