NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECTS OF INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION ON COLLECTIVE BARGAINING OUTCOMES:
A COMPARISON OF THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA

John K. Abowd

Thomas Lemieux

Working Paper No. 3352

NATIONAL 3UREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1990

The author acknowledges financial support from the Ford Foundation and the NSF
(Grant Number 88-13847 to Abowd), and the Industrial Relations Section at
Princeton University. This research was begun while the authors were at the
Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University. They thank David Card for
providing a clean version of the Labor Canada wage tape. They thank Charles
Beach, David Card, Henry Farber, Richard Freeman, Harry Oilman, Lawrence Katz,
W. Craig Riddell, and Gregory Schoepfle for comments on previous drafts. This
paper is part of NEER's research programs in International Studies and Labor
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3352
May 1990

THE EFFECTS OF INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION ON COLLECTIVE BARGAINING OUTCOMES:
A COMPARISON OF THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA

ABSTRACT

We study the effects of import and export competition on collectively
bargained wage settlements and bargaining unit employment from the sixties to
the mid-eighties for the United States and Canada. Both value-based and pricebased measures of international competition are considered. We distinguish
between the expected effects of increased international trade on new collective
bargaining agreements and the realized effects over the life of existing
agreements. Using value-based trade measures, the estimated effect of an
increase in import domestic market share, holding constant the rate of growth
of the domestic market, is negative for employment in both countries and
exceeds the effect of a comparable change in the size of the domestic market.
The import effect on wage rates is also negative for the United States but not
for Canada. The import wage effect in the U.S. is also larger than the effect
of a comparable change in the domestic market size. The estimated effect of
increased export growth is positive for employment in both countries. The
export effect on employment is comparable in magnitude to the effect of a
change in the size of the domestic market. The export effect on wage rates is
mixed-weakly positive for the U.S. and ambiguous for Canada. For Canada, we
also estimate world price effects.
Increases in the world import price index
for the industry are associated with increased union employment. Increases in
the world import price index for the industry are associated with increased
union employment and lower wage settlements.

John M. Abowd
School of Industrial and Labor
Relations and Johnson Graduate
School of Management
264 Ives Hall
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14851-0952

Thomas Lemieux
Department of Economics
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139

The decade of the seventies heralded the latest era of product and labor
market globalization with renewed internationalization of the United States

economy.' Canada, which has long been a very open economy, also experienced
substantially increased internationalization during this decade.2 The two
countries have very substantial bilateral trading activity. Canada is the
largest single destination of U.S. exports and the second largest source of

U.S. imports (after Japan). In the seventies Canada was the largest
destination and origin of U.S. traded goods.3

The growing importance of internationally traded goods in the United
States economy and the continuing importance of such goods in the Canadian

economy are displayed in Figure 1. The figure shows exports plus imports as a
percent of Gross National Product in 1960, 1970 and 1980 for both countries.

That the Canadian economy is three or four times more open than the U.S.

economy is directly evident from examining Figure 1.' The figure also
indicates that the Canadian economy experienced very significant increases in

its openness over this time period—imports plus exports grew from less than
forty percent of GNP to almost sixty percent. In the United States imports
plus exports grew from about seven percent of CNP to over twenty percent

during this period. The sixties and seventies, therefore, represents a period
of increasing international economic activity for both the U.S. and Canadian

economies. Both countries experienced changes in economic openness during
this period large enough to have detectable effects on the domestic labor
market.

For the last two decades the highly unionized Canadian manufacturing
sector5 and the less unionized United States manufacturing sector have become

more integrated into both the North American and world markets. The share of
imported manufactured goods in apparent Canadian consumption has increased

1

from 22 percent to 31 percent over this period. Similarly, exports as a share
of Canadian manufacturing production have more than doubled. Much of the
increased integration of the North American economy occurred in the
transportation equipment industry, which is covered by a 1965 bilateral

agreement between the U.S. and Canada that eliminates most tariffs in both

directions. Canadian transportation equipment imports rose from 28 percent of
apparent domestic consumption in 1960 to 51 percent in 1968 to 65 percent in

1983. Canadian transportation equipment exports also rose, from 14 percent of
domestic production in 1960 to 48 percent in 1968 to 67 percent in 1983. In
the United States transportation equipment imports increased from two percent

of apparent domestic consumption in 1960 to 18 percent in 1983 while exports

increased from six percent of domestic production to 14 percent in 1983. The
increased bilateral trade in many other U.S. and Canadian industries, although
not as substantial as the increased trade in transportation equipment.
supports our premise of increased integration of the North American economy.

In Canada the

effect of international competition on unionized domestic

workers is regarded as a macroeconomic question susceptible to analysis using
the

tools of open economy international trade theory.6 In the United States,

the effect is generally regarded as a microeconomic question susceptible to

analysis on an "impacted industry" basis.7 This paper is an attempt to blend
these two views.

Like the Canadians, we will estimate equations for the

average effect of international competition on unionized wages and
employments.' Like other U.S. researchers, we will model the microeconomic

basis for the trade effects.9
Our study

competition and
specific

addresses the relations among international product market
the outcomes of domestic collective bargains. We have three

goals. First, we quantify the effects of import and export
2

competition on the wages and employment of unionized domestic workers using

comparable data for the U.S. and Canada. Second, we compare the magnitude of
the estimated effects to a reference value—the effects of a comparable change
in domestic shipments—to determine if the trade effects are relatively large.
Finally, for Canada we compare the estimated effects of value-based measures
of import and export activity to the estimated effects of price-based
measures, which may be more appropriate from a theoretical viewpoint.

Using value-based trade measures, the estimated effect of an increase in
import domestic market share, holding constant the rate of growth of the
domestic market, is negative for employment in both countries and exceeds the

effect of a comparable change in the size of domestic shipments. The import
effect on realized real union wage rates is also negative for the United
States but not for Canada. The import effect on real wage rates in the U.S.
is also larger than the effect of a comparable change in the domestic market

size. The estimated effect of increased export growth is positive for
bargaining

unit employment in both countries. The export effect on employment

is comparable in magnitude to the effect of a change in the size of the
domestic

market. The export effect on real wage rates is mixed—weakly

positive for the U.S. and ambiguous for Canada. Increases in world export
price indices are associated with increased union employment in Canada.

Increases in world import price indices are associated with increased union

employment and lower wage settlements in Canada. All of the estimated world
price effects on the Canadian unionized labor market are consistent with the
estimated effects of based upon value-based export and import measures for
that economy.

3

The Role of International Competition
International

competition may

in

Collective Bargaining

influence domestic collective bargaining

in two ways. First, to the extent that foreign manufactured products are good
substitutes for domestically manufactured products, domestic firms must

compete for global market share. Within the domestic product market, import
competition reduces the effective extent of union organization in an industry

and may reduce the quasi-rents available to existing bargaining units. Within
foreign product markets, exports work in the opposite direction to increase
the effective extent of union organization in an industry and possibly to

increase the quasi-rents available to domestic bargaining units. Second, as
substitute foreign manufactured products gain market share within the domestic

product market, complementary services—wholesale distribution, retail

distribution, and repair—also gain market share. The expansion of service
employment opportunities may create quasi-rents that could promote the

formation of new bargaining units in these industries. This paper deals only
with the direct competition effects of imports and exports on unionized

workers in domestic labor markets. We do not consider the indirect effects of
service sector expansion.'°

The major direct effects of international competition on unionized
workers occur because either the union wage rate falls (relative to what it
would otherwise have been) or there are employment displacements, which may be
associated with unusually long unemployment spells and/or wage reductions on

re-employment. We consider only direct wage costs and direct bargaining unit
employment

effects. We do not examine unemployment spell length or

re-employment wage rates. The major direct benefit to worldwide consumers is

lower average product prices in the markets where there is substantial
international competition. We do not measure this benefit to the consumer,
4

although this is certainly an essential component of any policy prescription
arising from this research.

A bargaining unit is an ongoing relationship between a union and a

financially viable employer." The union represents the interests of the
organized employees. The management represents the interests of the
shareholders and other ultimate beneficial owners. For simplicity, the claims
of other factors of production are ignored. During the negotiations that
accompany the expiration of an existing collective bargaining agreement,

management and the union use current information to form an estimate of the
total value of the productive enterprise for which they represent competing

interests. A collective bargaining outcome consists of explicit and implicit
rules concerning the allocation of resources (employment) and the division of
the resulting quasi-rent between union members and shareholders (wage rates)
that is expected to remain in force for some fixed term.

If international competition is expected to have an adverse effect on
the fin's future profitability,'2 then the current collective bargaining

agreement will reflect that expectation. If the expected effects of
international competition are too severe, the bargaining unit may disappear so

that the evidence on surviving bargaining unit settlements will not reflect a
complete

analysis of either employment or wage effects. If the international

competition is
bargaining

In

expected to improve the firm's future profitability, current

units should be favorably affected.

this paper we measure the expected effects of increased foreign

competition on the future value of the firm using the relation between future
revenues (of organized employers) and current information on domestic

shipments, apparent domestic consumption, exports and imports in the

employer's product market. We consider two collective bargaining

5

outcomes—bargaining unit employment and wage settlements. Bargaining unit
employment is measured as the ex post growth rate of workers in the bargaining
unit over the life of the new the collective bargaining agreement, excluding
retirees and including members with recall rights.'3 Wage settlements are
measured as the realized growth rate of real wage rates over the life of the

agreement for the largest group of workers in the bargaining unit. We measure
the effects of predictable increases in international competition on

bargaining outcomes by relating employment growth and real wage growth during
a collective bargaining agreement to the growth of apparent domestic
consumption, exports, and imports expected to prevail during the life of the

agreement. We measure the effects of unpredicted changes in international
competition by relating the same outcomes to unexpected changes in domestic
consumption, exports, and imports over the life of the agreement.
In an open economy union employment and wage rates within
internationally competitive industries should respond to changes in the world

market for manufactured goods. In general, we would expect these changes to
depend upon the world prices of traded goods. Although the importance of
using world prices in modeling the effects of international trade on domestic
labor markets has been recognized for some time,'4 most empirical analyses of
the United States use import penetration ratios and export supply ratios as

the

main indicators of changes in the international environment.

In this

paper we also consider the effects of changes in the world price of exports
and imports on union employment and wage rates using our Canadian sample. We

use Canadian data for two reasons. First, properly constructed price indices
exist for a much longer time period in Canada than in the U.S. Second, the
Canadian economy is substantially more open than the U.S. economy. Our

analysis thus permits examination of the consequences of using a variety of
6

measures of international trade—value- and price-based—on the resulting
estimates of employment and wage sensitivity.

& Model for the Effects of International Trade on Union Wages and Employment

We begin at the bargaining unit level. Consider the effects of
increased international trade on the present value of the quasi-rents

accruing

jointly to the employer firm and union members. The quasi-rents are measured
as the difference between net revenue16 and the cost of employment. The cost
of employment is evaluated at an external or market wage rate and not at the

negotiated wage rate. For firm j in year t let:

wit

r
q

—

net

—

union employment of firm j in year t

—

total employment of firm

—

negotiated

—

any

exogenous variable for firm j in year t

—

one

year discount rate in year t

—

annual opportunity

—

length

revenue of firm j In year t

j

in year t

wage rate of firm j in year t

cost of employment in year t

of collective bargaining agreement.

If year t is the initial year of a new collective bargaining agreement, then

over the next q years the present value of the quasi-rents may be expressed
as:

q

—

i—i

(1 +

—r
Since

V measures the total quasi-rent available to the employer firm and

union, if increased import or export activity affects V, then wage
settlements and union employment will be affected by this activity.

Alternatively, if increased international trade has no effect on V, then
neither wage settlements nor union employment should be affected. The present

7

value of the quasi-rents accruing to the bargaining unit captures the relevant
total value of the enterprise, which may be divided among various claimants,

including union members.'7 If the total value increases because of increased
export activity, then the potential exists for greater union employment or

wage settlements as a consequence of this export activity. Alternatively, if
increased import competition lowers N/fl, then there is a presumption that

lower employment and/or wage settlements should occur.

To make these arguments concrete consider the effects of a change in
real industry shipments. Changes in real industry shipments due to external.
demand shocks should cause industry employment and total quasi-rents to move

in the same direction as industry shipments. If existing firms each represent
a constant fraction of industry output, then firm level employment and total
quasi-rents should also change in the same direction as the change in industry

output. The effect of a change in industry output on the negotiated wage rate
is less clear. An increase in industry output could be associated with an
increase or decrease in quasi-rents per worker. Since the negotiated
settlement divides the quasi-rents per worker between the firm and the union
members, an increase in quasi-rents per worker ought to be associated with

higher

wage settlements while a decrease in quasi-rents per worker ought to be

associated with lower wage settlements, all other things equal.
These

predictions can be derived explicitly from a simple version of an

efficient bargaining relation between the employer firm and the union members.

Assume that the fin is fully unionized. Suppose the revenue that accrues to
the firm is given by the function:

R(L) —
An

at

—

efficient bargain chooses L to maximize R(L) — xL and sets w to divide the

maximized quasi-rents in the proportion i to the union and
8

1 -

1

to the owners

of the firm. The resulting values for total quasi-rents, employment, and the
negotiated wage rate are:

V -

6[a;x]2

L -

[a;x]

-

+

iO{a_x]

In this simple model any increase in demand for the firm's product would be

modeled as an increase in a. As the equations for Vt L, and w show, increases
in a are associated with higher total quasi-rents, higher employment and

higher negotiated wage rates. Notice that the wage settlement awards each
union member the same percentage of the quasi-rents per worker (y)

as overall

negotiation determined. In the quadratic revenue model an increase in
quasi-rents is always associated with an increase in quasi-rents per worker so
that the negotiated wage rate must increase; however, general functional forms
for the revenue equation do not imply this particular result.

Consider next the effects of a change in the world prices of imports and

exports on the output of a particular industry. Assume that the domestically
produced goods are Hicks-substitutes for the imported goods and that the
exported goods are identical to the domestically produced and consumed goods.

Then, an increase in the world price of industry imports results in
substitution away from the imported goods and into the domestically produced

goods within the industry. This should increase domestic output within the
industry. Hence, employment and total quasi-rents should increase for the
existing firms within the industry. Negotiated wage rates will increase or
decrease depending upon whether or not quasi-rents per worker increase or

decrease. An increase in the world price of exports results in expansion of

9

domestic industry output along the industry supply curve. Hence, employment
and total quasi-rents should increase for the existing firms within the

industry. Again, the movement in negotiated wage rates will depend upon what
happens to quasi-rents per worlcer.t°

An Empirical Specification for Bargaining Unit Level Data
In order to give our model empirical content, we must specify relations

connecting the exogenous economic factors (industry output, value-based trade
measures, import prices and export prices) to the total quasi-rent,

employment, and wage rate outcomes. We will not use comparable quasi-rent
data for the United States and Canada; hence, our empirical models will

consider only bargaining unit employment and wage rates. We deal with three
important practical problems in developing our estimating equations.

First, since the model is developed for application to bargaining unit
data, the employer firms may have heterogenous shares of output within the
domestic industries and may face heterogeneous industry demand elasticities

with respect to import and export price changes. There are insufficient data
to attempt estimation of separate elasticities for each major industry.
Instead, we formulate the model to permit estimation of the

employment-weighted average elasticities across all domestic manufacturing
firms in

the sample for each country.

Second, since nominal wage rates are renegotiated infrequently relative
to changes in the economic environment, we distinguish between the effects of
expected and unexpected changes in the exogenous variables. Expected changes

in the exogenous variables are movements forecast in advance of the current
negotiation.

forecasted
available

The effect of expected changes is captured by including the

value of the exogenous variable, conditional on information

at the time of contract renegotiation, among

10

the explanatory

variables in the wage and employment equations. Unexpected changes in
exogenous variables are the difference between movements realized over the
life of the new agreement and the forecast of these movements formed during

the negotiation of the agreement. The effect of unexpected changes is
captured by including the forecast error among the explanatory variables.
Third, since the important outcomes are not observed at frequent,

equally-spaced, synchronous intervals, we specify a set of relations that can
be estimated using observations on the relevant variables that are measured in

contract time. This allows us to estimate the models using vector
autoregressions linking the annualized rates of change in the dependent and
exogenous variables.

In order to distinguish between the expected effects of economic factors
on collective bargaining outcomes and the realized effects of these changes
over the life of an existing agreement, we decompose exogenous economic

variables into expected and unexpected components. For any exogenous variable
Zit. we assume that the level follows a discrete martingale, so that:
I

for

Zjj —

any positive q. Then, write the logarithm of union employment, and wage

settlements as of the end of a contract that begins at date t and expires at
date t + q as:

If the

in

— E(in

inwit,.,

—

E[inw

in

L4, in Wit,

in

in

Zjt., Zit] +

Wit. Zit. Zit]

+

conditional expectations are log-linear in the levels of the underlying

variables, then:

in

—

fln + flju

in L4 + 0j13

+ J15 (Zit+q —

Zit)

11

+

in Wit

+ fi

Zit

in Wittq — Pj21 +

+

Pj22 in

+ fijn (z+ — Zit)

in Wit + fij24

Zfl

+ U2jt1q

where the average of the coefficients
vector

Pjn

must be estimated and the error

should be vector white noise. Our specification allows for firm

specific factors, summarized by the average elasticities in the log-level

equations. We difference this specification across collective bargains for
the same firm and correct for the differences in contract length. This
produces the following estimating equations:

A in U1 —

Ga)

fi

A

in

Litq

+ fi

+ $14 A Zjtq +
+ A

+

+ (Pjm —

z1 —

(A

(fijn —

A En Wjtq

$iz) A

A Zit_q)

in

+

fi) A Zit + (fi, —

$13)

(fij13 —

fits) (A Zjt+q —

A in wit
A

zj1)

Ainw — finAinLn..q+finAlnwj

(ib)

+

A Zjtq + $ (A z —

$24

+ A tl2jt + (Pjn —

$)

A

in L1 +

— $24) A Zit +
(fi

+

A Zjt_q)

—

(Pin

—

$23) A En Wit

$2,) (A Zn÷q — A

zit)

where:
firs

— employment-weited average of fijr.

A En

— (En

and similarly for A in Wit

—

in L)/q

and A

Equations (la) and (lb) form the basic statistical model used in our

analysis. The equations are a vector autoregression relating changes in union
employment and wage settlements over the life of the agreement running from t

to t +

q to lagged

variables

t+

q.

changes in these variables, lagged changes in exogenous

and the innovation in exogenous variables that occurs between t and

The last two

complete

lines

error structure.

of equations (la) and (ib),
We

assume that

12

the

respectively,

bargaining unit

show the

specific error

in each elasticity (fir. —

Ps.) is

uncorrelated with all of the right hand side

variables in each equation. Furthermore, we assume that the heteroscedastic
error structure implied by equations (la) and (lb) can be adequately corrected
by a weighted least squares estimator in which the weight is the size of the

bargaining unit at time t. We do not require that the effects of expected
changes in exogenous variables and the effects of innovations in those
variables be identical.

One of the key exogenous variables in the empirical analysis is industry

shipments. The rate of growth of real industry shipments can be decomposed
into a weighted combination of the rate of growth of real apparent domestic
consumption, the rate of growth of real exports, and the rate of change of the

import penetration ratio. This decomposition is given by:
(2)

A in

where

S

—

(S1—X1)

+

A in

A inX —

is total real shipments for industry J

in

A IPRJ

year t; X is real

exports; M3 is real imports; D4 is real apparent domestic consumption (D —

+ N —

X); IPRJ

is the import penetration ratio (IPR —

N/D);

S

and the discrete

differencing operation is defined in the notes to equations (1)." When the
separate components of this decomposition (multiplied by the indicated
weights) are used in the analysis instead of the rate of growth of real
industry shipments, the coefficients on the rate of growth of real apparent
domestic consumption and real exports should be the same and equal to the

coefficient on real shipments. The coefficient on the change in the import
penetration ratio should be equal in magnitude and opposite in sign to the
coefficients on apparent domestic consumption and

exports.

The equations

including

the value-based international trade measures are interpreted as

measuring

the effects

level

of increased export and import activity for a given

of apparent domestic consumption.

13

Description of Data

A detailed description of the methods used to form the bargaining
outcome, international trade and other exogenous variables is contained in the

Data Appendix and the references therein. Table 1 contains a summary

of

the

primary data sources for the United States and Canada.

For the United States we used data from 2,515 collective bargaining
agreements representing 250 bargaining pairs in the manufacturing sector for

the years 1959 to 1984. The path of the realized nominal wage rate over the
life of the collective bargaining agreement and the level of employment at the

beginning of the agreement were extracted from the Major Collective Bargaining
Agreements file developed by Vroman (1982. 1984, 1986) based on Current Wage
Developments.

For Canada we used data from 2,258 collective bargaining agreements in
Canadian manufacturing representing 299 bargaining pairs in the manufacturing

sector for the years from 1968 to 1983. The path of the realized real wage
rate over the life of the agreement and the level of employment at the
beginning and end of the contract period were taken from a version of the
Labour Canada wage tape based on the Collective Bargaining Review (see Card
1988).

Table 2 contains a sunary
variables—bargainip.g

of

the basic definitions of the dependent

unit employment and real wage growth rates. Table 2

also contains smary definitions of the growth rates of real industry
shipments,

real apparent domestic consumption, and

real exports. Finally, the

table defines the change in the import penetration ratio.
The timing of our measures of collective bargaining outcomes and

exogenous variables is based on the effective date of the current collective
bargain. To measure a realized change we must observe bargaining

14

unit

employment, real wage rates, and all exogenous variables at two points in

time, Of necessity, there is some arbitrariness in the timing conventions
used. In selecting intervals over which to calculate the realized changes we
tried to use the available contract and exogenous information in a manner that
permitted distinguishing the estimated effects of changes that were known
prior to the settlement of the current contract and changes that occurred over
the life of the current contract.

In order to understand the timing of the various measurements, Figure 2

shows a time line for an arbitrary three-year September contract effective in

year t. The relative dates of measurement for all variables and the value
labeled t, t-3, and t+3 are all shown on the figure. The figure illustrates
that the change in the real wage rate is taken between the last month of the

current contract (dated t+q) and the last month of the previous contract

Employment changes are measured between the effective month of the

(dated t).

next

contract (dated t+q) and the effective month of the current contract

(dated t). Monthly exogenous data (average hourly earnings) are measured as
of three months before the effective date of the current contract (dated t).
Annual

exogenous data are measured using

effective

the year that overlaps with the

date of the current contract (dated t).

Table 3 presents comparative sary statistics for the United States
and Canada.

The period covered is longer for the United States. There are

more Canadian

bargaining units

but fewer Canadian

contracts.

U.S. bargaining

units are larger, reflecting both the prevalence of larger establishments and
the difference in the BLS

cutoff

for inclusion in Current Wage Developments

(1,000) versus the Labour Canada cutoff for inclusion in Collective Bargaining
Reviev (500).

Real wages grew faster in Canada but

the U.S. Although real exports and

import

15

employment fell faster in

penetration both increased faster

in Canada, the time series variability of the U.S. and Canadian international
trade statistics swamps the difference in averages.
Results

of

Value and Price Analyses

Table 4 reports the estimated effects of value-based international trade
measures on the bargaining unit employment growth rate in the U.S. and Canada.

The estimated effect of the expected change in the log of real shipments on
employment growth is much larger for Canada than for the United States
indicating that the basic employment equation is more output sensitive in

Canada. For both the United States and Canada the effect of an expected
change in real exports is comparable in magnitude and direction to the same

size change in shipments. Employment growth is not affected by the
destination of domestic production. The estimated effect of import
penetration on employment growth is negative, which is the expected direction
from equation (2); however, the magnitude is

effect

greater than the magnitude

of

the

of a change in real shipments. Employment growth is slowed more

severely by import penetration than a comparable change in shipments.
The pattern of the estimated effects of unexpected changes in shipments

and

its components on employment growth is comparable to the effects of

expected changes in these variables. In the United States,
is

employment growth

somewhat sore sensitive to unexpected changes in exports than to unexpected

changes in shipments. Employment growth in the U.S. is substantially more

sensitive to unexpected changes in import penetration than to unexpected
changes in shipments generally. Employment growth in Canada responds with

about the same sensitivity to unexpected changes in real shipments, real
exports, and import penetration.

Table 5. reports the estimated effects of value-based international trade
measuree on bargaining unit real wage rate growth in the U.S. and Canada. The

16

estimated effect of the expected change in the log of real shipments on
employment growth is positive for the United States but negative for Canada.

The finding implies that quasi-rents per worker move in opposite directions
when expected output growth increases in the manufacturing establishments of

the two countries. For the United States the effect of an expected change in
real exports is comparable in magnitude and direction to the same size change

in shipments. For Canada the direction of the export effect is consistent
with the shipments effect but the magnitude is larger. For the U.S. the
estimated effect of an expected change in import penetration on real wage
growth is negative and very substantially larger in magnitude than the

comparable change in real shipments.2° For Canada the estimated effect of
import penetration on real wages has sign and magnitude consistent with the

real shipments effect. Increased import competition in Canada is associated
with increased, not decreased, real wage rates.
The pattern of the estimated effects of unexpected changes in shipments
and its components on real wage growth is not generally comparable to the

estimated effects of the expected changes. In the United States, real wage
growth is less sensitive to unexpected changes in real industry shipments

although the effect is still positive. In Canada, the estimated effect of
unexpected changes in real industry shipments on real wage rates is positive.

The finding implies that for both the U.S. and Canada quasi-rents per worker

increase when there is an unexpected increase in output. The size and
magnitude of the estimated effect of unexpected changes in real exports are
comparable to the estimated effects of expected changes in exports for the

U.S. For Canada unexpected increases in real exports are associated with
higher real wage rates, which is consistent with the sign and magnitude of the

unexpected change in real shipments. For both countries unexpected increases

17

in real imports are associated with decreased real wage growth. The magnitude
of this effect in the U.S. is substantially larger than the effect of
unexpected changes in shipments.

Table 6 reports the estimated effects of changes in world prices on
collective bargaining outcomes in Canada.21 The estimated effect of increases
in the expected world import and export prices is to increase bargaining unit

employment. The same is true of the estimated effect of unexpected increases
in the world prices on employment growth. All four of these results are
consistent with Canada's position as a (relatively) small open economy.

Increases in the world prices of Canadian exports stimulate Canada

production,

which increases employment. Increases in the world prices of Canadian imports
also stimulate Canadian production (presumably in response to substitution in
consumption away from the imported goods).

The estimated effect of world prices (both imports and exports) on real

wage rates is negative. For the expected changes in world prices, these
estimated effects are consistent with the negative effect of real shipments on
real wage rates; however, for the unexpected changed in world prices, the

negative estimated effect on wage rates is the opposite of the estimated
effect of unexpected changes in real shipments.
Conclusions

We have estimated very comparable bargaining unit
effects

level

models for the

of international competition on union employment and wages in the

United States and Canada. In the U.S. and Canada union employment increases
when exports increase by about the same amount as one would predict from the

estimated effect of industry shipments on union employment. On the other
hand, union employment declines in response to an increase in import
competition by substantially more than one would predict from the estimated
18

industry shipment effect and the identity connecting shipments, domestic

consumption, imports and exports. The result suggests that import competition
has large employment effects in unionized establishments—larger than the
effects one would predict by mechanically assuming all imports replace
domestic production dollar for dollar.

In the United States real union wage rates are equally sensitive to
increased shipments or exports; however, real union wage rates fall more in
response to an increase in import penetration than one would predict from the

knowledge of the shipment effect on real union wage rates! In Canada, real
wage rates move in the opposite direction in response to expected and

unexpected changes in shipments, exports and imports. The estimated export
and import effects on real wage rates in Canada are consistent with the

shipments finding. The effects of exports on Canadian real wage rates are
larger than the effects of imports. The pattern and relative magnitude of the
estimated price effects for Canada is very consistent with the estimated
value -based effects.

The major similarity between the U.S. and Canadian experience, as
summarized by the statistical evidence presented here, is in the employment

effects of import competition. For bargaining units in both countries,
increased import penetration is associated with very large employment effects.
The major dissimilarity between the U.S. and Canada can be found in the
effects of expected changes in international competition on real wage rates.
For the U.S. increase import competition is associated with relatively large

decreases in real wage rates but increased export activity is associated with

real wage changes of modest magnitude. For Canada, the import competition
effects on real wage rates are modest but the export effects are relatively
large and in the opposite direction of the estimated effects for the U.S.

19

Although we have not provided all the pieces required to analyze whether
the consumers benefit enough from the increased trade to offset the effects of
that trade on the domestic labor market, it is clear from all of our analyses
that the union employment effects of increased import penetration are

substantial. The finding certainly explains the widespread protectionist
sentiment within union leadership. Furthermore, for the U.S. at least import
competition does appear to have created competitive pressures that resulted in

lower union real wage rates. In Canada, the openness of the economy makes the
domestic labor market susceptible to changes in the world prices of many
manufactured goods.

The estimated responses of Canadian bargaining units to world price
changes are predictable from the small open economy international trade model.

Furthermore, the Canadian results using the value-based and price-based

international trade measures are essentially the same. This suggests that
although working with price data is theoretically preferable, the biases
associated with the value-based measures may not be severe. Civen the
similarity of the estimated U.S. and Canadian employment responses to changes
in

the value-based international trade measures, bargaining units in the

United States may now be operating in a more open economy than in previous
decades.

20

Data Appendix
United States Data

Imoort and ExDort Values by Industry
Imports as a percent of apparent domestic consumption for the period
from 1958 to 1984 were derived from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Trade
Monitoring System and the Bureau of the Census biennial report U.S.
Exports and Imports as Related to Output.

For

Conodity

the period from 1972 to 1981

the Bureau of Labor Statistics maintained a collection of times series called
the Trade Monitoring System that was designed to provide current information
on U.S. imports, the ratio of imports to domestic shipmànts plus imports,
exports, and the ratio of exports to domestic shipments on a detailed industry

basis. See Schoepfle (1982) for a report on the development and uses of these

data. His appendix contains numerous details of the calculations. See
Bennett (1982, available on request from the Department of Labor) for details

of the data base construction. We used the NBER Trade and Immigration Data
Files (Abowd, this volume) for the period from 1958 to 1971 and 1982 onward.

OutDut

Prices

and Ouantities by

Industry

Industry output was measured at the four digit SIC level using the value
of shipments from the Annual

Survey

of Manufactures

Statistics

for Industries

and Industry Groups. The basic data file, prepared by Wayne Gray for the NBER

is

documented in the discussion of the NBER

Trade

and Immigration Data Files

(Abowd, this volume).

Averafe Hourly Earnincs. Gross National Product, and the Consumer Price Index
Average hourly earnings for private non-agricultural employment, Gross
National Product, and the Consumer Price Index-All Urban were all extracted
from

the CITIBASE machine readable data file in seasonally unadjusted form.

21

Contract Data
Bargaining unit wage rate and employment information were taken from the
data file on 250 major bargaining situations developed by Wayne Vroman from
the Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Wage Developments (CWD) printed
reports. The realized nominal wage increase over the life of the contract,
stated as an annualized percentage rate, was calculated from the periodic wage
change reports in CWD and Vroman's imputation of the average scale wage at the

beginning of the contract. See Vroman (1982, 1984 and 1986) for a discussion
of the methods. The basic situation number list from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics was linked to four digit establishment SIC's for the bargaining

unit, available from the BLS as unpublished data. The SIC-based trade data

was linked using to the contract file using the S establishment SIC. See
Vroman and Abowd (1988) for a discussion of the link to international trade
data.

The wage rate reports in the CWD summarize scheduled fixed increases and

realized cost of living adjustments as they occur. The bargaining unit size
and average bargaining unit wage rate are reported (by the employer) at the
time a new contract settlement was recorded in the basic (confidential)
Current

Wage Developments data file, which is used to prepare the suimnary

on new collective agreements published quarterly.

information
reports

the

bargaining

unit

size

The printed CVI)

but not the average wage rate.

Canadian Data

Import and

ExDort

Prices and Values by

The Laspeyres

Industry

price indices and the trade value measures were derived

using CMSIM data supplemented for 1967 and prior years from the Bank of
Canada Review. The system of classification closest to standard industrial
:lassifications (SIC), which is used by Labour Canada to classify the

22

bargaining units, is the System of National Accounts (SNA) classification used

to construct the Canadian Input-Output tables. International trade price and
value data are available using the SNA classification; however, all source and

destination countries are aggregated. Since we wanted to eliminate trade with
the United States from the world price measures, we used the price and value
measures available on CANSIM under the import commodity classification

(MCC)

and the export commodity classification (XCC), which are disaggregated by

major countries. Unlike the SIC, the MCC and XCC classifications are
of classification for products and not for industries.

systems

Using the Canadian

Input-Output tables to provide the connection between products and industries,

we developed a concordance between two-digit SIC industries and the
international, trade measures obtained from the MCC and XCC.

Data on imports and exports for industrial sectors where the
international trade flows are not very substantial are very aggregated.

Only

an aggregated measure of import (and export) prices and values was available
for knitting industries, clothing industries, furniture and fixtures,

publishing and printing and miscellaneous industries. For exports, only an
aggregated measure was available for leather industries, fabricated metal and

non-metallic mineral products. Data for only seven and five aggregated
sectors were available for imports and exports before 1968 (in the Bank of

Canada

Review).

The

import price index is a combination of transaction prices and unit

values. The short description given in CANSIM is "The Laspeyres price indexes

are based on fixed weights derived from
reflect

shipments 1971 quantities and hence

changes in prices alone. Most of the non-end product indexes are

based on average prices derived from commodity import value and quantity data,
The end product indexes are based on wholesale price indexes from Canadian,

23

U.S. and foreign sources as proxies for import prices. For further details
see the September 1976 supplement to the summary of external trade catalogue

65-001." (CANSIM 1984, matrix 003681). The technical documentation may be
found in Statistics Canada 1976.

The series description for the export prices is "The Laspeyres price

indexes are based on fixed weights derived from shipments 1971 quantities and

hence reflect changes in prices alone. Most of the non-end product indexes
are based on average prices derived from commodity export value and quantity

data. The end product indexes are based on Canadian industry selling price
indexes as proxies for export prices. For further information see September
1976 supplement to the summary of external trade catalogue 65-001" (CANSIM
1984, Statistics Canada
Value

collected

1976).

of imports and exports by country of origin/destination is

as a part of the System of National Accounts. Combining data from

all sources produced the price and value measures for imports and exports for
the period from 1961 to 1984.

Input and 0utut Prices and Ouantities by Industry
Data on output and input price and values by industry were obtained from

two

publications of Statistics Canada: Real. Domestic

and

Gross

Domestic Output per

Industry

Product per Sector

61-71

(1978 and 1984 issues).

Averate Manufacturing Wate

Average hourly earnings in manufacturing obtained from the CANS]1(

University

Data Base

and the Bank of Canada Reviev. See Card (1988).

GM. Unemployment, and the Consumer Price Index
Basic monthly, quarterly, and annual time series data were extracted
from the CANSIX

University

Data Base from 1961 to 1984 and from the Bank of

Canada Review thereafter.

24

Contract data
We used 2,258 collective bargaining agreements for 299 bargaining pairs
in the manufacturing sector of Labour Canada's Wage Tape. The wage measure

used is a base wage rate. For a description of the data set and of how the
wage settlement variable was constructed, see Card (1988).
The employment variable provided on the Wage Tape is actually a measure
of how many workers were covered by the collective bargaining agreement on the

day of the agreement. Inspection of the data suggested that the employment
data were substantially contaminated by measurement error. In an effort to
reduce those measurement problems, we systematically compared the employment
data from the Collective Bargaining Review to the numbers from the Wage Tape

for all pairs where the employment was changing by 10% or more in absolute

value between two agreements at some point of time. In cases of discrepancies
between the two numbers, the employment from the Collective Bargaining Review

was used. More information is available from the Collective Bargaining Review
about the structure of the bargaining pair (for example, which plants and
which union locals are involved).

Two levels of correction were performed. The first level consisted of
using the number of employees from the Collective Bargaining Review when the
only identifiable source of discrepancies between the two data sources was

reporting error. Employment data for 175 contracts was corrected on this
criterion. Employment from 28 contracts was discarded because of major
changes in the definition of the bargaining pair.

Second, when the information from the Collective Bargaining Review
indicated that the structure of the bargaining pair changed over time, the
following rule was applied: if enough information was available from the
Collective Bargaining Review

to

construct a consistent series for a specific

25

pair, such information was used. Otherwise, the changes in employment that
could have been explained by changes in the structure of the bargaining pair,

e.g. one local drops off, were eliminated. Employment

data

for 131. contracts

were adjusted and employment data for 176 contracts were discarded due to this
correction.

26

References

Abowd, John M. 1989. The Effect of Wage Bargains
on the Stock Market Value of
the Firm. American Economic Review 79 (4, September): 774-800.
Abowd, John H. 1990. The NBER Immigration, Trade, and Labor
Markets Data
Files. In Immigration, Trade, and Labor Markets, ed. J. Abowd and ICE.
Freeman, Chicago: NBER.
Bank of Canada. Monthly. Bank of Canada Review. Ottawa: Minister of Supply and
Services (December 1984-86).

Bennett, Norman. 1982. trade Monitoring System, Technical
Note, Import
Penetration and Export Proportion Data Bases. Bureau of Labor
Statistics, Division of Foreign Labor Statistics and Trade,
Washington,
D.C., November.
Card, David. 1988. Strikes and Wages: A Test of a Signaling Model. NBER
Working Paper No. 2550 (April).
Christofides, Louis N. et al. l980a. A Microeconometric Analysis of the
Canadian Wage Determination Process. Economica 47 (May): 165-78.
Christofides, Louis N. et p1. 1980b. A Microeconometric
Analysis of Spillovers
within the Canadian Wage Determination Process. Review of Economics and
Statistics 62 (May): 213-21.
CITIBASE 1978. Citibank economic database (machine-readable
file). l946-present New York: Citibank, N.A.

magnetic data

Cousineau, Jean-Michel. 1987. The Impact of International. Trade Shocks on Wage
Adjustments in Canada. In P. Chinloy and E. Stromsdorfer Labor Market
Adjustments in the Pacific Basin, Boston: Kluwer-Nijhoff, pp. 61-78.

Dickens, William T. with Laura Tyson and John Zysman. 1985. The
Employment
Effects of International Trade: A Review of the Literature.
Report to
the Office of Technological Assessment. Berkeley: Univ. of California.
Farber, Henry S. 1986. The Analysis of Union Behavior. In 0. Ashenfelter and
R. Layard (eds.) Handbook of Labor
Economics, Volume 2, Amsterdam: North
Holland, pp. 1039-90.

Freeman, Richard B. and Lawrence Katz. 1990. Wages and Employment in an Open
Economy. In migration, Trade and Labor Markets, ed. J. Abowd and R.B.
Freeman,

Chicago: NBER.

Grossman, Gene. 1982a. The Employment and Wage Effects of Import Competition
in the United States. NBER Working Paper No. 1041. Cambridge, Mass:
NBER.
Grossman, Gene. 1982b. Import Competition from Developed and Undeveloped
Countries. Review of Economics and Statistics 64: 271-81.
Grossman, Gene. 1986. Imports as a Cause of Injury: The Case of the U.S. Steel
Industry. Journal of International Economics 20: 201-223.
27

Hamermesh, Daniel S. 1970. Wage Bargains, Threshold Effects, and the Phillips
Curve. Quarterly Journal of Economics 85 (August): 501-17.
Heywood, John S. 1985. Imports and Domestic Wage Levels. Department of
Economics, University of Michigan (November).
Hufbauer, Gary C., Diane T. Berliner and Kimberly A. Elliot. Trade Protection
in the United States: 31 Case Studies. Washington, DC: Institute for
International Economics.
Kahn,

Shulamit. 1986. Trends in Union Membership in the Postwar Period: The
Case of the ILGWU. IRRA Proceedings of the Thirty-Eighth Annual Meeting.
pp. 279-86.

Kumar, Pradeep et al. 1986. The Current Industrial Relations

Scene in Canada.
Kingston, ON: Industrial Relations Centre, Queen's University.

Labour Canada. Monthly. Collective Bargaining Review. Ottawa: Minister of
Supply and Services (1969-86).

Leonard, Jonathan and Rachel McCulloch. 1990. Wages and Employment in Foreign
Owned U.S. Businesses. In Immigration, Trade and Labor Markets, ed. J.
Abowd and R.B. Freeman, Chicago: NBER.
Riddell, W. Craig. 1979. The Empirical Foundations of the Phillips Curve:
Evidence from Canadian Contract Data. Econonetrica 47 (January): 1-24.
Riddell, W. Craig (coordinator). l986a. Adapting to Change: Labour Market
Adjustment in Canada. Toronto: University of Toronto Press in

cooperation with the Royal Commission on the Economic Union and
Development Prospects for Canada.

Riddell, U.

Craig.

Toronto:

1986b. Dealing with Inflation and Unemployment in Canada.

University of Toronto Press in cooperation with the Royal
Commission on the Economic Union and Development Prospects for Canada.

Riddell, U. Craig (coordinator). 1986c. Labour Management Cooperation in
Canada. Toronto: University of Toronto Press in cooperation with the
Royal Commission on the Economic Union and Development Prospects for
Canada.

Schoepfle,

Gregory. 1982. Imports and Domestic Employment: Identifying
Affected Industries. Monthly Labor Review (August): 13-26.

Statistics Canada. 1976. The 1971-Based Price and Volume Indexes of Canada's
External Trade. Ottawa: Minister of Supply and Services (December).

Statistics Canada. 1978. Real Domestic Product per Sector: 61-71. Ottawa:
Minister of Supply and Services.
Statistics Canada. 1984a. Cansim University Base. Ottawa: Minister of Supply
and Service.

28

Statistics Canada. l984b. The Input-Output Structure of the Canadian Economy
in Current Dollars 1971-1981. Ottawa: Minister of Supply and Services
(and

earlier editions).

Statistics Canada. 1984c. Gross Domestic Output per Industry. Ottawa: Minister
of Supply and Services.
Statistics Canada. 1987. CANSIM Main Data Base. Ottawa: Minister of Supply and
Services.
U.S. Department of Coiimierce. Bureau of the Census. Biennial. U.S.
Commodity
Exports and Imports as Related to Output. Washington, DC: GPO (1965/64
and 1972/71).

U.S. Department of Commerce. Bureau of the Census. Annual. Annual Survey of
Manufactures Value of Product Shipments. Washington, DC: GPO (1982,
1983, and 1984).
U.S. Departement of Commerce. Bureau of the Census. 1988. Statistical Abstract
of the United States. Washington, DC: GPO.

U.S. Departement of Labor. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Monthly. Current
Wage
Developments. Washington, DC: GPO (1955-1987).
Vroman, Wayne. 1982. Union Contracts and Money Wage Changes in U.S.
Manufacturing. Quarterly Journal of Economics 97 (November): 571-94.

Vroman, Wayne. 1984. Wage Contract Settlements in U.S. Manufacturing. Review
of Economics and Statistics 66 (November): 661-5.
Vroman, Wayne. 1986. Union Wage Settlements, Incomes Policy and tndexation.
Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute.
Vroman, Wayne and John M. Abowd. 1988. Disaggregated Wage Developments.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1:1988): 313-46.

29

Footnotes

1. See Abowd and Freeman (this volume) for an overview of the changes in the
United States.

2. See Riddell (1986b) for a recent discussion of Canadian labor market
responses to increasing global competition.

3.
In 1986 Canada accounted for $45 billion of $217 billion total U.S.
exports and $68 billion of $370 billion total imports. [n 1975 Canada
accounted for $22 billion of $108 billion total U.S. exports and $22 billion
of $97 billion total U.S. imports. (Statistical Abstract of the U.S. 1988,
page 770.)

4. The openness measure (imports + exports)/CNP is used by Abowd and Freeman
(this volume) to characterize the growing internationalization of the U.S.
labor market.

5.

Seventy-five percent of non-office employees in manufacturing industries
were covered by collective bargaining agreements in 1984 (Kumar, 1986).

6. See Cousineau (1987) and Riddell (l986a, 1986b, 1986c).

7. See, in particular, Hufbauer et p1. (1986). Other examples in the same
style as the current research include Heywood (1985) Kahn (1986).

8. See, for example, Riddell (1979) and Christofides (1980a, 1980b). These
relations are sometimes called "micro Phillips curves" (Hamermesh 1970).

9. See Farber (1986) for a review of these models.

10. See Leonard and McCulloch (this volume).

11.

When unions and employers

engage in industry-wide bargaining we assume

the multiple employer bargaining unit consists entirely of employers with
positive expected quasi-rents. When an employer has negative or zero expected
that

quasi-rents, we assume that the firm withdraws from the industry-wide
bargaining unit.

12.

Profitability is measured using quasi-rents. It includes the portion of
the return on the enterprise that goes to the unionized workforce. See Abowd
(1989).

30

13. It is difficult to state precisely the
definition of number of workers
the bargaining unit. The reason for this is the absence of standards within in
the Department of Labor Office of Wages and
Industrial Relations for
determining the Mnhimber of workers covered by a particular
collective
bargaining agreement. The definition in the text is the usual interpretation
of
includes all current employees and those
former employees
who are on layoff but who could return to work before
they lose the right to
vote on the contract settlement.

this number. It

14. See Grossman (l982a, 19821, and 1986).

15. See Schoepfle (1982), Yroman and Abowd (1990) and Freeman and Katz (this
volume). Dickens et al. (1985) reviews the employment effects literature.
16. Net revenue is the difference between net sales
(gross sales less the
value of discounts and other promotions) and the cost of all inputs except
labor.

17. See Abowd (1989) for a more complete development of this argument.
18.

The world price of Canadian exports stated in terms of the Canadian

dollar is

equal to the product of the world price stated in terms of a basket
of foreign currencies and the exchange rate between those currencies and the
Canadian dollar. The Canadian
dollar world price can increase either because
the world price stated in terms of the trading partner currencies increases at
a given exchange rate or because the Canadian dollar depreciates relative to
the trading partner currencies at a given trading partner
price. In this
paper we do not distinguish between these sources of price change, although we
intend to do so in future work.

19. See Freeman and Katz (this volume) for U.S. results
using this
decomposition.
20. This finding should be contrasted with the finding in Woman and Abowd
(1988) that nominal wage growth was only weakly affected by import penetration
in the same

data.

21.

The world price effects shown in Table 6 were estimated using price
indices that exclude trade with the U.S. The sign and magnitude of the
price
effects are generally not affected by using a world price index that includes
trade with the U.S.; however, the estimates in Table 6 are more precise.

22. The finding is consistent with the Freeman and Katz (this volume) result
that the estimated effects of import penetration on
average wage rates in the
industry is largest for heavily unionized industries in the United States.

31

Table 1
A Comparison of Data Sources for the United States and Canada

Variable

United States

Canada

Contract wage rates

Vroman Agreements
File from Current
Wage Developments
(CWD)

Labour Canada
Wage Tape from
Collective
Bargaining Review

Bargaining unit employment

Report to BLS
at settlement
in CYD

Report to Labour
Canada at
settlement

Industry shipments

Annual Survey of
Manufactures

System of National
Accounts (SNA)b

Industry prices

BLS shipments
deflator

Implicit deflator

MS trade

Input-Output
tables

Industry Imports

monitoring systemc

Industry Exports

BL.S trade

(SNA)

monitoring system

Input-Output
tables

Import prices

Not available

CANSIM data files

Export prices

Not available

CANSIM data files

Notes•

Revisions in the industrial coding for the Annual Survey of
Manufactures have been resolved to 1972 standards.
bRevisiona in the industrial coding for the Canadian System of National
Accounts have been resolved to 1971 standards.
°BLS trade monitoring system data are only available for 1972 to 1981.
The same methods have been applied to construct data for the periods 1958 to
1971 and 1982 to 1984.
dlmport and export prices from the Canadian data files are Laspeyres
indices (1971—100) based primarily on end use prices. Comparable U.S. are not
available for all manufacturing industries until 1980.

32

Table 2
Summary of the Definitions of Key Variables

Variable

Detailed Definitiont

Bargaining unit employment growth
rate

Annualized rate of growth of bargaining

unit employment between the end of the

previous contract and the end of the
current contract.
Bargaining

unit real wage growth

rate

Annualized realized rate of nominal wage

growth between the end of the previous

contract and the end of the current
contract minus the annualized growth rate

of the Consumer Price Index over the same
period.
Real

shipments growth rate

Annualized rate of growth of industry
shipments over the life of the current
contract minus the annualized growth of

the industry shipments deflator over the
same period.

Expected part: rate of growth over the
previous

contract.

Unexpected part: difference between the
rate of growth over the current contract
and the rate of growth over the previous
contract.

Real apparent domestic consumption Shipments plus imports minus exports,
growth rate
annualized growth rate over the life of
the current contract minus the annualized
growth rate of the industry shipments
deflator over the same period.
Expected and unexpected parts defined
the same manner as real output growth.

Real export growth rate

in

Exports from all sources to the
destination country (U. S. or Canada,
respectively), valued free alongside ship
(value at the point of exportation).
annualized growth rate over the life of
the current collective bargaining
agreement.

Expected and unexpected parts defined in
the same manner as real output growth.
(continued)

33

Summary of

Table 2 (continued)
the Definitions of Key Variables

Variable

Detailed Definition'

Import penetration ratio

Imports for consumption (customs value at

port of entry, usually foreign port value)
divided by shipments plus imports,
annualized change over the life of

the
current collective bargaining agreement.
Shipments have been reclassified at the
product class code level to conform more
closely to the SI based imports.
Expected part: annualized change over the
previous contract (not a growth rate).
Unexpected part: difference between the
change over the current contract and the
change over the previous contract (not a
difference in growth rates).
Note:

All annualized growth rates were constructed using the difference in
the logarithms of the appropriate variable at two points in time divided by
the length of time intervening.

36

Table 3
Comparison of the United States and Canadian Collective
Bargaining Contract Samples with Selected Summary Statistics
(Standard Deviations in Parentheses)
Description

United States

Canada

Industrial coverage

All Manufacturing
4-digit SIC's

All Manufacturing
2 or 3-digit SIC's

Period covered

1959-1984

1968-1983

Bargaining units

250

299

Total observations

2,515

1,280

Average bargaining unit size

8.881

1,644

Average annual real wage
growth rate (size weighted)

1.15% (7.25)

2.66% (4.52)

Average annual employment

-2.76% (43.5)

-1.91% (16.7)

Average annual industry
real shipments growth rate
(size weighted)

3.57% (24.1)

4.66% (6.55)

Average annual

industry
real apparent domestic
consumption growth rate

3.77% (23.2)

2.96% (4.43)

Average annual industry

.48% (4.21)

1.85% (4.57)

Average annual industry

.55

growth rate (size weighted)

(size weighted)b

real export growth rate
(size weighted)c

(3.53)

.70

(2.11)

import penetration change
(size weighted)6

Notes:

unit.

Size weighted statistics were weighted by employment in the bargaining
"The growth rate of real apparent domestic consumption is multiplied by

(shipments - exports) /shipments.

°The growth rate of real exports is multiplied by (exports/shipments).
6The change in import penetration is multiplied by (apparent domestic
consumption/shipments).
Sources: See Table 1 and Data Appendix.

35

Table 4
Estimated Effect of Value-Based International Trade Measures on the
Change in the Logarithm of Bargaining Unit Employment
United States

Independent Variable

Canadab

.311 (.058)

.703 (.124)

Change in log real apparent
domestic consumption

.087 (.048)

.581 (.194)

Change in log real exports

.292 (.289)

.733 (.171)

-1.408 (.308)

-1.176 (.319)

Expected change in log of industry
real shipmentsC
DecomDosed: d

Change in import penetration
ratio

-

Unexpected change in log of

.339 (.038)

.379 (.090)

Change in log real apparent
domestic consumption

.182 (.034)

.400 (.124)

Change in log real exports

.645 (.191)

.276 (.099)

industry real shipmentsC
Decomoosed : d

Change in import penetration
ratio

-1.667 (.212)

-

.473

(.214)

-.048 (.020)

-.136 (.034)

Change in log real wage rate
during previous contract

.750 (.136)

.087 (.135)

Standard error of equation

.403
.149

.160
.061

Change in log bargaining unit
employment during previous contract

Residual degrees of freedom

2,455

1,007

Notes:

Coefficients (and standard errors in parentheses) were estimated from a
sample of 2,515 contracts using weighted least squares with bargaining unit
size as the weight. The equation also included an intercept and the expected
and unexpected change in both the log of real average hourly earnings and the
log of real gross national product.
bCoefficients (and standard errors in parentheses) were estimated from a
sample of 1,019 contracts using the same method and controls as note a.
CCoefficiet (and standard errors) in this row were estimated from a
restricted equation in which this variable replaces its decomposition (the
three variables that follow in the table).
'rhe components are weighted; see notes to Table 3.
Sources: See Table 1 and Data Appendix.
36

Table 5
Estimated Effect of Value-Based
International Trade Measures on the
Change in the Logarithm of the Bargaining Unit Real Wage Rate
Independent Variable

United States

Expectedchange in log of industry

Canadab

.052 (.009)

-.052 (.025)

Change in log real apparent
domestic consumption

.023 (.008)

-

Change in log real exports

.058 (.046)

-.163 (.035)

-.372 (.048)

.010 (.065)

.019 (.006)

.033 (.018)

real shipmentsc
Decomimsed : d

Change in import penetration
ratio
Unexpected change in log of
industry real shipmentst

.179

(.040)

Decorwosed:d

Change in log real apparent
domestic consumption

.009

-

Change in log real exports

-

(.005)

.062

(.025)

.058 (.030)

.041 (.020)

-.221 (.033)

-.010 (.044)

Change in log bargaining unit
employment during previous contract

.004 (.003)

.027 (.007)

Change in Log real wage rate
during previous contract

.203 (.021)

-.134 (.028)

Standard error of equation

.064
.237

Change in import penetration
ratio

Residual degrees of freedom

.033
.510

2,455

1,007

Notes:

Coefficients (and standard errors in parentheses) were estimated from a
sample of 2,515 contracts using weighted least squares with bargaining unit
size as the weight. The equation also included an intercept and the expected

and unexpected change in both the log of real average hourly earnings and the
log of real gross national product.
bCoefficients (and standard errors in parentheses) were estimated from a
sample of 1.019 contracts using the same method and controls as note a.
CCoefficients (and standard errors in parentheses) in this row were
estimated from a restricted equation in which this variable replaces its
decomposition

(the three variables that follow

in the table).

dThe components are weighted; see notes to Table 3.

Sources: See Table 1 and Data Appendix.
37

Table 6
Estimated Effects of World Import and Export Prices on
Bargaining Unit Employment Growth and Real Wage Growth in Canada

Independent Variable

Employment'

Real Wages'

Expected change

in log real world
import price (excluding U.S.)b

.186 (.082)

- .028 (.018)

Unexpected change in log real world
import price (excluding U.S.)b

.198 (.046)

-.022 (.010)

Expected change in log real world
export price (excluding U.S.)b

.249 (.079)

-.022 (.017)

Unexpected change in log real world
export price (excluding tJ.S.)b

.092 (.050)

- .045 (.011)

Change in log bargaining unit
employment during previous contract

-.131 (.031)

.011 (.007)

Change in log real wage rate
during previous contract

.119 (.122)

-.142 (.026)

Standard error of equation

.162
.063

Residual

degrees of freedom

1,321

.035
.433

1,321

Notes:

'Coefficients (and standard errors in parentheses) were estimated from a
sample of 1,331 contracts using weighted least squares with bargaining unit
size as the weigjtt. The equation also included an intercept and the expected
and unexpected change in both the log of real average hourly earnings and the
log of real gross national product.
bThe

U.S.
Sources:

Laspeyres price index has been reweighted to exclude trade with the

See Table 1 and Data Appendix.

38

Openness of the U.S. and Canadian Economies
60%

0
C,

507.

0
C

I)
I-)

407.

4?

C-

0
0
'I
0

30%

E
20%
aci,

0

a

'C
LU

10%

0%

'4/

-n
1960

1970

—

USA

Figure 1

1980

Canada

Calendar/Contract Dating of Variables
- _________ _________(For a Three Year September Contract)

'I

(t+3#4<
)0IIIII

(t—3'

EXOCE 401)5 ANN frL DATA ( )
)0GGt-o- *0<

(t—3:

EXOGEI GUS k4ONl LY DATA t)

o*stotpl #4<

-z

E

-

(ti-a
A

A

A

0
.1

0C
C

°0

(t• 3)

00C

MON EMP OYMENT (

CONTRACT !QACE (t)

(t— $)

JAN

(t- 3)

JAN

PREViOUS (t—3)

JAN

JAN

JAN

CURRENT (t)

Contract time in years

Figure 2

(H- I)

JAN

JAN

JAN

n,crr
NEXT (ti-a)

