                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 PRODUCT MARKET COMPETITION, UNION ORGANIZINC ACTIVITY, AND EMPLOYER RESISTANCE




                                 John M. Abowd

                                Henry S. Farber




                            Working Paper No. 3353




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   May 1990



The authors thank Rebecca Demsetz, Cerald Oettinger. Leslie Sundt, and
Elizabeth Kulas for their assistance. Valuable comments were received in
workshops at Cornell University, UC Bericeley, UCLA, and the NEER, a labor
economics conference at the University of Western Ontario, and the MIT labor
economics lunch. Abowd acknowledges the financial support of the NSF (grant
number SES-8813847). Farber acknowledges the financial support of the NSF
 (grant number SES-8912664) and the Russell Sage Foundation. This work was
completed while Farber was a Fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the
Behavioral Sciences. The data used in this study will be available through the
Interuniversity Consortium for Political and Social Research at the University
of Michigan. This paper is part of NEER's research program in Labor Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                            NBER Working Paper #3353
                                            May 1990


  PRODUCT MARKET COMPETITION, UNION ORCANIZINC ACTIVITY, AN!) EMPLOYER RESISTANCE


                                        ABSTRACT

      We develop and estimate a model of the union's optimal extent of

organizing activity that accounts for the decision of employers regarding

resistance to union organizing. The central exogenous variable in the

analysis is the quantity of quasi-rents per worker available to be split

between unions and employers.
                                                              -



      We   measure available quasi-rents per worker as the difference per

worker between total industry revenues net of raw materials costs and labor

costs evaluated at the opportunity cost of the workers.    Using two-digit
industry level data for thirty-five U.S. industries for the period 1955

through 1986, we find that both organizing activity and employer resistance

to unionization are positively related to available quasi-rents per worker.

However, there is- still a strong negative trend in union organizing activity

and a strong positive trend in employer resistance after controlling for

quasi-rents per worker. Thus, the explanation for the decline in union

organizing activity and the increase in employer resistance to unionization

since the mid l970's lies elsewhere.




      John M. Abowd                        Henry S. Farber
      School of Industrial and Labor       Department of Economics
      Relations and Johnson School of      MIT
      Management                           Cambridge, MA 02139
      264 Ives Hall
      Cornell University
      Ithaca, NY 14851-0952
I. Introduction

      The dramatic reduction in union organization through representation

elections supervised by the National Labor Relations Board (NIlE) has been a

major contributor to the sharp decline in the extent of unionization in the

United States since the mid-1970's (Dickens and Leonard, 1985). According to

information from the May Current Population Survey (CPS), the percentage of

private nonagricultural workers who were union members fell from 25.6% in

1973 to 14.1% in 1985. Over the same period, the percentage of nonunion

workers who were organized through NLRB representation elections fell from

approximately 0.55% in 1973 to approximately 0.13% in 1983.1 Employer

resistance to union organizing has increased dramatically over a longer

period with the number of unfair labor practice complaints filed by unions

against employers alleging illegal activity in the course of a union

organizing effort rising from 9 complaints per thousand workers eligible to

vote in NIlE representation elections in 1955 to 33 complaints per thousand

in 1973 to 87 complaints per thousand in in 1985.

      We argue in this study that the decline in organization and     the
increase in employer resistance may result from increases in competitiveness

that reduce the quasi-rents available to be split between fins and workers.

We build a model of rent-maximizing union behavior with regard to the extent

of unionization in an industry where the employers optimally select a level

of resistance to union organization. We    then   link the decline in union

organizing   activity to a decline in the optimal extent of unionization for a
rent-maximizing union. The model implies that (1) the optimal extent of




  These figures overstate the level of effective new organization because
of an increasingly common failure to negotiate a first contract following an
election victory. An AFL-CIO survey suggests that unions only are able to
negotiate first contracts in 63% of election victories (MacDonald, 1985).
                                          -2-


 unionization and, hence) the quantity of organizing activity and (2) employer

 resistance to unionization will both     be related   to the quantity of

 quasi-rents available to be split between unions and employers.

        We use   data aggregated to the two-digit   industry level for 35 U.s.

 industries   for the period 1955 through 1986 to investigate 1) the

relationship between the change in available quasi-rents per worker and union

organizing    activity in the form of NLRB representation election activity and

2) the relationship between the level of quasi-rents per worker and employer

resistance in the form    of   unfair-labor-practice charges filed with the NIlE.

For our purposes, quasi-rents per worker are defined as the difference per

worker between total industry      revenues net of raw materials costs and labor
costs evaluated at the opportunity wage of the workers.       We find that both

employer  resistance and organizing activity are significantly positively
related to the change in available quasi-rents per worker. However, even
alter   controlling for changes in quasi-rents per worker, a strong     negative
trend   in union organizing activity remains.

II.     Stylized Iisx L shi Modus-ODerandi 21 Anerican Labor Unions
        In this section, we argue that unions in the United States are
primarily   organizations that extract quasi-rents     from employers in particular

industries. A reasonable objective for such a union is the maximization of

its share of the quasi-rents.2 The quasi-rents accruing to any particular

union   member are simply the difference between the     worker's union wage rate




2A variety of objective functions have been used in the analysis of union
behavior. See, for example, Dunlop (1944), Farber (1978), Dertouzos and
Pencavel (1980), Carruth and Oswald (1983), Pencavel (l984a, 1984b), and
MaCurdy and Pencavel (1986). Farber (1986) presents a selective survey of
this literature.
                                             -3-


and the opportunity wage rate in the worker's next best employment

alternative. More specifically, assume that there are N union members and

that there are L workers employed at the union wage.3 the N-L union members

who are not employed at the union wage are employed at their opportunity

wage. Assuming that all union workers are identical and noting that union

members employed at their opportunity wage generate no quasi-rents, the total

quasi-rents     (It) accruing   to union members are

       (11.1)
                        S.   L•IW   -
                                        W]
where V is the union wage, U is the opportunity wage. If the union

maximizes this objective function, it will maximize the wealth available for

distribution to the individual union members (including those not employed at

the union wage).

       We assume that quasi-rents are extracted from employers in a strongly

efficient fashion so that unions and employers are involved in bargaining

over the split of a pie of fixed size (a zero-sum game).4 In other words,

the quantity of quasi-rents available to be distributed between the union and

the employers is not affected by the actions of the union regarding either

its organizing decisions or its positions in bargaining. While strong




3Thedetermination of the relevant group of workers for a union to consider in
making its decisions is a fundamental issue in the analysis of union
objectives which has not been seriously addressed in the recent literature.
See Dunlop (1944) and Farber (1986). In the context of this study, a
sufficient condition for a union to value the gains that accrue to potential
members is that the union be free to redistribute income within the union
subject to the constraint that a worker would leave union employment rather
than be made worse off than he would be in a nonunion job.
'Strong efficiency is defined by Brown and Ashenfelter (1986) as efficiency
in the sense that employment will be set at the level where the value of
marginal product of labor equals the opportunity wage of labor rather than
the actual union wage. While they present evidence from one industry that
labor contracts are not strongly efficient, Abowd (1989) presents evidence
from a national sample of contracts that cannot reject strong efficiency.
                                        -4-


 efficiency is not strictly necessary to understand our approach to the

determination of union organizing activity, it greatly simplifies the

discussion and analysis because it implies that a measure of the total

quasi-rents available in an industry can serve as an exogenous measure of the

potential gain from unionization.

         Quasi-rents in an industry may be derived from underlying imperfections

in the product market such as a natural monopoly or oligopoly, from

government regulation that erects an entry barrier, or from producer specific

capital that prevents potential competitors from duplicating existing firms.5

Quasi-rents also include the normal competitive return to the fixed assets in

an industry, tie abstract from the possibility that unions can organize

competitive industries and act as an upstream monopolist1 generating

quasi-rents from the product market. Fundamentally, the process of

organizing large numbers of competitive producers in order to create

quasi-rents is bound to provide less benefit per dollar expended than

organizing a small number of oligopolistic producers. Thus, unions are more

likely to form where there are "ready-made" quasi-rents from noncompetitive

industrial   structures or where the nature   of the assets in the industry

limits   the possibilities for employers to protect the normal return component

of the quasi-rents by transferring the assets to other industries.



III. flit Union Decision Process and      Optimal Level f Unionization
      A major departure in this study from the earlier literature on the

determination of the union status of workers is that the union, rather than

the workers, is considered the central decision maker. The organizing costs




5Rose (1985) analyzes the the existence and incidence of quasi-rents due to
government regulation of the trucking industry prior to 1978.
                                          -5.


for an existing union are smaller than the direct costs the workers face

because of economies of scale in conducting numerous campaigns and the

advantages of having a professional staff. In addition, the union will

perceive general benefits from organizing currently nonunion jobs in the form

of an improved bargaining position for the union because it has organized a

larger share of the industry's workforce. Consequently, the union's net

benefit from organization exceed the workers' private benefit and the union

is making the relevant decision about which jobs to organize.

       Formally, the union in industry j is attempting to maximize the total

quasi-rents accruing to union labor in that industry           net of the costs

of organizing the the chosen number of workers:
                                                -

       (111.1)              —   S. -
where C represents the costs of organization.

      The union appropriates quasi-rents through a quasi-rent extraction

function, which relates the quantity of quasi-rents received by union labor

to the quantity of quasi-rents available and the extent of unionization in

the industry:

      (111.2)               —
                                Qh(U)
where Q   represents    the total quantity of quasi-rents in the industry, U

represents the proportion of workers in the industry who are unionized, and

h(.) is an increasing function with a nonpositive second derivative. If the

function h(U) — U       then the union simply gets a share of the rents in the

industry equal.   to   its share of employment. In this case, the benefit of

increased organization to the union is precisely the benefit that the workers

generate themselves. The idea that the benefit of increased organization to

the union exceeds the benefit to the workers directly involved is formalized

by ôh(U)/OU >1.

      The costs of organizing workers will vary with the amount of resistance
                                             -6-


 by employers. In this context, the cost (C) of organizing L workers in

 industry j can be expressed as:

          (111.3)       C —   L-g(U,S)
 where S is the amount of resistance to union organizing offered
                                                                        by employers
 in industry j. The function g is the average cost per worker of

 organization, which is assumed to be positively related to the extent of

 unionization and increasing in U so that ög/ÔU > 0. We also assume that

 the marginal cost of organization is increasing so that 82g/8u2 > 0.         This

 assumption is motivated by the necessity of organizing workers who are less

 favorably disposed toward unions and jobs that are less favorably situated

 for unionization (e.g.. smaller establishments) as the existing degree of

unionization increases. The average cost of organization is positively

related to employer resistance so that 8g/3S > 0. The effectiveness of

employer resistance declines at the margin so that 82g/as2 < 0.

         Substitution of the extraction and cost functions into equation (111.1)

yields

         (111.4)      V — Q.h(TJ)      -
                                           N3-U.g(tJ,S)
as the objective function for the union noting that L—N -U where N is the
                                                            iii           i

level of total employment in industry j. The union's decision problem is to

determine the extent of industrial unionization that maximizes        this objective

function. Assuming that employer resistance is set exogenously, the first

order condition is:

                              ah(U )                      ög(U .5 )
      (111.5)         O—q              -
                                            g(U.S)+U
                                                            81)
                                 i                            i
where q is quasi-rents per worker (Q/N). The first term represents the

marginal benefit in increased quasi-rents per worker and the second term

represents the marginal cost of increased unionization. The sufficient

second order conditions for a maximum are that the marginal benefit of
                                       .7-


unionization be decreasing in U (82h/8U C 0) and the marginal cost of

unionization be increasing in U (ö2g/8U > 0).

      Equation (111.5) implicitly determines the optimal extent of

unionization (U;) in industry j as:

      (111.6)       U; —

where aif/aq. is positive. Thus, the optimal extent of unionization is

increasing in the quantity of quasi-rents per worker available in the

industry. Furthermore, aid/as C 0 as long as the marginal cost of

organization does not decrease with employer resistance.6

      Suppose now that employer resistance is a (unspecified) function of

quasi-rents per worker. Equation (111.6) can be rewritten as

      (111.7)       U —    f(q,   S(q)),
so that the total derivative of the optimal extent of unionization with

respect to a change in quasi-rents per worker is

      (111.8)       du;,dq — 8U/Oq +       au/8S.dsdq.
The first term is positive (the optimal extent of unionization increases with

quasi-rents holding resistance fixed). The first part of the second term is

negative (the optimal extent of unionization decreases with employer

resistance holding quasi-rents fixed) under fairly general conditions. The

last term is crucial. Clearly, a sufficient condition for the optimal extent

of unionization to increase with quasi-rents (d!f/dq 0) is that employer

resistance not increase with quasi-rents (dS/dq s 0). The optimal extent




6This is a sufficient condition. The necessary and sufficient condition for
au/as < 0 is that (Bg/8S3 + U'8g2(U.S)/OUOSJ > 0. The first ten is
positive by assumption. The cross-partial derivative in the second term is
the change in the marginal cost of organization with employer resistance. It
is reasonable that this is positive.
                                                       -8-

  of    unionization will increase with quasi-rents
                                                                              even when employer resistance

  increases with quasi-rents so long as employer resistance                              does not increase
  too
        sharply (dS/dq < -8U;,8               / ÔU/8S            ).




  IV.       &wlover Decision Process 4 QDtimpl                            Employer Resistance

          Consider a simple model of employer behavior where                           the firm   gets   the
  residual of the quasi-rents after the union has extracted labor's share net

 of the costs of resisting unionization. This is

                           V —
          (IV.l)
                                    Q•flh(U)J -              S

 normalizing       the price of a unit         of   resistance to unionization to one. The
 firm will choose the optimal resistance level so as to maximize V subject

 to the constraint that the union will choose the extent of unionization

 optimally conditionsi on the resistance offered
                                                                              by the employer (equation
 111.6). The relevant constrained maximization is:

                          L         wax     Q[l-h(U)J
         (IV.2)                 —                                -    S   +   A[U - f(4S)]
 The first order conditions for a maximum                    are
                          o —                         -i-A
                                -Q•Oh(U)/au
         (IV.3)           0 — -1      -AOf(q,S)/35
                          o— U        -
                                           f(q,S).
The first condition defines A
                                            as the shadow price to the firm of an increase
in unionization The second condition determines the optimal
                                                            quantity of
employer resistance as        an    equality between the marginal cost of resistance
(normalized to one) and         the       marginal effect of resistance on the extent of
unionization times the shadow price of
                                                      unionization. The third condition is
the constraint that the union chooses the extent of unionization
                                                                                             optimally.
        Since the optimal extent of unionization as chosen by the union (the f

function) depends on first derivatives of the rent extraction function and

the cost of organization
                                function1 the firm's optimal choice of resistance
                                      -9-


depends on second derivatives of these functions (see the second of equations

IV.3). Thus, any àomparative statics regarding the firms decision (most

centrally, öS/8q4) will depend on third derivatives of the rent extraction

and cost of organization functions. While me may know a bit about first

derivatives and are willing to make assumptions about some second

derivatives, it is unrealistic to pretend knowledge of third derivatives.

Thus, we cannot make any predictions based on this model about how employer

resistance will respond to a change in quasi-rents.

      On the one hand, it may be the case that because an increase in

quasi-rents makes unionization more costly (more dollars are lost at any

level of U), employers will fight unionization harder. On the other hand,

it may be that an increase in quasi-rents reduces the effectiveness of

fighting unions because of the shape of the organization cost function so

that employers will resist unionization less.

      The conventional wisdom (e.g., Freeman 1985) seems to be that

employers, in the face of economic threats and increased competition, resist

unionization more strongly. While this outcome is consistent with the simple

model laid out here, the general argument in support of the view that

employer resistance increases with a decline in quasi-rents runs along

different lines than our model. Essentially, it is argued that in a

competitive environment firms cannot afford to live with unioni. If a firm

becomes unionized, it may not be able to continue operating. Thus, the

management resists unions more strongly. Implicit in this argument is one or

both of two possibilities. First, firms may share rents with unions

more-or-less voluntarily when times are good (Akerlof, 1982). Second,

managers of firms threatened with unionization in a time of increased

competition may spend more resources fighting unions than is optimal from the

shareholders' perspective in order to continue the firm in operation and/or
                                             - 10-

  maintain their positions as managers.

        The conclusion is that it is an empirical matter as to whether employer

  resistance increases or decreases with quasi-rents. This also makes it

  difficult to make an unambiguous prediction
                                                      regarding how the optimal extent
  of unionization is related to quasi-rents. What
                                                             we can say is that the
  optimal extent of unionization is positively related to
                                                                       quasi-rents unless
 employer resistance increases too rapidly. One
                                                            unambiguous prediction is
 that if we find that employers resist unionization
                                                               more strongly as
 quasi-rents decline (OS/Oq < 0) then it is the case that the optimal
                                                                      extent
 of unionization is positively related to quasi-rents. At least one of the

 optimal responses to an increase in q must          be    positive.



 V. EmDirical SDecificatimj Union Orzanizin Activity 4 Emolover Unfair
    Labor Practices

       The system of equations in IV.3 determines a Nash equilibriuji between
 the union and the employer that determinces the extent of unionization and
quantity of employer resistance. The quantity of organizing activity is                used
to move the actual extent of unionization toward the
                                                     optimal extent of
unionization. In a simple adjustzAent model          the   quantity of organizing
activity   in period t is a function of the
                                                 change in the optimal extent of
unionization between period t-l and period t. More formally, let

      (V.1)           Ait —A(Uit -if
                                     it—I.

where A represents the
                          quantity of organizing activity in industry j and
year t. The function A(•) is an increasing function of the change in the

optimal extent of unionization This does not imply that there will be no

organizing activity if the optimal extent of unionization is unchanged.

There is likely to be a general "depreciation" of the stock of union jobs
                                                                          as
nonunion fins enter   an industry   and older union firms shrink. Thus, we
                                                         -11-

expect    that A(O) > 0.

        A first order approximation to the change in the optimal extent of

unionization based on equation (111.6) is

         (V.2)                  -               — fl +   flaq

where 6q is the change in total quasi-rents per worker in industry                        j
between   period t-l and period t and ft0 and fl are parameters. Assuming a

linear form for the function A() and an additive error yields

        (V.3)          A —          a
                                        0
                                            +   ft
                                                 0    1 1 it ]
                                                   + a (ft Aq    + c
                           it                                          it

where a and a are positive parameters and                          is the random component.

Given a measure of organizing activity and data on changes in total rents per

worker, the parameters of this model can be estimated with standard linear

techniques. Note that it is not possible to identify both the a's and the

fl's. A normalized version of (IV.3) is

        (V.4)          Ait —y0              +8q
                                             1 Jt
                                                  +c       it

where the "s are the parameters to be estimated.

        The central measure of organization activity used in our analysis is

the fraction of the currently unorganized workforce that are involved in

representation   elections- -E/M, where E represents the number of workers
in   potential bargaining units where elections were held in industry j in year
t and H is the quantity of nonunion employment in industry j                      and   year t.
We call our measure the organization effort rate (OER) because it is the
relative quantity of election activity undertaken. One problem with our
measure   that we cannot address is that it misses organization activity that

does not progress to the point of an election.




'Dickens and Leonard (1985) consider this measure in their analysis of the
decline of unionization. Voos (1983) uses data on direct union expenditures
on organization to analyze union organizing activity.
                                           -12-

         In   our empirical analysis we use the logit transformation of the

 organization effort rate as the key dependent variable. The resulting

 regression is

         (V.5)            logit(E/M) — X.y        +   aq   +

 where         is a vector of variables affecting the organization effort rate and

      is a vector of related coefficients. The vector X includes such

variables as a time trend, the rate of change of real CNP, and industry

effects. The key parameter of interest in the model is              y•
         We   cannot make an unambiguous prediction for the sign of             unless
quasi-rents      and employer resistance to unionization negatively related. In

this case y would be positive. However, if quasi-rents and employer

resistance to unionization are positively related, then                  could be positive

or negative according to our theoretical model.

         Employer resistance to unionization takes many forms that are very

difficult to measure. Some examples are (1) higher wages, (2) creation of

union-like grievance, job posting, and promotion mechanisms, (3)               legal

discouragement of worker interest in unions, and (4) illegal discouragement

of worker interest in unions. We focus on the last of these techniques as

measured by the number of unfair labor practice claims filed by unions

alleging      illegal activities by employers in the course of organization
campaigns.       The particular measure we use    is the number of claims      filed (F)
per   eligible voter (E). This ratio (F/E). while it measures                  only a

part of employer resistance, captures the intensity            of overt employer
resistance of a certain type and at a certain stage of the organization
process.      We call our employer resistance measure the unfair labor practice

rate (UFLPR).

      In the empirical analysis we use the logarithm of the number of
unfair labor practices per eligible worker. The resulting regression is
                                              -13-


           (V.6)            log(F/E) — X60 + 61r +
where X is a vector of variables affecting the resistance level and-
            it

6       is a vector of related coefficients. The vector X includes such
    0                                                         it

variables as a time trend, the rate of change of real CNP, and industry

effects. The key parameter of interest in this regression is 6. Note that

this specification uses the level of quasi-rents per worker rather than the

change.          This is because the theory in section IV suggests     that employer

resistance         to unionization is a function of the level of quasi-rents because

the loss to the employer from unionization is related to the level of

quasi-rents. In contrast, organization activity is a measure of the change

in the optimal extent of unionization, so it is a function of the change in

quasi -rents.

           Once again, we cannot make an unambiguous theoretical prediction

regarding the sign of £.            However, determining its sign empirically is

central to understanding how union organizing and the optimal extent of

unionization are related to quasi-rents.



VI. fl fl g4 Measurement                 Jy Variables

           The   model is implemented using data from    1955 through 1986 for

thirty-five         industries at   approximately the two-digit (SIC) industry group

level of aggregation. The industry groups are listed in Table L They

include all of the manufacturing sector, wholesale and retail trade, selected

transportation industries, communication, utilities, mining, and selected

service industries. Parts of the transportation sector (air and rail) were

not included because they are not covered by the National Labor Relations

Act. Parts of the service sector were not included because there was

insufficient information to compute organizing effort, unfair labor practice

rates, or quasi-rents per worker.                                                      -
                                              Table 1:
           Industries Included in Analysts and Opportunity Wage Index
 Name                               SIC Industries          Wage Index
 Food and Tobacco                          20, 21              1.044
 Textile Kills                             22                  0.880
 Apparel                                   23                  0.791
 Lumber and Wood Products                           24                1.032
 Furniture                                          25                0.961
 Paper                                              26                1.126
 Printing and Publishing                            27                0.996
 Chemicals                                          28                1.164
 Petroleum Products                                 29                1.296
 Rubber and     Plastic                             30                1.026
 Leather                                           31                 0.833
 Stone, Clay, and Glass                            32                1.105
 Primary   Metals                                  33                1.194
 Ferrous Metals                                    34                1.136
Machinery, exc. Electrical                         35                1.176
 Electrical Equipment                              36                1.088
Aircraft                                           372               1.214
Transport. Equip. (cxc. air)                       37 (except 372)   1.214
Instruments                                        38                1.137
Misc. Manufacturing                                39                0.965
Mining, exc. Fuels                                 10, 14            1.121
Coal   Mining                                      12                1.154
Wholesale Trade                                    50                1.104
Retail Trade                                       52-59             0.829
Finance, Insurance, and       Real   Estate        60-65             0.994
Highway    Freight   and   Warehousing            42                 1. 146
Other Transport. (cxc. rail, auto, air)           41, 44, 46, 47     1.086
Communications                                    48                 1.061
Utilities                                         49                 1.209
Oil, and Gas Extraction                           13                 1.174
Hotel Services                                    70                 0.744
Amusement Services                                79                 0.784
Health Services                                   80                 0.825
Zusiness Services                                 73                 0.968
Motion Pictures                                   78                 1.001
                                     -14-


A. Organization Effort Rate

      The numerator of the organization effort rate, the number of workers

eligible to vote in representation elections by industry and year, is

available for cases closed by the NLRR in each industry in each year from the

annual reports of the NIlE. The denominator of the organization effort rate,

nonunion employment by industry and year. is more difficult to measure.

Average annual employment by industry was extracted from the National Income

and Product Accounts tables for two-digit industry. To overcome the absence

of published data on union coverage by industry prior to 1973 we developed

the imputation procedure described below.

      Data on the union status of workers by industry are available from the

May Current Population Surveys from 1973 through 1985 (with the exception of

1982). Prior to 1973 there is no industry breakdown of union status. The

Bureau of Labor Statistics (1980) published an annual time series on union

membership for the private nonagricultural labor force for the period from

1955 through 1978. An industry-level times series on unionization was

computed for the 1955 through 1978 period by a two step procedure: 1) We

assumed that the inter-industry mix of unionization was unchanged over this

period and had the values computed from the May 1973-75 CPS's and 2) We

adjusted the extent of unionization in each industry every year so that the

employment weighted average extent of unionization across industries matched

the total reported by the ELS for that year.' After 1978 we used fractions




'The assumption of unchanging mix of unionization across industries is
troublesome for a study that is focused on industry level explanations for
the decline in unionization. However, we are using our constructed series
only to normalize the level of organizing activity and not as a central
variable to be explained. Our series is not adequate to serve as the key
dependent variable, but it is adequate to scale the level of organizing
activity.
                                            -15-


 unionized computed as three year averages from the May CPS's.9 Specifically,

 we used the average of the current year and the first two lags of the

 fraction unionized by industry in order to reduce measurement error caused
                                                                                  by
 relatively small sample sizes in some industry cells.

       Figure 1 contains a graph for each industry of the organization effort

 rate by year. These graphs illustrate (1) the dramatic decline in

organization activity since the mid-1970's and (2) that this decline seems to

be present in almost all industries. One word of caution in
                                                              interpreting
these graphs (and the graphs in the figures that follow) is that the     y-axes
all have different scales so that comparisons of magnitudes across industries

are not meaningful. As a benchmark, we ran a simple regression weighted by

nonunion employment of the logit transformation of the organization effort
rate on a time trend (T), (RT) an additional (splined) trend after 1973 (RT),
and a complete set of industry effects.1° The trend coefficients from this

regression are:

             logit(OER) — Xfl +    .0183t   -   .11ORT
                                  (.0042) (.0081)
where the numbers in parentheses are standard errors and the R1   from   the

regression was .812. What we find is a positive trend through 1973 and a

sharp decline after 1973. One important test of the role of product market

competition is the extent to which controlling for changes in quasi-rents can

account for the post-1973 decline in the organization effort rate.




2We obtained 1982 values for unionization by industry as a straight average
of the 1981 and 1983 values. Recall that the CPS did not contain any
information on union status in 1982.

10The time trend equals zero in 1954, one in 1955, etc. The additional time
trend equals zero before 1974, one in 1974, two in 1975, etc.
                                           -16-

 B. Unfair    Labor Practice Rate

          The unfair labor practice rate is defined as the number of unfair labor

 practice charges per worker eligible to vote in NIRB supervised

 representation elections. The number of unfair labor practice charges is

 available for cases received by the N1.RB in each industry in each year from

 the annual reports of the NIlE. The number of workers eligible to vote in

 representation elections is the same number used in the numerator of the

 organization effort rate."

          Figure 2 contains a graph for each industry of the unfair labor

practice rate by year. These graphs illustrate the general increase (at an

 increasing rate) in the rate of unfair labor practices. There seems to be an

unusual, spike in unfair labor practice charges evident in a number of

industries in 1983 and/or 1984.12 As a benchmark we ran a simple regression

weighted by the number of eligible voters of the log of the unfair labor

practice rate on a time trend (T). an additional (splirted) trend after 1973

(RT), and complete set of industry effects:'3

                log(U}tPR) — X4 + .0636T + .03l8RT

                                    (.0025) (.0060)
where the numbers in parentheses are standard errors and the P.2 from the

regression was .815. We find a strong positive trend through 1973 that




'1The unfair labor practice charges are not perfectly temporally linked to the
elections with which they are associated. There can be substantial lags
between when election cases are closed and when the associated unfair labor
practice charges are resolved. Given limitations in the way the data are
reported, our most sensible option in computing the ratio is to use the
number of unfair labor practice charges received for the numerator and the
number of workers eligible to vote in elections in cases closed for the
denominator.


     rechecked the data and could find no problems.

'3These   trends are defined in the previous note.
                  -                                   -17-

 increases by about fifty percent after 1973. Rerunning this regression

 omitting years after 1982 (and the unusual spikes) actually results in a

 larger estimated increase in the trend after 1973:

                  log(UFLPR)        —
                                        Xfl +    061.9T + .0402RT
                                                (.0026) (.0076)
where the R2 was .804. Thus, the increase in the trend after 1973 is not due

 to the spikes in the unfair labor practice rate after 1982. Another

 important test of the role of product market competition is the extent to

which controlling for quasi-rents can account for the increase over time in

the unfair labor practice rate.

C. Quasi-Rents per Worker

         The   definition of total quasi-rents (Q) in industry j and year t is
revenues (REVit) less raw materials costs MAT less labor costs evaluated at
                                           it
the opportunity wage of the workers (tf):
         (VI.l)           Q
                              it   —REV
                                             it -MAT
                                                   it -WN
                                                        it ,jt
where N is total employment."                    The measure was developed at the firm level
and    aggregated to the industry level using a procedure described below.

         The firm level data            on   revenues (from 1955 to 1986) were computed from

the universe of 6,300 finns contained in the Standard and Poor's COMPUSTAT

Annual    Industrial    File, Annual           Research   File, and the supplemental historical

data files available from Standard and Poor's that contain information for

fiscal years prior to 1967. The firms were assigned to two-digit SIC

industries by Standard and Poor's on the basis of product line information

from the 10K reports. Revenues were defined as net sales--the amount                     of
actual   billings     to customers for regular            sales completed during the period



14Note that this measure of quasi-rents does not                    subtract out the opportunity
cost of capital. Thus, we are implicitly
is fixed and that its return is potentiallyassuming that all existing capital
                                            appropriable by the union.
                                          -18-


 reduced by cash discounts, trade discounts, returned sales, and allowances

 for which credit is given to customers.

        Since the firms in the COMPUSTAT universe are only a subset of the

fins in the industry, a measure of total quasi-rents in the industry cannot

be derived directly from these data. However, we are interested in

quasi-rents per worker so that the quasi-rents per worker in each firm i in

industry j in year t           can   be measured as

        (VI.2)         Q1jt/N1jt —          - MAT     -W
                                                            N
where variables subscripted ijt are the firm level analogs of the industry

level data. The industry average quasi-rents per worker were computed as the

employment weighted average of the fin level quasi-rents per worker. More

formally, this is

        (VI.3)        Q/N —
                                     w. IJt±tJ
where        is the employment weight computed as
        (VI.4)        0ijt —   N1/) N1j
where   the summation is over the i firms    in   industry j in year t that are
contained in the COMPUSTAT sample.
        Since our analysis is conducted at the industry level, some alternative
measures   of quasi-rents per worker were available from the National Income

and Product Accounts (NIPAs). We developed our measures from COMPUSTAT firm

level   data because Standard and    Poor's sampling frame is more appropriate for
our   model than the NIPA sampling frame. COMFUSTAT includes current and

historical information on successful firms. By combining the current,

research and historical data files, we constructed samples of successful

firms in operation during the years 1955 to 1986. The NIPA's include

information from all establishments that operated during the year in the

particular industry. Establishments are sampled at different rates but the
                                            -19-


NIPA totals are designed to be representative of the industry and not just

the successful firms in the industry. Clearly, only ongoing (i.e.

successful) businesses can be organized. It is important from out

perspective to use quasi-rent measures based upon firms at risk to face

representation elections, and COMPUSTAT firms meet this criterion.

        Because of U.S. accounting conventions, only data on revenues are

available consistently at the firm level. We assume that raw materials

costs and opportunity wages show only industry and time variation. Thus, we

can suppress the i subscripts on these variables so that

        (VI.5)             —                   -
                                 0±j•              MAT3J/Njt
       Raw materials costs were computed using the direct requirements per

dollar of gross output tables by industry from the Input-Output Tables of the

United States for 1958, 1963, 1967, 1972, 1977, and l982.' These tables

provide information on the fraction of gross output in each industry that

comes from other industries. Let v represent the fraction of gross output

in industry j that comes from other industries. The total raw materials

costs in industry j were then computed as

                      MAX —v REV
        (VI.6)
                           it     it it
which is the share of net revenues that flow to other industries as purchases

of   intermediate goods.
       Note that   1-v is the fraction of gross output in industry j that is

value added.     The definition of quasi-rents per worker can be rewritten as
       (vI.7)              —                                       -
                                (1.v).( E                      J




'5The data for years 1955 to 1957 were taken from the 1958 Input-Output
tables.The data for 1983 to 1986 were taken from the 1982 Input-Output
tables. The data for other years for which no table is available were     based
on linearly interpolated values between the two closest tables.
                                               -20-


which is value added per worker less the opportunity wage of the workers.

The weights (w), revenues (REV), and employment (N) are derived from

the COMPUSTAT data. The value added share (l-v) is derived from the

input-output tables. All that remains is computation of the opportunity

wage.

        The industry opportunity wage is the average wage that workers in the

industry could earn in their best alternative jobs. As such, it has two key

sources of variation. First, there is inter-industry variation in the skill

levels and demographic characteristics of workers that are related to wages.

Second, there is time series variation in the level of wages. It is not

possible to get detailed data on earnings by worker characteristics for the

entire time period needed, so a two step procedure was used to compute the

opportunity wage.

        In the first stage, an industry wage index was computed for the

1973-1975 period. Data on earnings and other characteristics of

private-sector workers from the May 1973, May 1974, and May 1975 Current

Population Surveys was pooled. An earnings function of the standard form,

        (VI.8)        lnW —    X $   +c
                           U    U         ii

for workers i in industry j was estimated using this sample. The X vector

contains measures of sex, race, marital status, the interaction of sex and

marital status, education, potential experience, the interaction of sex and

potential experience, nine-category region, and one-digit occupation. No

measures of union status or industry were included in this regression so that

the predicted wages derived using this sample would be representative of what

a worker with &   given   set of observable characteristics could earn elsewhere

in the economy! For the same reason, the CPS sample includes workers in all




16lmplicit in this treatment is the assumption that union and inter-industry
                                            -21-


industries and not simply those in the thirty-five industries used directly

in the analysis.

          The estimated coefficients of this regression were then used to compute

an average opportunity wage for workers in each industry as

          (VI.9)        £OJ) — exp(XB + 5;2)

where X is the average value of the X in industry j and          is the

estimated residual variance from the regression. This is converted to an

index value for each industry (I) by dividing E(W) by the employment

weighted average of the predicted wage across all industries. The last

column of Table 1 contains values of this index for the thirty-five

industries used in our analysis.

          In the second stage of the procedure our measure of the industry annual

opportunity wage for industry j in year t is computed as the product of our

wage index, average hourly earnings for private non-agricultural workers

(ARE), and average annual hours measured as average weekly hours for private

nonagricultural workers (AWH) times 52. This is

          (VI.lO)             — 52(1 •ARE •AWH ).
                        it.         i    t   t

Thus, our measure of the opportunity wage has cr?ss-section variation based

only on 1973-1975 differences in worker characteristics, and there is no

industry-specific time series variation. However, as long as the industry

skill mix and the returns to skill are not changing very rapidly, our measure

will capture important inter-industry and time-series variation in the

opportunity wage of workers.




wage differentials do not reflect unmeasured individual skills. To the
extent that they do reflect unmeasured individual skills, the correct
procedure would be to include them in the regressions and in the predictions.
See Murphy and Topel (1987), Dickens and Katz (1987), and Cibbons and Katz
(1989).
                                             -22-


         It is useful to examine the time series by industry of real quasi-rents

 per worker and its components. Recall from equation VI.7 that quasi-rents

 per worker was computed as the difference between value added per worker and

 the opportunity wage. Figures 3 and 4 contain graphs by year for each

 industry of the sum      of   the first three lags of real value added per worker

 and   the   sum of the first three lags of the real opportunity wage. The         sum   of
 three lags is used here and in all computations regarding
                                                                   quasi-rents and its
 components in order to smooth the data intertemporally. Figure 3 shows that

 there is quite a bit of variation in the time patterns of real value added

per worker across industries though many industries show a period of increase

through the l970's. Figure 4 makes clear the fact that there is
                                                                          only
aggregate time series variation in the real opportunity wage. Every
                                                                                 industry
shows the same time series pattern which reflects
                                                           movements in average hourly

earnings in private nonagricultural employment. Essentially, aggregate real

wages were rising until the mid-l970's and falling thereafter. The levels

vary due to differences in skill across industries.

        Figure 5 presents a graph for each industry of the sum of the first

three lags of real quasi-rents per worker by year. Similarly, figure 6

presents a graph for each industry of the sum        of   the first three lags of the

change in real quasi-rents per worker by year. While both figures show a

large amount     of                                                  is not
                      variation in the time patterns across industries, it

clear how these relate to the organization effort rates in figure 1 or to the

unfair labor practice rates in figure 2. This is a focus of the econometric
analysis     in the next section.

D.   Other Measures
       Aside from the splined time trend variables and a set of industry dummy

variables, only one other variable is used in the analysis. This is the rate
of change of real GtIP computed as the first difference of log CNP in 1982
                                      -23-


 dollars, and it is included in the econometric analysis in the next section

 to capture aggregate cyclical time series factors.



VII. Estimation     the Orvanization Effort      Model

       Table 2 contains an ordinary least squares (OLS) analysis of the

organization effort rate. The analysis uses 911 observations on industry-

years with complete data on the variables needed for the analysis. This

covers some or all of the years 1959-1986 for the thirty-five industries

 listed in table jh7 The first column of the table contains means and

standard deviations of the variables. The dependent variable is the logit

transformation of the organization effort rate. All models include industry

fixed effects, and all estimations are weighted by non-union employment.

      The second and third columns of the table contain benchmark estimates

of the model. The model in column 2 includes the rate of change in real GNP

plus a splined (at 1973) time trend. This model illustrates the average

modest rate of growth of organization effort through the early 1970's and the

sharp decline thereafter. The model in column 3 includes a complete set of

year fixed effects in place of the three time-series variables (the splined

trend and the CNP variable). This model fits the data somewhat better than

the more parsimonious specification in column 2 (p-value <.0001).

      The model in column four introduces the change in real quasi-rents   per
worker. The change in real quasi-rents and the organization effort rate are




17The year 1959 is the first year for which three lags on the change in real
quasi-rents are available given that quasi-rent data are not available prior
to 1955. There were complete data froit 1959 through 1986 for thirty of the
thirty-five industries. Data were not available to compute the organization
effort rate in some early years for the other five industries. The missing
observations are: 1) hotel services, 1959-1971; 2) amusement services,
1959-1975; 3) health services, 1959-1963; 4) business services, 1959-1971; 5)
motion pictures1 1959-1974.
                                          TABLE 2
                Models of the Effect of the Change in Industry Quasi-rents
                         per Worker on the Organization Effort Rate
                             (35 Industries from 1959 to 1986)

                                     Dependent Variable
                  logit(Eligible to Vote in Election per Nonunion Worker)

                            (1)                  (2)         (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)
                            Mean       Coeff.   Coeff.   Coeff.   Coeff.   Coeff.
 Independent Var          (St.Dev.) (t-stat) (t-stat) (t-stat) (t-stat) (t-stat)


Change in real, quasi        .3462                                   .0433          .0409
rents/worker, $000,         (2.448)                                (4.97)         (4.62)
sum of 1st 3 lags

Change in real value   .3458
                                                                                                  .0432
adder/worker, $000. (2.475)
sum of 1st 3 lags                                                                               (4.97)


Change in real opp.         -   .000469                                                          -   .150
wage, $000.                 (.2578)
sun of 1st 3 lags
                                                                                                (1.56)


Trend                                       .0222                    .0235                        .0218
(1954 —    0)                             (3.68)                   (3.95)                       (3.54)
Recent Trend                               -   .116                -.116                         -   .116
(1974—1)                              (11.6)                     (11.7)                        (11.8)
(—0 before 1973)

Change in log              0.030          -1.89                    -1.499                       -1.35
real GNP                  (0.024)         (2.22)                   (1.78)                       (1.58)

Industry controls                          Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
Year controls                              No          Yes          No            Yes             No


Root Mif                                       .586       .562      .578           .555              .578

R-squared                                      .805       .826      .810           .830              .811

Residual Deg. Freedom                      873         849          872           848             871


                                                  Notes

a. All, means1 standard deviations, and estimates are derived weighted by
   nonunion employment. All regressions include a constant.
b. Mean of dependent variable weighted by nonunion employment — -5.17
   (standard deviation 1.30).
c. The overall sample size is 911 industry-years.
                                         -24-


 significantly positively related. The estimates suggest that a one thousand

 dollar increase in the change in quasi-rents per worker implies a 4.3 percent

 increase in the odds that a nonunion worker will be involved in an election.

 Because the weighted average organization effort rate in the sample is so low

 (.0119), the estimates also imply that a one thousand dollar increase in the

 change in quasi-rents per worker is related to a 4.3 percent increase (from

 1.19 percent to 1.24 percent) in the probability that a nonunion worker will

 be involved in an election.

       Despite the statistical significance of the change in quasi-rents in

 explaining the organization effort rate, results clearly show that

 the decline in the organization effort rate since the early 1970's cannot be

 explained by changes in quasi-rents. The estimates in column four show as

 large a negative trend after 1973 as the estimates that do not include the

 measure of change in quasi-rents.

       The estimates in columns five and six investigate how robust the

 finding of a significant positive relationship between the organization

 effort rate and the change in quasi-rents is to variations in specification.

 The specification in column five uses year fixed effects in place of the

 three aggregate time series variables. While the more parsimonious model           in

 column 4 can be rejected (p-value <.0001), the estimate of the coefficient         of

 changes in real quasi-rents in virtually unchanged and is still significantly

greater than      zero.
      The specification is column six breaks the change in quasi-rents into

its two   major   components and allows each to have its own   coefficient.   The

estimates are consistent with the model in that the change in real

• value-added per worker has a significant positive coefficient while the

change in the real opportunity wage has a (marginally) significant negative

ffect of somewhat greater magnitude. The hypothesis that the change in
                                     -25-


quasi-rents is the appropriate variable cannot be rejected at conventional

levels (p-value—.266).



VIII. Estimation j Unfair Labor Practice gg Model
      Table 3, which has the same structure as table 2, contains an
                                                                      ordinary
least squares (OLS) analysis of the unfair labor practice rate. The
                                                                       analysis

uses 966 observations on industry-years with complete data on the variables

needed for the analysis. This covers some or all of the years 1958-1986 for

the thirty-five industries listed in table L1' The first column of the table

contains means and standard deviations of the variables. The dependent

variable is the natural logarithm of the unfair labor practice rate. All

models include industry fixed effects, and all estimates are weighted by the

number of eligible voters.

      The second and third columns of the table contain benchmark estimates

of the model. The model in column 2 includes the rate of change in real GNP

plus a splined (at 1973) time trend. This model illustrates the steady rate

of growth of the unfair labor practice rate through the early 1970's and the

sharp increase since that period. The model in column 3 includes a complete

set of year fixed effects in place of the three time-series variables. This

model fits the data somewhat better than the more parsimonious specification

in column 2 (p-value <.0001).

      The model in column four introduces the level of real quasi-rents per




1The year 1958 is the first year for which three lags on real quasi-rents are
available given that quasi-rent data are not available prior to 1955. There
were complete data from 1959 through 1986 for thirty of the thirty-five
industries. Data were not available to compute the unfair labor practice rate
in some early years for the other five industries. The missing observations
are: 1) hotel services, 1958-1963; 2) amusement services, 1958-1963; 3)
health services, 1958-1963; 4) business services, 1958-1971; 5) motion
pictures, 1958-1974.
                                      TABLE 3
            Models of the Effect of the Change in Industry Quasi-rents
                   per Worker on the Unfair Labor Practice Rate
                         (35 Industries from 1959 to 1986)

                                  Dependent Variable
                   log(Unfair Labor Practices per Eligible Voter)

                         (1)         (2)            (3)           (4)       (5)     (6)
                      Mean          Coeff.   Coeff.   Coeff.   Coeff.   Coeff.
Independent Variable (St.Dev.)     (t-stat) (t-stat) (t-stat) (t-stat) (t-stat)


Real quasi-rents   18.364                                    .0127        .0116
per worker, $000, (18.890)                                 (5.56)       (5.22)
sum of 1st 3 lags

Real value added   34.645)                                                          .0133
per worker, $000, (19.060)                                                        (5.80)
sum of 1st 3 lags

Real Opportunity       16.281.                                                     - .126
wage, $000,            (2.444)                                                    (2.50)
sum of 1st 3 lags

Trend                               .0465                    .0408                  .0684
(1954 —    0)                    (15.3)                   (12.9)                  (5.40)

Recent Trend                        .0579                    .0569                  .00880
(1974—1)                          (9.29)                   (9.27)                 (0.396)
(—0 before 1973)

Change in log           0.30        .972                   1.03                     .642
real CNP               (0.023)    (1.84)                  (1.97)                  (1.11)

Industry controls                   Yes       Yes           Yes          Yes       Yes
Year controls                       No        Yes           No           Yes       No


Root MSE                            .371          .355      .365         .350       .364

R-squared                           .808          .830      .815         .835       .816

Residual Deg. Freedom               928       903           927          902       926


                                          Notes

a. All means, standard deviations, and estimates are derived weighted by
   the number of eligible voters. All regressions include a constant.-
b. Mean of dependent variable weighted by the number of eligible voters —
   -3.78 (standard deviation 0.831).
c. The overall sample size is 966 industry-years.
                                         -26-


worker. There is a significant positive relation between real quasi-rents

and employer resistance as measured by the unfair labor practice rate. The

estimates suggest that a one thousand dollar increase in real quasi-rents per

worker implies a 1.27 percent increase in the number of unfair labor

practices per eligible voter. At the mean of the sample (3.3 unfair labor

practice charges per 100 eligible voters), a one thousand dollar increase in

quasi-rents per worker implies approximately an additional one unfair labor

practice per 1000 eligible voters.

       Once again, despite the statistical significance of quasi-rents in

explaining the unfair labor practice rate, the results clearly show that

neither the steady increase in the unfair labor practice rate throughout the

sample nor the sharp increase since the early 1970's can be explained by

quasi-rents. The estimates in column four show as large a positive trend

both before and after 1973 as the estimates that do not include the measure

quasi-rents.

       The estimates in columns five and six investigate how robust the

finding of a significant positive relation between the unfair labor practice

rate and real quasi-rents is to variations in specification. The

specification in column five uses year fixed effects in place of the three

aggregate time series variables. While the more parsimonious model in column

4 can be rejected (p-value <.0001), the estimate of the coefficient of

changes in real quasi-rents falls only slightly and is still significantly

greater than zero.

       The specification is column six breaks the change in quasi-rents into

its two   major   components and allows each to have its own   coefficient.   The

estimates   are consistent with the model in that the real value-added per
worker has a significant positive coefficient and the real opportunity wage
has   a significantly negative effect. The hypothesis that real quasi-rents is
                                     -27-


the appropriate variable can be rejected at conventional levels

(p-value—.025). This is due to the finding that the negative coefficient of

the real opportunity wage is significantly larger than the positive

coefficient of real value-added per worker. The point estimates suggest (1)

that a one thousand increase in real value-added per worker implies a 1.3

percent increase in unfair labor practices per eligible voter while (2) the

same one thousand dollar increase in the real (annual) opportunity wage

implies an approximately 13 percent decrease in unfair labor practices per

eligible voter.

      One interpretation of our finding is that quasi-rents matter in the

determination of employer resistance, but there is a negative relationship

between the opportunity wage of the workers and employer resistance even

after accounting for quasi-rents. This suggests that employers resist

unionization by low skilled workers more than unionization by high skilled

workers. This may be because resistance is more effective among low skilled

workers or unionization is more costly (in terms of the rents extracted)

among low skilled workers.



IX. Concluding Remarks

      The evidence presented here is consistent with the view that changes in

the total quasi-rents per worker in an industry play an important role in

unions' decisions regarding organizing activity. When quasi-rents per worker

increase, unions want to increase the extent of unionization, and the result

is more organizing activity.

     We also find a significant positive relationship between the level of

quasi-rents per worker and employer resistance in the form of unfair labor

practices. The theory we developed was ambiguous on this point, and the

finding of a positive relationship also makes the theory ambiguous with
                                     -28-


regard to how union organizing activity is related to quasi-rents.

Nonetheless, as an empirical matter, we find positive relationships between

quasi-rents and both union organizing activity and employer resistance.

      Although the results are in accord with our model- -quasi-rents are an

important determinant of union organizing activity and employer

resistance- -the results are also disappointing because changes in the

quasi-rents available to split between workers and firms do not seem to

account for more than a small part of (I) the decline of union organizing

activity since the mid 1970's or (2) the dramatic increase in employer

resistance to unionization since the mid-1970's. A complete understanding of

the decline of unionization in the United States lies elsewhere.
                                      -29-

                                  REFERENCES

 Abowd, John M. "The Effects of Wage Bargains on the Stock Market Value of the
       Firm" American Economic Review 74, no. 4 (September 1989): 774-800.

 Akerlof, George A. "Labor Contracts and Partial Gift Exchange," Quarterly
       Journal of Economics. 100 (November 1982): 543-569.

 Brown, James N. and One7 Ashenfelter. "Testing the Efficiency of Employment
       Contracts," Journal of Political Economy 94, no. 3, part 2 (June 1986):
       S40-S87.

 Carruth, Alan A. and Andrew J. Oswald. Miner's Wages in Post-War Britain: An
       Application of a Model of Trade Union Behavior," University of Kent,
       mimeo (December 1983).

Dertouzos, James N. and John H. Pencavel. "Wage and Employment Determination
      Under Trade Unionism: The International Typographical Union," Journal
      of Political Economy 89 (1980): 1162-81.              -




Dickens, William T. and Lawrence Katz. "Interindustry Wage Differences and
      Theories of Wage Determination," NBER Working Paper No. 2271, June
      1987.

Dickens, William T. and Jonathan S. Leonard. "Accounting for the Decline in
      Union Membership, 1950-1980," Industrial and Labor Relations Review 38
      (April 1985): 323-334.

Dunlop, John T. Wage Determination Under Trade Unions, New York. Macmillan Co.
      1944.

Farber. Henry S. "Individual Preferences and Union Wage Determination: The
      Case of the United Mine workers," Journal of Political Economy 86
      (October 1978): 923-42.

Farber, Henry S. "The Extent of Unionization in the United States," in t.
      Kochan (ed.), Challenges and Choices Facing American Labor. Cambridge,
      MA. MIT Press, 1985.

Farber, Henry S. "The Analysis of Union Behavior," in 0. Ashenfelter and R.
      Layard (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics. Amsterdam, North Holland,
      1986, pp-pp.

Freeman, Richard B. "Why are Unions Faring Poorly in NLRZ Representation
      Elections?," in T. Kochan (ed.), Challenges and Choices Facing American
      Labor. Cambridge, MA. MIT Press; 1985.

Gibbons, Robert and Lawrence Katz. "Does Unmeasured Ability Explain
      Interindustry Wage Differences," mimeo, November 1989.

MacDonald, Charles. Comments in t. Kochan (ed.), Challenges and Choices Facing
      American Labor. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1985, p 65.

MaCurdy, Thomas E. and John Pencavel, "Testing Competing Theories of Wage and
      Employment Determination in Unionized Labor Markets," Journal of
      Political Economy 94, no. 3, part 2 (June 1986): 53-539.
                                         -30-

Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert Topel. "Unemployment, Risk, and Earnings," in K.
      Lang and 3, Leonard (eds.), Unemployment and the Structure of Labor
      Markets. i.ondon:   Basil Blaclcwelj., 1987.

National Labor Relations Board. Annual Report (Washington, DC: GPO) various
      issues.                                    -



Pencavel, John. "The Empirical Performance of a Model of Trade Union
      Behavior," in 3. Rosa (ed.), The Economics of Labor Unions: New
      Directions. Kluwer-Nijhoff Publishing Company, l984.(a)

Pencavel, John. "The Trade-off Between Wages and Employment in Trade Union
      Objectives," Quarterly Journal of Economics 99 (1984): 215-231.

Rose, Nancy. "The Incidence of Regulatory Rents in the Motor Carrier
      Industry," Rand Journal of Economics 16 (Autumn 1985): pp. 299-318.

Standard and Poor's. COMPUSTAT (New York: Standard and Poor's, 1987).

U. S. Department of Labor. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Handbook of Labor
      Statistics (Washington, DC: GPO), 1980.

Voos, Paula. "Union Organizing: Costs and Benefits," Industrial and Labor
      Relations Review 36 (July 1983): 576-591.
         Figure     1


             Ioodtbac       textml      apparel           lumbwd          turn       paper



L                                                       s
            prntpub
                           :& :v
                           diem         petrcl            roplast
                                                                         nleather
                                                                                     __
                                                                                     stclgl




C
o
            __
            pmetals        fmetals      machel            eleceq          arcrtt
                                                                           :         autoetc




                                                                    MN
                    :i :i __
Z
'—   L      insir          miscmfr      pünx(uel          coalmin         whlstr     rettr
              :i :i 'i                                                   i
P           finsre
           :i :i :i :i ;i  hwyfrwhr
                          :i            fl4.l,bi4Nfl
                                        othertr           Comm            htitpwrw   oilgasx



           :LA             Ng.,l,Mfl   :iflth.ááNfl                       .hl,kNN
            hotel          amserv       hlthserv          busserv         motpct
In
              :w L ':& :i :i&
                                                          s               s
                           :L          :Lt             :.\
                                                   year
                        Organization Effort            Elate by          Industry
               Figure         2
    (J
    L
    a,                toodtbac             textml          apparel            lumbwd            turn               paper
-I-,
    0                                                                                                         I.


    a,                                        i           T1
-'-I
                      prntpub
                            T              chem            petrcl             rbplast           leather
                                                                                                              .L2  stclgl

•
    0)
    '-I

w
    U)
    Q•)




    (DC
                   :     ]
                      ______
                      pmetals
                 1 ':i L Il
                 I.
                                           ______
                                           thetals
                                                          : ______
                                                          Li
                                                           machel
                                                                              ______
                                                                              eleceq
                                                                                             : ______
                                                                                               arcrft
                                                                                                                   _____
                                                                                                                   ,kM4
                                                                                                                   __
                                                                                                                   autoetc




C,
          C
                      __
                      instr
                         :i                miscmfr         minxfuel           coalmin          whlstr              rettr
    a,    a,
 oa
-H'-'
-I-,
                   i   i    : :i
    (a
    C                 finsre               hwyfrwhr        othertr            Comm             htitpwrw            oilgasx
a                                     a,




    0
-°
                 j ':i : : ' ':i
    (0
                 Li .1hotel                amserv          hlthserv           busserv
                                                                                              •1
                                                                                             uI0
                                                                                                motpict

-   ri
    (U

    C
                       .i .
                      ____________
                         J                 ____________    ____________
                                                          I__
                                                                      year
                                                                          •   ____________
                                                                                     I         ____________
                                                                                               I__
                                  Unfair Labor Practice Pate by Industry
 (I,
            Figure 3
 L
 'U                 foodtbac                       textml                 apparel                       Iumbwu                       turn                         paper
                                       'UI,                       gui.                          ii,., .4                     I41i

m            17]
            mu                                 1
                                               ____                       1
                                                                          ____                      ____________________     III).                        71fl7   ____
                                                       .1                 fiNN
                                                                            S           NN                     ib                         N ,h ,b N
               flu .s ii 'bIN                  NUN b NI                                         III aN U ,NN                         ____N
U)                  prntpub                    cFiem                      petrcl                        rbplast                      leather                      stclgl
It)                                    lion                       712044                        illI,                        140i4                        5010
-J
'4-                 i
o                                                                 21034 ______________          21020                                                     —.      I
                    .bUN,,bNN
                                       .., 1NW.i'.4NN                                                   [
E                   pmetals                    tmetals                    machel                        eleceq                       aircrft                      autoetc
            21147                      30724                      4101'   4                     11154                       ls•Iu
       C.                                                                                                                                                 21017

   ri
  --I                                                                     I
            11041   ________________           1                                                •.,,, I________________     n,a I________________                 ________________
0) 0                 —.                        ,UN;b,bNN                  Lb,bIbNN                      ,bN.kg,bufl              ,bN.h,b,NN
                                                                                                                                                          .,
C.
                        r Y,Y
      0             instr                      miscmlr                    minxtuel                      coalmin                      whlstr                       rettr
                                       117                        40731                         70755                       1111$                         01745
C.10
       •'   nil. ________              .. I_________                      ______                        _________           •        1_________                _________
                                                                                                                                     sSNU.b,bIfl
0
                                                   Y ,, I_Y                                                 ,bNN                                          ..' IflUNA'NN
(1)                 tinsre                     Iiwyfrwlir                 othertr                       Comm                         htltpwrw                     oilgasx
-o                                     42177                      71101                         0)337                       Ii"'                          III,"
-o
Ct
                                         ._ I__________________           __________________
                                                                          ________________      34771 1__________________            __________________           __________________
cii
            I',,' 1N4N,4,bNN
                        Y                   sbNN,IAN.S
                                                                                                                            ._ INUfl*NN                   _,, I
                    hotel                    amserv                       hltflserv                     busserv                      motçhct
'-4         275$                       3)442                                                    50102                       52)41
>
7—.                                    37$51 __________________   '4%     __________________
            Ii.., I_______________                                                              5507 1__________________    24500 __________________
(U                fl4iib,bNN
                                               IsSoN'IANN                 U4A4Nfl                       NUNibibIfi                       Nib ib N N
a)
Ct
                                                                                               year
                            Peal Value Added per Worker by Industry
            Figure              4
ci)
C.                    toodtbac                            textml                        apparel                       Iumbwd                           turn                    paper
It           I7S                              'a..                          ''H,                              ''in                         111144                     11*1
0.)

                     I________                                              In,,]                                                                                              ________
m              "fl444,I,i                     IIfligg,g,g                                                     11ir ,i
                     prntpub                              them                       petrcl                           rbplast                     leather
.4-A                                                                                                                                                                           stclgl
U)           "                                "Ill                          •Ilib                              72                          I..., -l                   I",,
In
-J
             fliM    I_____________________   I4it I_____________________   ,        _____________________    ,_,, I                       11312
.4-                                                   ,S4.'I'4,b,5
                                                                                ,. I_____                             _____                                           I.",     ________________
                                                                                                                                                                                   , ii   ,
o'Th                 pmetals                              fmetals                    machel                                                        aircrtt
                                                                                                                      eleceq                                                 autoetc
                                                                            '"it                              £1341                        I$4lt I
EL                                                                                                                                                                    tilt


(flri                ________________                 I                     INE•                                                            tin
                                                                                                                      j                                               'tin   ________________
             1444,                            '"",?,4.I4a,4
                                                           7                        I,4.M'Nfl
                                                                                         7\ /'\
                      instr                           miscmtr                        minxfue)                         coalmin                      whlstr                    rettr'
       N—                                     II,,,                         I.—,                             an.                           I.",                       0474 1

       (p
                                              In..                          lit— I                           '3m I                         ,.,
>'''         ""s,          •                                                         _____                            _____                        I                         ________________

ri                   finsre                           hwy(rwhr                      Othertr                           comm
             I.,,.                            11314
                                                                                                                                                                             oiIgasx
                                                                            I.,'.                            In..                          fill Ihtltpwrw             It'—
1-A
C-
o                    I__t                             I                     14113   1__________________               __________________   .,,     ________________   MU ________________
                     ,44.,hAiV                        só.,IA,b,4                    ,¼I1.1I4,4SI¾                                                                               giiaic
a                                                                                                             ., I,M,S4,he,4                                                      •
0.                   hotel                            amsery                        hlthserv                          bussery
o                                                                                                                                                  matpict
                                              nil.                          11414                             III.                         Ian .4
ri                                                                                  i
 0)                  I________________        l4U                           11111   ________________
                                                                                    ________                 I 1434
                                                      L                                                                              ________________
                                                                                                                      ________ liii, ________
cc
                                                          7                                               year
                                              Peal Opportunity                                               Wage by                   Industry
    (I)
               Figure 5
    L
                         tooøtbac                     textml                       apparel                       lumbwd                       turn                             paper
                17344                                                       IllS
                                                 '3—i                                                   371441                        '51))                            'In.
m                                            -                                                           4147                                 I______________             M I______________
___                                                                                                                 . ,h7ap
                                                                             • j 4g
    o                   protput)                      diem                         petrdl                                                     leather
                                                                                                                rbplast                                                        stclgl
-I-,
In
               1)—I                          'SI"
                                                      V                    III))                         tall
                                                                                                                L                     111541                           1504


(U
                                             5)31)1                                                                                   ISIS                             1hIM'
_j                                                                          14431
                                                      flWeA4s                                            •'iC,.h
s                       pmetals                       fmetals                      machel                       eleceq                        arcrft                           autoetc
               I-fl                          155)3                         •1fl5                        1)411                        2)334                             1031S   I
U)ID
 ri
(1)
 0                                            .JW,I41N,&                                                                              ,,,,I                                    ___
L0                      nstr                          miscmfr
a'                                                                                 mnxiueI                      coalmin                       whlstr                           rettr
—
001
          r—   is..'
                       L J JY                ill II                        51755                        14)5)1                       s,33I                                     1



                      __________________
                III) I_______________         104     __________________           ________________
                                                                                   __________________   IS)?    ________________
                                                                                                                __________________            __________________
                                                                                                                                              j                                j
(I)
          ''            finsre                        hwyfrwhr                     othertr                      cumin                         htltpwrw                         oilqasx
C                                            ''UI.                         ill,'                        1)141                        IPSO)                             101,-
0)
 I                      __________________
•r-t                                                                                                                                          __ __
                        hotel                         amserv                       hlthserv                     busserv
(0
                       1y IJ                                                                                                                  miiotpict
               I,,.,                         334,.                         4?4))                        5)750   4                    33)4?



                3111                         slIM'_____________________    12_I_____________________    .01.1_____________________            ______________________
(0                        4.½;ANa                                                  .b44áN.4                                          sm.I          it ;b i it it
0)

                                                                                                   year
•
                       j         Peat Quasi—Rents pen VJonken by Industry
           Figure 6
L
>-
                      foodtbac            textmi                apparel                    Iumbwci                   furn                       paper
                                   5.4
mo                                                                                                                                     2S4 I

                                                          '"1                      ""1         rA4/                     _____                        -
                                                                                                                                                    _____
            -      'n/\
                  ________                ________       -nil________             .n"            V
                                                                                          I________          -—.     ________ -i... I
-i-I--i
E
                  prntpub
                                  Yv Lf   diem
                                                        ''n.j
                                                                petrcl
                                                                                   I'M
                                                                                           rbplast                   leather
                                                                                                                                       In,
                                                                                                                                                stdlgl
                                                                                                                                                     -
U] C
   ri                 ______                                                                   ______
                                          ___           -I,.,   ______________             ______________         ______________
                                                                                                            •I,ll __________________            __________________
  —c—I                                   ,h&.ScIAt&fl           gg,,h,4ap                                                              .i______
L—                pmetals                 Imetals               machel                     eleceq                   arcrft                      autoetc
            —I.                   I'"                    ill. I                    IIII4                     11711                     H.,     •4




                       rA                               .,l,. -J______________
                                          ___ I___ j' J\/                         -Ii"     ______________
                                                                                                                    I______________
                                                                                                                        \ik'\                 I
                                                                                                                                       -7,11______________
                                                                                                                                                    fr'(
-                 instr                   màscmlr               minxfuel                   coalmin                  whlstr                     rettr
                                  Sn,                    flIl                     11,11                      7717                      2211
c
a)
                  ___            -Il" I                         ______ .,J______
                                                                  K                                                 ______             Ii
C                 ftnsre                 hwylrwhr               othertr                   Comm                      htltpwrw                   oilgasx
                                 1112
c-Ito                                                                              fill                                                I—

 CD0                                                                                             —
                  I                                     _wJ                       —,.I    :1                -rnj        lrA                    J
lID         4',¾4a,14ofl
cN
-i__lw      Ion
                  hotel
                                 -i
                                 2114
                                         amserv
                                                         5,1I
                                                                  v
                                                                hlthserv
                                                                                  Inn
                                                                                          busserv
                                                                                                            Ill??   Imotpict
CD
                                                                                                                    J
     '-'           '1\i"
                  ________       .31.11  ________
                                           )rA          -'Sm __________
                                                             ________             -ii" ________                     ________
c                                                                                         7                             \AJ
Co
C
                                                                                 year
           Change in Peal Quasi—Pents per Worker by Industry
