                           NBER WORXING PAPER SERIES




     SOME INEFFICIENCY IMPLICATIONS OF GENERATIONAL POLITICS AND   EXCHANGE




                             Laurence J. Kotlikoff

                              Robert W. Rosenthal




                            Working Paper No. 3354




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   May 1990




Financial support from the National Institute of Aging under grant #NIA-AG-
05842 and from the National Science Foundation under grant #SES-8808362 is
gratefully acknowledged. This paper is part of NEER's research programs in
Aging and Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NEER Working Paper #3354
                                        May 1990


      SOME INEFFICIENCY IMPLICATIONS OF GENERATIONAL POLITICS AND EXCHANGE


                                    ABSTRACT
      Generational selfishness is a central assumption in the vast literature
 on the life cycle model. Much of this literature deals with the impact of
 alternative government policies in light of self—interested generational
behavior. Surprisingly, the choices of governments in virtually all of these
 analyses are assumed to be independent of the preferences of the selfish
 generations these governments presumably represent. We address this anomaly
by modeling each generation as having a government that
                                                          strictly represents
 its interests. Such selfish generational governments will potentially distort
the economy along a number of dimensions. We consider two types of
inefficiencies that have received little or no attention in the literature.
The first is the monopolization of factor supplies, and the second is the
under— or overprovision of durable public goods. We demonstrate that selfish
generations may place sizable marginal taxes on their factor supplies in order
to monopolize their factor markets. We also show that selfish
                                                                 generations
will provide inefficient levels of durable public goods both at the local and
national levels. Finally, we demonstrate that generational inefficiencies can
arise even in models of cooperative bargaining because of the first—mover
advantage of earlier generations.




    Laurence 3. Kotlikoff              Robert W. Rosenthal
    Department of Economics            Department of Economics
    Boston University                  Boston University
    270 Bay State Road                 270 Bay State Road
    Boston, MA 02215                   Boston, MA 02215
                                      —1—




     In the absence of intergenerational altruism one would expect each

generation to act in its self interest vis—a—vis other generations. For

example, one would expect current generations to expropriate as much as

possible from future generations. This seems likely even if the membership of

each generation is heterogeneous, at least insofar as generational issues are

at stake.

     While the selfish pursuit of generational objectives would seem the only

viable policy for a representative (of the living) government, the literature

on intergenerational fiscal policy (e.g.; Summers [1981]) has, with rare

exceptions (e.g., Kotlikoff, Persson, and Svensson (1988]), ignored this point

and modeled government as having its own arbitrary objectives. Our paper

addresses this anomaly by considering governments that are concerned solely

with their generations' interests. Specifically, we assume that each

generation has its own representative government. Each generation's

government can, within certain limits, regulate the economic affairs of its

members and bargain with other generations, but it cannot unilaterally

expropriate from other generations.

     The notion of generation—specific governments may seem hard to reconcile

with observed political institutions, but the competing power of different

generations may well underlie actual political decisionsJ In any case, our

purpose is to expose the kinds of inefficiencies that can result from


     'In the U.S. the elderly, at least, are viewed as a powerful and active
political block. The AARP, the American Association of Retired Persons,
appears to have near veto power on social security legislation. Also, a new
group, AGE, Americans for Generational Equity, has arisen to look out for the
welfare of the young.
                                         —2—


generationally self—interested behavior, and a model of autonomous generations

seems a potentially useful means toward that end.

     Research on inefficiencies arising from the combination of generational

selfishness and the sequential nature of generational interactions has a long

tradition in economics beginning with Samuelson's (1958) consumption—loan

model. This paper extends that literature by considering two additional

efficiency problems. The first is the prospect of factor monopolization by

successive generations. The second is the prospect of inefficient provision

of durable public goods. In addition to considering these issues, the paper

demonstrates that cooperative bargaining by coexisting generations is not, in

general, enough to overcome such inefficiencies.

     In the simple, two—factor model of factor monopolization analyzed in

Section I, we show that each generation has an incentive to restrict its

supply of labor when young and its supply of capital when old (its saving when

young) in order to raise the respective market returns to these factors. The

government of each generation implements such factor monopolizations by

placing distortionary taxes on its members supplies of labor and savings.

The model's utility and production functions are Cobb—Douglas. Given these

functions and realistic parameter choices, the equilibrium wage taxes and

capital—income   taxes turn out to be quite high; indeed, they are high enough
to account for the level of distortionary wage and capital—income taxes in the
U.S. Our factor—monopolization explanation for distortionary taxation is
obviously   different from the major alternative explanation in the literature

provided by Mirrless (1971) and Sadka (1976), namely that governments use

distortionary taxes   to help sort   taxpayers of differing, but unobserved,

characteristics.
                                      —3—


     In the analysis of nonexcludable durable public goods (bade) presented in

Section II, we show that changes in asset prices associated with the provision

of public goods—capitalization effects—can partly, fully, or more than       fully
offset the incentives of early generations to underprovide (overprovide)

public goods (bads). The capitalization effect we consider is associated with

the sale of land from one generation to the next. If the level of the public

good (bad) positively (negatively) affects the marginal utility of owning land

or housing, early generations will realize that increased provision of the

public good will raise the market values of their properties. In the case of

local durable public goods, capitalization incentives for providing these

goods can arise even if the level of the public good does not affect the

marginal utility of land. The reason is that, other things equal, a locality

that provides more durable public goods will be more attractive to new

residents (in our model new generations), and this added attraction will be

reflected in the locality's value of land. While the competition between

localities adds an additional element to the analysis, the special conditions

under which the provision of durable public goods is efficient are identical

in the cases of local and national (nonlocal) durable public goods.

     In our models of factor monopolization and public goods provision, the

governments representing the respective generations play noncooperatively;

i.e., it is assumed that there is no mechanism through which they can make

binding agreements with each other. One might ask whether the inefficiencies

in these games are due solely to the noncooperative rules of play. In the

third section of the paper we present a simple model in which an older

generation, which lives in periods 1 and 2, and a younger generation, which

lives only in period 2, bargain cooperatively (i.e., with the ability to

establish binding contracts) in period 2. Notwithstanding their period 2
                                      -4-


cooperation, the older generation is able to "get the beat" on the younger

generation in its first period of life. "Getting the beat in this model

gives the older generation a better period—2 bargaining position, but also

leads to an inefficient solution; no matter what efficient, individually—

rational bargaining solution is used in period two, as long as it is correctly

forecast in period one, the resulting two—period consumption program is not

Pareto—optimal among the feasible allocations for the two—period economy. In

other words, because the two generations cannot bargain before the first—

period consumption occurs, an inefficiency results. This inefficiency is

solely due to the lack of synchronicity of the generations and therefore seems

inevitable in any intergenerational setting.

     In the final section1 IV. we conclude the paper with some remarks about

the realism of generational models of government.



I. Factor Monopolization by Successive Generations

     In this section we assume that each generation's government taxes its

members' labor and capital incomes, but returns the receipts from these taxes

to them in a lump sum. These distortionary taxes reduce each generation's

supplies of productive factors, thereby raising the market return to these

factors.

     The framework is an infinite—horizon, overlapping—generations model. We

assume zero population growth, so that the number of young and old are equal
at each point in time. All individuals within a generation are identical and
selfish, in that each cares only about his own consumption and leisure. The

members of each generation live for two periods. They supply labor when young

and capital (their accumulated savings) when old. The utility function
                                      —5—


underlying these supply decisions is Cobb—Douglas in consumption when young,

consumption when old, and leisure when young.

     When each new generation arrives on the scene, its government,   acting in
the interest of its members, announces a first—period labor—income tax and     a

second—period tax on capital income. Given these taxes, the individual

members of each generation choose how much to work and consume when young and

how much to save (invest) for old age. There are no bequests, so the old

consume the entire return on their savings.

     Output at any point in time is produced according to a Cobb—Douglas

function of capital supplied by the old and labor supplied by the

contemporaneous young. The pre—tax returns earned by these factor supplies

are determined in competitive factor markets. Hence; while their governments

act strategically in setting tax rates, individuals in each generation simply

optimize subject to their after—tax budget constraints. This framework

captures the notion that each generation's government can collect taxes on

factor incomes, but cannot directly control any individual member's sale of

factors on the market.

     Since each generation's supplies of labor when young and capital when old

are effectively determined by decisions made when the generation is young, the

government of each generation makes its moves when the generation is young.

Hence, the old generation's government does not act strategically; and the old

generation passively supplies all its accumulated capital to the production

sector and earns the market—determined return. The young generation, however,

needs to consider how its second—period supply of capital will influence the

supply of labor by the next generation. Thus, each new young generation finds

itself moving first in a subgame that it plays with the next generation and,

indirectly, with all other future generations.
                                      —6—


      In setting its compensated taxes each government can effectively induce

its members to choose the point on their individual budget constraints that

the government desires, This fact permits us to simplify the analysis by

having the government choose directly the values of labor supply and

consumption that maximize its generation's utility, taking into account the

equilibrium effect on future generations. This planners problem differs,

however, from utility maximization by a representative individual because the

government planner takes into account the effect of its choices on factor

prices. We show later how the solution to the planning problem can be

decentralized through an appropriate set of proportional (and hence marginal)

taxes on labor and capital income which are rebated in a lump sum at the time

they are paid.

      The utility of the typical member of the generation that is young at time

. Ut.   is given by:


(1)       Ut —


where Cyt. C041, and 2 are, respectively, consumption of the young at time

t, consumption of the old at time t+l, and leisure of the young at time t.

The budget constraining the present value of consumption of the representative

member of generation t is:


           yt    ot+l t+l     t


In (2) R+1 and tJ stand, respectively, for the rental rates on capital in

period t+l and labor in period t. We assume 100 percent depreciation of

capital during production; hence, C01 in (2) is divided by R+1 and not by

l+Rt+1. The price of the consumption good at each point in time is normalized
                                                    —7—


to unity. Each individual is endowed with one unit of time when young; hence,

1- equals the individual's supply of labor.

          Output per unit of labor at time t,               is given by the Cobb—Douglas form

      —         where k stands for capital per unit of labor and where                    is

constant over time with OGC1. Competition in factor markets ensures that

marginal products of labor and capital equal their respective factor rentals,

hence:


(3)             W — (l—fl)k

                     —



          In   choosing i, generation Cs government takes into account that

depends on               since W depends on k —         K/(l—i).   where Kt stands for capital

per old person at time t. In choosing C as well as                         generation t's

government also takes into account that R÷i depends on ki —
                                                                                     Kt+1I(l—2+1) —
                —
(Wt(l_it)           CytI/(l_it+i).      The last equality reflects the fact that capital

per old person at time t+l equals the saving done when young at time t.

Rewriting W and                  to reflect their dependencies on Cyt and 2 yields:




(3)             W - (l—fi)14 -       '_'     [     :]
                                                                                 $
                                                            (1$)
                                                              —        K                  -
                Rt+l —    pi/
                           t+l
                                 —
                                         K
                                             t+l                   [   l_i   I        t

                                        11t+l

          We can now state the planning problem of the government of generation t:

choose Cyti C0+1,and                 to maximize (1) subject to (2) and (3'). In this
                                                 —8—


maximization generation t, whose members are young at time t, takes as given

      the capital supplied by the old at time t.

      In addition to taking account of the dependency of W                     and of Rt+i

on     and C>,, generation t's government must consider how its choices of

these variables will influence                         the time—(t+l) labor supply chosen by

generation t+l. We hypothesize that since                     summarizes all relevant

information at time t+l, if                  depends on      and Cyt. it depends on them

only through their effect on K÷1. We therefore study only subgame—perfect

equilibria in which strategic actions at t can depend on the history of play

only through K — so that punishments, for example, are ruled out. In the

derivation of the optimal choices of               and Cyt we further hypothesize that

the solution involves dt5/dK — 0 for all s>t. We then verify that this

hypothesis is consistent by showing that it implies d2t/dK—O. Both of these

hypotheses serve to focus attention on what we believe to be the interesting

equilibrium. Other equilibria can be expected to exist as well.

      The maximization with respect to Cyt. C0t÷1, and                of (I) subject to (2)

and (3') leads to the following first—order conditions:

            aC
                 o t÷l
(4)                      —
            bC               R÷1(l_(l_fl))


(5)                      —
                             Wt(l_$).


Equations (2), (4), and (5) can be solved for the optimal values of
                                                                                 Cyt
        and 1 which are given, respectively, in (6), (7), and (8):
                                                      —9—




 '   6              —wt            a(l—fl)
                          l+(1—fl)(a+b$)
               yt



(7            C        — V R           b$(l-.fi)
               ot+j.      t t+i l+(l-fi)(a+bp)


                  —            1
(8)
                       1+(l—p)(a+bpy

From (8) we verify that d1/dKsO.

         This solution can be decentralized with the government of generation t

instituting a wage tax at rate fi.                 a capital income tax at rate 1—fl, a first

period lump—stun payment                     equal to Wt(l_i)fl, and a second period lump—sum

payment M0÷i equal to (wt_it)Rt+i(l_fl). The individual's budget constraint

in this case is given by:


(9)
              Cyt + C0.1 (Rt+ifl) —                W(l_P) 1—' +         +


Taking R+i, W1                 and              as given, the individual's maximization of (1)

subject to (9), leads to the first—order conditions (4) and (5). Since (9) is

equivalent to (2) given the definitions of                       and        the individual's

demands for Cyt. C01. and 1t are those in (S)—(8).

         In the U.S. capital's share of net national product is roughly 25

percent.2 If we use that value for $                  the   solution calls for a 25 percent tax

on labor income and a 75 percent tax                 on   capital income. The intuition behind

this solution is that          the     first—order conditions involve the elasticity of

         with respect to k+i and the elasticity of V with respect to k. The


      2If one assumes that labor's share of proprietorship income is the same
as its share of total net national product, then labor's 1989 share of net
national product is 72.6 percent. Source: Econo.ic Reoort of the President.
122Q.
                                       —10—


former elasticity equals fl—l, while the latter elasticity equals fi.   Since the
interest rate is more elastic with respect to changes in relative factor

supplies than is the wage, it follows that the optimum includes & larger

distortion of saving than of labor supply.

       We next compare (6) through (8) with their counterparts (10), (11), and

(12) below, which are the equilibrium values when no strategic behavior on the

part of generations is assumed.


(10)        Cyt —   W   l+:+b


                                b
(11)        Cr41 — W R1 l+a+b


(12)         2t —   l+a+b


Since $<l. 1 is larger when generations are strategic; hence, there is a

monopolization (reduction) of labor supply. Under strategic behavior saving

by the young at time t, Wt(l_lt)_Cyt equals Wt(1_fl)fib/[l+(l_$)(a+bfi)], while

it equals lJtb/(l+a+b) with no strategic behavior. It is easy to see that the

former quantity is less than the latter quantity. Thus, there is also a

monopolization of the supply of capital. While the supplies of labor and

capital are reduced by strategic behavior, consumption when young and old, Cyt

and C01, may be larger or smaller depending on parameter values.

       To get an idea of the magnitude of factor monopolization, suppose a—l,

b—2, and fl—.25. For these parameters saving by the young equals half their

wages in the absence of monopolization. With monopolization saving by the

young equals less than a fifth of their wages. In addition, the labor

supplied by the young is almost 25 perc!nt smaller due to monopolization.
                                       —11—


      While these results are based on our particular
                                                         utility— and production—
 function assumptions1 it appears that the strategic manipulation of factor

 supplies would arise for virtually all nicely behaved preferences and

 production technologies. It appears unlikely, however, that one would be able

 to derive closed—form solutions with assumptions that are less specific than

 those made here. The reason is that in equilibrium
                                                        dit/dkt is generally
 nonzero, and its value will depend on all future values of this derivative.

 Unless a consistent stationary pattern exists for these   derivatives, there is
 no hope for an explicit solution.

     To summarize, our model of factor monopolization by successive

generations delivers an explanation for distortionary taxation. The

particular Cobb—Douglas example suggests that generational factor

monopolization can account for quite high marginal tax rates as well as

capital income taxes in excess of labor income taxes.



II. Inefficient Provision of Durable Public Goods

     One of government's presumed functions is to overcome the inefficiencies

of laissez faire in the presence of economic externalities—for
                                                                   example, the
free—rider problem associated with public goods. Some nonexcludable public

goods (such as highways) are durable enough to service multiple generations.

But if successive governments attend only to the selfish interests    of their
own generations and cannot force future generations to pay part of the cost of

the public good, one might expect to observe an underprovision of durable

public goods. A possible ameliorating factor is that generations might be

able to recoup their investments in durable public goods if such investments

lead to higher values of land or other assets. Such asset capitalization

might be of particular relevance in the case of durable local
                                                                public goods
                                       $     —12—



 since locational choice—the choice of where to buy or rent land and housing—

 is influenced by the availability of local public goods. -

         In   this section we explore two   capitalization   models. The first is a

 "national" model in which the durable public good is available to anyone

 owning land in the society. The second is a two—region model in which the

 durable public good is available only to individuals owning land in the region

 (locality). While      the   capitalization effects differ somewhat across the two

 models, both models suggest an underprovision of durable public goods unless

 there are strong utility complementarjtjes between public          goods and land.

 While there is an extra source of capitalization in the          two—region model as

 compared with the national model, it turns out that there is underprovision

 (overprovision) at the symmetric equilibrium of the regional model if and            only
 if there is underprovision (overprovision) at the equilibrium of the national

model.

     Stiglitz (1983) also examines the provision of local public goods in

light of land—capitalization effects. His conclusion that land capitalization

leads to an efficient provision of public goods hinges on his assumption that

each locality takes the utility level offered by alternative localities as

given. In contrast, we assume that each locality takes the level of taxation

and therefore the level of the public good provided by other localities as

given. Since in the simplest versions of local—public—goods models each

region offers the same level of utility in equilibrium, each region knows that

if it raises its utility level (attractiveness to new residents), the utility

levels of all other regions, no matter how
                                                    many and how large, adjust through
the process of individuals       voting with their feet,      Accordingly, in our
model, we assume that each region takes the actions (tax rate and level of the

public good) of the other region as given, rather than the utility level in
                                      —13—


the other region, and assumes that prices will adjust in response to its           own

strategic move so as to equate utilities anew across the localities,



A. The National Model

     To keep things as simple as possible, we assume that there are only two

periods and two generations. Only the early generation lives in the first

period, while the two generations coexist in the second period. There are

three goods: a public good, a private consumption good, and land. Each of the

n identical members of the early generation is endowed with one unit of the

private good and one unit of land. Private goods not consumed can be used to

produce public goods in the first period only. The technology is simple; one

unit of the private good is sufficient to generate one unit of the public

good. The public good does not depreciate and is non—excludable. The private

good is storable with no depreciation or appreciation across the two periods.

     To focus on the essential issues, we assume that the members of the early

generation gain no direct benefit from the public good, so that none will be

provided absent some compensation mechanism. The utility function of the

typical member of the early generation is u(c1,c2) —
                                                         c1 +   c2,   where c is

consumption of the private good in period t   (t—l,2).    In addition to any

savings, second—period consumption comes from the sale of land to the later

generation, whose n identical members are endowed only with one unit of the

consumption good in the second period and whose utility functions are given by

w(c,s,q), where c is consumption of the private good, a is the amount of land

purchased, and q is the quantity of public good that has been provided in the

first period.

     The land market is competitive: if the price of land relative to the

private good is p, the typical second—generation member's budget constraint is
                                          —14—


c+ps — 1, and the first—order condition for his utility maximization problem

is


(13)        —p w1(1—sp,s,q) +                  — 0,
                                w2(l—sp,s,q)


where subscripts indicate partial derivatives in (13) and below where obvious.

       Land is assumed to be supplied inelastf.cally (the first generation's

government cannot strategically confiscate land to drive up its price); so at

an interior competitive equilibrium s—l and


                 w2(l—p,1.,q)
(14)
                 w1(l—p,1,q)


Recognizing the dependence of p on q, the first generation's government can

levy a tax of r per capita on its members and use it to produce nr units of

the public good.3 The budget constraint of each member of the first

generation is then c1 + c2 — 1 +     p—   r.   Since utility of the first generation

also equals c1 +   c2,   the government of the first generation chooses T to

maximize 1 +   p(v) — r,   where p(v) is defined by (14) for q—n. Thus the

first—order condition for the provision of the durable public good in this

problem is dp/dt —   1, or

           —
(15)            + nw1w23 — mt2w13 + W2Wfl —           — 0.


       Equation (15) may be compared with the efficiency (Samuelson's) condition

(16)                  0.
           —Wi + nw3—




     3The second—generation's government is assumed to play no role in this
model.
                                        —15—


Equations (15) and (16) are not the same, and, except in very special

circumstances, the strategically—acting first—generation government will not

supply an efficient amount of the public good. For example, if the function w

is separable in its three arguments, the price of land in (13) will not depend

on the level of the public good; so the first generation will provide none of

the public good (a corner solution so (15) does not hold). At the other

extreme, we can have a corner solution with r—l if the ten w23 is

sufficiently large. Since w23 does not appear in (16) it is not hard to

construct examples in which equilibrium involves overprovision of the durable

public good.



B. The Re2ional Model

     Now suppose that there are two localities, a and p. each with a first

generation of n members as specified above, and suppose that the public good's

benefits accrue only to those in the second generation (of size 2n) who live

in the locality where it is provided. Second—generation members may purchase

land and live in either locality, but not in both. Let na and np stand,

respectively, for the number of second—generation members locating in regions

                      —
                    np 2n.
a and fi;   so na +          Let 5a stand for the amount of land purchased by a

second—generation member locating in region a. In equilibrium s —     n/na.
Hence, by analogy with equation (13), the equilibrium prices a and Pp of land

in localities a and ,   respectively,   satisfy
                                                                —16—




                    w2(l— --           p,       —--,     nr)
             p —                                    0
(17)
                    w
                     1
                         (1— n— pa —.nr )
                                    it  a
                                   a                a

                                  n                     n
                    w (1—
                     2    2n—n             p
                                               ft   2n—n        ,   at B   )
                                       a                    a
(18)
             Pp
                    w(l—
                     1            2n—n     p.       2n—n        ,nr)
                                                                   B
                                               ft
                                       a                    a


where      and      are the respective taxes. At an interior equilibrium the

second—generation members must be indifferent between locating in either

locality, hence,

            w(l— n             n
                                                                                             —. nr
                             a —,
                               na itta )
                                                                               n             n
(19)
                 n—  a
                         p    •                     — w(1—
                                                                       2n—n
                                                                                   a
                                                                                       p •
                                                                                        ft 2n—na   ft
                                                                                                        ).




Equations (17) and (18) implicitly define functions pa_pa(na,ra) and

                  These can be substituted into equation (19), with the result

being an expression for n as a function n9rar,) of the tax rates.

       We now assume that the two first—generation governments choose their

respective tax rates as simultaneous moves in a noncooperative game. Recall

that the utility of the typical first—generation resident of region A is

 1 +     — Ta — 1   +                                       —
                         P2(n0(ra.rp).ra)                        Ta•        Differentiating this expression

with respect to the strategic variable                                 and equating to zero yields

(20)
            a a          a



A comparison of equations (20) and (16) indicates that an interior symmetric

equilibrium will be efficient only if the left—hand side of (20) equals

nh/w'?, where wi stands for the the ith partial derivative of w evaluated

as in the left—hand side of (19). Differentiating (19) with respect to
                                              —17—


substituting (17) and (18) in the result, evaluating at the symmetric

equilibrium where naan and (19) holds, and simplifying yields4:
                                    a
                               nw
             a a  a                 3   $ a
(21)        p1n1+p2 —          —+p1n1.
                                   Wi

Since the right—hand side of (21) differs generally from ni/wi, the

provision of durable local public goods will not, in general, satisfy the

efficiency condition. Solving (21) for ni and substituting the resulting

expression into (20) yields

                 a
                 3        —
(22)                 +        2,
                Wi

using the fact that in the symmetric equilibrium t a              Note that if
                                                          —pf.
p9 —   ni/wi,    we have from (22) that ni/wi a 1, which is the efficiency

condition. But the conditions under which p9 —
                                                     ni/wi are   simply those

required for efficiency in the national model. In addition underprovision

(overprovision) occurs exactly under the same circumstances in both models.

       Since (15) indicated no reason to expect efficient provision of the

public good in the national model, there is no reason to expect efficient

provision of the public good in the regional model. The regional model,

however, appears to deliver more of the public good than the national model in

certain interesting cases. Consider, for example, the case of separable

utility. In this case p9 — 0 and, while there will be no public goods

provided in the national model, a positive, but less than efficient level of

the public good will be provided in the regional modil.


     'It is easy to see that this same expression arises regardless of the
relative size of the two regions. Hence, even if one region is tiny relative
to the rest of the country, this relationship will hold,
                                       —18—



III.   InefficLencles in Intergenerational Bargaining

       So far, all the inefficiencies in this paper have been associated with

equilibria of intergenerational noncooperative games. In this section we

exhibit an inefficiency arising in the context of an intergenerational

cooperative bargaining model. At first glance this seems paradoxical, since

the solution concepts of cooperative—game theory typically aásume Pareto

optimality. The resolution of the seeming paradox is that although the

analysis assumes that the generations bargain to an efficient solution, this

bargaining can only take place once the generations coexist. When one

generation precedes another prior to an overlapping era, there are times

before the existence of the later generation when the members of the earlier

generation take actions that have economic consequences, and these economic

consequences, in turn, affect the initial positions in the bargaining game.5

Thus the earlier generation has incentives to take actions strategically

before the bargaining begins so that it will be better positioned for the

bargaining game, even though the strategic actions may cause an inefficiency.

(In this sense, the inefficiency results from noncooperative aspects of the

rules of the game.)

       On one level, the result is no surprise; for instance, if the efficient

allocations all involved the earlier generation investing in some durable

public good, which it would not do by itself, the absence of the later

generation during the efficient investment time period means that the earlier

generation can extract no quid pro quo and therefore will not find it in its

interest to undertake the investment. What is perhaps surprising is that the


       Of course, if the generations do not overlap at all, they cannot ever
bargain.
                                        —19—


same effect can be obtained without public goods, in fact without production

at all. All that is necessary is an intertemporal consumption

complementarity.

       We exhibit a simple example in which all cooperative bargaining solutions

(i.e., solutions for the Nash bargaining problem) satisfying minimal

assumptions give rise to the inefficiency. There are two       players
(generations)—A and B. As in the previous section, player A lives for two

periods, while B lives only in the second period. There are two goods—X and

Y. A is endowed with one unit of good X in the first period, any part of

which can be consumed then, with the rest stored for consumption or exchange

(or some of each) in the second period. B is endowed with one unit of good '1

(in the second period, of course), which can be consumed and/or exchanged

then. Denoting A's consumption of X in the two periods by x and x2A.

respectively, and A's consumption of Y in the second period by y, we take A's

utility of consumption to be


(23)        u(x1.x2.y) — (xlA xY"2 + y

B's utility for consumption is taken to be


(24)        u3(x3,y8) — XB +


where xB and       are B's consumption of X and Y, respectively, in the second

period. Feasibility requires

(25)        x + xTh + xB — 1,       +    — 1, and nonnegativity of all variables.



Individual   rationality cx ante requires that   the   consumptions satisfy

(26)        u(x.x.y) 1/2 and u3(x8,y3) t 1,
                                           —20—




since   A can assure himself utility of 1/2 by consuming the vector (1/2,1/2,0)

without trade, and B can assure 1 by consuming (0,1) without trade. The

utilities that result from all the allocations that are both individually

rational and ex ante Pareto optimal are ((z, 2 —       z):   1/2   z S 1) obtained by

A consuming z         1/2 units of good '1 and B consuming all of good X and (l—z)
units of good Y.

       The bargaining      game begins after X1A is consumed, so fixing x    — A, the

threat   levels   of utility in the bargaining game are (A(l-.A))V2 and 1, for the

two players respectively, and the cx post individually—rational and Pareto

optimal bargains are obtained by maximizing


(27)                       +
                               y    subject to (I) + (l_A_x2A) — constant


and nonnegativity constraints. The solutions all involve


(28)              —   mm    (A/4, 1—A).



If A—O, the bargaining problem is simply one of sharing one unit of surplus,

since Player A's threat level of utility is zero, Player B's is one, and the

extra unit of surplus can be split unrestrictedly between them. All serious

solutions to this Nash bargaining problem involve a 1/2—1/2 split of the

surplus, bringing Player A back to his ex—ante individual—rationality bound.

If A>O, any solution to the bargaining game is ex—ante inefficient, so it only

remains to show that under any bargaining solution, Player A is better off

setting A>O and then bargaining rather than setting A—O and settling for the

utility of 1/2 he could have earned by ignoring the later generation. Of

course, the optimal value of A for Player A depends on the specific bargaining

solution to be employed, but it is easy to see that by setting A —        1/2 Player
                                      —21—


A guarantees that he receives utility more than 1/2 unless the
                                                                 bargaining
solution is completely unresponsive to him, to see this1 note that if —1/2

and x2A is set to 1/8 (see above) the sum of the two utilities is

1/4 +   3/8 + 1 > 3/2. Since the threat utilities sum to 3/2 (1/2 and 1,

respectively), there is surplus to be shared, and, so long as A gets some of

it (as all solutions to Nash's bargaining problem prescribe), the argument is

complete.

     One lesson from this example is that a potential cx ante inefficiency

arises from the simple fact that all generations cannot be present at the

beginning of time to bargain, or indeed at any time in which there are

efficiency gains to be had from coordinated action. A second lesson is that

the coordinated actions can range from the fairly obvious case of production

of a durable public good linked to a subsequent transfer as quid pro quo at

one extreme, to the (perhaps) less obvious case of pure exchange when there

are intertemporal consumption complementarities at another extreme.



IV. Conclusion

     This paper develops some implications of selfish generational behavior.

Its message is pessimistic. In seeking their own advantages, generations are

likely to monopolize their factor supplies, provide inefficient levels of

durable public goods, and act strategically in producing or consuming private

goods. One can think of additional inefficiencies associated with the

sequential nature of generational exchange, such as inefficient risk sharing.

     If the implications of representative generational government are

pessimistic, are they realistic? After all, one does not observe separate

elections for different age groups. We argue that the decisions made by

observed political institutions should often mimic those that would be made by
                                       —22—


representatives of different generations. Consider, for example, the

monopolization of factor supplies. If elected officials know that young

constituent workers favor compensated wage and capital—income taxes and that

their older constituents are indifferent to the perpetuation of such

compensated taxes, they will, presumably, enact such taxes. Elected

politicians might also emulate the behavior of generational governments in

cases of conflict between different contemporaneous generations. If the

elderly favor policy x, while the young favor policy y, and policy z would be

the equlibrium outcome determined with generational representation, a typical

politician might choose policy z because he realizes that any other choice of

policy would lead to the emergence of candidates for his office appealing to

particular age groups. Alternatively, failure to adopt z could lead the age

group that fared less well than under policy z to withdraw support for the

politician,

     One way out of generational inefficiencies of the sort considered here is

to hypothesize an infinite horizon and an equilibrium in which generations

punish their elders if the elders fail to provide a quid pro quo (or fail to

punish an earlier generation for failing to provide a quid pro quo, or ...) as

in Kotlikoff, Persson, and Svensson (1988). This seems implausible, somehow.

Another way out is to assume that intergenerational altruism is built into the

collective human psyche. While we certainly observe altruistic behavior in

everyday life that seems almost instinctive (Frank [1988]). recent empirical

research (e.g., Altonji, Hayashi, and Kotlikoff 119891) suggests that observed

altruistic behavior is far from the Becker (1974)—Barro (1974) perfect

intergenerational altruism needed to overcome the efficiency problems raised

here, It seems likely therefore that the intergenerational inefficiencies

described here arise to some degree.
                                           —23—




                                        References

Altonji, Joseph, Fumio Hayashi, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, "Is the Extended
Family Altruistically Linked?," NBER working paper, 1989.

Barro, Robert, "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?," Journal of Political
Economy vol. 82 (1974).

Becker, Gary, "A Theory     of   Social Interactions." Journal of Political Econoiy
vol. 82 (1974).

Frank, Robert 13. •   Passions Within Reason, New York, N.Y., LW. Norton Company,
Inc., 1988.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. •Thorsten Persson, and Lars Svensson, "Social Contracts
as Assets: A Possible Solution to the Time Consistency Problem," American
Economic Review vol. 78 (1988).

Mirrless, James, "An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum       Taxation1"   Review of
Economic Studies, vol. 38 (1971).

Sadka, Efraim,     Income Distribution, Incentive Effects, and Optimal Income
Taxation." Review of Economic Studies, vol. 43 (1976).

Samuelson, Paul A., "An Exact Consumption—Loan Model With or Without the
Social Contrivance of Honey." Journal of Political Economy, vol. 66 (1958).

Stiglitz, Joseph E. , "The Theory of Local Public Goods Twenty—Five Years After
Tiebout: A Perspective," in Local Provision of Public Services: The Tiebout
Model After Twenty—five Years, New York, N.Y.: Academic Press, 1983.

Summers, Lawrence H., 'Capital Taxation and Capital Accumulation in a Life
Cycle Growth Model," American Economic Review, vol. 71 (1981).
