NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MARKET POWER, ECONOMIC PROFITABILITY AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH MEASUREMENT:
AN INTEGRATED STRUCTURAL APPROACH

Catherine

.J. Morriaon

Working Paper No, 3355

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1990

Research support from the National Science Foundation, Grant #SES87-O821l,
gratefully acknowledged. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3355
May 1990

MARKET POWER, ECONOMIC PROFITABILITY AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH MEASUREMENT:
AN INTEGRATED STRUCTURAL APPROACH

ABSTRACT

The purpose of this paper is to treat scale economies, profit-maximizing
markups,

economic

profitability, capacity utilization and productivity growth

within an integrated structural model, and to assess their interactions

empirically using annual two-digit U.S. manufacturing data. Attention is
focused on error biases in measuring productivity using traditional accounting

procedures. An important conjecture by Robert Hall, that the coexistence of
normal economic profits and positive markups of price over marginal cost imply
the existence of substantial scale economies and excess capacity, is then
examined using this structure.

The empirical results suggest that markups in most U.S. manufacturing
firms have increased over time, and tend tn hR count.rcyclicl. However,

procyclical capacity utilization and scale economies tnd ;o offset the short

run profit potential from markup behavior. As a result, oi average economic
profits are normal, but declining profitability is prevalent in mos:

industries since the early l970s. Also, although cost and revenue shares tend
to be approximately equal, the error biases in standard productivity growth
measures resulting from input fixity and scale economies are substantial,
particularly over business cycles.

Catherine J. Morrison
Tufts University and

NBER

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

Page 1

I. Introduction

In

the last few years, macroeconomists and students of industrial

organization have reexamined relationships among scale economies, markups,

economic profitability and productivity growth. Paul Romer (1986] has
emphasized the importance of increasing returns for productivity growth at the

aggregate industry or economy level. Empirical evidence supporting this has
been presented by Robert Hall [1986,l988a,1988b], who reported both
significant increasing returns and markups of price over marginal Cost in

various U.S. industries. Hall also finds that economic profits are
approximately normal, suggesting an industrial structure along the classic

lines of monopolistic competition. Related evidence on the cyclical nature of
markups, suggesting some procyclicality of markup behavior, has been presented
by Domowitz, Hubbard and Petersen (1987, 1988].
Analysis of the cyclical characteristics of Robert Solow's [19581
productivity residiiial provided the basis for these empirical studies. The

resulting framework is limited, however, by its dependence on a number of

necessarily restrictive assumptions'. Each study therefore focuses on a
particular issue, with little acknowledgment of linkages among different

results and hypotheses. The purpose of this paper is to extend this type of
analysis to treat scale economies, profit-maximizing markups, economic

profitability, capacity utilization and productivity growth within an
integrated theoretical structural model, to assess their interactions
empirically using detailed two-digit U.S. manufacturing data, and to examine
the generality of findings reported in the earlier studies.

More specifically, using the "new industrial economics" approach

outlined by Timothy resnahan [1988] in which marginal cost and therefore

1These are outlined somewhat further in Section IV of this paper.

Page 2
markups are unobserved but estimated econometrically, I specify an integrated

cost and demand structure for each industry. The structure is quite general
in that (i) markups and returns to scale are permitted to vary over time (they
are not constant parameters); (ii) variable and quasi-fixed inputs are
distinguished (by explicit recognition of adjustment costs) thereby allowing
short- and long-run impacts to differ; (iii) quasi-fixity of both capital and
labor is incorporated (to accommodate labor hoarding as well as slow

adjustment of capital); (iv) input substitution is not constrained a priori (a
generalized Leontief restricted cost function is employed and gross output
rather than value-added is used as a measure of output); (v) nonstatic

expectations are allowed for (through an instrumental variable estimation
procedure); and (vi) the effects of supply and demand "shocks" are directly
represented (by specifying and estimating industry-specific cost, input demand
and output demand functions). Resulting estimated economic performance
indexes therefore reflect the existence of these characteristics of
production.

Although measures of scale economies, markups and economic profitability
by industry are of interest in their own right, this general specification
allows their linkages as well as their impacts on productivity growth to be
formalized and measured. In particular, in this paper I focus on implications
of these phenomena and their interactions for the measurement and
interpretation of multifactor productivity growth in U.S. industries.

Building on my earlier work (Morrison (1986,1989a,l989b,l990]) that
dealt with differences between primal- (revenue) and cost-based specifications
of productivity growth2. I consider theoretically and empirically the "error

biases" that result in traditional primal aultifactor productivity growth
measurement by failing to take into account properly the effects of markups.

2Thjs work formalized a framework sketched out by Zvi Griliches [19671.

Page 3

input fixities, and scale economies. The structural framework used for this
analysis facilitates empirical assessment of the important conjecture made by

Hall, that since economic profits are normal in most industries and yet
markups are considerable, then scale economies and excess capacity must be
substantial.
The data I use are similar to those used by Hall, although my focus is

on manufacturing rather than on all 1-digit industries. I estimate structural
equations for seventeen 2-digit U.S. industries, and aggregated durable,

nondurable and total manufacturing industries. The data on which the
estimation is based are annual data from 1950 to 1986 from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics on prices and quantities of gross output, and capital, labor,
intermediate material, energy and purchased services inputs.
I begin my analysis in Section II by outlining fundamental theoretical

results linking productivity growth, markups, scale economies and capacity

utilization. Then in Section III I compare the generality of the framework
motivated by these results with those used in previous literature on
productivity growth, stressing implications for error biases in measuring such

growth. In Sections IV and V I outline the contributions of the structural
model for empirical implementation, and present empirical results.
My principal empirical findings are that markups have been
countercyclical and have an upward trend for most industries, and that excess

capacity and the potential to exploit scale economies have tended to expand
over time. In terms of economic profitability, these characteristics of cost
and demand tend to offset each other. resulting in approximately normal
profits on average, although declining profitability since 1973 is prevalent

for a number of (especially durable manufacturing) industries. These
empirical results are consistent with Hall's conjectures. Moreover, they
imply that cost and revenue shares, and therefore standard primal and cost-

Page 4

based measures of multifactor productivity growth, are by coincidence rather

similar on average. However, I find that these traditional measures of
productivity growth may be misleading due to inappropriate assumptions and
error biases resulting from input fixities and scale economies.

II. Fundamental Results Used for the Analysis
To motivate formally the theoretical linkages among productivity growth,

markups, scale economies and capacity utilization, I will rely primarily on
three results. These results can be combined and employed directly to
motivate the use of estimated cost and demand elasticities that relax the

standard restrictive assumptions. This allows generalization and refinement
of productivity growth measures, and determination of how various

characteristics of technology and market structure are related. The three
results can be sumearized and integrated as follows.
First, I will initially base the analysis of productivity change on the
traditional output-side specification of productivity growth motivated by the
technical change literature introduced by Solow (19581:

âln Y

la) öt— — — dY/dt

Y

p v dv /dt

_____ —dY/dt
—-

P.Y

Y

Si

1

—

V1

where Y and Py are output quantity and price, Vj and pj are corresponding
input measures,

denotes a time derivative, and Sj is the revenue share

Pjvj/pyY. With perfect competition, instantaneous adjustment and constant
returns to scale, this is equivalent (except for a change in sign) to the

cost-sid,
3m

specification3
C

lb) —

- —. — - -i-i_
dC/dt

dY/dt

p v dp1/dt

3See Obta (1975] or Morrison (1990] for further elaboration of this
equality.

Page 5

—

where

dC/dt

dY/dt

C

Y

—e Ct

Y(v,t) is the production function, C(p,Y.t) is the corresponding dual.

(total) cost function, v and pare vectors of the v1 and Pj values, Mj is the
cost-share Pjvj/C and t represents technology (or the passing of time).
The residual measure of technical progress, representing the growth in
output that cannot be attributed to increases in inputs (la), or, conversely,
the diminution of costs not explained by changes in input prices (lb), has

been denoted the Solow residual. It is often constructed using only valueadded output, and thus only capital and labor inputs. Although Hall uses the
value-added approach, more generally this multifactor productivity measure can
include other inputs affecting production of gross output, such as energy and
intermediate

materials. In this study I employ

specification

of

this more complete

input changes, thereby permitting, for example, the

assessment of substitution of labor for energy after en.rgy price increases.

Secondly, I

will exploit information on

the relationship between costs

and revenues incorporated in the cost and output shares

productivity growth computations.

used in

the

If perfect competition, instantaneous

adjustment (full utilization) and constant returns to scale (CRTS) prevail.,

pyY—C. In this case revenu, and cost shares

cost

are

identical and thus

primal and

productivity measures are equivalent (as in (la) and (Ib)). However, if

any of these restrictions are invalid, differences between revenues and Costs

competition implies

will occur. For example, this can arise because imperfect

p.,'MC (where MC—ÔC/8Y represents marginal

returns
have

to scale or

fixity

in the relation

or because

cause AC1'MC (where ACC/Y denotes

shown elsewhere (Morrison

results

Cost),

nonconstant

average cost).

(l989b1) that recognizing these differences

Page 6

— — — C•c/(l+1)
MC•Y

2)

pY —

C

C

— C•ADJ

MC

This adaptation relies on two elasticity expressions. The cost

elasticity y —

3m

C(Y, .)/äln Y — MC.Y/C is defined in terms of the total

cost function C—C(p,Y,t). The inverse demand elasticity c —

[3py(Y,.)/8y].y/p

is based on the inverse demand function p—py(Y,p), where p

is a vector of shift variables for the output demand function. Equation (2)
therefore explicitly captures the dependence of revenue on both the cost- (or
supply-) and demand-side elasticities through the adjustment factor

ADJecy/(l+epy).
Although the ECYMC•Y/C equality holds by definition, the equality of
the inverse demand elasticity Epy and the markup of output price over marginal

cost requires some additional motivation. Essentially this relationship
emerges because, for any level of output produced, assuming the profit
maximization condition MR—MC holds (where MR is marginal revenue), the markup

py/MC

can be

written as py/MR —

py/(py-*.Y.öp.j(Y,.)/8y) —

l/(l+c).

Thus, when

market power exists from any factor affecting the shape of the demand curve
facing a firm, such as product differentiation in the context of monopolistic

competition, po and the pyY-.C equality must accordingly be adapted.
Thirdly, a result based on the c elasticity can be used to interpret

equation (2) further: the cost elasticity with respect to output y

— 81n C/81n Y — (8C/8Y)Y/C—I4C/AC differs from one if either nonconstant
returns (long run fixities) or short run fixities exist. Specifically, I have

shown

elsewhere

(in Morrison [l989b]) that c is a combination of the impacts

of long run returns to scale and capacity utilization, such that

MC•Y C*
3)

5y i(l-ZE) —

—

——

Page 7

This equality depends on the definitions of (the inverse of) returns to

scale £y (where L denotes long run), and a cost-side measure of Capacity

utilization 1• Development of these measures requires a representation of
the cost function explicitly incorporating fixed inputs, C(p,Y,t)

—

G(p,Y,t,z)+Zkpkxk,

where C(•) is a variable Cost function and x a vector of

K quasi-fixed inputs xk having cx ante rental (market) prices

Based on

this representation the associated shadow cost function C*_G(p,Y,t,x)+kZkxk
can be defined, where Zk is the shadow value of xk, 8G/8Xk. This forms the

basis for defining a1y as

as CU—C*/C —

(l-)

— (MC.Y)/C*4 (where MC—aC/aY—8G/aY), and CtJ

(where Ck —

[8C(•)/8xkJ.xk/C — (pk+ÔG()/öxklxk/C).5

Intuitively, equation (3) indicates that the change in costs as output
varies is a combination of the potential economies of scale implied by the
sloped long run average coat curve (cost changes associated with long run

returns to scale) and the constraints faced from input fixity that are
reflected in the slope of the short run coat curve (cost changes arising from

potential returns to variable inputs in the short run). When long run

constant returns to scale exist, y—l and all cost changes are associated
with short run returns to inputs. When instantaneous adjustment prevails,

—

(pK-Zk)xk/C — 0, and cost changes result only from movements along the

long run cost curve. This full equilibrium condition is equivalent to saying
that CU—l; capacity (defined in terms of all fixed inputs) is fully utilized.
Putting the second and third results together shows that:

therefore represents the proportional change in output possible from a
given percentage change in costs. If this exceeds one, long run average
costs decline with a scale expansion so there is potential for
proportionately greater output than cost increases.
'C*/C represents capacity utilization since utilization fluctuations arising
from fixity of factors imply the marginal valuation (Zk) deviates from the
market price (pit) for any fixed factor xk. This expression assumes
homotheticity of Y(.), as was shown in Morrison (1986], although a
comparable version can be generated for nonhomothetic cases.

Page 8

—

MC•Y C*

—

4)

C

L
— — — C•Ey•CU/(l+Epy)
C* C NC

An important implication of this expression is that when Ep'.,'O from product

differentiation or c'l due to either scale economies or fixity, the
equivalence of (la) and (ib) is destroyed. This results both because (1) the
assumptions on which these measures are constructed are invalid, so
corrections must be made to measure technical change appropriately, and (ii)
because the primal (but not the cost) measure includes all returns to cost and
market characteristics, so a decomposition may be carried out to identify

these impacts separately. This latter deviation arises from (4) because it
shows that revenue pY (and therefore the revenue shares appearing in (la))
embodies returns to all characteristics of the production process that cause
pyY,C -

- fixity,

scale economies and market power. However, costs C (and thus

the shares in cost) include only cx ante returns to inputs so (lb) captures
the effect of technical change independent of these other effects.
These implications highlight that adapting productivity growth measures
to recognize generally neglected characteristics of the technology and the
market provides insights into why observed productivity growth fluctuations

might occur, and how one might identify their underlying components. For
example, if markups are increasing over time, it follows that standard primal
productivity growth measures based on (la) will be increasingly downward

biased over time. Technical change advances in this case will be understated
because some growth in output will inadvertently be attributed to increases in

the price of a unit of output. Similar errors arise if invalid assumptions of

CRTS and instantaneous adjustment (cy—l) are made. These are, however,
somewhat more complex to untangle because not only biases but also

Page 9
dacompositions are implied.

Adaptations to deal with these measurement

issues will be formalized further in the next section.

Another useful point arising from consideration of (4) is that if
approximately normal profits are observed for a firm or industry, then pyYmC,

which in turn means AJ_y/(l+py)_i'Cy.CUC/(1+Epy)ml. This provides a
useful context in which to assess the Hall [1986] contentions that capacity
utilization and returns to scale may attenuate the profitability arising from

market power. Using (4), in essense this means that the cost characteristics
reflected in

must counteract the markup py/MC. This could occur since if

short or long run fixities (excess capacity) exist, y<l, and since markups
imply that py/MC—(l/spy)>l, it follows that the ratio of these two factors

could be approximately one.
The observation of apparent normal profits not only suggests that the
levels of the markup, capacity utilization and returns to scale measures must

be such that this condition holds, but also that if ty

declines

(due either

to decreases in capacity utilization or increases in potential returns to
scale), this will support a larger markup without increasing overall

profitability. This has significant implications for the cyclical behavior of
markups. If CRTS prevails, for example, increases in capacity utilization
will be associated with decreases in markups, meaning countercyclical markups

will be observed. Hall's [1986] conJecture about the relationship between
markups and excess capacity therefore directly implies countercyclical

markups.6 This tendency could, of course, be counteracted by changes in scale

economies if the RTS assumption is invalid.7

somewhat different argument for countercyclical markups, motivated by
industrial organization theory, has been presented by Rotemberg and Saloner
1986].
See Morrison [1988b,1989a] for further analysis of how this might happen
when capacity is overutilized.

Page 10

Issues motivated by consideration of (1) and (4) thus have important
implications for the correct measurement of "true productivity or technical
change, and for analysis of the interactions among cost and demand
characteristics of the production process. To pursue these implications
further, however, the theory underlying adaptation of traditional productivity
growth measures for these characteristics must

be

formalized, and an

empirically implementable model must be developed to allow estimation of the

appropriate elasticities. These steps are pursued in the next two sections.

III. The Imnlications of These Relationshioa for Productivity Crowth
Recognizing the impacts of the different cost and market characteristics
--

markups, scale and fixity -- has somewhat varied implications for

productivity growth measurement. For example, correcting for imperfect
competition simply requires recognizing that the denominators of the revenue

and cost shares differ due to pyY'MC•Y—C (given c—l). Since appropriate
measurement of aggregate input growth requires weighting input changes by cost

shares, adapting for this necessitates an error bias correction to change the

share-weights. Correcting for scale economies implies that the deviation
between MC and AC must be accomodated; this is accomplished as an error bias
correction to change the denominator of the weights on both output and input

changes. This also implies a decomposition of the primal measure to isolate
true

technical

change from the combined productivity impact of technical

change and scale economies. Allowing for th. impact of fixities from
requires one additional step; the numerator of both the primal and Cost share-

weights for the quasi-fixed inputs, as well as the denominator of the cost
shares must be adapted.

More specifically, the deviation between (la) and (ib) arising from

imperfect competition occurs only because (l+cpy)l implies pyYC; no

Page 11
assumptions are imbedded in the construction of these expressions affecting

the cost measures or the numerators of the shares. Thus, reconciling (la) and

(ib) requires recognizing that (l+py)—MC/pyC/pyY. so Sj_Mj(l+py)8 and

£yt_ctpyjMj(vj/'j). This expression appropriately measures the input
shares in terms of Costs rather than revenue. Therefore, correcting the

computation for markups requires computing eMyt_eCt_syt.epy.EjMjxj/xj.,

where cpy"EMj(xj/x) may be considered the "error bias" in the usual primal
measurement of productivity growth, and H stands for the "Markup correction".

The bias therefore depends on the cost shares, the inverse demand elasticity
(or markup), and the growth rates of the inputs.
If scale economies or changes in capacity utilization also exist, the

restrictive assumption that

,—l must also be relaxed for measurement and

interpretation of productivity growth. The additional complexity of adapting
productivity growth measures for

since this affects the weight on

output growth and the numerator as veil as the denominator of the shares,
motivates the division of the refinement of the productivity growth

measurement framework into two parts - -

a

decomposition in addition to the

error bias correction.

To correct for error biases arising from

it must be recognized

that (lb) is based on the assumption that the cost function can be written as

a unit cost function AC-C/Y—c(p,t) so i—l and din c/dt —

—

din

C/dt.din Y/dt. However, if

din

(C/Y)/dt

this is not valid; the average cost

derivative becomes din C/dt-y(dln Y/dt). Appiication of equation (lb) is
therefore incorrect unless this adaptation is made.

More formaiiy, to correct for 1yi owing to scale economies, as shown
in Morrison [1989bJ, the residual ECt must be adjusted to

8Thus Sj -Mj EprMj.

Page 12

R
Ct

5)

C Y

!L.1.

C P—- Y

_!.L. —( +(l-E )—
Ct
C Vj

where R represents "adjusted for Returns to scale", and the last term is the

error bias in traditional measures when CRTS is assumed inappropriately. The
adaptation in (5) reflects that

— MC•Y/C — MC•Y/AC.Y — MC/AC.

Thus, the

adjustment by eç restates the change in output in terms of its correct
marginal value. The impact of the bias depends on the extent of potential
scale economies and the output growth rate.

If instead yi'l because cv'° due to fixity and therefore non-optimal
capacity utilization, this implies that the valuation of the quasi-fixed inputs
at their market prices Pk is erroneous; valuation should instead be in terms of

the shadow value, Zk, reflecting the true marginal product of xk. This implies
an adjustment for the numerator of the share weight on quasi-fixed input
changes as well as for the denominator on weights of all inputs and output.
This occurs because (lb) depends on instantaneous adjustment through the
use of Shephard's lemma to substitute v1, the cost minimizing demand for input

i for 8C/8pj. which assumes marginal products always reflect market prices for

all inputs. If any input k (xk) is quasi-fixed, however, this is not valid
because the firm will not be able to choose instantaneously a cost minimizing
demand for xk; valuation of the changes in quasi-fixed inputs should be at the

shadow

value Zk

C*. A4aptation

instead of Pk and input shares should be measured in terms of

of the

weight on

output

because variable and total costs do not

the

changes arises in this case also,

change proportionately with output in

short run even if long run CRTS prevails. Non-optimal use of the fixed

inputs implies c —

l-Eke — C*/C ' 1.

Page 13

The resulting corrected expression for c therefore becomes

F - (l-X C
Ct
kCk

6)

) — - Zk

Y
—

+

-E
CXk

—Ci,1

- —)

Yxk
where

F represents "adjusted for Fixity".9 As before, the last term in this

expression can be thought of as an error bias occurring in this case if
instantaneous adjustment is assumed when subequilibrium (not being able to

reach a full equilibrium because of fixity) really exists; the bias now depends
in part on the relative growth rates of output and the quasi-fixed inputs.

Generating a fully adjusted measure of technical change from the cost
side, incorporating both fixity and returns to scale, requires combining (5)

and (6) as in Morrison [l989b]. This measure, denoted

(where T represents

the "Total adjustment") accomodatas the full error bias in the standard £ct

measure, Similarly, constructing a fully adjusted primal measure to obtain
requires recognizing quasi-fixity, and thus valuing the
the

fixed

inputs in

computation at their shadow values.

Once these adaptations of standard productivity growth

measures are made

to correct for invalid assumptions of CRTS and instantaneous adjustment, the
relationship between the primal measure of productivity growth and a pure
technical change measur, can be expressed in terms of a decomposition.

This decomposition is analogous to the treatment of returns to scale
motivated by Ohta [1975]. Ohta showed that the Cyt1Ct equality must be

adapted to 'yt ECt/CCY (or eTyt_ eTc,'ey in our notation, to account for
corrections of the standard measures) when nonconstant returns to scale (NCRTS-)

9This

is developed in more detail in Morrison [1989b1.

Page 14

exist so MC'AC and pyY—MC.Y,AC.Y—C. This implies that the primal productivity
growth measure can be divided into a component capturing technical change only
and one reflecting the cost changes arising from returns to scale, where by

definition

is the inverse of returns to scale.

Morrison (1986) shoved that an equivalent adjustment is implied when

Ey,l due to short run fixity. When both exist neither Ey, showing scale
economies, or CU, indicating utilization of fixed inputs, are equal to one;

thus, y—yCU,'l.
-

- including

The associated decomposition of the output-side measure

returns to all cost and demand characteristics -

- isolates

technical change independently from the characteristics captured in the

deviation of

from one, since it separately identifies the different

characteristics that cause pyY'C from equation (4).
It should be emphasized that whether the cost or primal productivity
growth measure (ETct or ETyt) is the appropriate measure for analysis depends

on the context and desired interpretation. The point of the decomposition is
to highlight the distinct factors reflected in primal productivity growth

measures. In some circumstances one might want to identify technical change
independently of other factors, in which case eTc would be the relevant
measure, but in others returns to scale might be thought of as an important

determinant of overall "efficiency or productivity", implying that Ty would
be a preferable measure for analysis. The decomposition simply accomplishes
the desirable goal (for interpretive purposes) of identifying the individual

contributions of technical change and

other

factors affecting economic

performance.

It is also important to note that both the error bias adjustments to

correct for erroneous

assumptions, and

different components of the primal

the decomposition to isolate the

productivity

help explain" fluctuations in standard

growth measure, may

productivity

be

used to

growth measures. The

Page 15
first adaptation is a pure correction, however, whereas the other facilitates
interpretation in terms of the technical determinants of economic performance.

IV.

Towards an Emoirical Itinlementation: A grief Review of Recent Literature
In order to implement the productivity growth framework developed in the

last

section, and to evaluate the magnitude of and relationships among the

different components generally captured in productivity growth measures, a
model is required to separately identify and .easure the corresponding
components. Previous contributions by, among others, Hall [1986,1988aJ, and
Domowitz, Hubbard and Peterson [1987,19881 provided steps in this direction.

However, the underlying framework used in these

studies is

insufficient for a

full analysis since it relies on an incomplee. p.cificstion of the underlying
cost and demand relations. Thus it does not distinguish the independent
impacts of different cost and demand

characteristics

on economic performance.

In particular, as indicated in Section I, measurement of markups, scale
economies and utilization fluctuations can be accomplished by estimating

certain coat and demand elasticities, including the inverse elasticity of
output demand (reflecting markup behavior), the long run elasticity of cost
with rsspect to output changes (capturing returns

to

scale), and the shadow

value of fixed factors, or alternatively the short run cost elasticity with
respect to output (revealing the impacts of fixity or utilization changes).

Measurement of these elasticities, however, requires a complete specification

of

the production technology and demand

was not pursued in the initial

structure facing the firm, a

goal which

Hall study or the subsequent related literature.

Hall [l986,l988a1 used the original development of the Solow [19581
residual to motivate his analysis, and measured the markup as a constant

parameter using simple parametric methods. Little scope for analysis of the
interactions among different components of the production structure exists in

Page 16
this framework, however, since the relationship between the constant markup and

the cost characteristics cannot be assessed. In addition, the determinants (or
even the trends in) the markup are not specified, so the simplicity of the

model limits interpretation of the measured markups. Estimation of only one
deviation from the usual maintained assumptions is possible; estimating markups
precludes consideration of scale economies, and characterizing returns to scale

requires somehow first imputing cost from revenue shares. Problems are also
evident from the empirical results generated using Hall's procedures. Both the
markup and returns to scale measures reported by Hall [1989,1988a,b] are
extremely large and implausible for some industries10, and the reasons for this
are not apparent.
Doiaovitz, Hubbard and Peterson [1987,19881 included other variables,

allowed the markup to vary, and based their analysis on an industrial
organization perspective that suggested markups would vary in response to

variables like concentration ratios. However, this framework is still based on
a fairly simple extension of the Solow residual equation", and does not allow
independent representation of cost characteristics such as capacity utilization

and returns to scale. For example, the cyclicality of markups was established
by them using a simple regression of markup indexes on published capacity
utilization measures.
In Morrison [1989a,bJ I instead employed a production theory approach

based on estimation of cost and demand functions. The econometric treatment
allows computation of a number of indexes and elasticities reflecting not only
the level and pattern of markups, capacity utilization, returns to scale and
other indicators, but also their dependence on exogenous demand and supply
(cost) variables facing the firm.

°The results found for the chemical, petroleum and printing and publishing
industries are particularly problematic in the manufacturing sector,
although those for food and paper also imply that the unit price is more
than three times the associated marginal cost.

Page 17

The framework, although more complex to specify and estimate, provides a
far richer structure in which to assess the different cost and demand
characteristics facing the firm than those relying only on the Solow equation.
It allows, for example, direct estimation of shadow values for fixed inputs,

since it is based on an explicit characterization of the variable cost function
C(.). The corresponding measures of capacity utilization and scale economies

can therefore be easily constructed. Similarly, an inverse demand equation
Py() is incorporated, thereby facilitating direct estimation of the inverse
demand elasticity.

The usefulness of this more structural framework is also demonstrated by
the results generated using the model; for example, markup, returns to scale

and capacity utilization measures for the U.S, Canadian and Japanese
manufacturing sectors, and for various Canadian manufacturing industries
reported in Morrison (l988b,l989a] respectively are reasonable, and the

measured utilization indexes are quite closely correlated to published
estimates.

are

The basic building blocks of my structural model

a Generalized

Leontief restricted cost function and a similarly constructed output demand

function. The NCRTS Generalized Leontief cost function has the form

7) G(Y,t,z,x,p) —

+

where

iXk 6ik

+

ii

EmEk

iiIcm5

EDXI

+

7ams

s5]

ZkZlllkXkXl

x1, xk denotes the fixed inputs (here capital, K, and labor, L), Pj and

Pj index the

and

+

Pj5 + EiZm 5im

Qjj

prices

of variable inputs (energy, E, intermediate materials, Pt,

purchased services, PS), 5m'

depict the remaining arguments (Y, t, X

and AL), t is a time counter, and

internal costs
demand

of

adjustment on

the

inclusion of Ax (AX

capital

and labor.

function for output is specified as

and

AL) allows for

The corresponding inverse

Page 18

8)

py(,pIM,r,pCpI,Y,UN,t) —

___________ 2

Y•PyUNyt
where

h indexes the components of the vector of shift variables p of py(Y,p),

including here consumption expenditures, EXP, a price index for imported

goods, p, the interest rate, r, a price index for consumption goods, Pcpi'
and UN is unemployment.11

These two

functions

are used to construct a system of estimating

equations

including (i) the cost function (7) plus variable input demand

equations

for

short

price

run

E, N and PS derived from Shephard's Lemma (vj_aC/apj); (ii)
setting equation MR—MC

using

a

the expressions for marginal

revenue (I—py+(ôpy/aY).Y) and marginal cost (MC.-8G/8Y); (iii) two Euler
equations to reflect adjustment paths of the two quasi-fixed inputs; and, to
complete the system, (iv) the output demand equation.12

Once the parameters of this model are estimated, the determinants of
costs (C.-G(.)+Ekp1xk)

and

(py(•)), and thus the derivatives underlying
markups, scale economies, and capacity

demand

the elasticities representing

utilization, are explicitly determined. These indexes may therefore be
constructed for evaluation and comparison, and adaptation of traditional

productivity growth measures. The results of such procedures are reported in
the next section.

11The.e variables were primarily taken from the Economic Renort of the
The rate of return, r, is the Moody Ma bond yield.
For further details, see Morrison (l988a].

esidant.

Page 19

V. Emoirical Evidence on Markups.

Fixities

and Productivity Growth Patterns

Va. Data and Estimation
Estimation of this model was carried out using U.S. manufacturing data

for

1952-1986 for a number

considered include food and

of manufacturing
kindred

industries. The sectors

products (P0) •

textiles

(TX), apparel and

other textile products (AP), paper and allied products(PA), printing and

publishing

(PP), chemicals and allied products (CM), petroleum and coal

products (PC), rubber and miscellaneous plastics (RB), lumber and wood (LW),
furniture and fixtures (FM), clay and glass (CL), primary metals (PM),
fabricated metal products (FM), machinery (MC), electric and electronic
equipment (EL), instruments and related products (IN), and transportation

equipment (TQ). In addition, a total manufacturing category (Ma), constructed

by

aggregating the individual sectors using

Divisia

indexes, was estimated for

comparison.

These data are based on series for prices and quantities of

capital,

labor, energy,

intermediate

materials and purchased

developed and used by the Bureau of Labor

and Technology.13

Statistics

output,

services

Division of Productivity

The capital data were, however, reconstructed

to

generate

an cx ante measure more closely related to the procedures used by Berndt

and

Wood [l984j) Such a recalculation is required because the residual" method
of capital measurement in the BLS

data

generates an cx post measure of capital

for

13The data, including detailed data
the capital components, were
graciously provided by Michael Harper at the Bureau of Labor Statistics

fLS).

"This was accomplished by taking the components of the capital stock used
by the BLS and reaggregating using the Moody Baa bond yield instead of the
internal rate of return (ignoring the cx post capital gains component). In
addition, the capital stock data used here do not include inventories or
land, which might be thought to affect production and productivity
differently than non-residential structures and producers' durable
equipment.

Page 20

quasi-rents including any returns not reflected in the other input measures.

Use of such an cx

measure would be inappropriate, for it includes effects

of returns to scale and market power, as well as the quasi-rents accruing to
capital.

The model was estimated for each industry separately, using three stage
least squares to incorporate the endogeneity of output quantity and price, and
to allow for the possibility of nonstatic expectations on input prices as
suggested by Pindyck and P.otemberg (1983]. The instruments employed included
lagged values of the exogenous variables facing the firm, as well as the world
oil price, defense spending, and the political party variables relied on in

the Hall studies. The results were quite robust to different specifications
of instruments.15
The estimated model for each of the manufacturing industries can be used
to generate a large number of indexes, elasticities, and other parameter

transformations. Since space constraints prohibit detailed analysis of the
different sectors, I concentrate here only on the overall evidence of markups,
scale economies and input fixity, and their effects on productivity growth and

economic profitability. A wealth of additional analyses and comparisons can
be made, however, from perusal and manipulation of the numbers provided in the

Tables. The interested reader can therefore pursue the analysis substantially
further.16

151n particular, including or omitting the Hall instruments had little
fect on the estimated indexes.
The results are presented in the text for all industries in terms of
average annual growth rates computed from the relevant indexes. More
complete indexes (from 1960) are presented in the Appendix. Some additional
results about correlations and other indexes computed are comeented on
below. Computations of certain measures underlying these comeents can be
made directly from the presented indexes. Other results, such as the shadow
valu, ratios underlying the
measures, require direct computation using
the estimated parameter values. ?urther information about these indexes and
the parameter estimates are available upon request from the author.

Page 21

Vb. Productivity Growth
Traditional multifactor productivity growth indexes Lyt based on the
K,L,E,M,PS division of inputs are presented in terms of average annual growth
rates (AAGR) in Table 1, and in their full form (from 1960 to 1986) in the

Appendix Table lA. These measures are computed using standard primal-side
measurement techniques, ignoring the potential existence of markups, input
fixity and returns to scale.

Table 1
Traditional Primal-Side Productivity Growth Measures (Eyt),
U.S. Manufacturing, (Average Annual 2)

MA

FO

TX

AP

PA

PP

CM

PC

RB

1953-86 1.005
1960-86 1.050

0.762
0.766

2.011

0.875
0.945

0.920
1.035

0.595
0.325

2.029
1.566

0.699

1.779

0.543

1.021
1.069

1960-73 1.610
1973-86 0.489

0.985
0.548

1.880
1.678

1.285
0.625

1.769

1.042

2.788

0.300

-0.392

St. Dcv. 1.344

1.255

2.961

1.877

2.450

3.085

LW

FM

CL

PM

FM

MC

1.255

1.670

0.345 -0.168

0.468

3.194

2.702

EL

1.081

IN

TQ

1953-86 2.035
1960-86 2.039

0.567
0.624

0.649 -0.499
0.571 -0.247

0.525
0.523

1.891
2.443

2.266

1.420
1.414

0.890

2.504

1960-73 2.886
1973-86 1.192

0.994

1.051

0.730

0.872

2.213

1.995

0.091 -1.224

0.174

2.112
2.774

3.145

0.253

1.864

0.614

0.139

St. Dcv. 3.325

2.050

1.774

1.431

2.646

2.127

2.665

3.244

3.897

The AACR reflect the existence of a post-1973 productivity growth
slowdown, even though the dramatic stagnation isediate1y after 1973 seen in
the full indexes is somewhat masked by including the most recent years in the

1.067

Page 22

annual average computations. The industries which show a negative growth rate
in the post-1973 period are printing and publishing (PP), primary metals (PM)

and petroleum and coal refining (PC). The latter two of these are capitaland energy-intensive industries which might be thought to be heavily affected

by energy price shocks. This tendency is evident overall; from the full
indexes it appears the industries hardest hit in the mid-l970s included PM,

FM, MC, Q, PA, and RA, all of which are capital intensive. These industries
are also those, however, that experienced relatively intense international

competition. Interestingly, the only industry to exihibit an increase in
productivity growth over this period was MC, which includes the computer
industry.17

The traditional productivity growth indexes appear considerably procyclical, with, for example, declines appearing in most industries around

1970, 1974-75 and 1982-83. One indication of the extent of these fluctuations
is the standard deviation, which for each industry indicates the deviations of

these productivity growth rates from their mean rate. These measures are
rather large, particularly for durable goods industries and those nondurable

goods industries mentioned above as suffering from productivity growth
stagnation and declines.

The fluctuations observed, however, are less systematic it might
initially appear, particularly given the emphasis on these relationships in

the recent studies by Hall. The correlations of these indexes with indexes
reflecting cyclical trends are not very significant. In particular, when this
productivity growth measure is correlated with either a standard published
capacity utilization measure (the Federal Reserve

Board

index for

17Se.iconductors are included in EL, which also experienced very strong
productivity growth over this period, particularly in the late l970s. The
relatively strong performance of the MC industry is driven largely by the
enormous productivity growth experienced in 1984-86.

Page 23

manufacturing, FRB) or the CU measure resulting from estimation of my model,
the correlations tend to be primarily positive but generally statistically

insignificant. Similarly, simple correlations of multifactor productivity
growth carried out using the Hall variables --

the

world oil price (WOP),

defense spending (DEF) and political party in power, were largely
insignificant at standard confidence levels.18

For example, using a one-tailed test of the hypothesis that the
covariance of the productivity residual and WOP was positive, marginal
significance levels under five percent were only found

for

the AP, CM, PC, KB,

CL and FM industries. For DEF this was the case for PA, GM, PC, CL, MC and
TQ. Hall's results also, however, inferred limited correlation patterns.
This was especially true

for

DE?, which was only correlated at the five

percent level with the productivity growth measure for one manufacturing
sector, FM.
GM,

For

WOP more correlation was found; the residuals for the FO, PA,

PC, CL and EL industries were correlated with WOP at this level of

significance. If my results were based on a two-tailed test (a standard t-

test

of the significance of the

slope

coefficient), the only significant

correlations remaining would be that of the PC productivity residual with both

instruments, and of the CM

measure with DEF. For Hall, no significant

correlations at this level would occur for DEF, and

marginal

FO and EL would become

or drop out for WOP.

It should be noted that my results differ from Hall's for a number of
reasons. One disparity

is the

inclusion of intermediate materials, purchased

services and energy costs, and therefore their substitution with capital and
labor, in my productivity growth measure. This suggests that using VOP as an
instrument may not be

very appropriate. One

indication that the

correlation

outlier

18The one
for this was PC (petroleum and coal refining) which is
intuitively reasonable since energy price shocks affect this industry
a
very direct manner.

in

Page 24

measures may suffer from some endogeneity is that many of the manufacturing
sectors for which correlations with WOP were found use energy as either as an

energy or material input. Thus the observed correlations could reflect the
treatment of these inputs.
The cyclical fluctuations in productivity that do exist, although not

pervasive in terms of statistical significance, influence the interpretation
of changes in economic performance.

Thus, it is useful to see to what extent

these variations might be smoothed, and in this sense explained", by taking
into account cyclically related markup, capacity utilization, and returns to

scale characteristics. These characteristics, and the associated adaptations
of traditional productivity growth measures, will now be considered in turn.

Vc. Markups
It has been argued that markup behavior might be expected to be
cyclical, although controversy remains about whether they are pro- or counter-

cyclical.'9 Hall's treatments of the markup do not allow for cyclicality to
exist, since in his empirical analysis the markup is simply estimated as a

constant parameter. However, his general hypothesis about excess capacity
counteracting markups implicitly suggests that increasing markups would be
accoimsodated by additional excess capacity, leading to countercyclicality of

markups. Domowitz, Hubbard and Peterson more directly address this issue by
allowing for

measure

and

vari.bl. markups

and

with a published measure

find som.

assessing the correlation

of the markup

of capacity utilization (as mentioned above).

evidence of procyclicality.

t9See Morrison (1988b,1989a] for further elaboration of cyclicality of
markups and its determinants.

Page 25

In this study, the cyclicality and determinants of the markup

are

directly incorporated into the model.20 One indication of the cyclicality
implied for markup behavior, motivated by the Domowitz, Hubbard and Peterson
studies, is a correlation of the markup index with a capacity utilization

measure. The relationship of the markup index with other exogenous factors
affecting aggregate output in the economy, such as Hall's world oil price and
defense spending variables, may also provide some evidence of cyclicality,
since output changes largely drive utilization variations.

The estimated markup indexes implied by my modal are presented in Table
2 in terms of annual averages, and in Appendix Table 2A in their full form.

As found by Hall, significant markups do appear to exist, although the
estimates of the markups are intuitively more reasonable than those based on
the simpler framework of the Hall studies.21 The year-to-year variations are
also important; although the standard deviations are not large (especially
relative to mean markups), clear tendencies do emerge.

A secular increase in markups over time is evident, although significant

year-to-year variations occur. This tendency is more clearly apparent from
the year-to-year changes appearing in Table 2A than from the overall averages.

although it is not as pervasive as found in studies such as in Morrison
[l989a,bJ. The only industries experiencing a clear downward trend in markups
are AP, LW, PC and PM; this is consistent with intuition given the

should be noted that the impacts of labor hoarding, adjustment costs
and other similar characteristics that might affect productivity growth are
reflected in these estimates as well as those for the cost elasticity,
discussed in further detail in Section Vd. below.
21This is particularly true for the CM, P0, PC and PP industries, for which
the Hall estimates are clear outliers (with markup ratios of 20.112, 5.291,
-139.478 and 14.263, respectively). The estimates here are also comparable
to those found using different data in Morrison (1989) where pooled total
manufacturing data for the U.S. • Canada and Japan were used for estimation,
and in Morrison (1989aJ which is based on data for Canadian manufacturing
industries.

Table 2

Average Annual Markups (py/MC) and Cost Elasticities

U.S. Manufacturing
py/MC(—l/(l+epy))

MA

FO

TX

A?

PA

PP

CM

PC

RB

1953-86 1.188
1960-86 1.197

1.292
1.298

1.259
1.272

1.283
1.280

1.324
1.363

1.362
1.396

1.608
1.695

1.210
1.237

1.197
1.223

1960-73 1.183
1973-86 1.211

1.285

1.261

1.287

1.324

1.350

1.588

1.255

1.198

1.311

1.284

1.273

1.402

1.441

1.803

1.220

1.248

St. Dcv. 0.027

0.031

0.048

0.018

0.098

0.095

0.236

0.072

0.073

FM

CL

PM

FM

MC

EL

IN

TQ

1953-86 1.471
1960-86 1.475

1.192

1.213

1.257

1.179

1.317

1.306

1.220

1.247

1.186

1.326
1.359

1.228

1.204

1.252

1.354

1.318

1960-73 1.507
1973-86 1.443

1.191

1.221

1.268

1.187

1.275

1.203

1.241

1.304

1.217

1.220

1.225

1.184

1.443

1.302

1.467

1.332

St. Dcv. 0.074

0.036

0.025

0.050

0.023

0.111

0.078

0.140

0.050

FO

TX

AP

PA

PP

CM

PC

RB

1953-86 0.860
1960-86 0.835

0.826
0.811

0.743

0.771
0.756

0.762

0.773

0.712

0.738

0.671
0.626

0.831

0.728

0.821

0.832
0.791

1960-73 0.855
1973-86 0.815

0.832
0.791

0.767

0.760

0.759

0.766

0.837

0.752

0.665

0.710

0.689
0.562

0.793

0.689

0.849

0.745

St. Dcv. 0.062

0.042

0.062

0.042

0.120

0.085

0.122

0.039

0.108

FM

CL

PM

PM

MC

EL

IN

TQ

1953-86 0.667
1960-86 0.660

0.801
0.779

0.813
0.786

0.773
0.748

0.859

0.783

0.794

0.745

0.848
0.815

0.793

0.846

0.756

0.762

1960-73 0.650
1973-86 0.671

0.809
0.748

0.827

0.789

0.863

0.804

0.708

0.830

0.686

0.875
0.756

0.843
0.669

0.793

0.746

0.062

0.078

0.073

0.036

0.101

0.093

0.122

0.079

LW

((_(TJ(L)

—

MA

LW

St. Dcv.

0.057

0.730

Page 26
intensifying international competition in the apparel, lumber and primary
metals markets, and the rise in costs of crude materials in the petroleum
refining industry which has provided downward pressures on profit margins.
Some other industries facing increasing international competition such as CL
and PM (and to a lesser extent TX and TQ) appear from the averages to be quite

constant. Interestingly, markups in high-technology industries such as CM,
EL, MC and IN all increased for 1960-73 to 1973-86.
In general, markups appear to decline during recessions and in that

sense seem procyclical. For example for all industries the 1973 and 1979 OPEC
shocks are reflected in a downturn in the markup ratio. However, from
correlations of the markup with the economic measure of-capacity utilization,
the evidence is overwhelmingly in favor of countercyclicality of markups.

The correlations of the reported markups with CU (and the full cost

elasticity y) are negative throughout except for the primary metals industry
(PM),22 and are all statistically significant at the one percent level. For
total manufacturing (MA), for example, the correlation23 is -0.419 with a

standard error of .088 The correlations with the published FR3 capacity
utilization for manufacturing are somewhat more ambiguous, though; although
the correlations are generally negative, they tend to be very small and
largely insignificant.

and capacity utilization was also found for
22The positive correlation of
Canada in Morrison (l989aJ. -In the Canadian study P0 (and to a lesser
extent TQ) were also found to be procyclical. The evidence of
countercyclicality in nondurable manufacturing in the U.S. found here is
largely dependent on the correlation for TO which is a large proportion of
total nondurabl. manufacturing; the different result
a quite different composition of this industry in Canada. In addition.
is also has one
although the corr.lation for TQ is negative in the U.S. •

is likely the result of

of th. smallest values.

it

23These computations were carried out similarly to Hall. using a simple
regression of the markup index en the capacity utilization index and a

constant, and the significance assessed in terms of the t-statisvic on the
slope coefficient.

Page 27

Correlations of markups with defense spending were often positive,
suggesting indicating that expansion due to increased government expenditures
has a different effect on markup behavior than a general increase in output.
Correlations of markups with the world oil price variable, however, weakly
support the conclusion of countercyclical markups since increases in this
variable tend to be closely associated with recessions; the correlations were
primarily positive but often insignificant
Countercycality of markups has a well defined impact on productivity

growth patterns through the error bias cpy•jMj(xj/xj). Since EMyt_ect
ytpyZjMj(Xj/Xj), and an increase (in absolute value) in Epy implies a
larger markup, an upward trend in the markup will compensate to some extent
for a downward trend in the productivity growth rate (as long as inputs in

general are increasing). Since this occurs for both secular and cyclical
markup fluctuations, countercyclical markups imply that cost-based measures of
productivity growth reveal higher levels and less cyclicality of productivity
growth.

This correction for demand characteristics can, however, be misleading
if cost characteristics such as scale economies exist that should also be
accommodated in the measures, particularly given the offsetting cyclical

patterns of the indicators. Additional insights about fluctuations in
traditionally measured productivity growth can therefore be obtained by

considering the

returns

to

impact

of explicitly relaxing the assumptions of constant

scale and instantaneous adjustment - -

incorporating

fixity.

Vd. The Cost Elasticity, s, and its Components
The cost elasticity s reflects a combination of both short and long
run fixity, captured as downward sloping short- or long-run average cost

curves. This fixity was recognized in the Hall studies as a potential

Page 28

determinant of cyclical swings in measured productivity growth, but was
developed in the context of long run returns to scale and the effect measured

as a constant parameter. Using my model the effects of short run fixity
(capacity utilization) or long run returns to scale (scale economies) may
independently be distinguished, and the varying cyclical behavior of such

measures incorporated. This distinction is particularly important for
providing an assessment of Hall's contention that markups coexist with normal
profits owing to excess capacity.

In particular, capacity utilization, which is one component of Ey,

is

by definition procyclical. Similarly, if scale economies exist, output
expansion from upward swings in the cycle cause average Cost declines, so this

component

of

will

also tend to be procyclical. This procyclicality

suggests that increased profitability from countercyclical markups tends to be

by excess capacity and the existence of scale economies; the Hall

offset

correction to change

productivity

revenu,

to cost shares will

therefore

affect measured

growth less than if only markups were taken into account. The

remaining effect of error bias corrections to accomodate the deviation of
from

one is not obvious a priori since the

bias depends not only on the

measure of s, but also on the relative growth rates
fixed
in

of output and quasi-

inputs. However, in general procyclical variations in

corrections incorporating

will result

to smooth the productivity growth measure,

since this procyclicality implies greater output than input changes.
The measured
averages

Table
are

in

cost elasticity £

is presented

in terms

of

annual

the second panel of Table 2, and in full index form in Appendix

3A. These measures suggest short and

quite substantial in a numb.r

of

long

run

scale economies exist and

industries. Scale economies also appear

to be increasing, especially in industries which tend to be more capital

Page 29

intensive and have experienced productivity growth stagnation, such as PA, CM,
and PM.

One interesting exception to this is the MC industry, which, as

mentioned above, includes the computer manufacturing sector. Although
productivity growth in this industry has been strong and actually increasing,

scale economies have also risen substantially. Note also that this industry
experienced one of the largest jumps in markups during this period, as did CM,

where scale economies also expanded. This is in sharp contrast to PM, where a
(more modest) increase in scale economies occurred along with a decline in

markups. This suggests declining profitability as well as productivity
performance, due perhaps to a decline in relative efficiency and increased

international competition. To a lesser extent this is true also for A?.

The procyclicality of the y measure is evident from the more complete
indexes in Table 3A, where, for example, declines are evident for most

industries in the downturns of 1969-70, 1974-75 and 1982-83. To a large
extent cyclical movements in

are driven by utilization fluctuations, since

potential scale economies appear to be increasing over time rather smoothly.

In turn, the capacity utilization patterns appearing in the CU indexes result
primarily from changes in capital utilization, although labor hoarding24, and
thus procyclicality from changes in work effort, are also evident from
fluctuations in the shadow value of labor.
More specifically, the independent effects of short and long run
fixities can be distinguished from the equality

The two

components of y are presented as annual averages in Table 3, and graphically
for total manufacturing in Figure la. The CU numbers in Table 3 show that

24This could be interpreted as reflecting changes in work effort, which will
tend to be procyclical, as mentioned by Hall.

Table 3
Average Annual Capacity Utilization (CIJC)
and (Inverse) Returns to Scale
U.S. Manufacturing

—

MA

FO
1.002
0.996

TX
0.994
0.996

AP
0.968
0.956

PA

PP

1953-86 0.968
1960-86 0.953

0.989
0.946

0.930

1960-73 0.955
1973-86 0.950

0.999
0.993

1.019
0.973

0.959
0.953

0.966

St. Dcv. 0.042

0.022

0.045

FM

1953-86 0.860
1960-86 0.861

0.898

CM
1.028
1.019

PC
0.971
0.961

RB
0.927
0.898

0.927

0.916
0.881

1.032
1.006

0.924
0.999

0.922
0.873

0.042

0.101

0.077

0.043

0.045

0.081

CL

PM

FM

MC

EL

IN

TQ

0.889

0.946

0.952

0.957

0.947

0.930

0.976
0.958

0.983

0.910

0.951
0.926

0.955

0.874

0.962

0.930

1960-73 0.827
1973-86 0.894

0.889
0.858

0.964
0.855

0.969
0.883

0.966
0.929

0.949
0.911

0.990
0.927

0.994
0.931

0.949
0.911

St. Dcv. 0.071

0.045

0.101

0.084

0.030

0.061

0.054

0.065

0.068

—

FO

TX

AP

PA

PP

CM

PC

RB

1953-86 0.887
1960-86 0.876

0.824
0.814

0.747

0.796

0.767

0.829

0.650

0.856

0.894

0.730

0.791

0.751

0.820

0.612

0.854

0.880

1960-73 0.895
1973-86 0.857

0.833
0.796

0.751
0.709

0.792
0.789

0.785
0.717

0.835

0.666
0.558

0.858

0.906

0.805

0.850

0.853

0.030

0.028

0.044

0.013

0.047

0.025

0.098

0.008

0.042

LW

FM

CL

PM

P14

MC

EL

IN

TQ

1953-86 0.776
1960-86 0.768

0.900
0.891

0.861
0.865

0.812

0.899

0.819

0.867

0.803

0.829

0.808

0.894

0.800

0.849

0.782

0.818

1960-73 0.786
1973-86 0.750

0.910
0.871

0.857
0.872

0.815
0.802

0.893

0.846
0.754

0.884
0.815

0.847
0.718

0.835

0.894

0.029

0.028

0.013

0.014

0.017

0.062

0.052

0.078

0.036

LW

eL(_MC.Y,c)*

St. Dcv.

St. Dcv.

MA

0.802

Page 30

capacity utilization has been declining in every industry but PC and LW.25
They also suggest excess capacity virtually everywhere, although
overutilization of capacity appears in the CM industry throughout the time

period, and in the early years for the textile industry.26 The excess
capacity has been driven primarily, especially in the post-1973 period, by a
low shadow value of capital relative to its market price; in most industries a
decline in the ZK/PK ratio and an increase in ZilPL has occurred post-1973
Note also that the levels of CUc are less than .9 in the PP, RB, LW, FN, CL
and PM industries, indicating that the cost consequences of short-run excess
capacity are often greater than lOZ.

The bottom panel of Table 3 indicates, however, that scale economies

seem to be driving the evidence of a low and declining y even more than CU.
In particular, long run returns to scale (the inverse of

are very

substantial and increasing, especially in the nondurable industries such as

TX, AP, PA and CM. Excess capacity therefore exists even in the long run.
Precisely why long-run scale economies are increasing over time in all
industries except CL and FM is a fascinating topic for further research.

Ve. Normal Profits
The counteracting effects of markups and utilization/scale are evident

from the average annual levels of ADJ_yLCU/(l+p,1)_py/AC (where AC is short

does not explicitly include the impact of adjustment costs, but only
of the fixity itself. The following adaptation of the productivity growth
measure also ignores this modification. This was simply neglected for the
sake of brevity, however; as in Morrison (l989bJ the direct adaptation for
adjustment costs has a negligible effect on the results.
26This is in contrast to indexes measured by B.rndt md Morrison [1981] and
others for total manufacturing in the U.S. This likely arises because of
the explicit recognition of fixity arising from both capital and labor
stocks (from adjustment costs), a more complete specification of inputs, and
incorporation of nonatatic expectations through the estimation process.
This last point is elaborated in Morrison (1985].

Page 31
run average total cost with the fixed factors values at their ex ante prices)

in Table 4 and Figure lb. ADJ tends to be close to one, suggesting that
revenues approximately equal economic costs, and that economic profits are
therefore roughly zero on average.

Table 4

Full Adjustment Factor (AN),
U.S. Manufacturing (Average Annual

ADJEy/ ( l÷
Year
MA

Level)

FO

TX

AP

PA

PP

CM

PC

RB

1953-86 1.021
1960-86 0.999

1.065

0.933

1.046

1.052

1.004

0.924

0.988
0.967

0.999

1.052

0.966

1.026

1.045

1.014

0.989
0.964

1960-73 1.011
1973-86 0.987

1.068
1.036

0.963

0.978
0.957

1.001
0.931

1.031

1.078

0.994

0.885

1.021

1.011

1.035

0.999
0.929

St. Dcv. 0.056

0.034

0.049

0.053

0.082

0.051

0.044

0.034

0.073

FN

CL

PM

PM

MC

EL

IN

TQ

1953-86 0.978

0.953

0.985

0.974

1.012

1.028

1.034

1.028

1.035

0.971

0.936

0.959

0.935

1.003

1.005

1.016

1.010

1.002

1960-73 0.977
1973-86 0.965

0.963
0.910

1.008
0.910

1.001
0.869

1.024
0.983

1.021
0.988

1.051
0.982

1.043
0.977

1.032
0.972

St. Dcv. 0.062

0.052

0.086

0.122

0.033

0.058

0.057

0.061

0.084

LV

1960-86

Although short
maximizing markup

rw profits or losses

behavior

are possible

does not result in high

in this model, profit-

profitability

since its

countercyclical pattern is accomaodated by procyclicality of the output-cost
elasticity.

Thus the Hall assertion

concerning

the

relationship between

Page 32
markups and capacity utilization, which implies monopolistically competitive
markets are predominant in the U.S., is not only possible theoretically but is

borne Out empirically by my results. Essentially, managers' pricing responses
balance the technical and market economic fluctuations encountered, but do not
allow for excess profitability on average.
The annual average ADJ measures presented in Table 4 suggest that this
balancing act has increasingly resulted in revenues falling short of covering
all costs of production, including appropriate returns to capital, in U.S.

manufacturing industries.27 Although for total manufacturing normal profits
were approximated on average for the 1960 to 1986 period, a decline in
profitability in the post-1973 period is evident for all industries except

pc.28 In particular, although before 1973 only six industries had negative
economic profits, post-1973 the number of such industries more than doubled to

thirteen. Only four industries experienced a positive economic profit post1973 (FO, PP, CM and PC), with TO, and PC being the most profitable.
It is interesting to conjecture that these nondurable manufacturing
industries were perhaps subject to less intense competition than most of the
other industries during this period of international expansion of markets.
Other industries, even the MC industry which performed better than other
durable industries but still fell short of normal profits by lX on average,
tended to be more internationally competitive as well as more energy and
capital intensive.

Overall, these
discussion

numbers are

dramatic confirmation of much recent

on the apparent declines in competitiveness of U.S. durable goods

and textiles industries. It should be noted, however, that the post-1973

27P.ecall that the interest rate used in the cx ante opportunity cost of
gPital is the Moody Baa bond yield.
Note that realized capital gains on equipment and structural assets are
not included in the opportunity cost of capital measure here. These gains
could possibly add to the profitability implied here.

Page 33

decline in profitability was reversing toward the end of my sample; more
complete indexes show increasing profitability after 1982, with positive
economic profits by the end of the sample for the MC industry.
Little variation of the ADJ factor is apparent, but there is a clear
downward trend and some procyclicality in the ratio of returns to costs. This

is evident from Figure lb. which illustrates that y has a relatively greater
impact on AN than the markup ratio; markups are not keeping pace with changes

in technical factors and competition, so AN is declining. This suggests some
pattern in the difference between cost and revenue shares.

Although the Hall

correction to measure input shares in terms of costs instead of revenues will

have little impact, since AN closely approximates one, a measure based on
Cost shares will tend to show a somewhat smaller decline in productivity
growth over time,

It appears, therefore, that the greatest explanatory clout for

productivity growth fluctuations arise from error bias corrections. This
seems to be the case from my measures; true technical change is smaller and
less volatile than usually measured because of erroneous assumptions about

returns to scale and fixity imbedded in the measurement process. I will now
turn to this final result.

Vf. The Corrected Technical Change Measure
Productivity growth indexes resulting from adapting standard measures

for short and long rm fixity are presented in Table 5. Note that these
measures implicitly already incorporate adjustments for markups, since they

are based on cost-side computations. The first panel of Table 5 includes the
impacts of technical change, returns to scale and utilization

(eTyt_(TCt/ICY_ETCt/(LCy.CU) and therefore represents a primal-side measure
of total productivity growth with error biases removed and the influence of

Table 5

Corrected Cost-Side Productivity Growth (TYt) and Technical Change (ETc),
U.S. Manufacturing, (Average Annual 1.),

—
T

T

Yt CtECY
TO

TX

AP

PA

1953-86 0.762
1960-86 0.751

0.361
0.368

1.717

1.354

0.607
0.688

1960-73 0.973
1973-86 0.528

0.582

0.802

0.796

0.774

0.155

1.906

0.580 -0.218

St. Dcv. 1.058

1.697

3.445

2.343

2.342

3.193

3.394

0.964

2.723

TN

CL

PM

FM

MC

EL

IN

TQ

1953-86 1.898
1960-86 1.718

0.422

0.359 -0.545
0.362 -0.300

0.407
0.364

1.447
1.781

1.847
1.982

0.563
0.368

0.358

0.465

1960-73 2.216
1973-86 1.220

0.645
0.286

0.512 -0.070
0.211 -0.531

0.346

0.797

0.700

2.766

2.326
1.637

1.192

0.382

-0.457

-0.187

St. Dcv. 4.517

1.736

1.580

3.048

1.197

2.920

2.035

3.170

2.604

—

TO

TX

AP

PA

PP

CM

PC

RB

1953-86 0.655
1960-86 0.625

0.294

1.285
0.981

0.451

0.134

0.523

0.505

0.123 -0.056
0.173 -0.348

0.443

0.295

-0.097

0.011

0.473

1960-73 0.839
1973-86 0.411

0.489

0.631

0.587

0.531

0.221

0.063

0.192

0.583

0.101.

1.332

0.424 -0.186 -0.918

-0.257

-0.170

0.364

St. Dcv. 0.918

1.392

2.407

1.787

1.750

2.269

2.340

0.813

2.422

TN

CL

PM

FM

MC

EL

IN

TQ

1953-86 1.278
1960-86 1.140

0.347

0.286 -0.445
0.278 -0.235

0.347

1.038
1.267

1.566
1.639

0.549
0.346

0.338

0.303

1960-73 1.444
1973-86 0.836

0.53-6

0.436 -0.052
0.119 -0.421

0.299

0.657

2.051

0.999

0.600

0.213

0.308

1.877

1.227 -0.062 -0.103

St. Dcv. 3.087

1.419

1.311

2.373

1.020

2.138

1.642

MA

LW

PC

RB

0.202 -0.178
0.516
0.278 -0.525 -0.129

0.163
0.020

0.617
0.575

0.249

0.246

0.623

-1.299 -0.370 -0.207

0.528

PP

CM

0.112

0.257

'TCt
MA

LW

0.375

2.642

0.249

2.138

Page 34

markups omitted. The second panel isolates the impact of technical change
(eTct), provided by a decomposition of the full measure.

A comparison of the indexes in Tables 1 and 5 indicate that correcting
for error biases resulting from markups and input fixity is quantitatively

important. In general productivity growth appears lover than reflected in the
traditional measure for the 1960-73 period, but often is higher after 1973.

Thus, the difference between the pre- and post-1973 periods is substantially

reduced. For example, for total manufacturing, unadjusted growth rates for
1960-73 and 1973-86 are 1.610 and 0.489, while corresponding fixity-adjusted

values are 0.973 and 0.528. This reflects less of a productivity growth
slowdown than is generally perceived, and thereby suggests a partial

explanation" of the usually measured slowdown. The entries in Table 5 also
suggest that true efficiency growth in some industries, especially in PP, CM,

PC, PM and IN, has been very limited even from the early years of the sample.
A further decline in the apparent growth of technical change, especially
for earlier years, appears when the impacts of scale economies are removed.

This can be seen by comparing the top and bottom panels of Table 5. However,
in some industries, notably CL, PM and FN, standard productivity growth

measures understate technical change. It is also the case that indications of
negative productivity growth are attenuated with this adjustment; some of the
declines attributed to productivity change therefore appear to be due to
diminished
scale

output demand

and therefore the potential to take advantage of

economies.

In

total,

corrections to standard productivity growth measures tend to

somewhat reduce secular and cyclical fluctuations in productivity growth

measures. This tendency
corroborated by an

to

"smooth" the productivity growth measure is

examination

of the year-to-year fluctuations reported in

Appendix Table 4A, and the graph of ey (traditionally measured), Tct and

Page 35

cTy for total manufacturing in Figure lc. The smoothing of fluctuations is
evident even though standard deviations for the total productivity growth

measure eTy increase for some industries relative to the standard primal
measure. It is also consistent with a reduced statistical significance found
to correlations of these productivity residuals with the capacity utilization,
world oil price and defense spending indexes (except for the MC industry).

In summary, the Hall-inspired correction of

for markups by adapting

revenue into cost shares does not significantly affect the evidence of
productivity growth, because the offsetting impacts of markups and utilization

and scale imply approximate equivalence of cost and revenue shares. However,
corrections of productivity growth measures for error biases due to erroneous
assumptions about returns to scale and fixity do provide insights into the
"explanations" of productivity growth fluctuations.

VI. Concludina Remarks

The issues addressed in this paper about the determinants of
productivity growth fluctuations •fixities •-

in particular

the effects of markups and

are based on a somewhat different perspective than recent studies

such as those by Robert Hall. The analysis here is developed in terms of a
full structural model allowing formalization and measurement of the
relationships among productivity growth, profit-maximizing markup behavior,

capacity utilization and scale economies. Such a framework permits
consideration of whether these cost and revenue components, usually ignored in
productivity growth analysis, are in some sense "responsible" for cyclical
fluctuations and secular downturns in productivity growth.
The first "cause" evaluated is the markup

of

price over marginal cost.

Markup

indexes

embodying a cyclical component have been constructed for a

number

of U.S.

manufacturing sectors. The patterns of these profit-maximizing

Page 36
markups tended to reveal increases in markups over time and in cyclical
downturns -• markups appear to be countercyclical. As a result, the
traditional primal productivity growth measure, developed in terms of revenue
shares and thus implicitly based on the assumption of perfect competition,

exacerbates declines over time and in recessionary periods. Thus, adaptation
of the measure to be in terms of Cost shares provides some "explanatory power
for productivity performance variation, in terms of smoothing observed
fluctuations.

However, fixities in both the short and long run also have an impact

observed

on

economic performance. Within my model, short run fixities are

represented in terms of changes in capacity utilization, and

"fixities" are reflected as scale economies. Although

long

capacity

run

utilization is

by definition procyclical, I find it also appears to have an upward secular

trend. On the other hand, the capability of taking advantage of scale
economies seems to be increasing over time. This is consistent with
intuition, for in order to obtain normal

economic profits, the existence of

increasing excess capacity and scale economies must

be

offset by increasing

markups. My empirical results confirm this counteracting effect in U.S.
manufacturing industries; I find that economic profits on average have been

zero, but have

exhibited

a downward trend over time.

Together, these forces tend to offset the smoothing effect of adjusting

primal

productivity growth measures

revenue shares. However,

contributes
growth

for markups

incorporating

by measuring coat instead of

these characteristics still

way to "explaining" fluctuations in productivity
in terms of error biases. Corrections of erroneous assumptions made in
in an important

traditional computations have a significant smoothing impact on observed
trends in productivity growth and technical change.

Page 31

The framework used here for productivity growth measurement is based on
a consistent treatment of interactions among productivity growth, markups and
short and long run fixities, and thereby facilitates detailed analyses of

economic performance and fluctuations. The conjectures of Robert Hall which
form the motivation for this study are largely confirmed, in the sense that
markups are significant, and tend to be counteracted by excess capacity and
returns to scale, resulting in approximately normal

profits.

However, the

full structural framework of this paper is necessary for assessing empirically
the validity of such conjectures; in the Hall model restrictive assumptions
preclude such an analysis.

Page 38

References
Berndt, Ernst R., and Catherine J. Morrison [1981], "Capacity Utilization:
Underlying Economic Theory and an Alternative Approach", American
Economic Review, Vol. 7, No. 2, May 1981, pp. 48-52.

and David 0. Wood [1984], "Energy Price Changes and the
Induced Revaluation of Durable Capital in U.S. Manufacturing During the
OPEC Decade", manuscript, M.I.T. Center for Energy Policy Research,
January.

Berndt, Ernst R. •

Bresnahan, Timothy [1988], "Empirical Studies of Industries with Market
Power", Handbook of Industrial Orsanization, (R. Schmalensee and
R. Willig, ads.), North-Holland Press.
Domowitz, Ian. ft. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen (1987], "Market
Structure, Durable Goods, and Cyclical Fluctuations in Markups",
manuscript, June 1987.

Domowitz, Ian. R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen (1988], "Market
Structure and Cyclical Fluctuations in U.S. Manufacturing", Review
of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 70, No. 1, February.
Griliches, Zvi [19671. "Production Functions in Manufacturing", in
The Theory and Emoirical Analysis of Production, Murray Brown, ad.,
Studies in Income and Wealth Volume No. 31, Columbia University Press:
New York.
Hall, Robert E. (19861, "Market Structure and Macroeconomic Fluctuations",
Brookines Psoers on Economic Activity, 2, pp. 285-338.
Hall, Robert E. [l988a], "The Relation Between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S.
Industry", Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 96, No. 5, October,
pp. 921-947.

Hall, Robert E. [1988bJ, "Increasing Returns: Theory and Measurement with
Industry Data", Manuscript, October.
Hall, Robert E. (1989], "Invariance Properties of Solow's Productivity
Residual", National Bureau of Economic Working Paper #3034, July.
Morrison, Catherine J. (1985], "On the Economic Interpretation and Measurement
of Optimal Capacity Utilization with Anticipatory Expectations",
Review of Economic Studies, No. 52, 1985, pp. 295-310.
Morrison, Catherine J. [1986], "Productivity Measurement with Nonstatic
Expectations and Varying Capacity Utilization: An Integrated Approach",
Journal of Econometrics. Vol. 33, No. 1/2, Oct./Nov., pp. 51-74.
Morrison, Catherine J. [1988a], "Quasi-Fixed Inputs in U.S. and Japanese
Manufacturing: A Generalized Leontief Cost Function Approach",
Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 70, No. 2, May,
pp. 275-287.

Page 39
Morrison, Catherine J. (1988b], "Markups in U.S. and Japanese Manufacturing:
A Short Run Econometric Analysis", National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper #2799, December.
Morrison, Catherine J. (1989a], "Markup Behavior in Durable and Nondurable
Manufacturing: An Applied Production Theory Approach", National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper #2941, April.
Morrison, Catherine J. [1989b], "Unraveling the Productivity Growth Slowdown
in the U.S., Canada and Japan: The Effects of Subequilibrium, Scale
Economies and Markups", National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper #2993.

Morrison, Catherine J. [1990], A Microeconomic Aooroach to the Measurement of
Economic Performance: Productivity Growth. Caoacitv Utilization, and
Related Performance Indicators, forthcoming, Springer-Verlag Press.
Ohta, Makoto [1975], "A Note on the Duality Between Production and Cost Functions:
Rate of Returns to Scale and Rate of Technical Progress", Economic
Studies Ouarterly, 25, pp. 63-65.
Pindyck, Robert S. and Julio J. Rotemberg [1983], "Dynamic Factor Demands,
Energy Use and the Effects of Energy Price Shocks, Anerican Economie
Review, Vol. 73, No. 5, December, pp. 1066-1079.
Romer, Paul M. [1986], "Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth", Journal of
Political Economy, 94, October, pp. 1002-1037.
Rotemberg, Julio J., and Garth Saloner [1986], "A Supergame-Theoretic Model of
Business cycles and Price Wars During Booms", Ouarterlv Journal of
Economics, 101.
Schembri, Lawrence (1988]. "Export Prices and Exchange Rates: An Industry
Approach, forthcoming in Trade Policy and ComDetitiveness, Robert
Feenstra, ed., University of Chicago Press.
Shapiro, Matthew, (1988], "Measuring Market Power in U.S. Industry", National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #2212, April.
Solow, Robert M. [1958], "Technical Change and the Aggregate Production
Function", Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 39, No. 5, August,
pp. 312-320.

APPENDIX TABLES

Table LA

Primal-Side
Year

MA

Productivity Growth

FO

TX

1960

0.079

0.774

1.830

1961

1.135

0.496

0.798

1962

2.025

1.322

1963

2.388

1964

AP

U.S. Manufacturing (Z),

PA

PP

GM

PC

RB

1.983 -1.630 -6.046

0.141

1.638 -1.040

-1.747

1.079

5.698

2.066

1.364

3.972

3.232

0.660

0.333

-3.616

3.449

1.128

2.834

1.141

1.532

1.892

1.328

2.776

3.337

1.302

2.027

2.527

0.222

3.155 -0.656

2.633

3.676

4.522

1.511

2.195

1965

2.460

1.996

1.432

1.841

0.854

0.606

3.208

0.309

1.499

1966

1.489

1.598

2.771

1.740

0.795

1.792

1.798

1.035

0.420

1967

-0.070

2.801 -1.698

0.237 -2.054

1.021

0.855

0.194

1.398

1968

1.146 -0.550

-0.243

-0.454

3.973

-0.335

3.982

2.032

1.360

1969

1.174

0.925

2.316

0.386

3.219

1.747

2.442

0.865

2.247

1970

-0.495

1.172

5.165 -0.911

-1.233 -3.405

2.034

2.623 -2.716

1971

1.868

1.568

1.882

1.309

2.039

0.428

2.611

0.514

3.050

1972

2.791

1.577

1.821

7.529

3.956

2.212

4.525

1.039

1.724

1973

2.493

1.138

-0.814

2.053

5.721

1.728

4.326

1.567

2.247

1974

.1.663 -2.268

-3.322

1.440

-1.138

1975

-1.781

0.905

1.503

0.879 -6.222 -0.977

1976

1.881

1.472

4.215

0.480

2.874

0.405

2.859

0.276 -0.826

1977

0.521 -2.040

6.860

0.563

0.923

-0.287

1.053

0.185

1.038

1978

0.470

1.356 -1.372

0.807

1.564 -0.103

0.166

0.087

-0.189

1979

0.627

1.277

3.721

0.796

1.980

-1.657

-0.792

1980

1.124

1.978

4.915

4.031 -0.274

0.022 -2.510

1981

1.851

2.469

2.824

2.676

1.781

2.392

1982

0.130

2.109

2.336

0.041

1983

-0.323

-0.901

1984

2.063

0.155

1985

1.109

1986

0.352 -1.630

-0.231

-0.750 -3.861 -1.761 -3.152

-0.250

-5.391 -0.562 -1.418

0.604

2.307

-0.895

5.499

4.107 -0.615

0.573 -0.418

0.564

0.549 -1.322 -0.649 -1.518

1.495 -1.275

0.584

1.734

1.890

2.236 -9.085 -0.292 -1.573 -0.497 -1.168 -0.022

2.364

0.920

1.529

7.751 -3.501

0.282 -0.255

2.463 -2.662

3.719

0.944

4.626

1.526 -1.787

Table 1A, contd.

LW

FN

CL

-2.774 -0.576

PM

FM

MC

-1.980 -0.504 -0.095

1960

-1.462

1961

0.466

0.882

2.076

0.567

0.373

1962

1.562

-1.251

0.709

0.364

1963

7.437

2.929

3.335

1964

10.144

1.454

1965

3.087

1966

0.731

1967

EL

IN

TQ

2.807

-1.323

1.441

4.032

-2.354 -0.120

1.700

3.625

5.609

1.732

4.132

2.329

0.703

1.055

4.494 -0.845

5.435

1.718

2.845

1.399

4.960

3.631

4.356

3.213

2.435

0.636

0.882

1.705

1.461

6.077

6.243

5.764

0.495

-0.295

2.352

0.431

2.415

2.428

2.989

0.237

4.805

-0.437

-0.991

-2.244

1.504

0.107

0.937

0.103 -1.087

1968

3.128

0.524

1.613

-1.926

0.898

0.366

1.826

3.206

2.932

1969

-2.845

2.351

1.425

-0.525

0.543

1.170

3.816

4.328

-0.360

1970

5.131

-2.333

-1.071

-1.537

-1.789

1971

-0.314

0.222

-0.057

0.135

0.390

0.326

0.903

4.291

7.201

1972

4.584

5.005

3.004

1.708

1.659

5.764

4.075

4.043

0.868

1973

-0.399

0.641

1.561

4.545

1.823

3.638

3.795

2.411

3.067

1974

1.900

-1.174 -2.329 -1.013

-3.558

-0.612

-1.924

0.760

-1.301

1975

1.842

-0.488

-3.743 -0.842

2.424

0.597

1976

-1.200

2.615

1.382 -0.880

2.912

3.521

3.447

0.510

3.898

1977

-2.838

0.617

-1.905 -4.221

1.221

3.346

6.259

1.388

0.753

1978

-1.836

2.105

1.731 -0.594

1.656

2.843 -0.276 -0.747

1979

4.062

0.161

1.159

2.995

2.339

1980

6.390

2.782

0.538

2.770

1.494

3.608

3.774 -1.851 -3.230

1981

0.125

1.192

2.045

2.519

0.943

3.444

1.347

1982

-4.501

1983

-0.350

1984

6.274

2.155

3.297

5.725

1985

0.180

-0.888

1986

5.448

-3.356

-0.799 -10.887 -2.595

0.082

.0.616 -0.406

1.131 -0.741

0.243 -0.122 -5.775 -0.686 -0.694

1.167

-1.730 -5.345

1.797 -1.912

4.501 -1.225

2.521 -0.081

1.151

0.867

2.782 -2.101 -1.531

3.371

2.686

7.172

1.563

2.495

2.732

1.842

0.624 -0.100

5.216

3.214

-0.367

0.550

-1.968

-0.878 -1.487

7.369

1.796 -1.790 -2.796

-2.670 -0.271 -5.222

Table 2A

Markups (p.j/MC—l/(l+rj)), U.S. Manufacturing

Year

MA

FO

TX

AP

PA

PP

CM

PC

RB

1960

1.149

1.277

1.194

1.265

1.203

1.255

1.320

1.148

1.108

1961

1.149

1.278

1.195

1.278

1.232

1.257

1.339

1.161

1.104

1962

1.151

1.264

1.193

1.273

1.241

1.261

1.369

1.179

1.122

1963

1.158

1.271

1.192

1.273

1.258

1.286

1.403

1.197

1.123

1964

1.163

1.283

1.199

1.274

1.263

1.309

1.420

1.209

1.138

1965

1.169

1.266

1.219

1.269

1.280

1.335

1.455

1.219

1.159

1966

1.179

1.256

1.240

1.279

1.306

1.358

1.505

1.239

1.181

1967

1.183

1.277

1.249

1.274

1.318

1.365

1.525

1.254

1.190

1968

1.197

1.300

1.286

1.299

1.352

1.394

1.636

1.265

1.231

1969

1.203

1.304

1.322

1.311

1.373

1.404

1.721

1.282

1.256

1970

1.201

1.323

1.322

1.317

1.397

1.374

1.741

1.327

1.233

1971

1.199

1.325

1.321

1.311

1.385

1.376

1.747

1.316

1.241

1972

1.209

1.309

1.326

1.284

1.402

1.408

1.833

1.320

1.282

1973

1.218

1.248

1.323

1.285

1.408

1.425

1.946

1.346

1.319

1974

1.210

1.246

1.292

1.239

1.356

1.375

1.826

1.256

1.250

1975

1.193

1.266

1.288

1.265

1.327

1.326

1.609

1.222

1.175

1976

1.203

1.299

1.291

1.269

1.351

1.347

1.688

1.217

1.195

1977

1.217

1.308

1.303

1.283

1.368

1.390

1.763

1.223

1.246

1978

1.229

1.298

1.323

1.297

1.388

1.425

1.856

1.253

1.270

1979

1.225

1.287

1.323

1.287

1.389

1.434

1.877

1.220

1.261

1980

1.214

1.297

1.282

1.279

1.380

1.436

1.805

1.191

1.222

1981

1.212

1.319

1.270

1.279

1.398

1.446

1.842

1.179

1.238

1982

1.198

1.341

1.239

1.274

1.416

1.455

1.743

1.173

1.218

1983

1.203

1.340

1.265

1.279

1.446

1.479

1.792

1.174

1.238

1984

1.214

1.330

1.269

1.276

1.448

1.527

1.879

1.203

1.296

1985

1.211

1.346

1.266

1.262

1.460

1.545

1.855

1.207

1.306

1986

1.221

1.362

1.285

1.253

1.503

1.551

1.904

1.336

1.306

Table 2A, contd.

LW

FN

CL

PM

FM

MC

EL

IN

TQ

1960

1.432

1.146

1.184

1.248

1.144

1.187

1.136

1.184

1.228

1961

1.432

1.140

1.182

1.230

1.140

1.182

1.139

1.179

1.222

1962

1.485

1.154

1.181

1.237

1.150

1.198

1.157

1.176

1.253

1963

1.499

1.153

1.193

1.250

1.156

1.208

1.160

1.175

1.272

1964

1.444

1.163

1.201

1.255

1.163

1.228

1.160

1.180

1.267

1965

1.467

1.182

1.213

1.271

1.180

1.252

1.178

1.197

1.281

1966

1.449

1.199

1.223

1.292

1.197

1.290

1.201

1.222

1.309

1967

1.478

1.198

1.215

1.271

1.205

1.290

1.202

1.232

1.316

1968

1.493

1.208

1.229

1.292

1.220

1.297

1.223

1.258

1.356

1969

1.496

1.218

1.238

1.293

1.219

1.320

1.243

1.288

1.350

1970

1.642

1.201

1.233

1.256

1.195

1.311

1.231

1.281

1.289

1971

1.564

1.198

1.237

1.247

1.188

1.286

1.220

1.280

1.312

1972

1.617

1.231

1.254

1.280

1.201

1.320

1.241

1.307

1.339

1973

1.523

1.235

1.268

1.314

1.222

1.391

1.280

1.359

1.384

1974

1.409

1.205

1.249

1.291

1.199

1.398

1.246

1.359

1.325

1975

1.369

1.164

1.224

1.258

1.169

1.340

1.205

1.326

1.284

1976

1.424

1.144

1.229

1.256

1.181

1.361

1.227

1.357

1.322

1977

1.442

1.208

1.236

1.270

1.192

1.399

1.268

1.399

1.356

1978

1.428

1.229

1.244

1.290

1.198

1.448

1.295

1.448

1.385

1979

1.378

1.230

1.239

1.275

1.201

1.487

1.315

1.475

1.377

1980

1.356

1.220

1.217

1.237

1.191

1.486

1.306

1.487

1.311

1981

1.372

1.219

1.206

1.239

1.185

1.512

1.324

1.520

1.287

1982

1.398

1.195

1.189

1.176

1.166

1.431

1.304

1.526

1.256

1983

1.466

1.210

1.199

1.171

1.169

1.405

1.316

1.516

1.302

1984

1.553

1.247

1.207

1.170

1.181

1.498

1.379

1.564

1.356

1985

1.535

1.250

1.205

1.153

1.183

1.501

1.361

1.559

1.373

1986

1.636

1.255

1.210

1.143

1.181

1.490

1.377

1.535

1.382

Table 3A

Cost Elasticity (cUe'y—ecy), U.S. Manufacturing Industries

Year

MA

P0

TX

A?

PA

PP

CM

PC

RZ

1960

0.911

0.852

0.809

0.825

0.880

0.853

0.814

0.834

0.946

1961

0.908

0.852

0.815

0.803

0.846

0.852

0.801

0.823

0.940

1962

0.900

40.851 0.839

0.797

0.831

0.856

0.790

0.820

0.930

1963

0.893

0.846

0.847

0.781

0.815

0.822

0.771

0.814

0.930

1964

0.894

0.839

0.852

0.790

0.823

0.812

0.771

0.814

0.917

1965

0.897

0.852

0.820

0.802

0.814

0.799

0.767

0.813

0.903

1966

0.880

0.855

0.800

0.801

0.785

0.777

0.731

0.803

0.877

1967

0.862

0.835

0.771

0.781

0.757

0.764

0.723

0.799

0.869

1968

0.827

0.814

0.723

0.737

0.719

0.726

0.656

0.784

0.805

1969

0.807

0.807

0.693

0.711

0.701

0.713

0.612

0.770

0.772

1970

0.794

0.798

0.697

0.687

0.665

0.709

0.594

0.758

0.743

1971

0.808

0.798

0.700

0.681

0.687

0.713

0.599

0.767

0.744

1972

0.820

0.814

0.708

0.742

0.697

0.707

0.583

0.767

0.732

1973

0.832

0.851

0.701

0.769

0.720

0.706

0.561

0.776

0.725

1974

0.857

0.846

0.714

0.789

0.734

0.728

0.590

0.835

0.776

1975

0.856

0.837

0.685

0.757

0.715

0.753

0.638

0.831

0.818

1976

0.843

0.816

0.686

0.753

0.714

0.750

0.607

0.834

0.804

1977

0.839

0.806

0.709

0.756

0.716

0.745

0.588

0.840

0.778

1978

0.822

0.807

0.673

0.739

0.696

0.730

0.557

0.831

0.759

1979

0.829

0.805

0.681

0.736

0.691

0.726

0.552

0.855

0.761

1980

0.818

0.786

0.690

0.730

0.660

0.701

0.552

0.870

0.748

1981

0.795

0.768

0.691

0.724

0.629

0.681

0.525

0.873

0.704

1982

0.782

0.756

0.688

0.734

0.611

0.666

0.540

0.867

0.699

1983

0.794

0.765

0.697

0.747

0.620

0.678

0.546

0.870

0.711

1984

0.783

0.763

0.699

0.749

0.617

0.675

0.520

0.858

0.689

1985

0.788

0.762

0.663

0.771

0.619

0.687

0.541

0.861

0.705

1986

0.790

0.763

0.687

0.793

0.625

0.702

0.549

0.816

0.733

Table 3A contd.

LW

FN

CL

PM

FM

MC

EL

IN

TQ

1960

0.672

0.864

0.874

0.810

0.904

0.911

0.931

0.909

0.871

1961

0.665

0.865

0.877

0.804

0.904

0.905

0.917

0.897

0.858

1962

0.624

0.859

0.887

0.800

0.900

0.879

0.898

0.912

0.842

1963

0.610

0.859

0.889

0.802

0.894

0.866

0.894

0.906

0.830

1964

0.675

0.859

0.890

0.828

0.893

0.856

0.904

0.905

0.830

1965

0.697

0.853

0.888

0.827

0.892

0.849

0.918

0.904

0.843

1966

0.712

0.831

0.854

0.822

0.877

0.813

0.924

0.888

0.808

1967

0.686

0.813

0.832

0.812

0.869

0.800

0.917

0.864

0.787

1968

0.669

0.784

0.797

0.768

0.842

0.767

0.867

0.822

0.751

1969

0.661

0.768

0.769

0.759

0.830

0.739

0.836

0.804

0.735

1970

0.553

0.741

0.738

0.765

0.821

0.742

0.825

0.775

0.754

1971

0.600

0.758

0.761

0.754

0.829

0.760

0.828

0.770

0.767

1972

0.611

0.765

0.781

0.749

0.837

0.751

0.830

0.764

0.765

1973

0.685

0.767

0.783

0.773

0.826

0.719

0.818

0.746

0.740

1974

0.728

0.776

0.781

0.811

0.842

0.714

0.834

0.760

0.769

1975

0.725

0.766

0.751

0.749

0.845

0.732

0.830

0.772

0.797

1976

0.714

0.772

0.767

0.734

0.839

0.715

0.800

0.746

0.773

1977

0.734

0.776

0.778

0.709

0.844

0.709

0.794

0.727

0.752

1978

0.752

0.767

0.778

0.708

0.837

0.684

0.782

0.696

0.727

1979

0.785

0.760

0.776

0.728

0.839

0.668

0.779

0.687

0.717

1980

0.701

0.736

0.728

0.717

0.822

0.650

0.758

0.658

0.720

1981

0.634

0.712

0.693

0.698

0.802

0.625

0.723

0.621

0.709

1982

0.594

0.700

0.665

0.632

0.795

0.646

0.702

0.597

0.721

1983

0.608

0.723

0.709

0.642

0.819

0.698

0.711

0.613

0.730

1984

0.561

0.726

0.725

0.675

0.830

0.669

0.696

0.598

0.694

1985

0.600

0.745

0.758

0.687

0.832

0.683

0.706

0.597

0.688

1986

0.589

0.764

0.787

0.706

0.845

0.723

0.710

0.627

0.695

Table 4A

Corrected Cost-Side Productivity Growth (eTct), U.S. Manufacturing (Z)

Year

MA

1960

-0.123

0.441

1.743

1961

1.089

0.215

0.233 -2.337 -0.032

4.642

1962

1.075

0.970

2.073

-0.427 -0.839

-3.604

1963

1.701

0.560

0.873

1964

1.639 -1.134

1965

1.233

1.629 -0.173

1966

0.142

1.315

0.926

0.570 -1.084

-0.827 -1.138

0.548

2.422 -2.280 -0.486 -4.4.49

1967

FO

TX

AP
1.766

PA

PP

CM

-1.819 -6.158 -0.387

PC

RB

0.972

-1.347

0.303

0.470

3.866

1.027

-0.105

1.568

1.347

0.186

1.610

1.001

0.193

1.433

1.871 -1.839

1.364

2.437

2.103

0.639

1.221

1.132 -0.839 -0.690 -0.226 -0.353

0.086

0.385

-1.439

-0.170 -0.741

-0.170

0.233

0.277

0.698

-0.863

0.606

-0.026

0.049

1.068

0.581

4.326 -0.138 -0.933 -2.331

1.373

1.366 .1.939

1.131

0.198

0.863

1.621

0.443

0.983

0.007

1.881

0.888 -0.303

6.187

1.870

0.306

-0.340

0.033

-0.635

2.059 -0.784

0.687

3.696

0.746

0.235 -0.163

0.394

1968

0.124 -1.306 -2.203 -1.320

2.301 -1.187

1969

0.559

0.586

0.616

1.876

1970

0.077

1971

1.544

1972

1.262

1973

1.290

1974

-1.634 -3.007

1975

-0.004

0.965

-2.053

2.211

0.477

3.420 -1.184 -0.288 -4.448 -0.781
0.436 -2.462

0.138

0.251 -0.201

-1.931

2.609

1976

0.716 -0.722

2.202 -0.690

1977

-0.514 -2.397

3.559 -1.318

1978

-0.437

0.813

-1.149

1979

0.219

1.442

3.034

1.834 -0.778

1980

1.701

1.726

4.973

3.302

0.111 -0.758

0.096

2.204

2.722

1981

0.977

1.788

2.018

1.519

0.784

1.871 -0.539

2.481

1982

1.594

1.761

3.510 -0.464

3.213

0.467

0.791

-1.239

0.802

1983

0.152

-0.065 -0.537 -0.730 -1.359

1984

0.571 -0.147

1985

1.505

1986

0.716

0.226

1.720 -6.292
-2.089

5.808

0.280 -0.384 -1.509 -1.031 -1.955
-0.781

0.292

-1.995

-2.648

-1.597 -1.926
-1.040

0.840

3.810 -1.405

-1.143 -1.427
-0.413

-0.770

0.780 -1.509

-0.259

-1.307

-0.868

-1.031

0.865 -0.709

-1.693

-1.006

0.371 -0.751 -0.611

0.083

0.271

2.937

0.298 •0.320

-2.550

0.278 -2.273

1.404 -1.008
3.002

Table 4A, contd.

LW
1960
1961
1962

FN

CL

PM

FM

MC

IN

TQ

-1.455 -2.273 -0.405 -2.486 -0.674

-0.003

2.044

-1.654

1.417

1.284

0.618

1.839

3.302

-1.857

0.604

0.168 -1.149

0.729

2.188

3.781

1.408

0.869

3.783 -0.925

3.827

0.209

1.052

-0.091 -1.703

2.048

1963

5.089

2.998

2.215

1.067

0.303 -0.018

1964

8.629

0.926

0.790

1.121

0.547

1965

1.450

1.604 -0.583

-1.232

1966

0.707

1967

2.395 .0.189 -0.434 -1.125

1968

1.609

0.098

0.618 -2.665 -0.290

1969

-3.076

1.251

0.779 -0.972

1970

EL

-0.352

-0.973

1.243 -1.793 -0.423

2.664

3.127

3.321

3.001

0.278 -1.179

4.511

4.242

3.630

0.321 -0.998 -1.122 -0.219

0.435

-2.759

0.542

0.439

0.124 -0.070

-0.308 -0.203 -1.484 -2.430
0.326

1.079

1.678

0.017

-0.353

2.792

2.535

-0.421

1.496 -0.208

-0.773

-1.200

0.211 -0.415

0.992

0.714

1.532

1.222

3.646

4.192

2.390

1.347

-0.285

0.542

2.291

2.142

1.244

-1.633

0.469

0.531

1.846

1.550 -0.484

0.103

-1.977 -2.817 -2.606 -1.789 -1.352

1.081

4.008

1.632

1.650

1.929 -1.648

1.662

0.178

0.762

3.177 -1.069

-1.132

1971

-0.119

1972

0.521

1973

0.201

1974

4.350 -0.080 -1.968

1975

5.607

1.514

1.010 -6.182 -0.329

0.105

1.388

1976

-3.794

1.282

0.842 -0.885

1.748

1977

-5.320 -0.267 -2.165 -4.000

1978

-2.432

1979

4.144

1980

7.044

0.535 -0.815

0.843 -1.029

0.062

-1.119

-1.666

1.305

-2.635

-2.349

-0.010

-0.772

-1.022

0.669

0.309

0.493

0.132

-1.578

1.730

1.493

4.532

2.420

3.061

3.360 -2.645

0.255

1981

-0.317 -0.485

1.021

0.148

0.566

1.903

0.695

3.174 -0.902

1982

-3.081

1.325

0.547 -0.225

0.660

4.373

3.422

0.054

1.849

1983

-1.527 -1.458

0.480 -1.849

1.077

3.677 -1.946 -1.002

0.998

1.549

1.476 -1.192

0.172

-0.159

1984

3.556

0.207

1.375

2.706

1985

0.631

0.171

1.972

2.078 -0.054

4.265

3.803 -0.543 -0.086

1986

2.009 -1.996 -1.257

.0.549

7.093

1.310 -0.632

1.138

-2.610

Cue

Cy
L

£CY

1975

12

1985

..

__•_____

0.7
1965

Figure la

py/MC

0.8

1800

1980

iaio

IO,S

'C',

Figure lb

C
C

I

ICt

1Yt

Figure Ic

