                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 DOES SCHOOL QUALITY MATTER? RETURNS TO EDUCATION AND THE CHARACTERISTICS OF
                     PUBLIC SCHOOLS IN THE UNITED STATES




                                  David Card

                                 Alan Krueger




                            Working Paper No. 3358




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   May 1990




We are grateful to Michael Boozer and Dean Hyslop for outstanding research
assistance. We have also benefitted from comments by Richard Freeman, Claudia
Coldin, Jean Grossman, James Heckman, Lawrence Katz, Robert Margo, Andy Oswald,
and seminar participants at several institutions. Financial support from the
Princeton Industrial Relations Section and an NBER Olin Fellowship are
gratefully acknowledged. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #3353
                                         May 1990

         DOES SCHOOL QUALITY MATTER? RETURNS TO EDUCATION AND THE
           CHARACTERISTICS OF PUBLIC SCHOOLS IN THE UNITED STATES

                                  ABSTRACT
      This paper estimates the effects of school quality - - measured
                                                                      by the
 pupil-teacher ratio, the average term   length,   and the relative pay of
 teachers -. on the rate of return to education for men born between
                                                                     1920 and
 1949. Using earnings data from the 1980 Census, we find that men who were

 educated in states with higher quality schools have a higher return to

 additional years of schooling, holding constant their current state of

 residence, their state of birth, the average return to education in the

 region where they currently reside, and other factors. A decrease in the

pupil-teacher ratio from 30 to 25, for example, is associated with a 0.4

percentage point increase in the rate of return to education. The estimated

relationship between the return to education and measures of
                                                                 school quality
is similar for blacks and whites. Since improvements in school quality for

black students were mainly driven by political and judicial pressures, we

argue that the evidence for blacks reinforces a causal interpretation of the

link between school quality and earnings. We also find that returns to

schooling are higher for students educated in states with a higher fraction

of female teachers, and in states with higher average teacher education.

Holding constant school quality measures, however, we find no evidence that

parental income or education affects state-level rates of return.



  David Card
                                    Alan Krueger
  Department of Economics
                                    Department of Economics
  Princeton University              Princeton University
  Princeton, NJ 08544               Princeton, NJ 08544
  (609)258-4045
                                    (609)258-4046
       Beginning with the highly influential Coleman Report (1966), researchers

 have found little, if any, association between the quality of schools and

 student achievement on standardized tests (see Hanushek (1986) for a recent

 survey). On the basis of these findings it is now widely argued that

 increa :5   in   public school funding have few important benefits for students.

 This conclusion, although currently politically popular, contradicts two other

 strands of evidence on the quality of schooling. On one hand, the small

 number of studies that have directly correlated school
                                                           quality and earnings
 have found a significantly positive relationship between them (Morgan and

 Sirageldin (1968), Welch (1969), Johnson and Stafford (1973), Wachtel (1976)).

 On the other hand, a widely-cited series of studies has identified

 improvements in the relative quality of black schooling as an important factor

 in the narrowing of the black/white wage gap (Welch (1966, 1967, 1973a,

 1973b), Freeman (1973), Smith and Welch (1989)).

     There are several explanations for the conflicting evidence. Most

 studies of earnings and school quality focus on the correlation between school

characteristics (typically per-capita expenditure) and the mean earnings of

students educated in a school district. One
                                                 can easily argue that family

background variables affect both educational expenditures and labor market

earnings. In this case, the correlation of school quality and earnings is

potentially spurious) From the opposite perspective, however, one can argue

that test scores are an imperfect measure of school performance. Indeed,

although earnings and test scores are correlated, they are by no means




     1An
         exception is Wachtel's (1976) study of the earnings of air force
veterans, which controls for father's education.
                                              2

 identical4     The   aspects   of school training that affect subsequent labor

 market achievement (e.g. ,     discipline)   may be poorly measured by test scores.

 Furthermore, the relation between school quality and test scores measured when

 students are in the eighth or twelfth grade fails to capture any effects of

 school quality on subsequent schooling achievement.

      This paper presents an extensive analysis of the relation between

 earnings and school quality for cohorts of men born between 1920 and 1949. We

 use the relatively large samples available from the 1980 Census to estimate

 rates of return to education by state-of-birth and cohort. We then relate

 rates of return to schooling to objective measures of school quality,

 including pupil-teacher ratios, relative wages of teachers, and the duration

of the school term.3

     Our procedures overcome at least some of the objections to earlier

studies of earnings and school quality. First, our statistical models include

unrestricted state-of-birth effects, and therefore control for any differences

in the mean earnings of men born in different states. To the extent that

differences in family background raise or lower earnings for all levels of

schooling attainment, our estimated rates of return are purged of any effects

of differential family background. Second, we control for systematic

differences in the returns to education associated with an individual's

current region of residence. We thereby eliminate relative supply or demand


     2For example, the addition of test score information to the log-earnings
regressions reported by Griliches and Mason (1972, Table 3) improves the
explanatory power of their regressions by less than 0.5 percentage point.

     3Our approach is conceptually similar to that of Behrman and Birdsall
(1983), who relate the returns to schooling among young Brazilian men to the
average years of education of teachers in each individual's region of
residence.
                                      3

effects chat raise or lower the returns to education in different parts of the

country. Finally, in much of our analysis we incorporate permanent state-

specific effects in the return to education, and use only the within-state

variation among birth cohorts to identify the effects of school quality on the

returns to education.

     The results indicate that there is substantial variation in the rate of

return to education across individuals educated in different states and at

different times. Much of this variation is related to differences in the

quality of schooling. We find that rates of return are systematically higher

for individuals who attended schools with lower pupil-teacher ratios and

higher relative teacher salaries. For example, our estimates suggest that a

decrease in the pupil-teacher ratio by 5 students is associated with a 0.4

percentage point increase in the rate of return to schooling. Similarly, a 10

percent increase in teachers' pay is associated with a 0.1 percentage point

increase in the rate of return to schooling. We also find that returns are

linked to higher education among teachers. Controlling for measures of school

quality, however, we find no evidence that returns to education are related to

the income or schooling levels of the parents' generation, or to the fraction

of students who graduate from high school or college.

     Our main results are obtained for samples of white men. In view of the

remarkable growth in school quality for black students during the past 70

years, however, the effects of school quality are of particular interest for

blacks.4 Comparative data for the segregated Southern school systems confirm



     4See Welch (1967, l973a, 1973b) and Freeman (1973), for example.
Contemporary observers throughout the early 20th century consistently stressed
improvements in the quality of education for blacks as a key to their economic
progress. See, for example, Bond (1934).
                                                   4

 that measures of school quality were significantly lower for black students in

 the 1920's and 1930's. By the early 1950's, however, most states had reduced

 or even eliminated the gap in measured quality. These rapid changes provide a

 unique and arguably exogenous experiment with which to evaluate the effects of

 school quality.5 Perhaps surprisingly, the measured relationship between

 school quality and returns to education is very similar for blacks and whites,

 providing more support for a causal interpretation of our estimates.



 I. Empirical Framework

        Our goal is to relate the returns to education earned by individuals

educated in different states to the characteristics of the public school

system during the time they attended school. To describe the empirical

framework, it is useful to assume that individuals attend school in their

state of birth. (Procedures that adjust for the interstate mobility of pre-

school and school-age children are developed in section HId, below)                  .   Let
        represent the logarithm of weekly earnings for individual i, born in

state j in cohort c and currently living in state k, and let
                                                                            Eijkc represent
the years of education attained by individual i. We assume that earnings are

determined by an equation of the form;

  (I)     >'ijkc —
                     5jc
                           +
                               Mkc
                                     +
                                         Xijkc c + Eijkc   7jc +   kc   +
                                                                             £ijkc
where 6jc represents a cohort-specific effect for each state-of-birth,

represents a cohort-specific effect for each state-of-residence,
                                                                 xijk
represents a set of measured covariates (including years of labor market


     5lncreases in spending on black education in the South during the 1940's
were driven in part by the attempts of white legislators to defuse impending
challenges to the 'separate but equal' doctrine. See Freeman (1976, Chapter
2), Margo (1990), and the descriptive chapters by Griffith (1969, pp. 658-659)
and Kirk (1969, p. 1129).
                                       5


experience and its square), and •k represents a stochastic error term.6

Equation   (1) assumes a linear specification of the return to education that

consists of two additive components: a cohort-by-state-of-birth component

       and a cohort-and-state-of-residence component             These components

allow observed rates of return to schooling to vary because of differences in

the return to education across different labor markets (i.e. ,   variation   in

      and because of differences in the rate of return to education earned by

individuals in a given state-of-birth and cohort group in any labor market

(i.e., variation in

     Notice that by including an interaction between individuals' state of

birth and education, and an interaction between individuals' current region of

residence and education, the state-of-birth-specific contribution to the

return to education is identified by individuals who are educated in one state

and move to another region. It is the shift in the return to education

attributable to schooling in a particular State that we seek to explain by

differences in school quality across states and over time.

     Specifically, we hypothesize that the state-of-birth component of the

return to education depends on the quality of the education system in the

state when the cohort attended school, on an aggregate cohort effect, and

possibly on a Set of state-specific effects that are invariant across cohorts:


     6Although there is a substantial literature on possible unobserved-
variable (e.g. ,   ability)
                         bias for estimates of the return to education, we
assume that unobserved variables are not correlated with years of education,
conditional on the other variables in the equation. We make this assumption
to keep the estimation tractable, and because we focus on school quality,
which itself is an unobservable in most studies of the return to education.

     71n the empirical work reported in this paper we only allow rates of
return to education to vary by current region of residence (indexed by r).
We normalize the coefficients y. and p    by assuming E f p     — 0, where f
                                                        r rero                    rc
is the fraction of cohort c living in one of the 9 Census regions.
                                       6

     (2) jc — a. + Q.b    +   d,
 where Q. is a vector of measures of the quality of the education system in

 state j during the time that cohort c attended school.   In this specification,

 any permanent differences in the returns to education, arising (for example)

 from differences in the distributions of ability across states, are absorbed

by the state-of-birth effects, a., in (2).

      Under these assumptions, the effects of a particular measure of education

quality can be obtained in one step by estimating a conventional log-linear

earnings function that includes state-of-birth dummies, state-of-residence

dummies, interactions of region of residence with education, and interactions

of education with the quality measures for state j and cohort c.8

Alternatively, one can proceed in two steps: first, estimate the average rate

of return to education for individuals born in cohort c in state j,

controlling for state-of-birth, state-of-residence, and any geographic

differences in the return to education; and then use a second-stage regression

to relate estimated rates of return to observed quality variables.

     In this paper we employ both estimation strategies, although we

concentrate on the two-step approach. A two-step procedure provides a

convenient reduction of the data, and allows us to illustrate the diversity of

returns to education and their relation to measures of school quality. It

also facilitates a relatively simple correction for interstate mobility of

pre-school children. Nevertheless, in a two-step procedure cohorts must be

defined fairly broadly to obtain reliable estimates of the state- and cohort-

specific returns to education. In the analysis below we use 10-year intervals


     81f the state-of-birth effects a in equation (2) are non-zero, the
equation must also include interactioAs of education with state-of-birth
dummies.
                                        7


of births. This   aggregation   eliminates any within-cohort variation in either

school-quality or rates of return to education, and may potentially limit our

ability to estimate the effects of school quality on the returns to schooling.

By comparison, the one-step estimates that we present have the advantage that

cohort-groups are defined quite narrowly: by year-of-birth.

a. Functional Form

     The assumption of a linear relation between schooling and (log) earnings

is widely used in applied studies of earnings, and is often found to perform

as well as or better than simple alternatives.9 However, most studies pool

samples of individuals from different States and birth cohorts with no

allowance for regional or cohort differences in returns. It is conceivable

(and indeed roughly true) that the log earnings-schooling relation is

approximately linear in pooled samples, but is non-linear for particular sub-

samples. It is also conceivable that changes in the quality of public

schooling shift the returns to elementary or secondary education more (or

less) than the returns to college. If so, then the specification of the

return-to-education function should allow for kinks at 12 years of education.

     In an effort to obtain some simple evidence on these issues we estimated

a series of unrestricted earnings-schooling models on narrowly defined sub-

samples of individuals in the 1980 Census. These models include a complete

set of.dununy variables for 0 through 20 years of education, as well as

controls for potential labor market experience, marital status, state of




     9Heckman and Polachek (1974), for example, test the conventional
semi-logarithmic earnings-schooling model against other specifications by
estimating the functional form parameter of a Box-Cox transformation.
Hungerford and Solon (1987) present some evidence of non-linearitieS around
the 12th and 16th years of completed education.
                                          8

 residence, and residence in an SMSA.10 Figure 1 graphs the estimated

 education coefficients for 9 of the sub-samples: three cohorts of white men

 born in Alabama or Georgia (1920-29, 1930-39, and 1940-49), three cohorts of

 white men born in California, and three cohorts of black men born in Alabama,

 Georgia, South Carolina, or Mississippi. Figure 2 graphs the estimated

 schooling coefficients (together with their standard error bounds) for

 national samples of white men in the three birth cohorts.

      These figures illustrate three general findings. First, for a particular

 cohort and state-of-birth group, the earnings-education relation is

 approximately log-linear for levels of education above a minimum threshold.

Although there is some evidence of a college graduation effect, departures

from log-linearity above the threshold level are small.      Second, the threshold

education level varies widely across states and over time within states, being

relatively lower for older cohorts and for individuals from states with lower

average educational attainment, and lower for blacks than for whites. This

phenomenon is evident even in the national samples in Figure 2: the threshold

is at 2 years of education for whites born between 1920 and 1929, at 3 years

of education for those born during 1930-39, and at 5 years for those born in

1940.49. Finally, the rate of return to education (for years of education

above the threshold level) is higher for later cohorts: especially so for

blacks -




     10Specifically, the models include linear and quadratic terms in
potential experience, a di.inimy variable for being married with
                                                              spouse present,
a dummy variable for residing in an SMSA, and unrestricted dummy variables for
residency in each of the 50 states. Additionally, dummy variables
                                                                   indicating
state of birth were included if the sample combined observations from more
than one state. The models are estimated on subgroups of the sample described
in Appendix .
                                         9

    The positive correlation between the average educational attainment of a

state-of-birth and cohort group and the threshold point in their return-to-

education function led us to investigate the determinants of this threshold

more carefully. For each of 13 larger states (or pairs of contiguous states)

and each of three 10-year birth cohorts, we first estimated a non-parametric

version of the return-to-education function (using 20 unrestricted dummy

variables) and found the approximate threshold point in the return-to-

education relation. We then compared this point to various percentiles of the

education distribution in each state-cohort group. This comparison led us to

a simple empirical relation: across different cohorts and states-of-birth, and

different race groups, the threshold point corresponds approximately to the

grade level attained by the second percentile of the education distribution of

workers. For example, a simple linear regression of the estimated threshold

point on the grade attained by the second percentile of the education

distribution has an estimated coefficient of .88, with an estimated standard
                                        11
error of .13 and an R-squared of .57.

     The approximate linearity of the returns functions in Figure 1 suggests

that states and cohorts with higher returns to elementary and secondary

schooling have higher returns to post-secondary education. Indeed, in the

sub-sample of 13 states and 3 birth cohorts the earnings gap between

individuals with 8 and 12 years of completed education is positively

correlated with the earnings gap between individuals with 12 and 16 years of



     11Further details of our investigation, including tabulations of the
estimated threshold points and education percentiles, are available on
request. The 13 state-groups include 11 individual States (California, New
York, Ohio, Texas, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Michigan, New Jersey,
Massachusetts, North Carolina, Virginia) and two pairs of states
(Alabama/Ceorgia and Kentucky/Tennessee).
                                            10

education. This suggests that improvements in the quality of elementary and

secondary education increase the returns to post-secondary education as well

as the returns to the first 12 years of schooling. We present further

evidence on this question in section V below.

     Given the pattern of the non-parametric estimates of the return-to-

education function for the larger states, in the remainder of the paper we

concentrate on measuring the return to education for years of schooling above

the second percentile of the education distribution of an individual's state-

of-birth and cohort. Specifically, we replace an individual's completed

education by

           max CE..     -   T.    ,   0),
                 tjkc        jc
where Tic is the second percentile of the (race-specific) education

distribution for men born in state j in cohort c. Estimates presented in

Section V examine the effect of ignoring the minimum threshold and treating

the earnings-schooling relationship as log-linear.



II. Measures of the quality of Pu i.c Schooling

     Since the late nineteenth century the U.S. Office of Education has

regularly published a summary of the characteristics of the public school

systems in each state, These data are available on a semi-annual basis from

1918 to 1958 in the gjennjal Survey of Education, and annually since 1960 in

the Dizesc of Education Statistics. The Office of Education tabulates the

results of questionnaires sent to the state offices of education inquiring

about state-wide enrollment, revenues, number of teaching positions, length of

school term, average teacher salaries, and other variables. Prior to 1954,
                                         11

data are available separately for the white and black school systems in states

that operated segregated schools.

     The Biennial Survey of Education is a rich source of information on the

average characteristics of public schools in different states at different

points in time. From the available data we have collected information on

three main characteristics: the ratio of enrolled students to instructional

staff in the state ("pupil-teacher ratio"), the average length of the school
                                                              12
term ("term length"), and average annual teacher salaries.             We hypothesize

that increases in term length increase the amount of material covered in a

school year, and thereby increase the economic value of additional years of

schooling. We similarly hypothesize that reductions in the pupil-teacher

ratio improve the quality of classroom instruction and lead to higher returns

for each year of completed education. Finally, we hypothesize that higher

teacher salaries enable schools to attract and retain more-qualified teachers,

leading to improved classroom instruction and higher returns to education.13

     Several previous authors, including Morgan and Sirageldin (1968), Johnson

and Stafford (1973), and Wachtel (1976), have used total expenditures per

pupil as an index of school quality. We suspect that the quality of education

is more directly linked to indexes of pupil-teacher ratios and teacher

salaries than to total expenditures per pupil, and indeed this is suggested by

the results in Welch (1966). Nevertheless, roughly 60 percent of total


     '2The data are described in detail in Appendix A.
     13                                                            .
          As a check on the quality of the salary data in the BLennl.al Survey, we
compared average teacher wages for each state in the 1939-40 Biennial Survey
to state-specific averages of annual salaries for teachers in the 1940 Census.
We also compared average wages of teachers in the 1959-60 Biennial Survey to
state-specific averages of annual earnings for teachers in the 1960 Census.
In each case the correlation across states was over 0.95.
                                      12

 education expenditures are for instructional salaries.14 Since the per capita

 expenditure on instructional salaries is simply the ratio of the average

 teacher wage to the pupil-teacher ratio, differences in teacher salaries and

 pupil-teacher ratios account for much of the variation in total expenditures

 per pupil.

      Given geographic differences in the Cost of living and in the level of

alternative wages available to potential teachers, it seems unlikely that the

level of teacher wages is an adequate index of teacher quality in different

states. We have therefore normalized teacher wages in each state by the level

of average wages in the state. We use average weekly earnings of employees

covered by the Social Security system to adjust wage rates from 1940 onward.

Due to a paucity of state-wide wage data prior to 1940, we use a regional wage

rate for workers on federal construction projects to normalize average teacher

salaries. The comparison wage series are index-linked between 1940 and 1944

as described in Appendix A. In view of the changing coverage of the Social

Security wage index, and given the necessity of index-linking disparate wage

series, we prefer to remove the time trends in the average relative teacher

salary in our sample period. We therefore divide the relative teacher wage

for each state by the national average of this ratio in the same year. This

second normalization eliminates any time-series variability in the average

value of relative teacher salaries, while preserving the cross-sectional

information on relative teacher wages at a point in time.

     A summary of these three measures of school quality is presented in Table

1. We present average values of the quality measures by state for three


     14For example, in 1919-20 the proportion was 61 percent nationwide. It
was 60 percent in 1939-40, 57 percent in 1969-70, and 56 percent in 1979-80.
(Dizest of Educational Statistics 1987 edition, Table 96, page 110).
                                     13

different cohorts of students: those born between 1920 and 1929, those born

between 1930 and 1939, and those born between 1940 and 1949. The averages for

a cohort assume that each person attends public school for 12 years, and that

the number of individuals born per year in any cohort is constant. The

quality measures for each year of school attended are weighted equally. We

have also computed the averages using individual-specific years of education

for men born in these cohorts and obtained virtually identical averages.15

     The data in Table 1 show substantial variation in education "quality"

across states. For the 1920-29 birth cohort, pupil-teacher ratios range from

20 (in the Dakotas, Montana, and Wyoming) to over 35 (in Arkansas, Mississippi

and North Carolina). Average term lengths for this cohort range from 139 days

(in Mississippi) to over 180 days (in the mid-Atlantic states). Similarly,

relative teacher wages range from 0.75 or lower (in many Southern states) to

over 1.25 (in many Northeastern states). As one might expect, the interstate

variation in our three measures of education quality is much lower for the

later cohorts. This is particularly true of the term length variable, which

falls in a very narrow range for the latest cohort.

     The patterns of quality variation over time within individual states also

vary widely. Most of the Southern states show uniform improvements in

quality. Other states, such as Michigan and Missouri, show almost no change

in the, quality variables, while some states show declines in certain

dimensions of quality. The differences are most pronounced for relative

teacher wages. For example, teachers in Alabama and Georgia show strong



     '5The correlations across state and cohort observations between the
average quality measures described in the text, and averages of individual-
specific quality measures, based on individual-specific age and years of
education, exceed 0.99.
                                        14

relative wage gains, while teachers in Massachusetts, New Jersey, and New York

show relative wage losses during the period.



III. Returns to Education by   Cohort and State of Birth for White Males
     In this section we present estimates of the average rates of return to

education for white men born in the 48 mainland states and the District of

Columbia between 1920 and 1949. We divide the samples of men born in these

states into three 10-year birth cohorts, and estimate rates of return for 147

separate state and cohort groups. We then perform a second-stage analysis of

the relation between rates of return to schooling and the measures of school

quality in Table 1.   We also explore the effects of additional characteristics

of the school systems in each state, and contrast these to the effects of some

simple measures of family background. Finally, we present the results of a

simple correction for the 'measurement errors induced by the interstate

mobility of pre-school and school-age children.



a. Rates of Return to Education by State and Cohort

     Our estimated rates of return to education are obtained from three

cohort-specific regressions fitted to individual data on log weekly earnings

for 1979. The data samples are taken from the 5 Percent Public Use A-Sample

of the. 1980 Census (see Appendix B for details) .   Following   the specification

of equation (1), the explanatory variables in each regression include a set of

50 indicator variables for an individual's current state of residence (Mk) a

set of 48 indicator variables for an individual's state of birth (5.), and

controls for potential experience and its square, marital status, and

residence within an SMSA. To control for any differences in the current rate
                                      15

of return to education across different labor markets in the country, the

models also include interactions between 9 current region-of-residence dummies

and completed education.16 Finally, the models include state-of-birth.

specific interactions with individual education, where, as described in

Section 1, individual education is modelled as the maximum of zero, and years

of education over and above the years of schooling attained by the second

percentile of the education distribution in an individuals state-of-birth and

cohort. These interactions are interpreted as estimates of the rate of return

to education for individuals from a particular cohort and state.

     The estimated rates of return (times 100), together with their estimated

standard errors, are presented in Table 2. The lower panel of the table

reports the weighted means and standard deviations of the estimated returns

across the 49 states, and the weighted correlations between the returns and

cohort-specific quality measures. Despite the fact that the estimates are

obtained from highly parameterized models (there are 158 explanatory variables

in the regression equation for each cohort) ,   the estimates are relatively

precise, with standard errors in the range of .1 to .3 percent for most

states. As the information in Figures 1 and 2 suggests, rates of return to

education are much lower for older workers: 5.1 percent per year for the

oldest cohort (age 50-59 in 1979) versus 7.4 percent for the youngest cohort




      L&The results are qualitatively unchanged if state of residence is used
 instead of region of residence. The estimated coefficients suggest that rates
 of return to education vary across regions of residence by as much as 2
 percent per year. Returns are lowest in the Mountain and Pacific regions. and
 highest in the East-South Central and West-South Central regions. These
 patterns are consistent with those reported by Chlsuick (1974) in an earlier
 analysis of the regional variation in returns to education.
                                     16

(age 30-39 in 1979). The interstate dispersion in returns shows the opposite

trend, being largest for the oldest cohort and smallest for the youngest.17

     The correlations in the lower panel of Table 2 suggest that returns to

education are significantly related to all thre. measures of school quality.

The connection is illustrated in Figure 3, which plots the rate of return for

each state-of-birth (for the 1920-29 cohort) against the relative teacher wage

in the state. We have divided the states into three groups, based on the

pupil-teacher ratio, and plotted states in each group with a different symbol.

The pattern of the plot suggests that returns are higher, controlling for

teacher wages, among states with lower pupil-teacher ratios.

     A second illustration of the relation between school quality and returns

is provided by Figure 4, which plots the change in the return to education

between the 1920-29 and the 1940-49 cohort against the chane in the pupil-

teacher ratio for the same cohorts. Even within states, the figure suggests a

systematic correlation between the return to schooling and the quality of the

public schools.



b. Rates of Return and the quality of Schools

     Table 3 presents estimation results for a series of regression models

fitted to the estimated rates of return presented in Table 2. The models are

estimated by weighted least squares, using as weights the inverse sampling

variances of the estimated returns.18 The first group of models, in columns


     17The dispersion measures in Table 2 are adjusted to account for the fact
that our estimated rates of return are measured with sampling error.

          optimal second-stage estimation scheme should take account of the
covarjances between the estimated returns for different states. We have
experimented with such a procedure and found few differences from the simpler
weighting scheme described in the text. The reason for this is that the
                                        17


(1) through (5) ,   exclude any state-specific information other than the
measured quality variables, while the second group, in columns (6) through

(10), includes a set of 49 unrestricted state effects. The latter models are

identified by changes in school quality that occurred over time within states.

    The model in column (1) includes only dummy variables for the second and

third cohorts. These two variables alone explain 71. percent of the (weighted)

variance in the returns to education.t9 The estimated coefficients show

significantly higher returns for the later cohorts - -   approximately   1.2

percent per decade. The three quality variables are introduced individually

into the r'?gression model in columns (2) through (4), and jointly in column

(5). Individually, all three variables are strongly correlated with returns

to education, with c-statistics of 3.3. 7.0, and 7.2 for the pupil-teacher

ratio, term length, and the relative teacher wage, respectively. Jhen the

three quality variables are entered together, they are jointly significant.

although the effects of term length and the pupil-teacher ratio are smaller

and less precisely estimated, presumably as a result of the high degree of

colinearity between the quality measures.



estimated returns by state-of-birth are "almost" independent. The only source
of covariation between them arises from the fact that the same regression
parameters are used to adjust for other control variables in the first-stage
regression.

     19The a-squared coefficients in row 6 can be used to form chi-squared
test statistics for the hypothesis that the included explanatory variables
exp1ain2JJ. of the variation in state and cohort returns. The transformation
is (l-R )*TSS, where TSS represents the weighted sum of    ares of the
dependent variable. For the sample in Table 3, TSS—4014J3. The resulting test
statistic is distributed as chi-squared with degrees of freedom equal to the
number of estimated returns (147) minus the number of estimated parameters.
For example, the chi-squared test Statistic for the model in column (1) is
1164, with 144 degrees of freedom. On the other hand, the chi-squared test
statistic for the model in column (10) is 165.5, with 93 degrees of freedom.
                                         18

      The models with state-specific effects lead to broadly similar

conclusions as the models in columns (l)-(5), although the estimated

coefficients of the pupil-teacher ratio are larger in absolute value when

state effects are included, and the estimated effects of the other two quality

measures are attenuated. When the three quality variables are included

jointly (in column (10))   the   estimated coefficient of the term length variable

falls to zero. Evidently, only two dimensions of school quality can be

identified in the data once state-specific effects are included.20

     The quality variables have a sizeable impact on the return to education.

For example, based on the estimate in Column 10, a decrease in the pupil-

teacher ratio of 6 students (which is the nationwide change experienced from

1966 to 1986) is associated with a .56 percentage point increase in the return

to education for years of schooling above the threshold level.      If the

threshold level of education is the eighth grade, this reduction in the pupil-

teacher ratio would lead to about a 4.5 percent increase in the relative

earnings of college graduates.

     Despite the significance of the quality variables, they explain

relatively little of the inter-cohort trend in returns to education.

Comparing the models in columns (5) and (1). for example, the quality measures

explain only about 12 percent of the increased return to education between the

earliest and the middle cohorts, and 6 percent of the increase between the


     200ne possible difficulty with the term length variable is that teachers
would prefer a shorter term. This suggests that teacher quality may decline
with term length, holding constant teacher wages. We have re-estimated the
models in Table 3 using the teacher wage expressed in terms of days worked per
year (using term length as the measure of days worked) instead of annual
salary. This change has the effect of raising the coefficient on the term
length variable by about 0.5, with little or no effect on the other
coefficients in the model. Even with this adjustment, the term length effects
in column (10) are insignificantly different from zero.
                                       19

middle and latest cohorts. in the models with State effects the school

quality variables explain a larger share of the inter-cohort trend in the

return to education: about 20 percent of the increase in returns between the

1920-29 cohort and the 1930-39 cohort, and about 10 percent of the increase

between the 1930-39 cohort and the 1940-49 cohort. Nevertheless, the cohort

dummies are highly significant, and their omission would lead to a substantial

overstatement of the effects of the quality variables.21

     Of course, the higher rate of return for younger cohorts is not

necessarily a consequence of higher quality education.      if there is any

relation between age and the returns to education, the dummies in Table 3

confound age and cohort effects. To provide some evidence on the relative

importance of cohort and age effects, we used the 1970 Census to estimate

rates of return to education in 1970 for two of the same birth cohorts. Based

on a simple log-linear regression model with controls for linear and quadratic

experience and state of residence, we estimated the following rates of return

by cohort and time period:22

                                              Year
                             Cohort    1970          1980

                             1920-29   6.73          5.04

                             1930-39   7.44          6.25

     If we assume that the 1930-39 cohort had as good (or only slightly

better) quality schooling than the earlier cohort, these data indicate an


     21For example, if the cohort dummies are excluded from the model in
column (10) the coefficient of the pupil-teacher ratio is -50.1, with a
standard error of 3.7.
     22                  .                                       .
       To the extent possible, we have used similar sample definitions and
similar variable definitions in our analysis of the 1970 and 1980 Censuses.
Details of the estimation results are available on request.
                                       20

overall decline in the average return to education between 1970 and 1980 of

about 0.50 percent (comparing the 6.73 percent return of the 1920-29 cohort in

1970 to the 6.25 percent return of the 1930-39 cohort in 1980). Using this

estimate of the period effects, the implied age effects indicate a 1.2 percent

decline in the return to education between age 40-49 and age 50-59, and a 0.70

percent decline between age 30-39 and 40-49. Thus, most of the increase in

returns to education for later cohorts documented in Table 3 is probably

attributable to aging effects.

     Finally, we note that the estimated state effects in Table 3 are also

highly significant. For example, a comparison of the models in columns (1)

and (6) leads to a chi-squared statistic of 963 for the joint significance of

the state effects (with 48 degrees of freedom). A similar comparison of the

models in columns (5) and (10) leads to a test statistic of 642. These

results suggest that some important determinants of the return to education

are missing from our analysis. Examination of the estimated state effects

indicates that returns to education are relatively low (controlling for

measured quality) for men born in the South and in the North-Central/North-

West regions (Montana, the Dakotas, Oregon, Washington, Idaho), and relatively

high in the Midwest and Northeast.

     A finding of relatively low returns for white men in the Southern States

may be. somewhat surprising, given that the quality measures in our analysis

refer to the entire school system in each state. States that operated

segregated school systems before 1954 typically had lower pupil-teacher

ratios, longer term lengths, and higher teacher salaries for white students

than black students (see section IV,   below).   As a result, average quality

measures based on total student enrollment probably understate the quality of
                                         21

the schools for white students in the segregated states. Nevertheless, when a

dummy variable for the segregated states is added to the model in column (5)

of Table 3, it   has   an estimated coefficient of - .41 (with a standard error of

0.13). Furthermore, when the segregated states are stratified into those with

20 percent or higher black enrollment, and those with less than 20 percent

black enrollment, the returns to education are even lower in the states with

higher black enrollments (0.42 percent versus 0.31 percent lower in states

with less than 20 percent black enrollment). These findings are not

consistent with a simple mis-measurement hypothesis for the quality of white

schools in the South. Rather, they suggest that other dimensions of quality,

or characteristics of the state such as the degree of urbanization, affect the

returns to education for individuals from the South.



c, Family Background and Additional Aspects of School Quality

     In view of the substantial unexplained differences in     the   returns to

education both within and across states, we have explored the effects of

several other school and state-level characteristics on the returns to

education. Table 4 summarizes our main findings. In each case we have

included our three basic measures of school quality, as well as state-

specific fixed effects. To preview the results, we find that the estimated

coefficients of the school quality variables are largely unaffected by the

addition of controls for other characteristics, including characteristics of

teachers, average income in the State, and characteristics of private schools.

     Columns 1-3 of Table 4 address the effect of family background

characteristics on the return to education. A number of previous studies

(including the Coleman Report (1964)) have found a strong association between

family background factors, such as parental education and income, and student
                                      22

performance on standardized tests. If these family background characteristics

are correlated with school quality, and if these characteristics change

substantially over time within states (SO they are not partialled-out by the

state fixed-effects), our estimates of the effect of school quality may be

confounded by the effect of family background variables.

     Although the Census lacks direct information on the education of

individuals' parents, we can at least partially control for differences in

parental education by including the median level of education among adults who

lived in the state when the men in our sample attended school (row 4).

Likewise, we include the log of real per capita income in the state at the

time the cohorts in our sample entered school (row 5)23 Regardless of

whether they are included separately or jointly, each of these variables has a

relatively small and statistically insignificant effect on the return to

education. Moreover, the estimated effects of the three main school quality

variables (pupil-teacher ratio, term length, and relative teacher wage) are

unaffected by the inclusion of these family background variables.

Teacher Characteristics

     Columns 4-6 explore the role of teacher characteristics on the returns to

schooling. The fraction of male teachers is included because, holding

constant the level of teacher salaries, one might expect the quality of the

teaching staff to vary with the fraction of male teachers. For example,

assuming that female teachers were paid less than otherwise identical males

during the period 1926-1966, one can view the percentage of male teachers as a

proxy for lower quality teachers. Alternatively, one can view the fraction of

male teachers as an indicator of higher non-wage compensation or better


     23These variables are described in greater detail in Appendix A.
                                     23

working conditions within the schools, as would be necessary to attract more

men into the teaching profession in a given state, holding constant wages.

     Perhaps surprisingly, the results indicate that an increase in the

fraction of teachers in the state who are male has a substantial negative

impact on students' return to education. An increase in the fraction of male

teachers from 19 to 42 percent, which is the range observed across states in

1966, is associated with a 0.77 percentage point lower return to years of

education above the threshold.

     Columns 5 and 6 add the mean years of education of teachers in the state

to the regression equation.24 The estimated coefficient of mean teacher

education is positive and statistically significant, whereas the estimated

effect of teachers' experience is negligible. Notice that the pupil-teacher

ratio and relative teacher wage continue to be significant determinants of th

return to education when these teacher quality variables are included; in

fact, their estimated coefficients are hardly affected by the addition of the

teacher quality variab1es.5 Furthermore, the addition of controls for the

average education and experience of teachers hardly changes the estimated

coefficient of the fraction of male teachers. Whether the fraction of male

teachers influence the return to education because male teachers are less


     24The Biennial Survey does not Contain information on the training of
teachers. Consequently, as described in Appendix A, we derived these
variables from the 1940, 1950 and 1960 Censuses.

     251n results not reported here, we have also included the truancy rate,
defined as one minus the ratio of average daily attendance to average daily
enrollment. This variable had an insignificant effect, perhaps because it is
measured with substantial error as many schools are slow to administratively
eliminate dropouts from the list of enrolled students. In addition, the
correctly measured truancy rate may have two opposing effects that cancel out:
a higher truancy rate reduces the effective pupil-teacher ratio for students
in attendance, but the effective length of the school term is shorter for
those who are absent.
                                     24

effective teachers, or through some other channel, is difficult to ascertain.

     Estimates of the high school completion rate and the college completion

rate for each state-of-birth and cohort group are included in the models in

columns (8) and (9). These variables are added to control for biases that may

arise as more schooling is acquired by a higher fraction of a given cohort.

For example, suppose that more schools are built in a state, leading to a

decrease in the pupil/teacher ratio and a decrease in the travel time for

students. Suppose further that individuals differ in their expected returns

to education, and that as more high schools are built, some individuals who

previously dropped out after 8th grade acquire more education.   In this case,

one might expect increases in school quality to be correlated with lower

returns to education, reflecting a negative correlation between the average

rate of return to education and the fraction of individuals with higher

education. In our data there is a strong positive correlation (both in cross-

section and within particular states over time) between average educational

attainment and measures of education quality.26   Therefore, if rates of

return vary systematically across the population, and if individuals with

higher expected returns choose more schooling, then there is a possible

downward bias in estimates of the effect of schooling quality on returns to

education. This can be controlled in part by including measures of the

fraction of individuals at higher education levels in each cohort.27


     26For example, across our 3 cohorts and 49 states of birth the
correlation between the fraction who completed high school and the pupil-
teacher ratio is - .71.

     27Similar biases are widely acknowledged to make interstate comparisons
of standardized test scores, such as the SAT, very difficult. For example,
data for 1982 on average SAT scores and the fraction of high school graduates
taking the test show a strong negative association across states. See Di2est
of Education Statistics 1987 edition, Table 82, page 95.
                                       25

     Perhaps surprisingly, neither the high school graduation rate nor the

college graduation rate has a statistically significant effect on the return

to education. Moreover, the high school graduation rate has a negative

coefficient, while the college graduation rate has a small, positive

coefficient. These results provide little evidence of sorting among students

into higher education on the basis of different expected returns to education.

Private Schools

     All of the previous estimates have measured school quality by the

characteristics of the public school system. Not all students attend public

schools, however. During the period 1920-1960, the fraction of students

enrolled in private schools grew from 7.5 percent to 13.6 percent.28 The

variation is even greater in a cross section of states: in 1938, for example,

the share of private enrollments ranged from less than 2 percent in many

Southern states to over 20 percent in New Hampshire and Rhode Island. The

presence of private schools introduces two potential sources of unobserved

variation in school quality. First, private schools may be more or less

effective than public schools.29 Second, private schools may have different

staffing levels, teacher salaries, and term lengths than the public schools.




     28
          Most prtvate school students attend Catholtc schools. For example, in
                 .




1938 the fraction of private school students in Catholic schools was 89.5
percent. In 1956 this figure was 90.9.

     29Coleman, Hoffer and Kilgore (1982) present data on standardized test
scores that indicate higher achievement levels among students in private
(mainly Catholic) schools. The interpretation of these data is an issue of
some dispute: see Goldberger and Cain (1982), Murnane (1984), and San Segundo
(1987).
                                      26

 In an effort to examine these issues, we collected information on private

school enrollments and the pupil-teacher ratio in Catholic schools.3°

     Evidence on the effects of accounting for private school enrollment is

presented in columns (9) and (10) of Table 4. In column (9) we include the

fraction of students enrolled in all private schools as an additional

explanatory variable for the rate of return to education. Controlling for

pupil-teacher ratios, term length, and relative teacher salaries in the public

schools, the effect of higher private school enrollments is numerically small

and statistically insignificant. These results suggest that increases in

private school enrollment do not by themselves affect returns to education.

     The specification in column (10) is an attempt to directly measure the

biases created by using data for the public schools to proxy pupil-teacher

ratios for the state as a whole. The average pupil-teacher ratio is a

weighted sum of ratios in the public and private systems. Hence, the

measurement error in using the public school ratio as a proxy for the overall

state average is the product of the fraction of enrollment in private schools

and the gap between the private and public school ratios.31 An estimate of

this error component is included in the model in column (10). As predicted by

a naive model of attenuation bias, the addition of this control variable

raises the estimated coefficient of the pupil-teacher ratio. Furthermore, the


     30As described in Appendix A, the Biennial Survey contains information
on private schools in some years. Information on the number of private school
teachers, however, is limited to Catholic schools.

     31Let p represent the pupil-teacher ratio for all students, let p1
represent the ratio in the public school system, let p2 represent the ratio in
the private school system, and let £ represent the fraction of enrollment in
private schools. Then p —           +        Hence
                           (1-f).p1   f.p2.
         -   —
                      - pi).
                                           27

estimated coefficient of the error component is (roughly) equal to the

estimated coefficient of the pupil-teacher ratio in the public schools.

Nevertheless, the relatively modest changes in the estimated effect of the

public school quality variables suggest that the biases introduced by

measuring only the quality of public schools are small.

     Thus far, we have proceeded by considering extensions to the basic

quality variables (family background, teacher quality, private schools)

individually. In coluxnn 11 we jointly include several of the additional

variables. With the exception of the term length variable, the school qualit',

variables have their expected signs and are statistically significant. In

contrast, the variables measuring family background characteristics, student

educational achievement, and private school attendance generally have

insignificant and small effects. The data seem to accord a greater role to

school quality than to other variables in determining the return to education.



d. Adjustments for Mobility of Pre-school and School-age Children

      Interstate mobility of pre-school and school-age children introduces a

problem similar to measurement error in the interpretation of the returns to

education for individuals born in a particular state. To proceed, it is

useful to concentrate on a single cohort. Let . represents the estimated

rate of return to education for individuals born in state j (in a particular

cohort) ,   and let -   represent   the rate of return for individuals educated in

state s.32 Finally, let p. represent the probability that an individual

attended school in state s, given that he was born in State j. Then



     320f course, some children are educated in more than one state. We
abstract from this difficulty.
                                             28

              —
                      *
                  Es Ts • P•js.
        ii
If we define P as a matrix whose j,s element is              then the vector of

coefficients          is related to the vector of true returns i by    -y
                                                                            —P       y



Given estimates of -i and P, one can obtain an estimate of           by 7*       —



Notice that if individuals are always educated in their state of birth, then P
                                  *
is   an identity matrix and           —

      We     obtained an estimate of the matrix P by cross-tabulating state-of.

birth with current state-of-residence for white children age 6-12 (both male

and female) in the Public Use Sample of the 1940 Census. The average

probability that a 6-12 year old is living in his or her state of birth is

around 90 percent, although this probability ranges from 62 percent for

children born in the District of Columbia to 94 percent for children born in

North Carolina and Pennsylvania.          In principle, this estimate of the matrix P

is only appropriate for children born between 1928 and 1934, and only for

those with 1-6 years of schooling. Nonetheless, we used this transition

matrix to transform the estimated rates of return for each of the 3 birth

cohorts into estimates of the rate of return for attending school in different

states. We then re-estimated the regression models in Table 3, using the

corrected rates of return as dependent variables. The results are presented

in Table 5•33

      The results are qualitatively similar to those in Table 3. The

correction has the effect of expanding the standard deviation of the estimated




     33We also used the estimated P matrix to obtain estimated sampling
variances for the corrected returns. These sampling variances are used to
weight the regressions in Table 5.
                                        29

returns by 10 percent.34 As a consequence, the magnitudes of the estimated

coefficients are typically 5 to 15 percent larger than in the uncorrected

model, although the associated standard errors rise by roughly the same

proportion. On balance, the results suggest that corrections for interstate

mobility have a relatively minor impact on the qualitative and quantitative

conclusions in Table S. This reflects the relatively low mobility rates of

pre-school and school-age children, and the absence of a strong connection

between interstate mobility and the geographic pattern of the measured quality

of education.



IV. Returns to Education by   Cohort   and State of Birth for Black Males

     The quality of schooling available to blacks born between 1920 and 1949

varied even more widely across states than that for whites. In the early part

of this century, black students in the segregated Southern states attended

overcrowded schools staffed by poorly qualified teachers.35 By comparison,

most Northern states allowed black students to attend regular schools, often

far superior to those attended by Southern whites.36 During the 1940's,

however, there was a remarkable surge in the absolute and relative quality of


     34The correction actually affects the estimated returns for the oldest
cohort more than for the youngest cohort. The ratio of the corrected to the
uncorrected standard deviation of estimated returns is 1.19 for the 1920-29
birth cohort, 1.11 for the 1930-39 birth cohort, and 1.08 for the 1940-49 cohort.

     35The U.S. Office of Education published an impressive series of
monographs throughout the early 20th century documenting the poor quality of
black schools: for example, Jones (1917). See also the classic work by Bond
(1934).

     36Prior to World War II, some Northern states still operated segregated
schools. For example, in 1938 over one-half of black high school students in
Illinois and Indiana attended segregated schools (see the Btennal Survey of
Education 1936-38 Edition, Chapter IV, Table 5).
                                      30

black schools in the South. These changes have been attributed to the legal

campaign to equalize teacher salaries initiated by the NAACP in 1936, and to

the growing political influence of blacks in the Southern states (see, for

example, Bullock, 1967). In any case, interstate differences in the quality

of black schooling, and in the rate of change of the quality of black schools,

reflected forces far beyond simple differences in family background. It is

therefore useful to use differences in the characteristics of schools for

black students as a check on the inferences we have drawn from the relation

between school quality and feturns to education for whites.

     Although we have little direct information on the quality of schools for

blacks educated in the North, the Biennial Survey provides relatively complete

data for those who attended school in the South. Tables 6a and 6b illustrate

the extent of racial inequality in school characteristics for students

educated in the 18 states with segregated schools. These tables present

average quality measures for three cohorts of men, assuming that each person

attended six years of elementary school. The discrepancy between quality

measures for white and black students is readily apparent. For example, in

Mississippi blacks born between 1920 and 1929 attended schools with an average

of 50 students per teacher, while whites attended schools with an average of

32 students per teacher. In most States the length of the school term and the

level of teacher pay were also substantially lower in black schools during the

1920's and 1930's. Nevertheless, in some Southern states (West Virginia,

Kentucky, District of Columbia) the gap in quality between white and black

students was relatively small.

     By the time the 1940-49 birth cohort attended school, the gap in the

quality of education between white and black students had diminished, even in
                                       31

the deep South. For example, in South Carolina the average school term for

the 1920-29 cohort of blacks was only 60 percent as long as the corresponding

school term for whites. In the 1953-54 school year (the last year for which

data are available by race in the Biennial Survey) the white and black schools

in South Carolina met for averages of 180 and 179 days, respectively. Similar

equalization of teacher salaries and pupil-teacher ratios is evident for most

states by the early 1950's.37

     Following the procedures outlined in Section III, we used data from the

 980 Census to estimate rates of return to education for blacks born in the 49

mainland states in each of three 10 year birth cohorts (1920-29, 1930-39,

1940-49) .   As for white men, these returns were estimated in three cohort-

specific regressions, including state-of-birth dummy variables, state-of-

residence dummy variables, controls for experience, marital status, and

residence in an SMSA, and interactions of education with current region of

residence. The returns to education were estimated by interacting education

and state-of-birth indicators, where education is defined as the maximum of

zero and the difference between completed education and the grade of the

second percentile of the education distribution of black workers in the

individual's state-of-birth and cohort.

     because of the relatively small numbers of blacks born in many states,

the rates of return are less precisely estimated than those for whites. In

fact, the 1980 Census sample contains no black men born between 1920 and 1929

in Mew Hampshire, and none born between 1930 and 1939 in Vermont. Table 7



     37The one important exception to this pattern of equalization seems to
have been Mississippi. In 1953-54, the ratio of black-to-white average teacher
salaries was 0.57. By 1959-60 this ratio had risen to 0.83 and by 1965-66 to
0.92. See Griffith (1969).
                                         32

reports weighted means, standard deviations, and coefficients of variation of

the estimated rates of returns to education by race and cohort.38 These data

confirm   earlier   findings (e.g., Jelch (1973a, 1973b)) that the rate of return

to education is lower for blacks than whites among individuals born before

1940. Sy comparison, imong individuals born after 1940 the rate of return to

education is slightly higher for blacks than for whites. The interstate

dispersion in the rate of return to education --     whether measured by the
standard deviation or the coefficient of variation -   - is   greater for blacks

than for whites for the two earlier cohorts, but again this pattern is

reversed for the cohort of men born after 1940. The dramatic reduction in the

interstate dispersion in the return to education for blacks coincides with the

relative improvement in the average quality of education for blacks in the

Southern states, and with the corresponding reduction in the interstate

dispersion in school quality for black students.

     The estimated rates of return to education for black men form the

dependent variables for the regression models reported in Table 8. For men

born in the segregated states, the explanatory variables are the measures of

school quality reported in Table 6a.39 For men born in other states, we use

the average quality variables for the state school system as a whole, assuming

that each individual attended 6 years of public school. These measures


     38The standard deviations and coefficients of variation in Table 7 are
adjusted for the expected contributions of sampling variation in the estimated
rates of return.

     39The relative wage for black teachers was constructed in the same manner
as the relative wage for white teachers. The small number of Southern states
which did not report school quality data by race for years prior to 1954 were
dropped from the sample used in these regressions because the data for the
system as a whole (i.e., white and black schools combined) are a grossly
inaccurate measure of school quality for blacks in these states.
                                      33

presumably overstate the quality of schools actually attended by black

students in the non-segregated states, although available data on pupil-

teacher ratios in segregated high schools in Ohio, Illinois, and Indiana show

little difference between school quality in black and white schools.4° The

models in Table 8 are estimated by weighted least squares, using the inverse

sampling variances of the estimated returns as weights.41

     The first column of Table 8 reports estimates of a model that includes

only cohort dummy variables. The estimated cohort effects reflect the sharp

increases in rates of return to education noted in Table 7. The school

quality variables are introduced individually in the models in columns (2),

(3) and (4), and jointly in the model in column (5). Similar specifications

with 44 unrestricted state-effects are reported in columns (6)-(lO). The

models with individual quality measures are quite similar to those estimated

for whites in Table 3. In each case, returns to education are significantly

related to school quality. In row 7 of the table we report the probability

value of an F-statistic t.jat tests for equality of the estimated coefficients
                                                                       42
between the model for blacks and the corresponding model for whites.        These

statistics are generally favorable to the hypothesis of the same model for


     40See Biennial Survey of Education 1936-38 Edition. Chapter IV, Table 5.

     41As a rough check on the effect of assigning overall school system
characteristics to black students, we re-estimated the models in Table 8 on
the subset of segregated Southern states. Estimates from models without
individual state effects are very similar to those in columns (l)-(5) of Table
8. When individual state effects are included the models in columns (8)-(lO)
are again very similar. The one major discrepancy is for the model that
includes only the pupil-teacher ratio. On the subset of segregated states,
with state effects, the estimated effect of the pupil-teacher ratio is small
and imprecise.

     42The models for whites are those reported in Table 3. In testing for
equality between the models for whites and blacks we allow for race-specific
intercepts, and race-specific cohort effects.
                                         34

                                              coefficients of the relative teacher
whites and blacks, although the estimated

wage are uniformly smaller for blacks.

     In the two models that include all 3 quality measures (columns (5) and

(10)) the individual contributions of the quality variables are poorly

determined. This is particularly true of the model chat includes state-

specific effects. Given the rather imprecise measures of the return to

education for blacks from many states, and the high degree of colinearity

between the quality measures, it is understandable that the regression model

has difficulty identifying the precise effects of the individual quality

variables. On balance, we believe that the results for blacks provide strong

support for a causal interpretation of the quality coefficients. The

similarity of the estimated equations for the two groups is consistent with
                                                           variables are not a
the view that endogenous school quality and/or omitted

major source of bias in the estimated quality effects.43

     An examination of the estimated cohort effects in the various columns of

Table 8 indicates that, especially in the models that exclude state fixed

effects, the quality variables explain much of the inter-cohort convergence of

 returns to education for blacks and whites. In particular, trends in the

 pupil-teacher ratio are able to account for most of the relative growth in

 returns to education for blacks between the first (1920-29) and second (1930-

 39) cohort, and about one-half of the relative increase between the second and


      430ne potentially important difference between whites and blacks is the
 out-migration rate of children from their state-of-birth. Following the
 approach in Section hId, we tabulated the probability that a child age 6-15
 was living in his or her state-of-birth at the time of the 1940 Census. This
 probability is slightly higher for blacks than whites (91.5 versus 89.3
 percent). Interestingly, the probabilities by age show a sharp increase for
 blacks after age 13, and are higher for blacks than whites by age 16. These
 patterns suggest that blacks were more likely than whites to leave their state
 of birth after comoletinz schoolinz.
                                             35

third cohort. Whether controls for other aspects of school quality, such as
                                                             in relative returns is an
teacher education, can fully explain the convergence

important question for further research.



V. Oe-Ste Estimates of the Effects of School quality on Earninzs

     The estimated effects of school quality presented in the previous two

sections are based on a relatively simple specification of the earnings-

schooling relationship. To explore the robustness of our findings to

alternative specifications it is convenient to work directly with the micro-
                                                             procedure has the
data in a one-step estimation procedure. A one-step
                                                           variation in school quality
additional advantage of incorporating intra-cohort

resulting from differences in the timing and duration of school attendance.

In this section we present a series of models that relate individual earnings

to individual-specific measures of school quality.          We compare the results of

alternative functional forms for the return-to schooling relationship,

including models without a minimum threshold level of education, and models

 that permit differential effects of school quality on the returns to pre-

college and post-secondary education.

         Unfortunately, one-step estimation of the model in equations (1) and (2)

                                              A one-step model equivalent to the fixed-
 poses a major computational burden.

 effects estimates presented in Tables 3 and 4 includes over 350 variables! To

 simplify the model, we estimate:

   (3)                     +    +
            'ijkc —   8j
                      i-(rc                          +p).E..   +c..
                               ÷r'Q
                                      ijc +rAge
                                            a   ijkc   k   Ljkc   tjkc
 where ijkc represents         log weekly earnings for individual i, born in state j

                                                          is a state-of-birth effect,
 in cohort c, and currently living in state k,
                                      36

   is a state-of-residence effect, X..k is a vector of control variables

(experience and its' square, marital Status,   and an indicator for residence in

an SMSA),      is an individual-spCifiC vector of schooling quality measures,

formed from simple averages of state-specific data during the years in which

individual i attended school, and AGEjiC is the age of individual i.

     This model differs from the one described by equationS (1) and (2) in a

number of important respects. First, the state-of-residence and state-of-

birth effects are constrained to be the same across all three cohorts.

Similarly, the coefficients of the x vector are constrained to be the same for

all three cohorts, as are the controls for differences in the rate of return

to schooling by region of current residence (the           Second, there are no

state-of-birth interactions with years of education in (3). Consequently,

one-step estimates based dn (3) correspond to two-step estimates that exclude

state-specific fixed effects in the second state. Finally, equation (3) uses

individual-specific measures of the school quality variables, and incorporates

age-specific interactions with the return to education.

     The specification of equation (3) retains the assumption that measures of

school quality affect earnings only insofar as they raise or lower the returns

to education. Thus, levels of the school quality variables are explicitly

excluded from the earnings equation. In equation (1) this is a costless

restriction, since the levels of the school quality variables are absorbed by

the cohort-specific state-of-birth effects. In a model such as (3) that

restricts the state-of-birth effects across cohorts, and includes individual-

specific education quality measures, the effects of the levels of the school

quality variables are potentially identifiable.
                                       37

     Even the estimation of this simplified specification is a formidable task

on our 1980 Census sample, which Contains some 1.2 million observations. To

ease the computational burden we drew a stratified random sample of white men

from the 5 Percent A-Sample of the 1980 Census.      The sample was drawn to

contain at most 2000 observations from any particular state-of-birth and

cohort. We then estimated the micro-level models by weighted least squares,

using as weights the inverse sampling probabilities for each observation. The

results are presented in Tables 9 and

     Columns (l)-(4) of Table 9 introduce the three quality measures

individually, and then jointly, into the earnings equation as interactions

with the level of education. Following our two-stage estimation approach,

individual education is measured as years of schooling above the grade
                                                         distribution in the
attained by the second per'centile of the educational

individual's state of birth and cohort. (The coefficients have been scaled to

be comparable to the two-step estimates.) The estimated coefficients of the

education-quality interactions ire very similar to those reported in columns

 (2)-(5) of Table 3, although the   standard   errors are 40-50 percent smaller

Apparently, the restrictions on the state-of-birth and state-of-residence

effects in the one-step model have little impact on the signs or magnitudes of

 the estimated quality effects.

     The   models in columns (5) and (6) present even more restrictive
 specifications of the state-of-birth and state-of-residence effects. The
                                         state-of-birth effects, while the
 specification in column (5) drops the
                                            state-of-residence and state-of-birth
 specification in column (6) drops both



      44We have also replicated the one'step estimates using the 1970 Census,
 and obtained similar results.
                                          38

effects. These restrictions increase the magnitudes of the estimated quality

effects -   - particularly   the pupil-teacher ratio. Evidently, the interactions

of school quality and individual education are correlated with permanent

state-level characteristics that are associated with higher returns to

schooling.

     Our specifications so far have assumed that improvements in the quality

of the public school system raise the returns to each additional year of

schooling by the same amount. It may seem plausible that increases in the

quality of the public schools have a bigger effect on the returns to

elementary and secondary education than on the returns to college.      One could

easily argue, however, that improvements in the quality of elementary and

secondary schooling (such as improved mathematics instruction) actually

benefit students who attend college more than those who only attend high

school.

     In an effort to address this issue, the specifications in columns (7) and

(8) allow for differential effects of school quality on the returns to post-

secondary education. Column (7) includes three additional interaction terms

between the measures of school quality and years of post-secondary education.

The estimates suggest that higher pupil-teacher ratios do indeed affect the

returns to elementary and secondary education more than the returns to post-

secondary education. In fact, the net effect of higher pupil-teacher ratios

on the returns to post-secondary education is positive. By comparison,

changes in teacher wages and changes in term length have statistically similar

effects on pre-college and post-secondary returns.

    The model in column (8) adds years of post-secondary schooling and its

 interaction with the three age/cohort variables to the model in column (7)
                                     39


Only the effects of the teacher wage variable are similar to those in the

restricted model. The effects of the pupil-teacher variable are negligible,

whereas increases in term length are estimated to have a negative effect on

the returns to pre-college education, and a large positive effect on post-

secondary returns. It is important to keep in mind that the model in column

(8) includes a total of 20 education interaction terms, including the 12

displayed in the table and 9 interactions with current region.   Evidently, the

regression has some difficulty apportioning the variation in rates of return

to education, once the returns to pre-college and post-secondary education are

completely unrestricted.

     The models in Table 10 address a second set of issues: What is the

effect of adding the levels of the quality measures to the earnings

regressions? And what is the effect of ignoring the threshold level of

education?   As in Table 9, the first two columns of Table 10 present models

that define education as years of schooling above the threshold level attained

by the second percentile of the education distribution in an individual's

cohort and state-of-birth. By comparison, the third and fourth columns

present models that simply use years of completed education. Column (I) is

 reproduced from column (4) of Table 9, and is presented for ease of

 comparison. The specification in column (2) adds the levels of the three

 quality variables to the earnings model. This addition increases the

 magnitudes of the estimated interaction effects of the pupil-teacher and term

 length variables, while having only a small effect on the interaction of

 teacher wages and education. The levels of the pupil-teacher and term length
                                                              the pattern of the
 variables are themselves highly significant. In each case,

 level and interaction coefficients implies that an improvement in quality
                                       40

                                                In the case of the pupil-teacher
rotates the earningsscho0ling relationship.

ratio, the point of rotation is at 14 years of education above the threshold

level (which averages 7 years of schooling), while in the case of the term

length   variable the rotation point is at 7 years above the threshold.

      Columns (3) and (4) present specifications that ignore any threshold in

the earnings-schooling relationship. A comparison of the models with and

without the levels of the quality variables shows the importance of including

the levels of the quality variables if the education threshold is ignored.

Whereas the results in column (4) are similar to those in column (2), the

results in column (3) give very little evidence of school quality effects.

This is apparently a result of the fact that improvements in school quality

 tate the earnings-schooling relation through a point other than the zero-

schooling intercept. Although the rotation point is somewhat above the

threshold level of schooling, the specification in (I) is nevertheless close

enough to the correct specification to obtain significant quality effects.



VI.   Conclusion
      The estimates presented in this paper provide new evidence that the
quality of schooling affects earnings. Men who are educated in states with

higher quality school systems tend to earn a higher economic return for their

years of schooling. Although the evidence we have assembled is necessarily

non-experimental, we believe that our findings are consistent with causal

 interpretation of the role of school quality. In the first place, our

 findings are based on statistical models that control for any differences

 across state-of-birth and cohort groups in the overall level of earnings.

 Secondly, we have controlled for differences in the rates of return to
                                       41

education earned by current residents in different regions of the country.
                                               differences across states in the
Third, we have controlled for any permanent
                                            cohorts of men, and for differences in
return to education earned by different

family background measures (education and earnings of the parents' generation)

that may affect subsequent labor market performance.      Finally, our analysis

suggests that the relation between school quality and the returns to education

is similar for whites and blacks. Since we believe that changes in the
                                                      to individual student
quality of black schooling were largely exogenous

choices and backgrounds, the similarity of the estimated effects of school

quality for the two race groups is reassuring.

     Our findings underscore the paradox we noted in the introduction: school
                                       effect on earnings, but is often found to
quality appears to have an important
                                                  achievement tests.65 Although
have little measurable impact on standardized

much further research will be needed to resolve this paradox, we believe that

success in the labor market is at least as important a yardstick for measuring
                                                       on standardized tests. At
 the performance of the education system as success

 a minimum, our finding of a positive link between school quality and the

 economic returns to education should give pause to those who argue that
                                                  few benefits for students.
 investments in the public school system have




                                                                     random
      45We note, however, that an important, ongoing study that uses     the
 assignment to examine the effect of additional academic training during
                                      finds that, at least in the short run.
 summer months on student performance           substantial positive effect on
 the provision of summer school education has a
 disadvantaged students' math and reading test scores (see Sipe, Grossman and
 Milliner (1988)).
                                            42


                                         Referencea

1                                                        of Schooling: Quantity Alone
 Berhxuafl, Jere and Nancy Birdsall. "The Quality Review 73 (December 1983): 928-946.
        is Misleading." American Economic

    Bond, Horace Mann. The Education of the Nezro in the American Social Order.
          New York: Prentice Hall, 1934.

    Bullock, Henry Allen, A History of Negro Education in the South: From 1619 to
                                                          University Press, 1967).
          the Present. (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard

    Chiswick, Barry R. Income Inequality : Rezional Analysis Within a Human
          Caiital Framework. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1974.

    Coleman, James, et al. Equality of Educational OpportunitY. Washington:
          GPO, 1966.

    Coleman, James, Thomas Hoffer, and Sally Kilgore. Hi2h School Achievement:
          Public. Catholic and Private Schools Compared. New York: Basic Books,
          1982.

IFreeman, Richard. Black Elite: Education Labor Market Discrimination. New
          York: McGraw Hill, 1973.

(o1dberger, Arthur and Glen Cain. "The Causal Analysis of Cognitive Outcomes
       in the Coleman, Hoffer and Kilgore Report." Socio1ov of Education 55
           (April/July 1982): 102-122.

    Griffith, R. W.  "Mississippi." In Jim B. Pearson and Edgar Fuller, editors.
          Education in the States: Historical Development and Outlook.
          Washington, DC: National Education AssociatiOn, 1969.

    Griliches, Zvi and William Mason. "Education, Income, and Ability." Journal
          of Political Economy 80 (May 1972, Part II): S74-S1O3.

     Hanushek, Eric.   "The Economics of Schooling: Production and Efficiency in
           Public Schools." Journal of Economic Literature 24 (September 1986):
           1141- 1177.

     Heckman, James and Solomon Polachek. "Empirical Evidence on the Functional
           Form of the Earnings-Schooling Relationship." Journal of the American
           Statistical Association 69 (June 1974): 350-354.

    'Hungerford, Thomas and Gary Solon. "Sheepskin Effects in the Returns to
           Education." Review of Economics and Statistics. 66 (February 1987):
           175-177.

    \ihnson, George and Frank Stafford. "Social Returns to Quantity and Quality
           of Schooling." Journal of Human Resources 8 (Spring 1973): 139-155.
                                        43

Jones, Thomas Jesse, editor. Negro Education: A Study of the Private and
      Hither Schools for Colored People in the United States. New York: Arno
      Press, 1969. Originally published by the United States Department of
      Interior Office of Education as Bulletin Number 38, 1917.

Kirk, Frank M. "South Carolina." In Jim B. Pearson and Edgar Fuller, editors.
      Education in the States: Historical Development and Outlook. Washington,
      DC: National Education Association, 1969.

Margo, Robert. Se2reEated Schools in the American South. 1880-1950: A
      Ouantitative History. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
      forthcoming 1990.

Morgan. James and Ishmail Sirageldth. "A Note on the Quality
                                                             Dimension in
      Education." Journal of Political Economy 76 (September 1968): 1069-
      1077.

Murnane, Richard. The Imoact of School Resources on the Learninz   of   Inner-
      City Schools. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Ballinger, 1984.

San Segundo, Maria Jesus. "Do Private Schools Make a Difference?" Southern
      European Economics Discussion Series, August 1988.

Sipe, Cynthia, Jean Baldwin Grossman, and Julita Milliner, Summer Traininz and
      Education Proram (STEP): Report on the 1987 Experience. Public/Private
      Ventures, Summer 1988.

 Smith, James and Finis Welch. "Black Economic Progress after Myrdal."    Journal
       of Economic Literatura 27 (June 1989): 519-564.

 United States Commission on Civil Rights. The Economic Progress of Black Men
       in America. Washington: GPO, 1986.

 Wachtel, Paul. "The Effects on Earnings of School and College Investment
       Expenditures." Review of Economics and Statistics 58 (August 1976):
       326-331.

 Welch, Finis. "Measurement of the Quality of Education." American Economic
L      Review 56 (May 1966): 379-392.

 __________   "Labor Market Discrimination: An Interpretation of Income
       Differences in the Rural South." Journal of Political Economy 75 (June
       1967): 225-240.

 _________    "Black-White Differences in Returns to Schooling." American
       Economic Review 63 (December 1973): 893-907. (1973a)

              "Education and Racial Discrimination." In Orley  Ashenfelter and
 _________                                                 Princeton, New
       Albert Rees, eds. Discrimination in Labor Markets.
       Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1973. (1973b).
                                   Appendix A
                   Sources for Data on School Quality: 1920-66

I.   Basic Data for All Students

    The following series were extracted from various issues of the Bienniel.
Survey Of Education and the Digest of Education Statistics:

        a. number of pupils enrolled in full time public elementary and
            secondary school.
        b. average number of days in the school term (full-time public
            elementary and secondary schools)
        c. average number of days attended by each enrolled student (full
            time public elementary and secondary schools) (1920-58 only).
        d. number of instructional staff, including supervisors and
            principles (full time public elementary and secondary schools).
        e. percent of teachers who are male (full time public elementary
           and secondary schools).
         f. average annual salary per member of the instructional
            staff (full time public elementary and secondary schools).

These data were collected by state for alternating years, beginning with
1919-1920. In some cases, the figures in the most recently published
Bienniel Survey were revised in subsequent editions. We have attempted to
incorporate as many of these revisions as possible. For 1960 and later we
collected a variable representing the percentage of school days attended by
enrolled students. This percentage was then used to construct an estimate
of average days attended from the series on the length of the school term.
The data from the bienniel editions of the Survey are allocated to the
previous two years: for example, data from the 1937-38 edition is used for
both 1937 and 1938.

 II. Data for White and Black School Systems -- 18 Segregated States

     With the exception of the percentage of male teachers, the above data
 are available for most States for the white and black school systems
 separately up to 1954. Data on teacher salaries are unavailable for 1933-
 34, and are missing for some states in other years. We used the average of
 salaries in 1931-32 and 1935-36 to estimate 1933-34 salaries. In some
 cases we had information ott teacher salaries in the black schools only.   In
 these cases we used information on the numbers of teachers in the white and
 black schools, together with information on average salaries for both
 races, to infer the average salary for teachers in the white schools. Data
 by race for the schools in Kentucky, Tennessee, Missouri, and West Virginia
 are missing in many issues of the Bienrtiel Survey. We used information in
 the annual reports of the state offices of education of these four states
 to estimate enrollments, numbers of teachers, and average wages in some
 years. Data for other years are estimated by linear interpolation between
 the available years. In cases where data were unavailable in two
 consecutive Bjertnjel Surveys, the observations were dropped from the data
 set.
                                     45

iii. Construction of the Relative Teacher Wage

    Two wage series were combined to create a relative wage index for
teachers in each State. For 1920-38, we used the wage paid to laborers on
federal road construction projects. This wage is available on a regional
basis (for 9 Census regions) in the Statistical Abstract of the United
States. Data for 1920-29 are taken from the 1930 edition, Table 358. Data
for 1930-56 are taken from the 1957 edition, Table 271. For 1940-66 we use
the average state-level wage of workers covered by the Social Security
system, from U.S. Department of Labor Employment and Training
Administration Handbook number 394. To convert the regional construction
wage rates into state-level averages, we formed the average ratio of the
state Social Security wage to the regional construction wage in the period
1940-44. This average ratio was then applied to the construction wage in
the period 1920-38 to obtain a state-specific average.


IV. Data on Education and Experience of Teachers

a. 1940
   We used the public use sample of the 1940 Census to form extracts of
teachers in each of the 48 (mainland) states and District of Columbia.
Teachers were identified by industry (educational services) and occupation
(teachers not elsewhere classified). We sampled only those teachers who
reported either white or black race, and who reported positive earnings and
weeks worked and non-allocated age, sex, race, industry, occupation, and
years of education. The extract contains 9161 teachers.

b. 1950
    We used the public use sample of the 1950 Census to form extracts of
teachers in each of the 48 (mainland) states and District of Columbia.
 (Owing to technical difficulties our public use sample excludes 1/9 of the
available sample). Teachers were identified by industry (educational
services) and occupation (teachers not elsewhere classified). We sampled
only those teachers who reported either white or black race, and who
 reported non-allocated age, sex, race, industry, occupation. and years of
education. The extract contains 3206 teachers.

 c. 1960
    We used the public use sample of the 1960 Census to form extracts of
 teachers in each of the 48 (mainland) States and District of Columbia.
 Teachers were identified by industry (educational services) and occupation
 (teachers, elementary schools and teachers, secondary schools). We sampled
 only those teachers who reported either white or black race, and who
 reported non-allocated age. The extract contains 16052 teachers.
                                     46


V.   Data   on Faintly Background

a. Average Per Capita Income                            State for the years
     We collected average personal income per capita by
1930, 1940, and 1950 from State Personal Income: Estimates for 1929-1982.
Revised Estjmat, Washington. D.C.: Bureau   of Economic Analysis,  1984. The
                                         the National Income and Product
income data were originally derived from
                                        used to convert the data into real
Accounts. The consumer price index was
dollars. The state-level per capita income in 1930 was assigned to the
cohort of men born in the 1920s, the state-level per capita income in 1940
was assigned to the cohort of men born in the l930s, and the state-level per
capita income in 1950 was assigned to the cohort of men born in the 1940s.
These years roughly correspond to the years when educational expenditures for
each cohort would have been determined.


b. Median Education of Parents' Generation
     As a measure of the education of each cohort's parents, we collected
information on the median education of white persons age 25 or older by state
in 1940, 1950, and 1960. These data are reported in Statistical Abstract of
the United States (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, no. 66, 75,
and 85), and were originally derived from the 1940, 1950 and 1960 Censuses.
In 1940, the education data are only reported for native-born individuals,
while in 1950 and 1960 the data pertain to native and foreign born
individuals. The median education of adults in 1940 was assigned to the
l920s cohort, the median education of adults in 1950 was assigned to the
 1930s cohort, and the median education of adults in 1960 was assigned to the
 l940s cohort.




 VI. Private Schools

     State-level data on the number of students enrolled in private schools,
 the number of students enrolled in Catholic schools, and the number of
 teachers in Catholic schools were collected from the Biennial Survey.
 Unfortunately, these variables are only available on an irregular basis.
 Data for 1937-1938 were assigned to the cohort born in the 1920s, data for
 1949-1950 were assigned to the cohort born in the 1930s, and data for 1955-
 1956 were assigned to the cohort born in the l940s.
                                        47

                                 Appendix B
                           1980 Microdata Samples

    Our samples are taken from the Public Use A-sample of the 1980 Census (a
5 percent sample of the population) . The samples consist of men born in the
48 mainland states or the District of Columbia between 1920 and 1949, and
currently Living in any of the 50 states or D.C. Year of birth is estimated
from information on age and quarter of birth. We include only those
individuals whose race is identified as "white" or "black". Individuals with
imputed information onage, race, sex, education, weeks worked, or total
annual earnings are excluded, as are individuals who report no weeks of work
in 1979. In addition, individuals with wage or salary income in 1979 less
than $101. and individuals with average weekly wage and salary income of less
than $36 or greater than $2,500 are excluded. The final sample sizes are:

                     whites - 279,008        blacks - 20,258
     Born 1920-29:
                     whites - 299.063        blacks - 26,108
     Born 1930-39:
                     whites - 441,675        blacks - 38,659
     Born 1940-49:

These samples are used to form the first-stage estimates of the return to
education in our 2-step procedure. For the one-step estimates presented in
Tables 9 and 10, we used stratified random samples of these overall samples,
drawn to yield a maximum of (approximately) 2,000 white men per cohort and
state-of-birth. The sampling procedure generates a subsample of 265,618.
The regression models are then estimated by weighted least squares, using as
weights the inverse sampling probabilities of the various states-of-birth.
                                         Figure 1
          Wages vs. Schooling, by Cohort and State of Birth
           1.1

           0.
           0.8
           0.7
>'
           0.6
           0.4
           0.3
           0.2
o          0.1
-J              0
          —0.1
          —0.2



            0.8
            0.7
            0.6
 o
 0
            0.5
            0.3
 .>'        0.2
            0.1
                 0
     , -0.1
         -0.2
          —0.3
          —0.4
          —0.5



                1.1


     a)

            0.7
     >'     0.6
            0.5
            0.4
            0.3
     o'         0.2
     0
                  0
           —0.1
           —0.2                                                                   20
                                               8        10
                                     Yeors of Completed Education
                                                                        Born 1940—49
                 I    Born 1920—29         +       Born 1930—39     0
                                     Figure 2
       Return to Single Years of Education
                             White Men Born 1920—29.


        as
        as
        0.7
3
        0.5
        as
        a.
        0.3
        az
        aI

       -0. I
       —0.2
                5    2   4      U        5         0
                                    v.a, of CansIdoS sdilfls



        I.'

        as
        as
        ai
        a.
        as
        a,
        a3
         0.2
         al
          0
       -0.1
        -4.2

                                         It Cadsd odwoir,




         a.
         as
         0.7
3
         as
         as




         —0.2


                                          ,e cww.e.5 Saontq
                                                               + 1 Std. Cror
    Point CrirnatS                   Q     - 1 Std. (jyor
U
                                                              Figure 3
                                      Relative feocher Wage vs. Return to School.
                           With High. Low and Medium Pupil—Teacher Ratios (P/i) Indicated
      0.08



      0.07
                                                                                                                         U

C                                                                                              .
0     0.06                                                                 U       U
0
-C                                                        U                       U
 U                                           0            N
(I)                                                            U
                                                         U             U
0
                                 0
C     0.05                             U   'U    +
L.                                                                 .
                                           UI'           ..
—I                     0     U
                   +
4-                                               U
                           'p..'U
 0                 +
 1)   0.04                   +
4-,
 0
                                       U
                            0

      0.03                       +




      0.02
             0.6                 0.8                 1                 L2                1.4       1.6             1.8

                                                          Relative Teacher Wage

                   +             >   33                       •    24      'z   P/i   < 33          0    P/I   <   24
                           P/I
                                     Figure 4
          Change in Returns to Education vs. Change
                                                    in Pupil Teacher Ratio
                               1940s Cohort minus 1920s Cohort
      5



      4-                                               U

C
0
0U
                                       . .
      3-        •   a..
                    •••
0
E     2
I1.



                                                                        a
C
      1-
rU
      0-
                                                                                    a

                                                                    I           I   F
                        I                         I        I

                       —6                —4                —2               0           2
           —8

                                    Change in Pupil—Teacher Ratio

                            Note: The OLS line is ulso shown on   the figure.
                                           Table 1
                                 Variables  For Cohorts Born 1920—29,        1930—39, 1940-49
      Averages of School Quality
                             Black and White  Students Combined


                                                     Term Length (Days       Relative Teacher Wage
                         Pupil/Teacher Ratio
                                                             30—39   40—49    20—29        30—39       40—49
      Cohorts Born:     20—29      30—39    40—49    20—29
                                                                      176     0.73          0.81        0. 90
                         35.9       31 .7    29.1     150     168
1.    Alabama                                                                 1.05          1.13        1.11
                                    28. 6    26.4     169     169     170
2.    Arizona            30. 8                                                                          0.86
                                             29.1     151     165     173     0.      65    0.75
3.    Arkansas           36.3       32. 3                                                               1.17
                                                              176     177     1   .   30    1   .27
                         28.0       29.7     27.2     177
4.    California                                                      177     0.95          0.98        0.95
                         24.   9    24.1     24.1     174     175
5.    Colorado                                                        180     1.11          1.09        1.07
                                    25.2     24.2     182     18].
6.    Connect icut       29.6                                                               1.05        1.01
                                    24.4     22.5     183     182     180     1.13
7.    Delaware           27.3                                                               1.06        1.15
                                             26.1     166     175     180     0.96
8.    Florida            30.4       26.5                                                    0.80        0.93
                                             28.4     154     173     180     0.75
9.     Georgia           34.8       30.2
                                    26.5     26.0     170     173     174
10.    Idaho             26.0                                                               1.02        1.00
                                             24.3     184     187     184     1.06
11.    Illinois          28.1       24.9                                                                1.00
                                             27.2     169     171     175     0.96          0.99
12.    Indiana           30.0       28.3                                                                0.85
                                                      176     177     179     0.79          0.85
13.    Iowa              21.7       20.8      20.5                                                      0.89
                                                      171     171     174     0.76          0.82
14.    Kansas            21.3       20.5      21.1
                                                              165     172     0.75          0.76        0.76
                         33.4        29.7     27.4    159
15.    Kentucky                                                       179     0.78          0.96        1.04
                         33.7        29.8     27.2    161     173
16.    Louisiana                                                      181     0.73          0.76        0.82
                         25.9        25.0     23.8    178     179
17.    Maine                                                                  1.20          1.22        1.19
                          32.8       30.4     26.7    187     185     182
18.    Maryland                                               178      177    1.32          1.26        1.12
                          27.8       25.2     23.4    179
19.    Massachusetts                                                   180    0.89          0.91        0.91
                          28.6       27.5     25.6    180     180
20.    Michigan                                                        174    0.89          0.97        1.00
                          25.0       24.0    23.5      175    173
21.    Minnesot a                                                      168    0.65          0.66        0.78
                          37.6       34.4     31.4     139    154
22.    Mississippi                                                     182    0.86          0.86         0.87
                          27.7       27.1     26.6     177     180
23.    Missouri                                                177     179     0.80             0.96     0.96
                          20.1       19.7     20.0     176
24.     Mont   dna
                                                             Table     1   Continued


                                                                                Term Length (Days)      Relative Teacher Wage
                                    Pupil/Teacher Ratio

                                                                   40—49        20—29   30—39   40—49    20—29   30—39   40—49
        Cohorts Born:          20—29           30—39


25.      Nebraska                   21.0
                                                   24.3             24.9                 176     178     0.92     0.97    0.96
26.      Nevada                     22.7
                                                                    23.8         177     116     177     1.07     1.03    1.02
27.      New Hampshire              25.1           23.5
                                                                                 186     183     181     1.31     1.14    1.02
28.      New Jersey                 28.2           24.1
                                                   29.1             26.0         176     179     180     0.92     1.11    1.13
29.      New Mexico                 28.5
                                                   25.7             23.2         184     182     181     1.54     1.30    1.13
30.      New York                   27.6
                                                   31.9             28.8                 175     180     0.95     1.09    1.12
31.      North Carolina             35.8
                                                   17.7             17.9                 172     177     0.67     0.76    0.81
32.      North Dakota               18.4
                                    29.4           27.4             26.4                 179     177     1.03     0.97    0.93
 33.     Ohio                                                                                            0.74     0.87    0.92
                                    32.1           27.0             25.6                 176     176
 34.     Oklahoma                                                                                                 0.97    1.02
                                    24.7           24.5             23.0                 176     179     0.90
 35.     Oregon                                                                                          1.17     1.08    1.05
                                    31.4           27.2                          181     182     182
 36.     Pennsylvania                                                                            180     1.23     1.20    1.17
                                    27.8           25.0                          180     180
 37.     Rhode Island                                                                                    0.89     0.89    0.92
                                     34.2          29.9             28.7         154     171     179
 38.     South Carolina                                                                                           0.81    0.82
                                     17.7           16.6            17.6         174     175     177     0.72
 39.      South Dakota                                                                                   0.78     0.80    0.88
                                     32.8           29.9            28.8                 170     176
 40.      Tennessee                                                                                               0.92    1.01
                                     29.3           27.2            25.7         164     173     175     0.75
 41.      Texas                                                                                          0.91     1.07    1.06
                                     31.0           29.2            27.8                 174     176
 42.      Utah                                                                                                    0.84    0.91
                                     23.5           22.7            22.6                 173     173     0.74
  43.     Vermont                                                                                        0.81     0.89    0.96
                                     32.9           29.3            26.7                 179     180
  44.     Virginia                                                                                                1.11     1.05
                                     30.8           29.0                          180    178     178      1.05
  45.     Washington                                                                                              0.84    0.77
                                     27.2           27.3             26.8         171    174     174     0.85
  46.     West Virginia                                                                                   0.94    0.94    0.94
                                     25.7           24.0             23.3         179    179     178
  47.     Hsconsin                                                                                        0.83    0.91    0.98
                                     20.3          21.5              21.4         175     175    177
  48.     Wyoming                                                                                178      1.85    1.54     1.28
  49.     h.C.                       30.8          28.5              27.4         78      176

           Cohot   t   ave rayes ar         for med      a   uminq         12   years ot eleiiieiitary and secondary educat ion.
 Notes:                                     jOOS    ot       VOL    dk) I es     see Data Ap1iidi x foi sources
           See t ext f or    (jet   iii j
                        Table 2

Estimated Returns to Education by State and Cohort

              White Males Born    1920-1949

            (standard errors in parentheses)


                Estimated Return for Cohort Born:

 State              1920-29    1930-29     1940-49


Alabama               4.52        6.08         7.15
                      (0.22)      (0.21)      (0.20)

Arizona                5.62        7.15       7.47
                      (0.49)      (0.50)      (0.42)

 Arkansas             4.44         5.60        7.28
                      (0.23)      (0.23)      (0.23)

 California            5.76        6.20        6.96
                      (0.21)      (0.19)      (0.13)

 Colorado              5.82        6.22        7.49
                      (0.34)      (0.33)      (0.29)

 Connecticut           5.46        7.14        7.83
                      (0.28)      (0.28)      (0.23)

 Delaware              6.19        7.07        6.31
                      (0.76)      (0.76)      (0.58)

 Florida               4.25        6.07        7.40
                      (0.33)      (0.30)      (0.23)

 Georgia               4.76        6.14        7.71
                      (0.21)      (0.21)      (0.19)

 Idaho                 4.58        5.60        6.57
                      (0.50)      (0.43)      (0.39)

 Illinois              5.74        6.91        7.63
                      (0.15)      (0.14)      (0.12)

 Indiana               5.89        6.98        7.95
                      (0.22)      (0.20)      (0.16)

 Iowa                  5.19        6.02        6.92
                      (0.24)      (0.23)      (0.21)
                 Table 2, continued



              Estimated Return for Cohort Born:

 State            1920-29     1930-29    1940-49



Kansas              4.92        5.90       7.40
                   (0.27)      (0.26)     (0.24)

                    3.99        5.59       6.90
Kentucky
                   (0.19)      (0.18)     (0.16)

Louisiana           3.02        4.78       5.84
                    (0.27)     (0.25)     (0.22)

Maine               4.49        6.63       8.29
                    (0.40)     (0.36)     (0.33)

                     5.41       5.99       7.74
Maryland
                    (0.28)     (0.27)     (0.22)

                     5.54       7.21       8.10
Massachusetts
                    (0.22)     (0.22)     (0.18)

                     5.59       6.64       8.17
Michigan
                    (0.18)     (0.16)     (0.14)

                     5.17       6.09       6.89
Minnesota
                    (0.23)     (0.22)     (0.20)

                     4.12        5.67      6.87
Mississippi
                    (0.29)      (0.27)     (0.24)

                     4.99        6.32       7.68
Missouri
                    (0.20)      (0.19)     (0.17)

                     4.27        4.82       6.39
 Montana
                    (0.48)      (0.46)     (0.42)

                      5.06       6.43       7.38
 Nebraska
                     (0.31)     (0.30)     (0.29)

                      5.69       6.64       7.24
 Nevada
                     (1.20)     (1.00)     (0.75)

                      4.96       6.12       7.57
 New Hampshire
                     (0.52)     (0.50)     (0.43)
                 Table 2, continued



               Estimated Return for Cohort Born;

 State             1920-29   1930-29   1940-49



New Jersey           5.91      7.49      7.95
                    (0.20)    (0.20)    (0.16)

New Mexico           5.56      5.84       .80
                    (0.47)    (0.42)

New York             6.16      7.18      8.28
                    (0.13)    (0.12)    (0.10)

North Carolina       4.94      5.93      7.40
                    (0.19)    (0.19)    (0.17)

North Dakota         4.76      5.17      6.53
                    (0.38)    (0.36)    (0.38)

Ohio                 5.43      6.86      7.78
                    (0.16)    (0.15)    (0.12)

Oklahoma             4.39      5.72      7.34
                    (0.22)    (0.22)    (0.22)

                     4.79      5.26      6.23
Oregon
                    (0.42)    (0.40)    (0.29)

Pennsylvania         4.87      6.26      7.61
                    (0.13)    (0.13)    (0.11)

Rhode Island         5.96      6.62      7.90
                    (0.41)    (0.40)    (0.33)

South Carolina       5.05      5.76      6.56
                    (0.28)    (0.27)    (0.22)

South Dakota         4.87      5.68      6.79
                    (0.41)    (0.39)    (0.39)

Tennessee            4.53      6.62      7.80
                    (0.20)    (0.19)    (0.18)

Texas                4.73      5.93       7.72
                    (0.16)    (0.15)     (0.14)
                             Table 2, continued




              State           1920-29    1930-29   1940-49


             Utah               4.90       5.56      6.28
                               (0.44)     (0.39)    (0.34)

             Vermont            3.57       6.82      7.54
                               (0.55)     (0.53)    (0.48)

                                4.29       5.54      6.44
             Virginia
                               (0.21)     (0.20)    (0.17)

                                4.82       5.46      6.28
             Washington
                               (0.34)     (0.30)    (0.23)

             West Virginia       3.66      5.25      6.34
                                (0.23)    (0.21)    (0.20)

             Wisconsin           5.17      6.10      7.37
                                (0.21)    (0.20)    (0.18)

                                 7.10      4.99      6.65
             Wyoming
                                (0.69)    (0.65)    (0.59)

             D.C.                6.54      6.07      7.14
                                (0.63)    (0.54)    (0.38)



    Mean over all states:        5.07      6.27      7.44

    Standard Deviation:          0.65      0.58      0.56

    Correlation with:
      Pupil/Teacher Ratio       -0.36     -0.23     -0.19

                                 0.62      0.51      0.35
      Term   Length
      Relative Teacher Wage      0.71      0.51      0.25

Note: Column entries are estimated rates of return to education, based on
       samples in the 1980 Census. See text for estimation method.
       Estimated standard deviation of returns is adjusted for the
       expected contribution of sampling variability.
                                                                      Table 3

                                        tten,.tS of the Reonn to                Eckaticii: '.4iite Males

                                         Depeixient Variable: Percenta            Ret,..n   to    Eôxad.c'n


                                                     (stard errors in parentheses)

                               Cli*1flE State Effects                                    Irli.xtth 48 State Effects
£pe!1i&t                                             (4)       (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)       (9)     (10)
Variable             (1)        (2)       (3)


                     ---                  ---        ---     -2.38          ---         -9.52       ---       ---     -9.35
1. pi.1/reac1r                 -5.37
                                                             (1.64)                     (2.81)                        (3.18)
     Ratio (1w)                (1.62)

                        ---     ---       4.57       ---       1.93         ---          ---        2.16      ---      -.02
2. Term   Length                                                                                    (0.70)            (0.99)
                                                             (0.94)
     (1(Ys   of days)                      (.67)

                        ---     ---        ---       1.86      1.35         ---          ---         ---      0.99    0.97
3.   P1.ative
                                                                                                              (0.35) (0.44)
     Teacher 'Jage                                  (0.26) (0.33)

                                                     1.20      1.07         1.21           1.U 1.21 0.98
                                                                                         0.98
4.   cu=y for           1.21    1.07       1.03
                                                                                          (0.07) (0.07) (0.09)
     Born 1930-39       (0.14) (0.14) (0.12)        (0.12) (0.12)           (0.07) (0.10)
                                                     2.35      2.16         2.35         1.98        2.24     2.36     1.99
5. Ctmny for            2.37    2.16       2.1.3
     Born 1940-49    (0.13)    (0.14) (0.12) (0.U) (0.12)                   (0.07) (0.12) (0.07) (0.06) (0.12)
                                                       .78       .80            .95         .96       .95       .95      .96
6. a2                    .71      .72        .78


 Note:          Sa1e size      is 147.             ar4 stard              d deperxient variable are 6.421 ar4 1.161
                                                               deviatict' of
                                      Fuaticts    are itad by the inverse sa1ing variace of the depeixent variaL
                respectively.
                All equaticcs     ircltxle   i xrestricted ccttat term                (rt reported).
                                                         Table 4
                             AdditionaL Determinants of the Return to Education: White Mates
                                   Dependent Var .01*: Percentage Return to Education
                                                 Fixed Effects Estim.te.
                                             (standard errors in p.renthesis)


                           (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (1)            (8)          (9)         (10)         (11)


                           -9.67        -9.36        -9.77        -9.33        -9.81        -9.80        -8.42         -10.62        -9.23       -9.77        -8.82
1. pi1/T..cher                                                                                                          (3.22) (3.23) (3.20) (3.51)
       Ratio (+ 100)       (3.16) (3.21) (3.20) (3.10) (3.06) (2.98) (3.54)

                           -0.51        -0.04        -0.65        -0.98        -0.40        -1.26        -0.08          -L04          0.06       -0.35        -1.09
2.     Term Length                                                                                                      (1.13) (1.04) (1.04)
       (100s    of Days) (1.03) (1.12) (1.17) (1.05) (0.97) (1.01) (1.00)                                                                                     (1.25)


                                         0.95         1.13         0.86         1.05         1.05         0.86           1.12         1.00        0.80            1.52
       Relative

                                                                                 --- - -
                            1.22
3.
       Teacher Wage        (0.47) (0.57) (0.58) (0.43) (0.44) (0.43) (0.68)                                             (0.44) (0.47)            (047) (0.61)
                                          --          0.18          -"                                                    --.          •--         ---
4. Median       Education-C.18                                                                                                                                (0.13)
       of Parents          (0.11)                    (0.11)


5.
       Generation

       l.og Real Per
                             ---         0.18         0.13
                                                                                                                                       . ---                  -0.50
                                                                                                                                                              (0.53)
       Capita   tncS of                 (0.52) (0.51)
       Parents Generation

6.     Fraction Mate         ---          •--              ---    -3.36              -.-    -3.46                                                  --         -2.98
                                                                  (1.39)                    (1.43)                                                            (1.73)
       Teachers

7. Mean Years of                 ---          ---          --           ---     0.33   0.38
                                                                                                                                       ---         .--            0.38
                                                                                                                                                              (0.13)
    Education of                                                               (0.13) (0.13)
    Teacher.
                                 ---          ---          -.-          ---     0.03         0.02              ---            ---          ---     ---            o.o2
8.      Mean Years of
                                                                               (0.02) (0.02)                                                                  (3.02)
        Experience of


 9.
        Teachers

        fraction IS Grads
        in Cohort
                                                           -"           -            ---          - 0.89
                                                                                                         (1.48)
                                                                                                                                           -.-      ---           0.93
                                                                                                                                                              (1.52)



 10. Fraction CotLee -"
                                              ---          ---          -.-                       - ---                  -3.86
                                                                                                                         (2.11)
                                                                                                                                                    ---           -1.38
                                                                                                                                                                  (2.34)
        Grads in Cohort
                                              ---          ---          ---          --.          .--          ---            ---      0.71         ---            1.51
 11.    Fraction of              ---                                                                                                                              (2.62)
                                                                                                                                      (2.69)
        EnroUment in
        Private SchooLS

 12. WeIghted Gap                -•-          --           .-.          ..-          ."                                                           -6.06
                                                                                                                                                  (5.80)
        Between    Pi.it
        Teacher Ratio in
        Catholic and Piic
        Schools
                                                                                                                          1.26         0.96        1.04            1.01
                                          0.98     1.01   0.88
                                                           1.12  0.97   0.90
 13. Di.' for Born               1.12
                                                                                                                         (0.18) (0.12) (0.11)                     (0.24)
    1930-39                 (0.11) (0.10) (0.13) (0.09) (0.10) (0.11) (0.16)
                                                                                                  1.84         184        2.72         1.96             .9         2.20
     14. Dy for Born             2.32         1.98         2.27         2.22         1.59
                                                                                                                          (0.62) (0.16) j.16) (0.54)
         1940-49            (0.24) (0.26) (0.31) (0.16) (0.18> (0.20) (0.27)
                                                                                                  0.97         0.96           0.96     0 .96       0.96            0.97
                                 0.96         096          0.96         0.96         0.96
     15. a2
                                                                                                                      See text for definitions               of
     Mote:      See note to Table 3. All equation. include 48 state effects.
                eiiplanatOry variables.
                                                                   Table 5

                                        ters1n&its of die Rebirn to i4iaticx: iite Males


                    !perdenC
                                Variable: Percitage Return to Ed.atixt, Mjted for Pre-School ility
                                                   (stard errors In parses)
                              Fccliinz State Effects                                1rc].1r 48 State Effects
lrxlepenieflt                                                            (6)       (7)      (8)      (9)      (10)
                                                  (4)      (5)
Variable             (1)        (2)       (3)


                               -6.4].     ---     ---      -3.03         ---       -9.77    ---      ---     -10.24
1. Fil/reacher
                                                           (1.84)                  (3.12)                     (3.53)
   Ratio   (;loo)              (1.79)

                     ---        ---      4.83     ---      1.79          ---        ---     2.11     ---       -.41
2. TereLigd
                                         (0.72)            (1.03)                           (0.76)            (1.09)
    (lYs of days)

                     ---        ---       ---     2.01      1.49             --     ---      ---     1.08     1.17
3. Relative                                                                                          (0.37) (0.49)
    Teachor Wage                                  (0.28)   (0.35)


                                1.07      1.05     1.23     1.09         1.23       0.99     1.12     1.23     0.99
4. lAmny for         1.22
    8orn 1930-39 (0.15) (0.15) (0.13) (0.13) (0.13)                     (0.07) (0.11) (0.08) (0.07) (0.10)
                                          2.14     2.39     2.17         2.37       1.98     2.27     2.39     1.99
 5. tuii' for        2.39       2.14
    Born 1940-49     (0.14)    (0.15) (0.13) (0.12) (0.13)              (0.07) (0.14) (0.08) (0.07) (0.14)
                                  .70       .75     .76      .78             .94     .95      .95      .95       .95
 6. R2                 .68


 Note:          Sa1e size is 147. Maan stxard viaticn of die dept1t variableofare 6.435 arii 1.19
                respectively. Equatics are itted by die Inverse slix variarre die depererit varia
                All equations ir1te t triresicted ctt tenii (rot rerted).
                                                    Table Se

             Averages of School Quality   Variables For   Chorts Born 920-29, 1930-39, 1940-'.;


                                    Black Man Born On Segregated States




                          ?uoil/Teacher   Ratio


     State              20-29    30-39      40—49       20—39    30-39    40—40     20—29      33-33     -S   -




     Alabama              47.3    38.5       30.8         132     159      175       351        756       55:3
 1
                          45.6    39.8       33.4         129     148      :71       348        525
 2   Arkansas
                          31.8    28.0       24.8         183     182      182      :493       3255
 3   DeLaware
 4   Florida              38.1    29.9       25.9         155     171      :30       458        30        3—5.

                          45.5    36.5       31.4         135     164      179       297        537
 5   Georgia
                          34.1    27.5       26.3          NA     171      175
 6   Kentucky
                                                                  135                           5';       :       S
 7   Louisiana            49,4    39.1       31.5         126
                                  33.7       29,2         179     185      183      1185
 3   MaryLand             35.7
                          49.5    43.1       36.5         116     130      159       293                  S
 9   Mississippi
                                  31.9       30.1          NA     188                 MA          NA              A
10   Misaouri             31.3
                                  35.6       31.4         152     173      180       522        :555
11   North Carolina       42.3
                                  25.2       24.2         164     175      175       624
12   Oklahoma             32.5
                          47 4    35.6       30.9         122     155      177       302                  :322
13   South Carolina
                                  34.9       30.7         158     159      177         NA
14   Tennessee            40.9
                                  31.5       27,0         145     156      174       558
15   Texas                40.0
                                             29.1         152     178      160        518                 :3:5
15   Virginia             39.7    34.0
                                                                  174                  NA         NA              A
17   West virginia        27,7    26.7       26.4         172
                                                          179     17       177         NA         NA      -553
18   D.C.                 33.9    31.9       29.5



 Notes: Cohort averages   are formed assuming 5 years of public education. See      text    for detnct
        variables. See Data Appendix for     sources.
                                          TabLe 6b
                                  VartbLeI For Chorts Born 192029, 1930-39. 194049
 Averages of Scho.

                                     Whit. M.n Born 1n Se8r.8ated States




                                                                term Length            Averae Teacner 4a..e
                           pupti./tiaOheE Ratio

                                                                    3039      0—40    28-29    30-33    ..3 -
        Stat.            20-29       30—39    40-49     20—39



                                               28.9      154         165       175      502     125       1321
        ALabama           33.5        30.3
I                                                                              173      528     985       Za.5
                                               29.2      152         1.66
        Aran.aa           35          31.6
2                                                                              160     1431     2845      -.866
                                      24.5     22.'      183         182
3       8.Lawar.          27.8                                                                            836
                                                                     174       130     1015     1561
                                               26.3      158
        Florida           3o.4
                          33,0
                                      25.8
                                      28.4     27.7      155         173       180      810     1134      53
S       G.orgia                                                                          NA       NA            NA
                                                          NA         161       172
6       K.ntucy           35.8        30.4     28.5
                                                                                                          3587
                                                                     178       179     1034     1565
 7      Loiana            30 4        27.0     25.3      175
                                                                     185       182     1556     2156
                          32.3        30.6     27.'      188
 S      MaryLand                                                                        739     :8-.3     2:;3
                                               29.1      154         167       169
 3      Mis515SiPP         31 5       29.8
                                                                               182       NA       NA            NA
                                               26.8       NA          179
10      Missouri           28 0       26.8
                                                                               180      372     1-37      3152
                                                         159          173
11      North CaroLina
        OkLahoma
                           35.4
                           34,2
                                      31.7
                                      27.8
                                               29.0
                                               26.0      159          175      177      973     33        3237
    2
                                                                      175      180      896      271      ::o
                           29.4       27.3     27.6      172
13      South CaroLina                                                                            NA            NA
                                               28.9      155          167      175       NA
14      Tenn.15.e          32 5        29.2
                                                                               175      988     :551
                                       26.9    26.3      154          174
15      rexas              29 2
                                                          170         179      180      937     J.O0      Z35
:5                         32.8        29.2    27.0
        Virginia                                                                         NA       NA            NA
                                               27.3       171         1.74      73
    7   WeSt Virginia      27.1        27.3
                                                                      175      177       NA       NA      -.733
:3      8 C.               30.9        27.1    25.0       179



                                                                       education. See text Cor ef:n::.afl CS
    Notes' Cohort averages are formed assuming 5 years of public
           variables. Si. Data App.fldix for sources.
                                 Table 7

 Summary Statistics for Percentage Return to Education by State of Birth:

                          Black and hite Men



                     Black Men                        white Men
Birth                                                             C.V
              Mean   Std. Dev.   C.V           Mean   Std. Dev.
Cohort



                       0.71      0.20          5.07     0.65      0.13
1920-29       3.63


                       0.71      0.14          6.27     0.38      0.09
1930-39       5.25


                       0.38      0.05          7.44     0.56      0.08
1940-49       7.52



Notes: Summary statistics are weighted by the inverse sampling variance of
        the estimated coefficients. The summary statistics for all cohorts o:
        whites are based on 49 jurisdictions; the summary statistics for
        blacks are based on 48 jurisdictions for the 1920-29 cohort, 8
        jurisdictions for the 1930-39 cohort, and 49 jurisdictions for the
        1940-49 cohort. The standard deviations and coefficient of variations
        have been corrected for sampling variance in the estimated returns.
                                                                            Table 8

                                              Dete12ElntS of       the   Retn to            i: Black Males
                                              (Depxt Variable: Pexctta Reti.n to FâEati)
                                                   (staiard errors in part±ses)
                                     clir State Effects                  Irlixi1r 43 State Effects
Iriepetxnt                                                 (4)      (5)           (6)       (7)      (8)      (9)     (10)
Variable                 (U          (2)        (3)


                                                           ---     -10.30         ---       -6.75             ---     -041
1.    piçi1freackr ---               -9.91      ---
                                                                                                                      (9.03)
                                                                                            (3.75)
      Ratio (1w)                     (1.39)                         (3.01)


                   ---                ---       2.90       ---      -0.29         ---        ---     1.70             0.96
2. Te Length
                                                                    (1.10)                           (0.89)           (2.23)
   (l(XYs of days)                              (0.50)

                         ---          ---                  1.07                                               0.65    0.33
3 pjv                                                                0.06
                                                                                                              (0.35) (0.58)
      Te.ac±r Wage                                        (0.20) (0.36)


4. Ximr for      1.69                 0.97       1.14      1.71 1.                 1.68      1.19     1.35    1.69     1.47

   torn 1930-39 (0.21)               (0.21) (0.21) (0.19) (0.27)                 (0.18) (0.32) (0.24) (0.17) (0.47)

                                                                                   3.90      3.12     3.39     3.94    3.59
5. C...mny    for        3.97         2.73       3.05      3.95      2.77
      Born   1940-49 (0.21)          (0.25)     (0.25)    (0.19) (0.37)           (0.18) (0.47) (0.32) (0.18) (0.73)


 6.                      0.73         0.81       0.79      0.79      0.81          0.88      0.89     0.89     0.89    0.89


 7.   P-Val of           ---          0.138      0.101     0.C45     0.(X)1           ---    0.738    0.943 0.107      0.051

      F-Test of
      Different
      Quality Effects
      for    Blacks ai
      unites

 Note:              Saple     size    is 131.            arI stardard *viatictt of deperde.nt variable are 5.53
                    1.89, respectively. Eq..iati are ited by d im'erse sax].ing variarce
                                                                                         of
                    deperent variable. Sale cists of all states with rixisegregated scheol systa,
                         segregated        states kiich report separate data for black sdco1s. ( thservatixt
                    for both New Haipshire               Vent s cc].u3 becaise dEre re r black n in dr
                    1980 ceris sale born In these states in 1920-29. All eq.2ati irl'. a
                    .rresicted const1t term (ret reported).
                                                             TabLe 9

                        One-Step Estimates of the Effect of SchooL Quality on Earnings:
                                           White MaLes, 1980 Census

                                          Dependent VariabLe: Log WeekLy Earnings
                                            (standard errors in parentheses)


       Independent                                               (4)       (5)      (6)       (7)        (8)
       variable                (1)           (2)      (3)


                                            -4.07     1.08      -0.72     -1.64     1.34      0.30       9.01
1.     Education               3.98
       (I00)                  (0.38) (0.69) (0.38) (0.92)                 (0.73)    (0.71)    (0.98) (1.45)

2. Education x
       Pupil./Teacher         -5.10
                                                       --       -2.47     -7.94 -13.02   -3.53   0.06
                              (0.91)                            (1.05)    (0.65) (0.60) (1.39) (1.71)
       Ratio (-10,000)

3. Education &                                         --        1.30                3.13      1.07     -1.67
       Term Length
                                --           3.62                          1.16
                                            (0.30)              (0.43)    (0.33) (0.31) (0.45) (0.66)
       (-10,000)

4.     Education    x
                                              --                                               0.85      0.81
       Relative Teacher
                                 --                   1.85       1.50      1.54      2.09
                                                      (0.13) (0.16)       (0.12) (0.11) (0.25) (0.26)
       Wage (-100)
                                0.03         0.04     0.03       0.04      0.06      0.12      0.03     '0.07
5. Education x                                                            (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01)
       Age (-100)              (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01)

6. Education x                                                   0.95      0.87      1.06      0.76       0.32
       Born 1930-39             0.89         0.92      0.97
                               (0.06) (0.06) (0.06) (0.07)                (0.06) (0.07) (0.07) (0.11)
        (-100)

7. Education x                                                             1.63      2.11      1.75       2.58
        Born 1940-49            1.96          L99      2.06      2.04
                               (0.11) (0.10) (0.11) (0.11)                (0.06) (0.10) (0.11) (0.19)
        (-100)
                                               --                  --                 -.        -.      - 12.79
8. Post-MS Educ.                                                                                         (2.84)
        (-100)

 9. Post-MS Educ.
                                 --            --       --         -.       --        --       6.15       0.89
        Pupil/teacher                                                                         (1.83) (2.75)
        Ratio (-10,000)

io. post-MS Educ. *
                                 -    -                 --                   --       --      -0.38       5.68
     Term Length                                                                              (0.39) (1.37)
        (10,000)
11. Post-MS Educ. x
                                  --                    --         --        -.        --      0.66       0.12
        Relative Teacher                                                                      (0.43) (0.45)
        Wage ('100)
                                  -.           --       -.         .-        --        -.        --       0.09
12. Post-MS Educ. *                                                                                      (0.02)
        Age ('100)

13. Post-MS Educ. x
                                  --           --       --         --        --        --        --        L17
     Born 1930-39                                                                                        (0.25)
        (-100)

14. Post-MS Educ. *                            --                  --                  -.        --      -1.65
        Born 1940-49                                                                                     (0.64)
         (-100)
                                                                 Yes        Yes        No       Yes         Yes
15. so state-of'                Yes          Yes       Yes
        Residence OLaiis.

                                                       Yes       Yes         No        No       Yes         Yes
 16. 48 State-of-               Yes          Yes
         Birth OuT's.

                                                        0.182     0,182     0.178     0.161     3.183      0.184
 17. R2                          0.181        0.182

     Notes: Eduation is defined as the maxirm.tT of zero, and years
                                                                    of conçLeted schooLing minus
            the nuter of years of schooling of the second     percentile of the education
                                                                                           aLso
            distribution  for the individual's state of birth and cohort. Each equation
                                                                                current marital
             includes potentiaL experience and its square, a dcamly indicating
                                         residence in an SNSA, 9 region of residence duirlies
            status, a duirry indicating
             interacted with years of education, and an intercept. Sample size is 265.618.
                              Table 10

One Step Estimates of the Effect of School Quality on Earnings:
                   White Males, 1980 Census

              Dependent Variable: Log Weekly Earnings
                  (standard errors in parentheses)

                            Education Spline
                              at Threshold            Linear Education

        Independent                                                (4)
                            (1)          (2)          (3)
        Variable


                                         -3.40         7.88        0.33
 i.     Education           -0.72
                                         (1.27)       (0.63)       (1.23)
        (÷100)              (0.92)

                                         -8.08         1.46        -3.59
 2.     Education x         -2.47
                                         (1.29)       (0.74)       (1.29)
        Pupil/Teacher       (1.05)
        Ratio (÷10,000)
                                          3.60         0.47         4.34
 3.     Education x          1.30
                                         (0.64)       (0.27)       (0.62)
        Term Length         (0.43)
        (+10,000)
                                          1.23         0.30         1.16
 4.     Education x        1.50
                                         (0.23)       (0.11)       (0.23)
        Relative Teacher (0.16)
        Wage (+10,000)
                                          0.04        -0.06        -0.06
  5.    Education x          0.04
                                         (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.01)
        Age (+100)          (0.01)

                                          0.87         0.21         0.19
  6.     Education x         0.95
                                         (0.07)       (0.04)       (0.04)
         Born 1930-39       (0.07)
         (+100)

                                          1.90         0.04         0.38
  7.     Education x         2.04
                                         (0.11)       (0.05)       (0.05)
         Born 1940-49        (0.11)
         (+100)

                                           1.15                     1.15
  8.     Pupil/Teacher
                                          (0.13)                   (0.18)
         Ratio (+100)

                                          -0.25                     0.45
  9.     Term Length
                                          (0.05)                    (0.08)
         (÷100)

                                          -0.01                     -0.16
 10.     Relative Teacher
                                          (0.02)                    (0.03)
         Wage
                                               .182         .182         .182
  11.    R2                       .182

 notes: See notes to Table 9. In columns (1) and (2) education is
        defined as in Table 9. In columns (3) and (4) educatiOn is
        defined as years of completed education.
