                          NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          ASYMMETRIC INFORMATION AND THE NEW THEORY OF THE FIRM:
                  FINANCIAL CONSTRAINTS AND RISK BEHAVIOR




                              Bruce C. Greenwald

                              Joseph E. Stiglitz




                            Working Paper No. 3359




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  May 1990




is paper is part of NBERs research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
onomics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
•.e National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #3359
                                       May 1990


            ASYMMETRIC INFORMATION AND TRE NEW THEORY OF THE FIRM:
                    FINANCIAL CONSTRAINTS AND RISK BEHAVIOR


                                   ABSTRACT

     This paper summarizes recent developments in the theory of the firm
that have arisen in examining the implications of imperfect information. It
shows that a wide range of these models have similar implications for the
likely reaction of firms to external environmental and policy changes.   Two
significant implications are (1) that firms behave as if they are risk
averse   individuals  maximizing a utility function of terminal wealth
(profitability) -. even when the risks involved are unsystematic -- and (2),
in many circumstances, because this utility function is likely to be
characterized by decreasing absolute risk aversion,     firms are likely to
respond significantly (and positively)       to  changes  in  cash flow and
profitability.   Together these two phenomena are able to account for a wide
range of firm behaviors that have been empirically observed (both formally
and informally)    and that are difficult to explain in terms of the
traditional theory of the firm.   Furthermore, the responses of such firms to
policy interventions are likely to differ significantly from those of
neoclassical firms.




     Bruce C.   Greenwald               Joseph E. Stiglitz
    Bell Communications Research        Stanford University
    445 South Street                    Encina Hall
    Room 2A347                          Department of Economics
    Morristown, NJ 07960-1910           Stanford, CA 94305
                                                -2-

       Recent developments in the theory of the firm — beyond both its Arrow-Debreu incarna-

 tion as a disembodied production set and its formulation, due to Coase and Williamson [19851,

 as an efficient nexus for minimizing the cost of economic transactions —        have   been closely

related to developments in examining the economic implications of imperfect information.

Asymmetrically distributed information between a finn, as employer, and its workers has

replaced the traditional view of a finn which hires labor at fixed (or monopsonistically increas-

ing) wages in well-defined labor markets with one in which firms actively manage long-term

employment relationships, on average pay wages in excess of those available, on average, in the

labor market at large, control workers with carefully designed incentive mechanisms and often

ration access to jobs. Similar asymmetries of information between outside investors, who pro-

vide capital, and inside managers, who control its use, have lead to comparable developments in

the theory of how firms acquire and deploy capital. In both cases, there have been two dimen-

sions to the theoretical developments involved. On the one hand, much recent attention has been

paid to the internal structure of the firm — how rewards for individual workers should be

designed, what constitutes appropriate hierarchical or reporting structures, how the internal qual-

ity of life of the firm depends on these factors. On the other hand, a new view of the external

aspect of the firm — how it is likely to react to external environmental and policy changes —

has   developed. The focus of this paper is on the latter external dimension since developments in

this area have begun to lead to a broadly common set of implications for firm behavior.

       Among these developments those with perhaps the most striking implications for external

firm behavior have arisen from a reexamination of the role of financial variables (leverage, cash

reserves, financial• strength, etc.). The classical Modigliani-Miller approach to financial policy

concluded that the financial structure of a finn was irrelevant to both its value and its operating

decisions and the neoclassical theory of the firm assumed further that its financial position was
                                                  -3-

irrelevant. Yet both informal observations and systematic empirical evidence have suggested

that financial structure and position are of considerable importance to firm behavior. For exam-

ple, notions of deep pockets or financial strength which have always played a significant role in

qualitative observations of firm behavior have no place in a classical Modigliani-Miller world,

while recent empirical studies of investment have demonstrated the importance of financial vari-

ables.

     Models of imperfect information in financial markets have altered the traditional view in

two important ways. First, if information is asymmetrically distributed between the buyers and

sellers of financial instruments, then certain financial markets, such as that for equities, may

break down or be severely limited — a form of the lemons problem identified by Akerlof [1970]

— and accordingly the free access to all forms of financing envisaged by Modigliani-Miller may

not exist. In loan markets, there may be credit rationing. In these cases financial structure and

position matter and affect firm behavior. Second, if information is asymmetrically distributed

between those who make decisions (agents) and the theoretical beneficiaries of those decisions

(principals), then the reward functions which govern firm decision-making may not have the

form of simple valuation maximization assumed in the neoclassical theory. This paper seeks to

examine the consequences of both kinds of imperfections for the behavior of firms and their evo-

lution over time. In doing so, it looks at an exemplary case of imperfect competition and explicit

investment in long-run research and development. However, the lessons of that model point

more broadly to the general direction in which informational imperfections in financial markets

affect the external dimension of firm behavior.
                                                   -4-

The Model

      We will assume for expository purpose that firm decision-making takes place in two dis-

tinct stages. In the first stage, the firm decides on a level of productivity improving activity, x.

This may be interpreted as either explicit research and development spending or as spending on

an overhead establishment whose task is to improve the firm's productivity, broadly construed to

include the efficiency of its marketing and general aththnistrañve activities. The activity reduces

the constant marginal cost of output with which a firm enters the second stage of market activity,

in which output is produced and sold. This constant marginal cost, c, will be assumed to depend

on an inherited level of production knowledge, c0, which depends on the spillover benefits of

past economy-wide productivity improving activities; on first stage overhead expenditures to

improve productivity, x, which we will refer to for convenience as R&D; and on a random fac-

tor, s, with expected value one, which determines the success of those efforts:

                                      c   =sg(x)c0 ,E(s)=1

where the function g is assumed to be decreasing in x.


      In the second stage of market activity, firms maximize profits, given their cost levels and

the demand for their product, d, which we assume depends on both the firm's own price, p. and

the average price, , charged by other firms. Formally, therefore, in the second stage firms

                                     maxit=(p—c)dQ, ,j)

which leads to an optimal price and profit level


                  mc, m = 11(1—lie)
and


            r =(m—1)cd(mc,m),
                                                -5-

where c is the average of the cost of other firms and e is the own price elasticity of the demand

function, d, assumed to be a constant.

     The pay-off function to first stage R&D activity is, therefore,

                           it(x)=(m—1)sg(x)c0d(,nSg(X)C0 ,mc).

If there are a large number of competing firms, then c will be approximately equal to g   c0, where

j is the average of g (x) over other firms and c0, the initial inherited technology, is assumed to
be the same for all firms (i.e. technologies fully spillover into the public domain after a single

period). The second stage profit function can, thus, be written

                              t(x)=(m —1)sg(x)c0 d(sg(x),g)

where the m and c0 terms in the demand function have been suppressed for notational conveni-

ence. Profits are a random variable looking forward from the beginning of the first stage in

which x has been chosen.

     The choice of a level of research activity in stage one depends on the objective function of

a firm at that time and, in particular, on its attitude toward risk. We assume that the firm in ques-

tion is owned and managed by an individual who maximizes the utility of end-of-period wealth,

having sold a fraction (I — a) of the firm to outside investors. Thus, in stage one, the firm

decision-maker maximizes expected utility,


                                    maxE[u(w+Øt(x)—x)a)]                                          (1)
                                     x


where   we assume that u is characterized by decreasing absolute risk aversion and w, initial

wealth, includes the proceeds from the sale of the fraction (1—a) of the firm. For the case        in

which the risks associated with x are unsystematic, such an entrepreneur, in a world of perfect

information, would diversify completely and simply maximize the expected value of t (x).
                                                 -6-

However, if he both is and is known to be better informed about his own prospects for produc-

tivity improvement than investors at large, then the firm's owner/manager will be constrained to

hold an excessive fraction of the firm in order to signal confidence in his own prospects.1 And

firm behavior, even with respect to the unsystematic risks that are associated with active produc-

tivity improvements, will be governed by the risk aversion implied by the utility function in

equation (1).

      An objective function similar to that of equation (I), or at least with similar implications,

emerges from a wide range of imperfect information models. For example, the distinction

between owner-managed and professionally managed firms is not especially significant here.

When professional managers' actions are unobservable, in effect managers become part owners

of their firms' equity capital. The managers' wealth then consists of their private holdings, w,

plus the fraction, a, of the terminal equity (profit) of the firm which they are able to appropriate

to their own use. Since this latter part of their wealth is non-tangible and since the managers,

like owners, should be deterred from issuing shares by informational considerations, managers

will be maximizing a function similar to that of equation (1). Alternatively, if agency arrange-

ments are made with risk averse managers and these arrangements are limited for practical rea-

sons to pay-offs which are linear in the profits of the firm, an objective function identical to that

of equation (1) will emerge, with the variable, a, now representing the slope of the pay-off func-

tion and w now being the returns to safe projects (i.e., liquid investments).

     Similarly, since the fact that issuing shares has a negative impact on the market value of the

firm makes the firm reluctant to issue shares, if external funds are raised it will in theory be (and

in practice is) predominantly through loans. But this makes the firm face a risk of bankruptcy, a

risk which is affected by firm behavior. We can show that the behavior generated by maximiz-
                                                 -7-

ing expected profits minus an expected cost of bankruptcy (the cost of bankruptcy times the pro-

bability of bankruptcy) is similar to that generated by equation (1) under plausible restrictions on

the firm's cost and probability of bankruptcy. Thus, if professional managers are subject to an

agency arrangement which either explicitly or informally rewards them with a share of profits,

but imposes a large penalty in the event of bankruptcy (i.e. dismissal with a stigma which

significantly impairs future earnings), then the resulting objective function produces behavior

almost exactly identical with that of equation (1 ),2 when (as we assume here) the utility function

is characterized by decreasing absolute risk aversion.

     The first order condition for the problem of equation (1) can be written

                             c0 d'(—g) = d / d + coy (U 'ds ) + coy (ds)                          (2)


where E [u '1 has been normalized to equal one. Both covariances are negative (since better out-

comes for research activities are correlated with higher sales ant sale revenues) (—g) is positive.

The right-hand side of this equation is the risk adjusted cost of research investment at the mar-

gin. It is least when the firm is risk neutral (i.e. coy (U 'ds) = 0) and increases with firm risk

aversion. The left-hand side is the marginal return to research expenditures. Assuming the

appropriate second order condition is satisfied, the behavior of a finance and/or agency con-

strained firm can be derived straightforwardly from equation (2). Broadly speaking these firms

act as if they are risk averse individuals, which is not surprising since one basic impact of imper-

fect information is to interfere with the proper distribution of risk.

     A first consequence of this is that an increase in the wealth of firm owners (financial

strength of the firm) leads to reductions in the size of the covariances and hence a reduction in

the risk premium associated with overhead investment. Thus, as a rule, increases in historical

firm profitability and/or temporarily high current profitability (increasing w)      lead   to higher
                                                -8-

levels   of research investment (or investment generally), more rapid expected productivity

growth for each firm and, through future spillover effects, higher productivity for the economy

as a whole. Consequently, temporary demand disturbances which reduce current profitability

will lead to effective supply contractions (as in a standard Keynesian model as firms reduce

investment activity, R&D, etc.) and these, in turn, lead to permanently lower future output. Not

only is the informal notion of the importance of the strength of a firm's financial position vali-

dated in these imperfect information models but they also provide a mechanism for the propaga-

tion of macroeconomic demand disturbances and the persistence of their effects.

     Increases in the uncertainty of the technological or future market environment (i.e. in the

variance of s)   have   a similar impact. The risk premium associated with investment rises, even

when the risks involved are unsystematic, and the level of research investment falls. Ultimately,

therefore, productivity growth declines across the economy as a whole. The imperfect perfor-

mance of financial mechanisms for risk distribution means that an economy may react negatively

to increases in variables like relative price uncertainty (which affect the uncertainty of returns to

productivity improvement). These are all, it should be noted, effects which are not part of the

responses of the traditional firm.


Dynamics

     Another significant aspect of the finance constrained firm is that it is characterized by a

well-defined dynamic evolution, which depends on the evolution of the owner/manager's wealth

(or in the case of a managerial firm, the accumulated retained earnings of the firm). The wealth

of a firm's owner in period t is determined by the relationship

                             w1   =a ir(x1)+(w —ax)(l-4-r1)—y1(w,)                                (3)
                                                  -9-

where r, is a safe rate of return on assets not invested in the firm at stage one, Yt is consumption

in period r which is an increasing function of wealth in period r, and, as described above, x is

the level of investment in research and development which depends positively on w; namely

                                          ; =h(w1)h'>O.4
For an individual firm, this is a stochastic difference equation, since ic(x1) is a random variable,

depending on the random return variable s. Under reasonable circumstances (a bounded distri-

bution of s, sufficiently rapidly diminishing returns to x and sufficiently concave preferences) a

limiting distribution of w1, independent of initial wealth, will exist.5

     Among other factors this limiting distribution will depend in the present model on the

wealth levels of other firm owners. Higher economy-wide wealth levels imply higher economy-

wide levels of research and development spending, lower expected costs and hence prices for

competing firms, lower expected demand at each own price le :1 for any single firm, and there-

fore, lower expected profits for each firm. Thus, for the economy as a whole, there will be in

equilibrium (again under reasonable circumstances) a limiting distribution of wealth across firms

which implies a limiting distribution across firms of research and development expenditures.

     Finally, the long run evolution of the model depends on the evolution of c0 which embo-

dies the inherited technology in each period. In order to simplify matters as far as possible we

will assume that the demand function at t , d1 (p, ,p,), has the form

                                 d, (p,   ,pj) = (1 /c0(r))d(p,   /
As inherited costs fall, real income rises, demand increases proportionately and the share of

demand served by each individual firm depends on its price relative to the average price of all

other firms. Under these conditions, t(x) and the level of x, chosen by each finn is independent
                                                 -10-

of c0(:). Thus, the analysis of the dynamics of the model can be separated into U) an analysis

(described above) of the evolution of the wealths and research and development expenditures of

individual firms and (2) an analysis of the overall improvement in the baseline technology of the

economy, embodied in c0, as a function of the wealth and R&D spending distributions. For-

mally, that second step can be described by an equation of the form

                                         c0 (r+l)=c0 (r)G (x,)
which describes the process of technology spillovers where x, is a vector whose elements are the

levels of x, for the individual firms.

     In order to trace the long-term consequences of any environmental or policy change within

this context, its consequences for the evolution of both the wealth distribution of firm owners

and technology must be examined. For example, an unexpected increase in the wealth of firm

owners (due, for example, to an unexpected increase in demand in a single period will not alter

the limiting distribution of firm-owner wealth or research and development expenditures. It will

not, therefore, alter the long-run growth rate of productivity        However, it will temporarily

increase research and development expenditures, leading to an increase in the level of produc-

tivity. Consequently the new limiting growth path will involve a permanently higher level of

output.

     An increase in envimnmental uncertainty (due for example to greater policy instability or

to greater uncertainty in the results of research efforts) will in the short run lead to a reduction in

research and development efforts at the initial existing levels of firm-owner wealth. However,

the decline in economy-wide research and development expenditures will tend to increase the

profitability of such efforts by individual firms both on average and at the margin. The marginal

effect involved will in the short run partially offset the original impact of greater uncertainty on
                                                — 11—




risk-averse firm-owners. The increase in average profitability will lead to wealth accumulation

by firm-owners and, over time, to a partial restoration in research and development expenditures.

On balance, the increase in uncertainty is still likely to lead to lower R&D expenditures and

lower growth rates of productivity. However, the extent of the initial decline will be partially

offset by subsequent wealth accumulation. Thus, analysis of both the ultimate size and the tem-

poral pattern of the response of the economy to a change in uncertainty (or to a deliberate policy

change, like a tax increase) requires that the long-term effects of firm-owner wealth change be

taken into account.


Conclusion

     Imperfect information affects both the internal organization of firms and its external rela-

tions with labor, capital and product markets. The new theory of the firm is built on these foun-

dations. This theory has important behavioral implications • iich distinguish it from earlier

neoclassical theories. This paper, focusing on informational problems in the capital market,

including asymmetries of information between providers of capital and firm managers, has

argued that as a result firms will act in a risk averse manner. Several consequences follow: (i)

the firm will be concerned with its financial structure, and financial structure affects behavior

(ii) changes in financial strength (the firm's net worth) have real consequences; arid (iii) mean

preserving changes in distributions of prices and sales have real effects. Elsewhere (Greenwald

and Stiglitz [19891) we have shown that the appropriate way to look at the whole set of firm

decisions — including those relating to employment, production, pricing, investment (including

inventory changes) and research —    is   as a dynamic portfolio problem. The results of that model

can be contrasted both with the simple neoclassical model of the firm and with attempts to make

that model accommodate more of the facts concerning firm behavior, in particular, these postu-
                                              - 12 -


laung costs of adjustment. In some cases, to attain patterns of behavior consistent with the facts

— such as the greater variability in quantities than in prices — requires implausible assumptions

concerning adjustment costs. But even in those cases where the neoclassical models and their

exterior yield some results which are consistent with observation, they fail to account for the

facts that firm output and investment spending (in R&D and of other sorts) respond directly to

changes in firm wealth and to envimnmental uncertainty of an unsystematic sort, while our

models support much of the empirical literature that relates variables like investment directly to

firm financial conditions, and more informally, to conditions of uncertainty (due for example to

high inflation or unstable government policy) in the economy at large (even when these appear

unlikely to lead to increases in systematic risk). Here we have used the theory of the finance

constrained firm to explore the dynamics of firm and economy-wide growth. These models have

strong policy implications that while corresponding to widely held informal views, often differ

markedly from those based on the neoclassical theory of the firm and its derivatives.
                                           - 13   -



                                    BIBLIOGRAPHY



Akerlof, George, "The Market for Lemons: Qualitative Uncertainty and the Market Mechan-

    ism", Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, 1970, 84, 288-300.

Greenwald, Bruce and Stiglitz, Joseph E., "Toward a Theory of Rigidity", American Economic

    Review, Papers and Proceedings, May, 1989, 79, 364-69.

Greenwald, Bruce and Stiglitz, Joseph E., "Financial Market Imperfections and Business

    Cycles", NBER Working Paper No. 2494, 1987.

Leland, Hayne E. and Pyle, David H., "Infotmational Asymmetries, Financial Structure and

    Financial Intermediation", Journal of Finance, May, 1977,32, 37 1-87.

Williamson, Oliver, The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, New York: Free Press, 1985.
                                                - 14   -



                                              FOOTNOTES


1.   See Leland and Pyle [1977].

2.   See Greenwald and Stiglitz [1987]. This requires that bankruptcy costs increase with the

     size of the firm (as they appear to do in practice).

3.   The discussion below assumes implicitly that the ownership factor a does not change with

     the exogenous variables. In the pure finance constrained interpretation this is appropriate.

     In the agency interpretations a may change. However, the basic comparative static pro-

     perties of the model are unaltered.

4.   In a more general model, we can derive the equilibrium Y1 (we) function also.

5.   This holds as long as the basic firm decision problem is unaltered by changes in c0, which

     requires that the demand function facing each firm increases linearly with I/c0 (i.e. real

     income).
