NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EQUILIBRIUM MODELS OF ENDOCENOUS FLUCTUATIONS: AN INTRODUCTION

Michael Woodford

Working Paper No. 3360

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge. MA 02138
May 1990

This paper is part of NBERs research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3360
May 1990
EQUILIBRIUM MODELS OF ENDOCENOUS FLUCTUATIONS: AN INTRODUCTION

ABSTRACT
These lectures
in economic

comment upon recent theoretical modelsof

endogenous fluctuations

dynamics, including both the literature on nonlinear deterministic cycles arid

the literature on "sunspot equilibria". Two important themes include (1) reasons to be
interested in models of purely endogenous fluctuations, even though actual economics are
admittedly subject to exogenous stochastic shocks; and (2) the importance ofmarket
imperfections
either of

in making possible equilibria characterized by endogenous fluctuations of

the two types.

Michael Woodford
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637

Recently there has been a revival of interest in endogenous models of
econom Ic

fluctuations -- in models according to which fluctuations could continue
to occur even in
the absence of exogenous fluctuations in any of the external determinants of the economic

environment, such as consumer tastes or the state of technology. One of the most important
features of this recent literature has been cazeflul attentionto the consequences of optimizing

behavior on the part of economic agents, and of a slate of
competitive equilibrium between
the various producers and consumers in the economy, for the possibility of endogenous

fluctuations It is this question of the possibility ofendogenous equilibrium fluctuations
with which I am concerned here. (For a more broadly ranging survey of economic models
charactethed by endogenous fluctuations, see the lecture in this volume by Richard Day.)
I will begin, in section I, by clarifying what is meant by endogenous fluctuations,

and contrasting two rather different kinds of models ofendogenous fluctuations -. models
in which equilibrium is determinate but unstableon the one hand, and "sunspot"models on

the other. In section II, I discuss some of the reasons why purely exogenous models of the
source of economic fluctuations have been so popular in modern theorizing, and argue that

the grounds for dismissal of endogenous models a priori are not so strong as the tenacity of
this methodological prejudice might suggest. Finally, in section ifi, I consider the extent to
which methodological commitments to explaining fluctuations in terms of optimizing

behavior and competitive equilibrium canjusti& an exclusive emphasis upon exogenousshock models. I argue that the most plausible models of endogenous fluctuations depend
crucially upon the existence of "market failures" of one kindor another, but that this need

*

Lecture Notes prepared for the proceedings of the Workshop
on Alternative Approaches in
Macroeconomics, held in Siena, Italy, November 1987. The present draft of these notes baa been improved
substantially thanks to discussion with Michele Boldrin, Roger Guesnerie, David
Laidler, Torn Sargent,
and Jose ScheinIanan. Research referred to here was supported
by the National Science Foundation.

2

ly tb the end genous cydehypothesis Is inconsistent with a belief in the
rationality of economic actom.

I. Endogenous versus Exogenous Explanations of Economic Fluctuations:
Preliminary Distinctions and Examples
By erogenous shockmodels of economic fluctuations I mean models in which
equilibrium is detenninate and intrinsiwilystable, so that in the absence of continuing
exogenous shocks, the economy would tend toward a steady state, but because of
exogenous shocks a stationary pattern of fluctuations is observed. Such models of

economic fluctuations axe quite familiar -- so familiar, indeed, that many readers may
wonder how an economic explanation of fluctuations could be of any other kind.

Typologies of business cycle theories, for example, that classifr theories according to the
dominant type of"impulse" assumed on the one hand, and the nature of the "propagation
mechanism" posited on the other, take for granted this general structure of explanation. All

of the leading current equilibrium business cycle theories are of this kind, but the textbook
"Keynesian" and "monetarist" models are of this kind as well, as are the econometric
models inspired by them, if one accepts the conventional identification of residuals in the
various equations with exogenous shocks to fundamentals (of perhaps an unspecified

nature). Models of this kind include both theories that attribute aggregate instability mainly
to variations in government policy and theories that attribute it mainly to variations in

private sector behavior (inteapraed as originating in variations in tastes or technological
possibilities).

But this sincture of explanation is not the only logical possibility, and I argue
below that it Is not the only possibility consistent with economic theory. I will also argue

that ifaggregatefluctuations could be shown to be endogenous to some important degree,

3
this would be of considerable importance. Before addressing the reasons for interest in the
endogenous cycle hypothesis, however, it is useful to clarify exactly what Is meant by it.
A simple definition might characterize endogencus models of economic fluctuations

as ones in which peisistent fluctuations occur despite an absence of variation in exogenous

economic "flindamentals" such as tastes and technology and government policies. This is
indeed a property of the theoretical models that are usually thought of as examples of
endogenous cycle theories. But it is not an adequate definition from the point of view of
explaining what is thought to be interesting about such theoretical examples. For the point

of contention between proponents of exogenous and endogenous theories cannot be
whether or not exogenous shocks in fact occur. Anyone must recognize that theaggregate
economy is significantly affected by events that must be viewed as largely exogenous to the

economic process itself-- political events, for example, but also the random timing of
technological innovations. Hence we must be able to define endogenous fluctuations in

such a way that the hypothesis does not deny this obvious fact.
A more careful definition requires a

more formal description. Let an

economic model consist of a description of the evolution over time of variables of four

sorts: exogenous "fundamental" variables to be denoted ;, predetermined endogenous
variables k., non-predetermined endogenous variables pp and "sunspot" variables s. All of

these may be supposed to be vector quantities, taking values in sets X, K, P and S
respectively. (A given model might not involve state variables of all these types, but that

can be dealt with by assuming, for example, that the set K consists of a single point.) The

"fundamental" variables are exogenous variables (i.e., the evolution of; is described by a
stationary Markov process on X, independent of the histories of the other state variables,
and regarded as external to the economic process that is being modeled), whose values
affect the economic relations determining the endogenous variables. The "sunspot"
variables are also exogenous, but their values do not have any effect upon the economic

relations determining the endogenous variables. As is discussed further below, the

4
possibility that endogenous variables might nonetheless take different values depending
upon the state ; may be taken to represent the role of arbitrary revisions of expectations as
an autonomous source of instability In the economy. The predetermined endogenous
variables Is are determined completely by period t- 1, so that their values must be unaffected

by the realization of either; (period t changes in fundamentals) or s (period t revisions of
expectations). The values of the non-predetermined variables Pt may depend upon the

realization of either ;orsr
A description of the econom/s evolution consists of a specification of the histories
of the endogenous variables, given any possible history of realizations of the exogenous

variables, i.e., a sequence of functions
—

— ic,.1(x, sp

5t-i'

..' 1o' 5o' ko)

fort —0, 1,2, ... Twill suppose that the equilibrium conditionstake the form

(1)
(2)

g(xt, Is1 pt, Mi(Pt+j))

flx, Is, pt, i4Pt+i)) — 0

where f is a vector-valued function of the same dimension as Pt' g is a vector-valued
function of the same dimension as kt, and J.tt(Pt+i) denotes the probability distribution of

possible values for Pt+i.

given information available at time t. Equation (I) indicates the detennination of the
predetermined variables for period t+ 1 as a function of the economy's state in period t,

including period t expectations regarding the future. An example of such a relation might be
the determination of the capital stock in period t+ 1 by an investment decision in period t,
that depends upon period t prices, interest rates, and so on, as well as expectations

regarding the future values of such variables. A probability distribution for k+1 is not
included among the arguments of g, because the value ofk1÷1 can be known with certainty

at time t, and because in writing the condition in this form I have solved for lç+ .

A

probability distribution for ; is not included among the arguments of g, because given

S
the Markov process on X, this probability distribution is completely determined by the

value of x Equation (2) represents the determination of the non-predeternilned variables p
as a function of the predetermined period t state variables, the current state of exogenous

fundamentals, and expectations. The variables p are only defined implicitly by (2), because
the sort of equilibrium condition one has in mind (e.g., an equation stating that supply
equals demand, to determine period t prices) may in general have multiple solutions for
given values of the other variables; the values of predetermined variables are by contrast

necessarily uniquely defined, if the set of state variables is made large enough (e.g., in the
case of determination of the period t+l capital stock, if the list of period t endogenous
variables includes the level of investment in period t). A probability distribution for k+1 is

not included among the arguments off, because this can be written as a function of the

other arguments using (1), and again a probability distribution forx is not included
because it can be written as a function of x, Neither current nor future values of the

"sunspot" variables enter as arguments of either for g -- this is what makes them "sunspot"
variables rather than "fundamentals".

We will be concerned with the set of sequences of functions {7r ;+). for t = 0,
1, 2, ..., that satisfy (1) and (2) for all possibile histories of realizations of the exogenous
variables { x., sj fort — 0, 1, 2, ..., given an initial condition k0 for the predetermined

endogenous variables. Let this be referred to as the eçuilibrium set E(k). In the case of
greatest interest, the equilibrium set is non-empty for all lc in the set K; this would
generally be considered a minima] requirement for an internally consistent mode!. But

equilibrium need not be unique.
Now the point of view that underlies the conventional methodological preference

for exogenous shock models of fluctuations can be stated, I believe, in terms of two
general propositions reganling the structure of the equilibrium set, The two propositions
are related, and I will refer to both of them as determinacy theses, but it is important to
realize that they are logically distinct, and indeed the literature concerned with alternatives to

6
exogenous shock models an on the whole be divided into two pans, depending upon
which determinacy thesis is being challenged.

The Global 'Weak Detennlnacv Thesis. The equilibrium values of (k.1, Pt) at any
point in time t depend upon the history of realizations of the exogenous states up to
that time, and upon the initial condition, only Insofar as these affect the equilibrium
conditions (1) and (2) for periods t or later. As a consequence, any equilibrium can
be described by a pair of functions
(3)
(4)

p—

R(XD k)

k÷ — K(Z,k)

which furthermore have the property that if(x', k') and (x2, k2) are such that
f(x', k', p, p) — flx2, k2, p, p) and g(x', k', p, p) g(x2, k2, p, p) for all p in P
and for p any probability measure on P, and such that the distribution of possible
values for x conditional upon x1 is the same when; — xt as when; x2, then
n(x', k') ir(x2, k2) and K(x', k') — K(x2, k2). That is, there is no dependence
upon "irrelevant" components of either exogenous state variables or of
predetermined endogenous state variables.
According to this proposition, the realizations of "sunspot" states an have no effect
upon the equilibrium evolution of the endogenous variables, because the "sunspot" states
have no effect upon the equilibrium conditions (1) or (2); and the history of realizations

(x0, x,, ..., x.,) and the initial condition lç affect the determination of(k1+1, pt) only
through the sufficient statistics (x Ii.), which quantities may affect (lç+, p) because they

may enter the equilibrium conditions (I) and (2) for period t, and beause ; may give
information about the future values of fundamentals as well. Note also that the proposition
implies that it and IC are time-invariant functions; for dependence upon time would be like

dependence upon a sunspot state, given the time-invariance of conditions (I) and (2).
The reason for the appeal of thJs determinacy thesis is simple: these properties of
the solution follow immediately from our assumptions regarding the form of the
equilibrium conditions if one supposes that equilibrium is unique for each k0. The
reasoning is simple. If equilibrium is unique, there exist unique equilibrium functions

x0%, o' k) and ic1(x, s0, ka). Furthermore, since the restrictions upon the sequences
k+1, pj implied by equilibrium conditions (l)-(2) are the same regardless of the value of

7
o. the unique equilibrium values for p0 and k1 must be independent of %,allowing us to
derme functions

r(x, k) — ,r0(x, s, k)
ic(x, k) — K 1(x, s, k)
And the recursive form of the equilibrium conditions (1)42) implies that if the sequences

(k+1, pJ fort 0 are an equilibrium for initial condition k0 and exogenous shocks 1;)
then the sequences { k'+1, P't) must be an equilibrium for initial condition 14 and

exogenous shocks { x'j, where

a k+2
Pt+t

P'1

A
—

It then follows from the uniqueness of the equilibrium with initial condition k'0 that one
must have

w1(x1, s,
K2(X1,

i

•

5o' lc) — lr(x1, ic(x0, k0))
Xo, 5o' k0) — ic(x1, ,c(x0, lcd))

The arguments proceeds in the same way for subsequent periods, so that the equilibrium

must be of the form (3)44).
Uniqueness of equilibrium is often assumed, even though as noted above this need
not follow from the definition given of equilibnzm.1 But the determinacy thesis is often

assumed even when equilibrium is not assumed to be unique, and indeed even in the case

of models where non-uniqueness n be shown to be possible. This is revealed by the fact
that many authors choose a formalism with which to describe equilibria in their model that

1To be more precise, it is often argued that if equilibrium is not unique, the definition of equilibrium must
be supplemented by an addJtional "selection criterion" that selects one equilibrium for each model
specification and initial condition. The argument just given then explains why the principle of global weak
determinacy often plays a cenaai role in pwposed selection criteria, such as McCallum's (1983) concept of
the "minimum state variable solution" for linear rational expectations models, or the "Markov equilibrium"
refinement for stationazy dynamic games (Maskin and mole (1989)).

a
assumes the existence of a representation of the form (3)-(4); see, e.g., Lus and Stokey
(1987).
Another tacit assumption of much analysis is the following.
The Asymptotic Strong Determinacv Thesis. Eventually, the equilibrium values of
(k.i, Pt) depend only upon the realizations of the exogenous fundamentals (x,} for
t that is, the initial condition k0 will have no effect upon the equilibrium values
far enough in the future. Formally, for any initial condition k0 and for any sequence

of exogenous shocks (x0, x1, x, ...}, the sequences {k',, p'j defined
recursively by

k'5(O) —
—

Ic0

ic(x.5, k'5(n-l)),

— k'3(s),

1 Sn S s
s 1

7r(x0, k',(s-l)), s 1

p'3

converge to values (k, p*) as s goes to infinity, which limiting values may depend
upon the sequence {x0, x, x2, ...} but are independent of k0.2
The idea behind this proposition is that recursive substitution of expression (4) into
itself ought to yield a sequence of representations
—

x(xlç)

a

ic(x,,c(x1,

k))

x(x ic(x.1, ic(x.2, k.2)))

a
that converges eventually to a representation

ic(x,.,
in which

...)

is written as a function of a possibly infinite history of previous exogenous

shocks, with lagged endogenousvarthbles completely eliminated. The existence of such a
representation also allows p to be written as a function of a possibly infinite history of

previous exogenous shocks alone, i.e.,

2

this statement! am assuming the validity of the representation (3).(4), since lam mainly interested in
the consequences of asymptotic stong detuminacy when conjoined with
glc*ial weak detenninacy, but
strictly speaking it is logically possible to asset asymptotic stung determinacy while denying the global
weak detenninacy thesis, in which case one would allow (k, PS) to depend upon the history of realizations
of all exogenous state variables, including sunspot variables.

9
—

7r(XD

;-. ;.2 ...)

— ir(x., K(x.1, ;-2. •..))
These functions

x and ,r then describe the limits (k, p*) referred to in the above

statement.
One reason for the intuitive appeal of such a postulate is probably familiarity with

the properties of linear systems (which are often assumed to provide an adequate
approximation for purposes of quantitative investigations of equilibrium models of
economic fluctuations). For suppose that the function K is linear, i.e., that one can write

ic(x, k) Ax + Bk, for some matrices A and B. Suppose furthermore that the exogenous
shocks to fundamentals satisfy some uniform bound IxJ S K

c, and that the equilibrium

dynamics are such that a bounded sequence of exogenous shocks to fundamentals implies
bounded fluctuations in the endogenous variables, i.e., that the matrix B has all eigenvalues

with modulus less than one. Then recursive substitution of the kind described is possible

and yields

ic*(x ;- ;-2 •.)

— Z B1AXt.J

Now the theses of global weak determinacy and asymptotic strong determinacy
together clearly imply that penistent fluctuations in the endogenous variables must be
explained by fluctuations in the exogenous fundamentals. For suppose that there were no
variation in fundamentals. Then any equilibium would have to be described by a pair of

functions

(5)

p

(jç)

(6)

k+1

K(k.,)

and the function ic would have to have the property that the limit
n

urn x(k0) —
II—.

=

10
exists and is independent of k But this would imply that k must asymptoticallyconverge

p

to the constant value k5, and that Pt must asymptotically converge to the constant value

— *k). Hence fluctuations in the endogenous state variables must eventually die out. It

follows that a continuing pattern of fluctuations must be explained in terms of continuing
shocks to fundamentals.

On the other hand, it should be clear at this point that one might wish to deny this

conclusion -- to assert the possibility of eadogenous fluctuations — without one's being
committed to a beliefthat there are in fact no exogenous variations in fundamentals. For
one might wish to challenge one or both of the determinacy theses, both of which remain
strong restrictions (and the denial of either of which is logically possible) even in the case
of stochastic variation in fundamentals. And an obvious way of demonstrating that one or
the other of these propositions need not be true of well-posed economic models is to exhibit

examples ofwell-posed models with the property that even if fundamentals are assumed to
be constant, equilibria characterized by persistent fluctuations exist. This is what I take to
be the point of the theoretical literature on endogenous cycle models. The challenge posed

to orthodox business cycle theory is not the suggestion that perhaps fluctuations in
fundamentals are unimportant, but rather the suggestion that one or both of the determinacy
theses might be too restrictive. And one might refer broadly to all models of fluctuations

inconsistent with either of these theses as "endogenous" explanations.
The isolation of two distinct determinacy theses indicates that models of fluctuations
might be "endogenous" in either of two distinct senses; a model might contradict the thesis

of asymptotic strong detenninacy while possibly remaining consistent with the thesis of
global weak determinacy, or it might contradict the latter while possibly remaining

consistent with the former. And indeed there exist to some extent two distinct classes of
endogenous models of fluctuations, insofar as most examples in the literature are
constnicted in order to challenge of the determinacy theses or the other.

11

On the one hand there are models of detcnninate but unstable dynamics. In such

models, equilibria have a representation of the form (3)-(4), but differing initial conditions
k0 will imply different dynamic paths that flu to converge even far in the future. For
example, in the absence of shocks to fundamentals, a model may imply deterministic
equilibrium dynamics of the form (6), but It may be the case that all of the steady state

equilibria, i.e., all of the vectors k that are fixed points of the map Kin (6), are unstable,
because the derivative matrix Dic(k) in each case has one or more eigenvalues of modulus

greater than one. In such a case, the dynamics will not converge asymptotically to a steady
state, for almost all initial conditions. Instead, the dynamics may converge to a
deterministic periodic orbit, or even to a chaotic attractor, in which case bounded but
aperiodic fluctuations continue forever. Such models are consistent with the thesis of global
weak detemiinacy, but contradict asymptotic strong determinacy.
Examples of this kind include the optimal growth models considered by Benhabib

and Nishimura (1979, 1985) and Boidrin and Montrucchio (1986), among others. The
simplest example in which complex dynamics are possible is a two-sector growth model
(capital and exogenously supplied labor are used to produce both the capital good and a
consumption good) with a population of identical infinite lived consumers with stationary

recursive preferences. In such a model, because of the first welfare theorem, an

intertempotal competitive equilibrium must maximize the utility of the representative

consumer subject to the constraints imposed by the technology and the initial capitat stock.

Ma consequence, there must be a unique equilibrium for each value of the initial capital
stock (k,,, if we let the salar k denote the quantity of capital brought into period t), and

this equilibrium will be independent of the realizations of any extraneous "sunspot"
variables, since the equivalent optimal planning problem does not involve them. Hence the
global weak determinacy thesis Is valid for this kind of model. The equilibrium dynamics
for the capital stock can be described by a first-oixler difference equation of the form (6),

where ,c(k) denotes the optimal production of capital goods in a period, plus undepreciated

12
capital goods remaining at the end of that period, as a function of the capital stock carried

into that period. But whether or not global asymptotic determinacy obtains depends upon
the form of the map x.

It an be shown, under relatively weak assumptions concerning the decreasing
returns to additional capital inputs given the fixed exogenous labor supply, that the map ic

musibesuchthatforanykaboveafinitecriticalvalue L c(kj< k Asaresult, the
dynamia for the capital stock will eventually be confined to the bounded interval [0, Id.
But this alone does not imply convergence. Underadditional assumptions -- for example, a

one-sector technology (i.e., the production technologies for the capital good and the
consumption good are identical) and preferences for the representative consumer that are
additively separable over time -- one can show that ic must be a monotonically increasing

function, with a unique fixed point Ic' >0, and sc(k) greater or less than k according to

whether k is less than or greater than k. In this case, Ic must converge asymptotically to
k' for all initial conditions k0> 0. But as was first shown by Benhabib and Nishirnu ra
(1985), and as is thither developed by Boldrin (1989), in the case of a general two-sector
technology, K need not be a monotonically increasing function. If for some range of capital

stocks IS the optimal production program involves a sufficiently higher capital-labor ratio
in the consumption good sector, K will be a decreasing function of l and if it is sharply

enough decreasing near the steady state capital stock (specifically, if ic'(k) C -1), the
dynamics near the steady state will be unstable, so that except under fortuitous conditions,
Ic Will not remain near k asymptotically. If the relative capital intensity of the consumption
goods sector increases as the overall ratio of capital to labor in the economy increases, then

Kcanbeahump.shaped function of the kind shown in Figure 1. If the hump is steep

13
enough, quite complicated dynamics arc possible, and indeed the asymptotic dynamics may

be "chaotic".3
As a contrasting csse, there are also models of fluctuations due to self-fulfilling

expectations, often referred to as "sunspot" equilibria.4 Probably the best-known example
is the overlapping generations model of fiat money, studied byAzariadis (1981), Azariadis

and Guesnerie (1982, 1986), and many subsequent authors. In this model, there is no
predetermined state variable lc.. The level of money prices p, in each period is determined

by an equilibrium condition of the form

ftp, (+J)

(7)

0

Here I have taken as given a non-stochastic path for the money supply, and assumed that
there exist no other exogenous shocks to fundamentals either. Equation (7) indicates that
expectations regarding the period t+l price level (and hence the real returns to holding
money) affect desired money holdings in period t, and so the period tprice level that

equates the supply of and demand for real balances. Any stochastic process for {p} that
satisfies (7) represents a rational expectations equilibrium for such an economy.
Even if we restrict attention to deterministic equilibria ("perfect foresight"

equilibria), i.e., sequences of prices (pj satisfying
(8)

ftp,p+)

0

equilibrium may be indetenninatc. For there is nothing to determine what the initial price
The
level Po must be, except expectations about
m•price level p0 might be anything in a

certain interval of values, if appropriate expectations regarding p exist. The equilibrium

value oip could similarly be anything in a certain interval of values, given appropriate

3For a simple discussion of how a bump-shaped map can have this consequence, see May (1976). For
further examples of economic models resulting in dynamics of this sort, see those sources or Boidrin and
Woodford (1990).

4The tennis due to Cass and Shell (1983). The first general equilibrium example is due to Shell (1977),
although the indeterminacy of intertemporaj equilibrium as pointing to the possibility of purely
"speculative" fluctuations was discussed as early as Samuelson (1957), and the indetenninacy of rational
expectations equilibrium in adhocmacroeconomic models was much discussed in the 197O's (see, e.g.,
Shiller (1978)).

/"5°
/.

//
I

I

I,'

/
II

-- — ---1- ----"
I

-

I

wC

.1

p

k1k

F;qre t

kg')

14
expectations regarding p2, and so on. To verify that many different values for Po are

equally consistent with perfect foresight equilibrium, one must show that each of them an
be justified by a sequence of expected future price levels extending into the indefinite

future. This an easily occur. For example, in the overlapping generations model, money is
the only way in which wealth an be transferred from the first to the second period of life.
As a result, an increase in the expected price level in the second period of life may increase
rather than decrease the real money balances desired by the young agents, if the income

effect of changes in expected return on savings outweighs the substitution effect. If the
income effect is sufficiently strong, the graph of pairs (p,,,

satisfying (8) may be

sharply backward-bending, as shown in Figure 2. 5 The case drawn is that in which
(9)

f2(p', p*f1(p*, p*) >

1

A sequence of values (pj of the kind shown is a perfect foresight equilibrium, as is the

steady state p p for all t. It will be observed that a similar constnzction is possible
starting from any p0close enough to p. In this sense perfect foresight equilibrium is
indeterminate; each such sequence represents an equilibrium that an occur if only it is
expected to.
Such indeterminacy also creates the possibility of equilibrium fluctuations in

response to events ("sunspots") that do not change economic fhndamentals. Consider a

sunspot variable St that follows a two-state Markov chain, where 0< q1 < 1 is the
probability that state i is followed by state j, for i, j — 1, 2, and consider the possibility of
an equilibrium in which p — R whenever St — i, for i— 1, 2. The numbers (ps, p2)
describe a rational expectations equilibrium if and only if the induced stochastic process for

(pJ satisfies (7), i.e., if
(10)

ftpj, (p1,p2;c1)) — 0,

i

1,2

5Flere I have graphed this hunction with the inverse price level on the axes, so that the graph indicates the
demand for real balances (on the horizontal axis) as a function of theexpected real value of money in the
following period (on the vertical axis).

a

/

/

/
/

/

/
- -0-

/

i

1.

F;pre

2.

.1 Wp

I5
where (p, p'; q} denotes the probability distribution In which the value p occurs with

probability q and the value p with probability l-q. Given the transition probabilities (qj}.
(10) is a set of two equations for the two variables (pip P2). One solution 1Pi —P2 — P',
the deterministic steady state equilibrium, but there may also be solutions with Pt ' P2, "
which case the price level depends upon the realization of the "sunspot" variable. In such a

case the sunspot realization affects pt through its effect upon expectations regarding the
distribution M(pt+t)' which change in expectations is rational if people will continue to

change their expectations in response to the sunspot realizations in the future. Thus the
belief that the sunspot variable indicates something that makes it appropriate to change

ones expectations is self-Mfllling. The possibility of self-fulfilling revisions of
expectations of this sort is clearly closely related to the indeterminacy of equilibrium just

demonstrated for the deterministic case.6

The formal possibility of sunspot equilibria as solutions to (10) is illustrated by
Figure 3. Here the two equations in (10) are graphed; the intersections of the two curves
represent rational expectations equilibria. The figure is drawn for the case of preferences

and endowments like those that give rise to Figure 2, and a sunspot process with q11 and

qboth small positive quantities. Because q12 is near 1, the first equation in (10) gives p
as a function of p2. where the function is similar to the one that gives p as a function of

p in Figure 2. (In Figure 3, this graph is labeled "p1(p,j'.) Because q2 is near 1, the
second equation in (10) gives P2 as a similar function ofp1. (In Figure 3, this graph is
labeled "p2(pI)".) The same condition discussed earlier -. the demand for real balances a
sufficiently sharply decreasing function of the real return on money -- makes the two
curves cross at (pS-I, PS-I) in the directions shown. This crossing condition, together with

the lict that desired real balances do not grow without bound as the expected return on

6For ftMher discussion of this relationship, see my (1984, 1986c).

I

Pit P fj

/,
t( P2)

//

,/
SI

p.

F;Mrt 3.

16
money is made lower, then guarantees the existence of at least two off-diagonal

intersections between the two curves, as shown.
The Azariadis-Guesnerie construction, just discussed, depends upon strong income
effects, so that the demand for real balances can be a sharply decreasing function of the
expected return to holding money. While this Is a theoretical possibility in the overlapping

generations model, it is much more difficult for this to occur when the possibility of
substituting between money and other assets is admitted, and it is not consistent with
observed experience with the effects of inflation on money demand. It is acconlingly
perhaps useful to point out that even in the sort of simple model just considered, the
existence of sunspot equilibria does not depend upon this effect. Even when desired real
balances are monotonically increasing in expected return (monotonically decreasing in
expected inflation), it is still true that many values of p1 are consistent with equilibrium,

given appropriate expectations regarding Pt+i' and so on, and sunspot equilibria are often

possible. Chiappori and Guesnerie (1988) consider sunspot equilibria of the following
form. Suppose that the sunspot variable is a countably infinite Markov chain, with a state
space corresponding to the (positive and negative) integers, and suppose that if the sunspot

stateis iinperiodt, inperiodt+l itwillbei-l withprobability Ji2andi+l with
probability 112. Consider again the possibility of equilibria in which p1 —p1 whenever the

sunspot state is i, for some fixed sequence of price levels (p) where i ranges over the
positive and negative integers. A sequence (p-) represents a rational expectations

equilibrium if and only if

(II)
fori — ..., -2, -1,0, 1,2,

1p1, {p11,p1.1;

l/2})

—

0

Solutionsto(ll)canbeanalyzed inthesaine fashionas the

trajectories of a discrete time dynamical system. If the left hand side is monotonic in all

three (say, decreasing in p1and increasing in both p.1 and

as occurs if substitution

effects outweigh income effects), then one can solve for

as a function of(pj.1, pj, and

for PH as a function of(p1, p11). Then given any point (j, R+i) in the domain on which

17
these maps are defined, we can define a "forward" mapping that takes such a point to (pj+1,
p1+2), and a "backward" mapping that takes it to (p1.1, p0. We then wish to study the

itineraries of points In the plane under repeated applications of these mappings. If one is
able to apply both mappings an unlimited number of times (so as to define a complete
"trajectory") without reaching a point where prices become negative or where the mapping
ceases to be defined, then one obtains a sequence (pt) that represents a rational expectations

equilibrium. One such solution is the sequence j — p* for all i; this fixed point of the
"dynamical" system defined by (11) corresponds to the monetary steady state. But there
may be "trajectories" other than flied points that can be continued forever as well, and

these correspond to sunspot equilibria.
Chiappori and Guesnerie show that the dynamics in the plane induced by the

"forward" mapping can easily look like those shown in Figure 4. (Again I have graphed the
inverse price level on the two axes.) Here the solid lines with arrows superimposed

represent the stable and unstable manifolds of the fixed point (p*.I, p01).7 Now consider a

point (pi4, pi') somewhere on the segment of the stable manifold that connects (0,0) to

(pt, p*..I), Applying the "forward" and "backward" maps repeatedly to this point, one
generates a sequence of values (p1), such that for all I, (pç', p11-') lies on that same
segment of the stable manifold, and such that

P*< ... <PI+2<Pi+I<Pj<Pj.j<pI.2< ...
This describes a sunspot equilibrium in which the price level fluctuates forever between p

and infinity; the fluctuations are not transient, in the sense that every state i is eventually

visited infinitely often, with probability one. When the sunspot state changes from ito i I,
the price level falls, because, because the expected price level in the future falls, increasing
the current demand for real money balances through the standard Cagan-Bresciani-Turroni

7NOte that (0,0)12 another fixed point, representing the deterministic equilibrium in which money is not
valued In any period because it is not expected to be valued in the futurt

skLtt

pn

/

£

w
'4.

18
effect of inflation expectations on money demand. Again, the belief that the sunspot
realizations will affect the price level in this way is self-fiulfflling.6

These two types of models of endogenous fluctuations are different in some
important respects. One is that sunspot equilibria are inherently stochastic. Hence the
attempt to distinguish empirically whether economic time series are "genuinely random" or

not (see, e.g., Brock (1986)) can not be relevant to distinguishing between exogenous
shock theories and endogenous theories of economic fluctuations.9
Mother difference is the extent to which nonlinearities are essential to the
possibility of endogenous fluctuations of the two sorts. As indicated above, the asymptotic
strong determinacy thesis is very generally true of linear systems of equilibrium conditions,
assuming that global weak detenninacy obtains and that equilibrium fluctuations do not
grow without bound. Hence nonlinearities in the equilibrium conditions are crucial to the
possibility of endogenous fluctuations of the kind that I have called "determinate but
unstable", and in the case of most examples in the literature (in particular, the more
interesting examples, which are those of chaotic dynamics), the nonlinearities must be quite

severe. For example, in the case of one.dimensional dynamics of the kind illustrated in
Figure 1, it is necessary for the function K to go from having a slope greater than 1 for low

values of k to having a slope less than .1 rot high values of k. Global weak determinacy is
not, on the contrary, an especially general property even of linear models, and the features
of the equilibrium conditions associated with the Azariadis-Gucsneric model that allow
sunspot equilibria to exist have mostly to do with the derivatives of the functions involved

8A similar ccasnjcfio is possible using points on the unsrable manifold, or, indeed, many other points in
the plane that lie on "fraject.orj& that can be extended arbitrarilyin both directions, as is discussed by
Chiappori and Gueene.
9For reasons explained above, the distinction between random and deterministic time series is not even an
appropriate way of trying to distinguish what I have oiled "determinate but unstable" d>iiandcs from the
dynamics associated with a pure exogenous shock model

19

(in partlalar, of the function fin (7)) near the steady-state values of the arguments.10 For
suppose that (7) were exactly linear, i.e., that it took the form

(12)

f1(p..p*) + f2E(p..1-p) — 0

and suppose also that, in accordance with (9), the constant coefficients are such that

f/f1> 1. Then if (sj isa sequence of independent random variables with mean zero, one
class of solutions to (12) in which the sunspot realizations affect the price level would be
Pt

P + C;.0 (f/f2Yst..j

where c * 0 is an arbitrary constant. (If the random variables {sJ are uniformly bounded,
then the infInite sum in this expression is always well-defined.)
Because sunspot equilibria are perfectly consistent with linearity, it will often be
convenient to use linear methods, just as in the case of the familiar exogenous shock
models, both in theoretical analyses of the predicted character of economic fluctuations, and
in empirical testing of the implications of the models. This is a great advantage over the

models of determinate but unstable dynamics, as it allows for the analysis and testing of
more sophisticated (and so, possibly, more realistic) versions of the models. Finally, it
should be observed that tests for nonlinearity in the laws governing the evolution of
observed economic time series (see references below at footnote 13) have no clear

connection with the issue of whether observed fluctuations are exogenous or endogenous
in character, any more than do the tests for genuine randomness, insofar as one important
class of models of endogenous fluctuations does not depend upon nonlinearity.

t0This may seem paradoxical, given that Azariadis and Ouesnerie (1986) establish that the existence cia
two-period detenninistic cycle is necessary and sufficient for the existence of the two-state Markov
equilibria, and the existence of deterministic cycles is dependent upon nonlinearity in the generic case, as
just argued. Nonetheless a sufficient condition for the existence of the two-state Markav equilibria is (9). as
shown by Azariadis (1981), and this condition does not involve any nonlinear aspect of the function f; (9)
is both necessary and sufficient for the existence of sunspot equilibria that remain forever near the steady
state equilibrium, as shown by my (1986c). Furthermore, together with the boundary assumptions on the
behavior off made by Azariadis and Guesnerie (which imply nonlinearity, at least at exfreme values ofthe
arguments), (9) is also a sufficient condition for the existence cia periodt detenninistic cycle. On the
other hand,
is sufficient for the existence of two-state Markov equilibria even in theabsence of the
boundary conditions just referred to.

20
The degree to which these two types of models of endogenous fluctuations are

qualitatively dissimilar has probably been obscured by the fhct that the overlapping

generations model of fiat money, with a backward-bending demand for real money

balances as shown in Figure 2, has been much discussed as a leading example both of
sunspot equilibria (Azariadis and Guesnerie) and of deterministic equilibrium cycles

(Gmndmont (1985)). It will be observed that the mapping in Figure 2 is the same as that in
Figure 1, but with the axes reversed. That is, the function that gives the demand for real
balances as a function of the expected real value of money in the next period is the same

sort of hump-shaped function that gives k as a function of kin the growth model of
Benhabib and Nishimura. Accordingly, similar methods can be used (see Orandmont) to

show that if the hump is steep enough, the "backward perfect foresight dynamic" of the
overlapping generations model will be characterized by an unstable steady state, the
existence of deterministic equilibrium cycles, and even the existence of chaotic equilibrium
trajectories.

But this should not be taken to mean that the mechanisms giving rise to sunspot
equilibria on the one hand, and the sort of endogenous deterministic cycles studied by

authors such as Benhabib and Nishimura on the other, are essentially the same. For in fact
the Grandmont example has little in common with the main literature on deterministic

cycles.11 The "backward perfect foresight dynamics" are simply not the dynamics of
interest, and the Grandmont example does not really have dynamical properties similar to

those of models where a hump-shaped map describes the evolution of a predetermined state
variable. In the overlapping generations model, there is not anything that fixes the price
level at some future date (the way that an initial capital stock is given by history in the

Benhabib-Nishimura model), so that one would be interested in deriving the consequences

of that expectation for the price level in previous periods. Md even if there were, one

'Fcc fw'th discussion, see Boidrin and Woodford (1990).

21
would not be interested in tracing the consequences of that expectation into the indefinite

past (in the way that one solves a growth model forward Into the indefinite future), so that
one would not be interested in the asymptotic consequences of repeated iteration of the

"backward perfect foresight dynamics" map (such as whether the dynamics asymptotically
approach a fixed point or a cycle, or instead are forever aperiodic). In the ease of the
forward dynamics of a predetermined state variable, the existence of "chaotic" dynamics is
interesting because it indicates that the time series generated could be very irregular even in

the absence of exogenous shocks, indeed could closely resemble a "truly stochastic" time
series. But the existence of chaotic "backward perfect foresight dynamics" in the
overlapping generations model is not of similar interest. No such construction is needed to
demonstrate that irregular or apparentlystochastic equilibrium dynamics are possible in that
model. Even setting aside the possibility of sunspot equilibria, it will be observed from
Figure 2 that a given equilibrium price level p1 can often be equally well justified by two

different expectations regarding p, and so the forward perfect foresight dynamics, being
often not uniquely defined, plainly allow for very irregular trajectories, since a very

complex nile may be used to determine which value ofp+1 occurs following each time that
Pt takes such a value.
The Grandmont analysis does suffice to demonstrate the possibility of deterministic
cycles of all periods, since the existence of deterministic cycles in the backward dynamics
is equivalent to the existence of such cycles in the forward dynamics. But as I have argued
above, it is not really the possibility of deterministic cycles in the absence of exogenous

shocks that is the important feature of models such as that of Benhahib and Nishimura, but
rather the fact that the equilibrium dynamics are determinate but unstable, a properly not

true of the Grandmont example. In my view the overlapping generations model illustrates
the possibility of endogenous equilibrium fluctuations as a result of the indeterminacy of
rational expectations equilibrium, and the deterministic cycles studied by Grandmont are
best understood as simply degenerate, limiting cases of finite-state Markovian sunspot

22
equilibria of the kind studied by Azariadis and Guesnerie. The sort of determinate cycles

exhibited by Benbabib and Nishiniura represent a distinct type of endogenous fluctuations.

Still, some may ask, why should the question of whether observed aggregate
fluctuations are to some extent endogenous matter? Of course, all will agree that a more
accurate model of economic fluctuations would be useful, and methodological blinders that

prevent one from discovering the tne stnicture are obviously undesirable. Butthis does not
explain why the endogenous or exogenous origin of fluctuations should be a question of
interest in itself, apart from the interest that there might be in arguing for some particular

model that happens to explain fluctuations as endogenous. Indeed, it might be argued that
endogenous and exogenous explanations considered as general categories cannot be
regarded as different for any practical purposes, due to the substantial continuity that exists
between the two categories. Not much can follow from the claim that an economy

fluctuates in response to random events that are tnie "sunspot" variables -. in the sense of
having no effect whatsoever on fundamentals -- as opposed to its fluctuating in response to
events that represent changes of negligible size in fundamentals.12 Nor can much follow

from the claim that global asymptotic detenninacy does not hold for an economy, and so
that the effect of initial conditions on the endogenous state variables remains non-negligible
forever -- as opposed to the effect eventually dying out, as claimed by the determinacy

thesis, but with an extremely slow rate of decay.
But these are not really adequate reasons for ignoring the possibility of endogenous
fluctuations. The simple fact that the boundary between the different categories of
explanations that would be most relevant is not susceptible of clear definition does not

mean that models that represent ideal types" of the endogencus category are not useful in

-

wi

to small shocks to
eqjfljjj aM, eq'ffibrium
fun meat Is is also lndetetminjte, and that among the possible rational expectations equilibria are
equilibria in which the endogenous state variables respond vay strongly despite the fact that the change in
fundamentals is very smalL Such "over-response" to a change in fundamentals would be observationally
mdistingulshable from a "sunspot" equilibriwn. See Farmer and Woodfoni (1984). my (1986c, theorem 2),
and Quappori and Guesnerie (1988).

23
demonstrating what would be meant by an explanation of that kind and under what

circumstances it would be possible. And it is possible to speak of relatively general
implications of the hypothesis of endogenous instability that make the question of interest

even when framed so generally.
For one, it an be stated with reasonable generality that an endogenous explanation
of aggregate fluctuations implies that they are inefficient and so undesirable. The general

argument is that, under the usual modeling assumptions of strictly concave production sets
and utility functions, fluctuations in the allocation of resources that occur other than as a
response to fluctuations in either tastes or technological possibilities must reduce expected
utility compared to a steadier growth path. More precise results along this line are discussed

in the next section. It is shown there that the claim just made is subject to a number of

qualifications; one an construct theoretical examples of both sunspot equilibria and of
determinate but unstable equilibrium dynamia in which the equilibria are Pareto optimal.
Nonetheless it is argued that the cases of most likely practical relevance under which

endogenous fluctuations of either sort are possible are conditions under which the
fluctuating equilibria are inefficient (and can occur only because of some kind of "market

failure"). Nor is it by any means the case that exogenous shock models must imply that
fluctuations are not a problem; the mere fact that exogenous shocks to fundamentals imply

that some response would be efficient does not mean that the one that actually occurs must
be. Nonetheless this is a property of at least the currently most popular class of exogenous
shock models ("real business cycle" models), and this is not surprising, given the general
predilection of economists to be led from a basic commiUnent to explanation in terms of
optimization and equilibrium into the assumption of a perfect system of competitive

markets, except in cases where the phenomenon to be explained is clearly incompatible

with such an assumption.
Secondly, endogenous explanations as a class result in a presumption that policy
interventions ought to exist in principle that can suppress or at least significantly reduce the

24
fluctuations, without requiring a ndical alteration of the structure of the economy, and, in
particular, without having to cure the underlying "market failures" (due to private

information, say, or increasing returns) that allow the inefficient flurniitions to occur in
equilibrium in the first place. In the case of exogenous shocks, policy interventions can
affect the nature of the fluctuations that occur in response to the shocks, but it is hard to
prevent fluctuations of one sort or another from occurring. If the fluctuations are purely
endogenous then there is no reason why the economy could not follow a completely steady
path, and the modifications required to get this to happen might be minimal. For example,
in the case of sunspot equilibria, there will typically also exist equilibria in which no

fluctuations in response to the sunspot variables; one simplyneeds to design a policy
regime that prevents the occurrence of the sunspot equilibria and leaves the non-fluctuating
equilibrium or equilibria as the only possibility. The type of intervention needed may only
be a credible commitment to intervene if fluctuations were to arise, which will never have to
be acted upon in equilibrium.13 In the case of determinate but unstable dynamics,
elimination of the endogenous cycles requires only that the feedback loop that sustains them

beweakenedtothepointthatthecycIescetobeself.sug,nottthepureof
any of the causal links in the chain that creates the cycles be completely changed. Thus, in

the case of the dynamics represented by Figure 1, an intervention that changed the shape of
the hump to make it a bit less steep would succeed in rendering stable the deterministic
steady state; it is not necessary to transform the dynamics to the extent that they are no

longer described by a hump-shaped map. The issue of stabilization policy will not be

discussed in the case of any of the examples of endogenow cycle models that sketched
here, both because of space limitations and because of the foolishness of talking too much
about the policy prescriptions that might be drawn from models whose empirical relevance
has not yet been established. But the fact that models of the geneml class discussed here

13For an example of aabilization policy of this kind, see my (1986a).

25
could well have consequences for policy analysis that are different from

those associated

with more conventional models remains an important reason for being interested in the

question of those models' logical coherence and empirical adequacy.

II. The Consistency of Endogenous fluctuations with Optimizing Behavior
In discussing reasons for neglect of the hypothesis ofendogenous fluctuations in
the previous section, I have set aside what is perhaps the most serious objection to this
general class of explanations. This is the view that the possibility of endogenous
fluctuations czn be ignored, not because of a special rnethodologicaJcommitment to the

determinacy theses, but as a consequence of more basic methodological commitments -specifically, commitments to explaining economic phenomena in terms ofoptimizing

behavior and competitive equilibrium. If it can be shown that economic models founded
upon these postulates necessarily satisfy the determinacy theses, then there is no need to
argue for them as independent modeling principles.
The examples presented in section I already have demonstrated thatno really strong
claim of this kind is tenable, since the economies described are ones in which all agents
maximize their expected utility, all agents have rational expectations, and all markets are

perfectly competitive and clear at all times. Nonetheless, sufficiently restricted versions of
this claim are actually true. Some may feel that these suffice to create a presumption against

the empirical relevance of the endogenous cycle hypothesis. I wish instead to emphasize

that these results show to what extent endogenous fluctuations, if they do occur, are likely
to be connected with the failure of an ideal system of competitive markets to exist.
One important general result of this kind is the following.

The Sunsoot Irrelevance Theorem. Suppose that theeconomy is perfectly
competitive and that the standard conditions required to prove the efficiency of
competitive equilibrium (no externalities, no distorting taxes, etc.) are satisfied. In
particular, suppose that there exist only a finite number of distinct consumer types,

26
and suppose that there exists a complete set of Arrow-Debreu contingent claims
markets, including markets for securities contingent upon all possible realizations of
the "sunspot" variables. Finally, suppose that production sets are convex (no
ncreaslng returns) and that consumers von Neumann-Morgenstern utility functions
re strictly concave (consumers are risk averse). Then no rational expectations
equilibria involve fluctuations In the allocation of resources, or fluctuations in the
relative prices of any goods, in response to the realization of the "sunspot"
variables.

The basic idea behind this result was first demonstrated by Cass and Shell (1983). The
result has been extended by Balasko (1984), and a thorough discussion is given in
Guesnerie and Laffont (1988). The basic idea is that under the conditions assumed, a
rational expectations equilibrium is equivalent to an Arrow-Debreu equilibrium, and

involves a Pareto optimal allocation of resources. But no allocation of resources which

depends upon the sunspot state can be Pareto optimal (given that preferences, technology,
and endowments are independent of the sunspot state). For Wan allocation that fluctuates in
response to the sunspot state is feasible, then there exists another allocation that is not
contingent upon the sunspot state (e.g., take in each state the allocation that is the
probability-weighted average of the allocations previously specified for the various sunspot

states) that is also feasible (because of convexity of the production sets) and gives a higher
expected utility to all consumers whose allocation previously depended upon the sunspot
state (because of strict concavity of the utility functions). Hence no sunspot-contingent
allocation can be an equilibrium allocation. But then relative prices of goods cannot differ

across sunspot states either, insofar as in a competitive equilibrium these relative prices

must correspond to marginal rates of substitution in consumption and marginal rates of
transformation in production, which will not differ if the allocation of resources does not.
This strong result might appear to justify the view described above, according to
which sunspot fluctuations are simply inconsistent with rational expectations equilibrium,
when the full consequences of optimization and equilibrium are properly taken into
account. But the irrelevance theorem contains many qualifications, which indicate ways in
which self-fulfilling expectations may be a source of economic fluctuations, even granting
the postulates of optimization, rational expectations, and equilibrium.

27
For one, the "averaged" allocation referred to above need not be feasible if there are

indivisibilities, nonconvex adjustment costs, or increasing returns to scale; in such cases, a
randomized allocation (where the randomization is independent of any variation in

fundamentals) can be efficient,t4 and as a result might be associated with a competitive
equilibrium even under circumstances under which equilibirurn would have to be efficient.

Second, if consumers' utility functions are not strictly concave, then the "averaged"
allocation need not be a Pareto improvement over the sunspot allocation, and so again there

might be a Pareto optimal sunspot equilibrium. Guesnerie and Laffont (1988) exhibit an
example of this kind, based upon locally "risk-loving" behavior of the Friedman-Savage
sort, in which the sunspot equilibrium Pareto-dominates the unique non-sunspot
equilibrium. And third, an equilibrium may not be Pareto optimal, because of any of a
variety of sorts of violations of the conditions under which it is possible to prove the First
Welfare Theorem. As a result an equilibrium allocation might involve fluctuations in

response to sunspot realizations.
One reason that a competitive equilibrium might not be Pareto optimal is absence of
a complete set of Arrow-Debreu markets for contingent commodities. Here it is important
to note that if one allows for equilibria in which prices and supply and demand behavior

may be contingent upon sunspot variables, then the First Welfare Theorem requires, among
other things, a complete set of markets for securities contingent upon all possible
realizations of the sunspot variables. Even if there exists a complete set of frictionless

markets in all other senses, so that an equilibrium not contingent on the sunspot states
would necessarily be Pareto optimal, if there do not exist markets for insurance against
sunspot risk, in which all consumers who will ever exist can trade prior to the realization of
any of the sunspot states, then there might also exist inefficient sunspot equilibria. Given

14Hence the use of lotteries" to support efficient allocations in generalizations of the notion of ArrowDebreu equilibrium to economies with non-convexities, e.g., Rogerson (1988). The relation of this idea to
the literature on "sunspot equilibria" is developed explicitly in mrt work by Karl Shell and Randy Wright.

28
the large number of types of random signals that might conceivably serve to coordinate

shifts in people's expectations, it is not implausible to suppose that a complete set of such
markets do not in fact exist, in which case the irrelevance theorem is no practical

significance.
The sunspot equilibria in the Azaiiadis;Guesnerie model referred to in section I are

of this kind. '5

cease to be possible if markets for insurance against sunspot

realizations are introduced. To see why, it is necessary to describe in greater detail the
microeconomic foundations of the demand for money in the model considered by Azariadis

and Guesnerie. In this model, each consumer lives for two consecutive periods, and
acquires money (the only asset) by selling goods in the first period of life, holds the money

until the second period of life, and then uses it to purchase goods. Each consumer's
preferences over consumption are additively sepamble between the two periods of life. The
demand for real balances in a given period is then just the desired saving by young
consumers in that period; this depends upon the expected real return on savings, which in
turn depends upon the rate of inflation. Now suppose that there were also a complete set of
markets for securities that paid ofT in the event of different sunspot histories, which

securities are all in zero net supply. Suppose that all consumers who will ever consume in
any period have an opportunity to trade in these securities before the realization ofany of
the sunspot states, and that they trade so as to maximize their expected utility, taking into

account what their consumption will be in the event of each of the possible sunspot
histories, and with common (correct) expectations regarding the probability with which the

15Stricfiy speaking, this is not a model in which rational expectations equilibrium, even when not
contingent upon sunspot states, must be Pareto optimal, as discussed below. But monetaiy equilibria in
which the value of money is forever bounded away from zero we necessarily Pareto optimal (Balasko and
Shell (1980)) if not contingent upon sunspot states, and the Aiariadis-Quesnerje
sunspot equilibria have
this property. Furthermore, as Is shown in my (1984),
sunspot equilibria of the same kind exist under
exactly analogous conditions in an overlapping generations model in which the store of value
(land") pays
a constant
positive real dividend, unlike the flat money considered by Azariadis and Guesnerie. In the case of
the economy with land", dynamic inefficiency is impossible, and competitive
optimal if not contingent upon sunspot states. Nonetheless, inefficient equilibrium is necessarily
sunspot equilibria can exist,
if markets do not exist in which all agents
can insure against the sunspot realizations.

!°

2g
different sunspot histories will occur and what the consequences of each will be for market
prices. It is then impossible that a rational expectations equilibrium could involve a different

allocation of resources in a given period in the case of different sunspot states. For if it did,
then in one state the consumption of the old would have to be higher than in another, while

the consumption of the young would have to be correspondingly lower in that state, given
that endowments cannot depend upon the sunspot slate.16 But then, given strict concavity
of the consumers' von Neumann-Morgenstern utility functions, the marginal utility of
consumption by the old must be lower in the tint state than in the second, while the
marginal utility of the young is higher in that state. This is inconsistent with rational
expectations equilibrium in the case of insurance markets against sunspot risk, since that
would require the ratio of marginal utilities between the two states to be the same for all

consumers who consume in both states, i.e., equal to the relative price of contingent claims
to consumption in the two states divided bythe relative probability of the two states
occurring (upon which probability both types of consumers must agree at the time of the
trading in the contingent claims).
There are several possible defenses of the relevance of the Azaxiadis-Guesnerie

sunspot equilibria despite this result One is to observe that all sorts of random events could
play the role of the sunspot states, so that even if there were trading in claims contingent

upon some of them, one could still have sunspot equilibria in which the allocation of
resources fluctuated in response to other events, against which insurance was not possible.
This line of argument is developed by Azariadis (1981) and Azariadis and Guesnerie

(1982). It is not entirely convincing, however. After all, as noted in my (1989b), the
existence of a sunspot equilibrium requires a great degree of coordination by agents as to

'6The argument here assumes an exchange economy where the total available supply is simply given by
consumers' aepte endowment. But a similar argument is possible if one allows for variation in
endogenous labor supply ross sunspot stain, as in Azariadis (1981); then instead of the goodcconsumed
by the young being lower in the lint state, it is their consumption of leisure, but the argument proceeds in
the same way.

30
what signals will be interpreted in what way. As a result, the fact that the existence of an

Azarladis-Guesnerie sunspot equilibrium would create a profit opportunity for those who
were to introduce a new type of contingent security, the Introduction of which would then
prevent the equilibrium fluctuations, is no trivial problem; for it is not clear how easily

coordination upon some new, as yet uninsuzable, sunspot event could arise. Furthermore,
it is not mae that a large number of types of securities must be traded in order to rule out the

Anziadis-Guesnerie sunspot equilibria; the existence ofsecurities contingent upon the price
level would suffice.
Another defence of these equilibria is to point out that trading in securities

contingent upon the sunspot states is consistent with the existence of the sunspot equilibria,

if trading is possible only by consumers who are "alive" at the time of the trading (i.e.,

who consume in that period). For in the Anriadis-Guesnerie model, each consumer lives
for only two consecutive periods. Thus the only types of consumers who would care to
insure against sunspot risk in period t are the consumers who consume in periods t- I and t,
and those who consume in periods t and t+ 1; and of these, only the former are "alive" in

any period prior to the realization of the period t sunspot state. But if all consumers in a
given generation have the same preferences and endowments (as assumed by Azaxiadis and

Guesnerie), then trading in period t. I in securities contingent upon the period t sunspot
state by members of the generation that consumes in periods t- 1 and twill result in market
clearing securities prices such that no consumer's consumption allocation is any different
due to the existence of the markets for contingent securities.17 This resolution, however, is
17Torn Sargent has suggested the following interpretation of this result One may suppose that consumers
do not inswe against sunspot risk by trading in contingent securities
any at
thne before their first period
of
life" because consumers "born" in the same period but subsequent to different histories of sunspot
realizations are distinct individuals who do not desire to pool their riskcx ante. Under this interpretation,an
alternanve allocation of resources should be considered to be "Paretoimproving" only if the expected utility
Of flO Consumer type is reduced, where consumers "born" subsequent to distinct
sunspot histories are treated
as distinct types, and where the expected utility of each type is measured as of the first period in which that
consumer type consumes. With this considerablyweakened criterion for Pareto optimality, the argument
sketched above according to which sunspot fluctuations cannot be Pareto optimal does not work, and indeed
the
Anrjagjjs-l3uesuse sunspot equilibria are Pareto optimal. This interpretation is of some relevance to
the issue discussed at the end of section II, of whether u,jg,ep fluct.mopj axe necessarily inefficient and

31
convincing only under the literal interpretation of the Azariadis-Guesnerie model as

referring to consumers whose actual lifespans are only two periods. An interpretation of
this model of flat money (and the associated possibility of sunspot equilibria) that! prefer is
one according to which it represents an economy of long-lived consumers who are,
however, constrained in their ability to borrow every other period, due to periodic
fluctuations in either their endowments or their taste for consumption.16 In this
interpretation, the motivation for the restriction upon trading in the sunspot-contingent

securities by the other type of consumers disappears.
The best response to the objection that introduction of trading in contingent claims
removes the possibility of sunspot equilibria in the Azariadis-Guesnerie model is to observe
that this result is rather special to that model; many other examples of sunspot equilibria do

not depend upon the non-existence of or restrictions upon participation in markets for
insurance against sunspot risk. For sunspot equilibria can fail to be Pareto optimal for
many masons other than the absence of opportunity for trade of that sort. There are many

kinds of models in which equilibrium is not, or at least need not be, Pareto optimal, even
when sunspot equilibria are not considered. In these same kinds of models, inefficient
sunspot equilibria may be possible, as conditions assumed by the irrelevance theorem do
not hold. In some of these eases, the introduction of markets for insurance against sunspot
risk has no effect upon the existence or character of the sunspot equilibria at all.

For emple, equilibrium need not be Pareto optimal in overlapping generations
models, despite the absence of any restrictions upon trading by any consumer types, due to
hence undesirable. Since, however, the Azasiadis-Guesnerie example of sunspot equilibria does not seem to
me the type of example of greatest potential macroeconomic relevance, I will not discuss further the
desirability of this interpretation of that example.
16See Townsend (1980), Woodford (1986b), or Sargent (1987, cli. 6). This interpretation has the advantage
of providing a theory of the demand for fiat money that does not require assumptions that imply the
possibility of a dynamically inefficient equilibrium even in the presence of perfect intertemporal markets,
regarding which see below. For example, this sort of monetary theory is consistent with an assumption of
Berm-type bequest links between generations, or the existence of land", as long as the use of land" as a

means of payment is assumed to involve sufficiently large te ctions costs as to continue to allow the
borrowing constraints to bind periodically. On the possibility of sunspot equilibria in a monetary economy
of this kind, see my (l988a).

32
the existence of an infinite sequence of distinct consumer types. 19And it can be shown

(Cass and Shell (1989)) that sunspot equilibria are possible in overlapping generations
models, even with cx ante trading in claims contingent upon the sunspot history by all

consumer types who will ever consume, if one allows for preferences that are not
additively separable between periods, unlike Azariadis and Guesnerie, so that the above

impossibility argument does not go through, and if one considers equilibria with a
"dynamically inefficient" allocation of resources (due to a real rate of return that is on

average lower than the growth rate of endowments), unlike the allocations associated with
the Az.axiadis-Guesnerie equilibria. There are many reasons, however, for doubting that the
theoretical possibility of dynamic inefficiency in economies with a complete set of perfectly
competitive markets is empirically realistic. These may relate either to a belief that at least

some positive fraction of the econom/s endowment at all times is under the control of
"dynastic" families who because of bequest linkages behave like infinite-horizon

maximizers, as argued by Barro (1974), or to a belief that assets exist that are sufficiently
productive that a finite equilibrium value for those assets implies a finite value for the

economs aggregate endowment as well. (One might think that actual land has the
properties of the ideal land" referred to above, or more plausibly, that physical capital in
advanced economies is too productive to be consistent with a dynamically inefficient

equilibrium allocation, as argued by Abel eta) (1986).) Hence this does not seem to me the
reason for the possible existence of sunspot equilibria that is of the greatest practical
importance.

9The existence in the case of equilibrium prices of a well-defined budget constraint for each consumer type
need not imply a weli-defined value for the economy's aggregate endowment, if the number of consumer
types is not finite, so that the standard proof of the First Welfare Theorem is invalid. This explains the
reference to a finite number of consumer types in the statement above of the sunspot irrelevance theorem. A
First Welfare Theorem can, however, be proved for some classes of economies with an infinite sequence of
consumer types — for example, if there exists land" of the kind mentioned above, or if some finite number
of consumer types have a total endowment that is more than some positive fraction of the economy's
aggregate endowment in all periods. The sunspot irrelevance theorem can be extended to all such cases.

33
More relevant, in my view, is the fact that price signals may fail to guide the
economy to an efficient allocation of resources in the event of any of a number of types of
"market failures". I will limit my attention here to some of the types of market failures that
have been given frequent attention in macroeconomic modelling, for reasons unrelated to an
interest in the possibility of sunspot equilthriurn. Three broad classes of deviations from the
idealized competitive model that are arguably important for macroeconomics come to mind.

First, there are the types of imperfect financial intermediation that make possible a role for
intrinsically valueless fiat money (even in a world where dynamic inefficiency would not
exist in the case of perfect frictionless markets), or that may explain the apparent
importance of disruptions of financial intermediation in generating recessions and

depressions. Second, there are models of rigid money prices together with associated nonprice rationing of goods in some markets, often invoked to explain the non-neutrality of
variations in the money supply and the role of variations in aggregate demand more
generally in generating temporary fluctuations in the level of economic activity. And third,

there are increasing returns to scale in production, due either to externalities between firms

who individually face decreasing returns (the "thick marker externalities discussed by
Diamond (1982), Howitt and McAfee (1988), and Hall (1989), or the technological

spillovers discussed by Murphy etal(1988)), or to increasing returns at the firm level
combined (in order for equilibrium to exist) with imperfect competition between finns, of a
kind that have often been invoked as an explanation of observed cyclical variations in

productivity (Murphy etai(1989)), as well as of certain facts about long run growth
(Romer (1986)). All three types of imperfections are known to be possible sources of
sunspot equilibria. What is more, all three types of imperfections may result in sunspot
equilibria even in representative consumer economies, i.e., in economies in which all
consumers are assumed to be identical infinite lived Barro "dynasties". Examples of the
latter sort are plainly not dependent upon assumptions about whether or not there is trading
in securities contingent upon sunspot realizations. For given that all traders have identical

34
circumstances, tiading in such securities simply results in market-clearing at securities

prices such that no tiaderwishes eitherto buy orsell the securitics in question, and as a
result equilibrium behavior Is unaffected by the existence of the markets for these

securities. I will emphasize here only representative-consumer examples of these types for

this reason.
A representative consumer variant of an economy in which financial constiaints
create a role for valued flat money (even under circumstances under which dynamic
inefficiency would not exist in the case of perfect markets) is the cash-in-advance economy

considered by Lucas and Stokey (1987), among others. Here again an equilibrium
condition of the form (7) is obtained, although the micro-economic foundations of the
condition are different. The demand for real money balances (and hence the equilibrium
price level) in period t depends upon the extent to which consumers desire in that period to

purchase "cash goods" as opposed to "credit goods"; the optimal tradeoff between the two
kinds of purchases depends upon the expected price level in period t+ I as well as the price
level in period t, insofar as credit goods will be purchased in period t to the point where the
value of a marginal unit of currency in period t+l is equal to the value of the marginal
quantity of credit goods that could have been purchased in period t by promising to pay that
amount at the beginning of period t+ 1. Again the sort of situation depicted in Figures 2 and

3 is possible, for the right kind of utility function. rndecd, my (l988a) shows that in the
case that the representative consumer's utility function is additively separable between

periods and between cash and credit goods within each period, there is an exact formal
correspondence between the equilibrium conditions of the Azaiiadis-Guesnerie model and

those of the Lucas-Stokey model, with "consumption of cash goods" (respectively, "credit
goods") taking the place of "consumption by old consumers" (respectively, "young
consumers") in each period, and with the endowment of the representative consumer each
period (that can be transformed into either cash or credit goods) taking the place of the

endowment of the young consumers each period (some of which is consumedby them and

35
some by the old). As a result, the conditions known to allow the existence of sunspot
equilibria in the Azariadis-Cucsnerie model can be immediately translated into the context

of the Lucas-Stokey model (roughly, thit the utility firnction for cash goods consumption
be sufficiently strongly concave near the level of consumption associated with the monetary

steady state).20
In this case, however, the introduction of trading in securities contingent upon the
history of sunspot realizations does not affect the conditions for the existence of sunspot
equilibria. Following Lucas and Stokey, we can introduce securities trading by supposing
that in each period there is first a securities market sub-period, then a goods market sub.
period, with cash goods purchased in the second sub-period having to be paid for with
money held at the end of the first sub-period (possibly acquired by selling securities), and
with securities purchased in the first sub-period of period t paying off (or being able to be
traded again) in the first sub-period of the period t+ 1. In equilibrium, the ratio of marginal
utilities of cash goods consumption in two sunspot states in period t will have to equal the
ratio of the money price level in the two Mates, times the relative price in the period t- I

securities market sub-period of securities paying off contingent claims to money (payable in

the first sub-period of period t) in the two states, divided by the relative probability of
occurrence of the two states (given information at the time of securities trading in period

t-l). But the ratio of marginal utilities of credit goods need not equal this, if the cash-inadvance constraint binds in one or more of the states, since the shadow price on the cashin-advance constraint may be different in the different sunspot states. Hence the previous

argument for the impossibility of sunspot equilibria with insurance against sunspot risk
does not go through. Indeed, because of the assumption of a representative consumer,

more thorough analysis o(the conditions under which sunspot equilibria exist in the Lucas-Stokey
model, see my (1988c).

36
there is no change in the conditions for the existence of, or in the predicted character of, the
sunspot equilibria at alL21

My (1 988b) demonstrates the possibility of sunspot equilibria in an economy with

perfect financial intermediation, but in which output prices are rigid in money terms, so that
variations in aggregate demand induce a change in equilibrium supply, despite the fact that
marginal costs must vary relative to price.22 In this economy, the existence of the rigid

price and rationing in the product market results in an equilibrium level of output ythat (in
the absence of shocks to &ndamentals) will be given by
(13)

y—f(i.1,i)

where i denotes investment in period t. Here past investment (which equals the period
capital stock, assuming complete depreciation each period23) enters through the effect of
the capital stock and hence capacity upon equilibrium supply, while the current investment

enters through the "multiplier effect of current investment spending upon aggregate
demand. The returns ç per unit of capital in period t depend upon the amount of capital in
place and the level of output that ends up being produced. Substituting (13) into this
relationship allows one to write
(14)

çg(i.j,i)

Finally, due to the special form of preferences assumed for the representative consumer, it
can be shown that in equilibrium the expected real return on all assets must alwaysequal a
constant

r. As a result, the level of investment chosen in equilibrium in period twill be

21OUer examples of economjes with infinite lived consumers in which financial constraints result in the
possibility of sunspot equilibria are discussed in my (1988a). Indeterminacy of equilibrium. endogenous

cycles, and sunspot equilibria in represenafive consumer monetaiy economies of the Sidrauski-Brock variety
are discussed in Matsuymna (1989a, l989c).

example was originally introduced in the lecture notes for this workshop, but the presentation here
has been greatly condensed due to spaa limitations.
23Complete depreciation is in no way essential to the logic of this example. The nie analysis applies if
in each equation one replaces i by the capital stock chosen for period t÷ 1. I have used the notation k only
to make it clear that this is a non-predetermined endogenous state variable determined in period t-

37
that level that results in an expected return on capital in the

following period that is exactly

equal to this desired return, so that

E[g(ii1)J —

(15)

Condition (IS) indicates how equilibrium investment in period t is

determined by

expectations regarding investment (and hence aggregate demand) in period t+l. This is an

equilibrium condition of the same form as (7), and an be analyzed in a similar manner.
Any stochastic process for (U that satisfies (15) at all times (and stays within certain
bounds assumed in deriving (15)) represents a rational expectations equilibrium; a
fluctuating solution represents an equilibrium in which investment spending fluctuates in

response to self-fulfilling expectations, and results in fluctuations in economic activity
through (13). Stationary fluctuating solutions to (15) exist, including finite-state Markov

process equilibria of the kind discussed byAzariadis and Guesnerie, if both the"multiplier
effect of iron Yt and the "accelerator" effect of expectations regarding Yt÷i on i are

sufficiently strong.24
Indetenninacy of rational expectations equilibrium and the possibility ofsunspot
equilibria in dynamic models with increasing returns and/or externalities have been

discussed by a number of recent authors (Hammour (1988), Spear (1988), Murphy eta!

(1988), Kehoe etd(l989), Matsuyaxna (1989b)). A slight modification ofa standard onesector growth model with a representative consumer an illustrate thispossibility. Let Y(K)
denote aggregate output, net of depreciation, when the aggregate capital stock is K, and let
R(K) denote the gross real return per unit of capital under the same circumstances. Then if
consumers are all identical and seek to maximize an infinite discounted sum of utilities

E_3p u(CJ, where 0< < I and u is an increasing concave function, intertemporal
optimization requires aconsumption plan satisfying
types ot" marlcd imperfections which allow fluctuations in aggregate demand for produced goods to
result in fluctuations in equilibrium labor demand, such as the oligopotistic model ofRotemberg and
Woodford (1989), also allow sunspot equilibria to exist wide certain omditions.

38
u'(C)

(16)

P R(K.1) EJu'(C+1)J

together with a transversality condition. The resulting evolution of the aggregate capital

stock will then be given by

(17)

K11 — Y(K) -

C

Any stochastic processes for { K, Cj satisfying (16) and (17) for given initial condition
K0, and with both variables forever bounded (so that the transversality condition is also
satisfied) will constitute a rational expectations equilibrium.

Now there will typically exist a steady state equilibrium for such an economy,

namely a pair (K, C') such that if K0 K, then a possible equilibrium is C Cs, iç
Kt, for all t. These quantities will satisfy the equations R(K') ', C

—

Y(K') - K'.

Under the assumptions that R'(K') * 0, Y'(K') * I, it can be shown that in the case of
any equilibrium in which and K remain sufficiently near to the steady state values in all
periods, the equilibrium is well approximated by a solution to the following linear
approximation to the system (16) - (17):

(18)

[EJCt+t.C*J1

ri-BR' BR'Y'l[Ct-C*
Y' iL1Ct-K*

[ K+1-K' J [ -1

Here B -u'(C'Yf(C'), and the derivatives R' andY' are evaluated at K'. It can be
shown furthermore (Woodford (1986c)25) that
(I) in the case that one elgenvalue of the matrix in (18) is real with modulus less
than one, and one is real with modulus greater than one--the case of"saddlepoint
stability" or "exact detenninacy" -- then there is a unique rational expectations
equilibrium in which the state variables remain forever near the steady state values,
for each choice of K3 sufficiently near K', and this equilibrium is in allcases

a x(K.), so that a
described by the same pair of functions C y(K),
representation of the form (5) -(6) exists. Furthermore, the functions y and care

such that in all cases this equilibrium converges asymptotically to the steady state
values of the state variables. Hence both determinacy theses are valid for this class
of equilibria, and no equilibS involving endogenous fluctuations are possible, at
least near the steady state values of the state variables.

(ii) in the case that both eigenvalues of the matrix in (18) have modulus less than
one--the case of "indeterminacy"-- then there exists a large set of rational

25 also my (1984) for a more elementary discussion of this classification of local dynamics.

39
expectations equilibria for each choice of K0 sufficiently near K,in which the
values of the state variables remain forever near their steady state values, including
a large set of stationary sunspot equilibria, where the stationarity of the latter
stochasticprocesses implies that the sunspot fluctuations do not die down in
amplitude asymptotically.
(iii) in the case that both elgenvalues of the matrix in (18) have modulus greater
than one -- the case of"instability" -- then for each choice of K0 sufficiently near
K*, with K0 # K, there exists no equilibrium in which the state variables remain
forever near their steady state values. It follows in addition that for most initial
conditions there exist no equilibria converging asymptotically to the steady state
values of the state variables, so that in this case the thesis of global asymptotic
determinacy must be invalid.

Finally, it can be seen that in the present example, assuming that Y'> 0, case (1) occurs if

It' c 0, case (ii) occurs ifR' >0 andY' C 1, and case (iii) occurs ifR'> 0 andY'> I.
Now in the standard neoclassical growth model, Y(K) - F(K), the production
function shared by all firms, and under the standard assumption of decreasing returns to
sale, or equivalently constant returns with a fixed factor (inelastically supplied labor), one

must have F' <0. The real rate of return in equilibrium is furthermore given by the

marginal product of capital, R(K) F(K). From this it follows that at the steady state
equilibrium, Y' — It—

'>

1, and It' — F"

<0, so that only case (i) is possible. (Since we

have already shown in section I that in this model, both detenninacy theses hold not just
locally but globally, this must be the case.)
But increasing returns and externalities and/or imperfect competition allow other

possibilities. I will discuss here the case of external increasing returns because of its

simplicity, but Hammour (1988) shows that similar possibilities arise in the case of
increasing returns internal to the firm combined with imperfect competition. Suppose that a

given firm's production function is y - F(k, K), where k is the capital used by that firm
and K is the aggregate capital stock. Then the first other condition for optimal capital

accumulation by each firm is R - FL(K, K), so that R(K) is no longer the derivative of
Y(K) — F(K, K). 1fF2 <0 (which Hammour interprets as a congestion externality), it is

possible to have Y' < I at the steady state despite the fact that one must have R

40

l> 1.26 And the second order condition for optimal capital accumulation is F11 < 0,
which no longer implies that one must have R' CO. If one has external increasing returns

despite decreasing returns for the individual firm, one may have B'> 0.27 Hence all three
cases are In general possible, and in particular case (ii) is possible, in which case sunspot
equilibria exist in which fluctuations of the consumption and capital accumulation paths

continue to occur forever in response to arbitrary random events.25 Kehoe eta! (1989)
show that similar effects can result from the presence of distorting taxes in a growth model.
In all of these examples, because they involve representative consume is, the existence of
sunspot equilibria is independent of assumptions regarding the existence of contingent
claims markets.

The sort of endogenous fluctuations that we have identified with determinate but
unstable equilibrium dynamics are also inconsistent with assumptions of optimization and
equilibrium, in at least certain special cases that are not so special as to be completely

without interest. The case that has been most studied is that of detenninistic optimal growth
models, which is to say perfectly competitive representative consumer economies with
decreasing returns to scale technologies. I have already shown in section I that in the case
of a one-sector technology and additively separable preferences for the representative

consumer, the thesis of global asymptotic determinacy is valid, ruling out detenninate but
26lmperfect competition can also drive a wedge between the real rate of return and the marginal product of
capital. For example, excess capacity due to Chamberlinian competition between finnscould also result in

R> V.

27Alternatively, It' > Omay result from increasing returns at the fins level, with an interior optimum
existing for the capital accumulation decision of the firm despite F11 >0 due to the fact that finns face
downward-sloping demand ants.

26Euilibrium may be indeterminate and sunspot equilibria may exist even when the local dynamics are not
"indeterminate" in the sense of case (ii). For example, even in the case of type (iii) local dynamics, all
perfect foresight equilibria beginning near the steady state may diverge from the steady state and be attracted
to an Invariant cucle that is "stable" in the sense of having a stable manifold that includes all points near it.
In such a case, perfect foresight equilibrium is indeterminate and sunspot equilibria exist see the discussion
of the Diamond model in Woodjord (1984). Hammour shows how examples of this kind can be constructed
for a continuous time variant of this model using the Hopf bifurcation theorem; similar techniques (see.
e.g., Reichuin (1986)) are available in the discretetime case. Similar cycles, with a similar implication for
indeterminacy and sunspot equilibria, are shown to be a possible consequence of the externalities and
lnaeasmg returns associated with a search technology for matching trading paztnets in Diamond and
Fudenberg (1989).

41
unstable dynamics. I have also already indicated that on the other hand, deterministic
equilibrium cycles and chaotic equilibrium dynamics are possible in the case of optimal

growth models with multi-sector technologies. But even in the case of relatively general

multi-sector technologies, stronmg conclusions are possible concerning asymptotic
dynamics if the represenative consumer does not discount fiztuie consumption very much.
Consider an n-sector growth model, in which n distinct capital goods in addition to

one or more consumption goods are produced using those same n capital goods together

with fixed factors such as inelastically supplied labor. Let V(k,, lç+) denote the maximum
possible level of single period utility of consumption in period t by the representative

consumer that is technologically feasible, given a vector of capital stocks k to use along

with the rixed factors, and given that at least a vector lç, of capital goods must be
produced. This function is defined on a set D of 2n-vecton (Ic., k+1) that represent
technologically feasible possibilities for the evolution of the capital stocks. Then because
competitive equilibrium must maximize the welfare of the representative consumer, given
an initial vector of capital stocks k0, the unique equilibrium allocation of resources

corresponds to the sequence of capital stocks (kj that maximizes E 'V(kt2 k.1)
subject to the constraint that (ks, k÷1) eD for all t, and given the initial condition k0. The
following result is of particular interest.

The TurnDike Theorem. Let V be increasing in its tint vector of arguments,
decreasing in its second vector of arguments, and strictly concave, and let D be

convex and compact. Then for given V and D, there exists a discount factor C
such that if the discount fictor of the representative consumer lies in the interval

j<< I,theequilibriumdynamicsaresuchthat
limk

where k* is the steady state capital stock, regardless of the value of k0.

This version of the theorem is due to Scheinkinan (1976); related theorems were first
proved for continuous time optimal growth models by McKenzie and Rockafeller (see

42
McKenzie (1986)). This result establishes a sense in which, if one believes that the case of
greatest empirical relevance is that in which consumers do not discount the future very
much, then the thesis of asymptotic global determinacy is a consequence of equilibrium

theory, even for multi-sector economies. While the proof ofthe result involves many
technicalities, the intuition is reasonably simple. A perpetually fluctuating path for the

vector of capital stocks does not achieve as high an avenge value of the strictly concave
objective function V, as does a constant vector of capital stocks which is near the long run
average vector in the fluctuating case. Hence in order to maximize the long run avenge
value of V. one would eventually move the vector of capital stocks to the value that
maximizes V(k, k) and keep it there, regardless of the initial condition. In the case that one
is maximizing a discounted sum, the initial condition matters, but if the discounting is
surnciently weak it is still optimal to move the vector of capital stocks asymptotically

toward a constant vector, the value of which involves a correction for the value of.
Despite the strength of this result, it is worth emphasizing that there are still many

ways in which endogenous fluctuations can occur in an optimal growth model. One is to
suppose that the rate of time discount is simply greater than is consistent with the turnpike

property. Indeed, Boldrin and Montrucchio (1986) prove an "anti-turnpike" result,
according to which any twice differentiable runction x mapping an n-dimensional compact,
convex set into itself corresponds to the equilibrium dynamics generated by some n-sector
optimal growth model satisfying the Scheinkman conditions, assuming that the discount

factor can be chosen arbitrarily in the interval 0< b < 1. It should also be noted that the

theorem says only that some j <1 exists for given V and D; this does not mean that for
arbitrarily close to 1, one cannot find a V and D satisfying the Scheinkman conditions for

which the turnpike property would not hold. One simply needs to rmd a V and D for which

is even higher; for further discussion of why this is possible, see Boldrin and Woodford

43
(i9gO).2 Finally, it should be noted that a <1 need not exist if V is not strictly concave.
While concavity isa standard assumption (albeit not the only case of possible empirical
interest, as discussed above), strict concavity is a bit more special. !n particular, in the case

of a multi-sector technology with constant returns to scale, strict concavity does not hold in
general, even though there are diminishing returns to capital in the sense that all sectors

require a fixed factor, as long as the number of distinct capital goods exceeds the number of
fixed factors, or the number of capital goods is as large as the number of fixed factors and
utility is linear in consumption. This is the basis of a famous counter-example due to
Weitzman (reported in Samuelson (1973)). Of course strict concavity can be achieved in

any such example by introducing even a very small amount of decreasing returns to scale;

but if the perturbation is small, the turnpike property will hold only for very low rates of
time preference. Hence it is not clear how empirically unrealistic are the technology and

preference specifications needed for endogenous cycles in optimal growth models.
Nonetheless, the known examples of really complex endogenous fluctuations in

optimal growth models, i.e., the examples of chaotic dynamics30, involve what seem to be
extremely high rates of time preference. Furthermore, the reliance upon complications that
become possible only in the case of multi-sector technologies may not be of practical

relevance for business cycle theory, given that the kind of fluctuations one seeks to explain
typically involve a large degree of co-movement between different types of investment,
rather than cyclical variations in the type of capital goods that are accumulated. A more
29Benhabib and Rustichini (1989) show how to consflct explicit examples of continuous-time models
with two capital goods sectors and a consumption sector (all Cobb-Douglas with constant returns) using the
two capital goods and inelastically supplied labor, in which equilibrium limit cycles exist, for rates of time
preference arbitrarily close to the rate of depreciation of capital. These examples do not satisfy the strict
concavity condition needed for the turnpike theorem, for the reason discussed Immediately below.
Nonetheless perturbations of these examples that make V strictly concave should be possible that preserve
the limit cycles while keeping the rate of time preference within a neighborhood of desired size of the
depreciation rate.
30These are of greater interest than the examples of detenninistic cycles, not only because observed
aggregate fluctuations are not close to being exactly repetitive, but also because many of the examples of
deterministic cycles simply establish the possibility of a bifurcation creating a deterministic cycle of very
small amplitude in a neighborhood of the steady state. The examples of chaos necessarily involve
fluctuations of a larger amplitude insofar as a greater degree of nonlinearity in the dynamics is required.

44
Important quail fltion to the turnpike theorem may accordingly be that, like the sunspot

irrelevance theorem, it has little relevance once one admits the existence of market

imperfections of any of a variety of kinds.
All of the kinds of market imperfections just discussed in connection with sunspot
equilibria are also conditions which can result in failure of the turnpike pxoperty.3' I will

here discuss only a very simple example, that shows how determinate but unstable
dynamics, including possibly chaotic dynamics, can arise in a growth model with a simple
one-sector technology, and even in the case of arbitrarily low rates of time preference on

the part of all consumers, if one abandons the assumption of complete rmancw markets.
Consider again the one-sector growth model of section I, but now suppose that there are
two types of infinite lived consumers, "entrepreneurs" who alone are able to invest in

capital, hire labor and organize production, and "workers" who alone supply labor. (Some
sort of consumer heterogeneity must be introduced, or financial markets have no effect

upon equilibrium.32) The assumption that consumers are heterogeneous does not in itself
allow for more complex dynamics, if there are complete financial markets, for in that case a
competitive equilibrium still must maximize a weighted sum of the utilities of consumption

of the two consumer types.33 But suppose also that entrepreneurs are unable to finance
investment other than out of their own funds, owing to adverse selection or moral hazard

problems.34 Then the capital stock kft1 carried into period t+l an never be larger than the
31See Boldrin and Woodford (1990). The models discussed above in which financial constraints result in a
role for fiat money obviously allow for determinstic equilibria that cycle forever, given that they can
generate price level dynamics that exactly replicate those of the Grandmont (1985) model. However, these
are not examples of detenninate but unstable dynsn.ics the equilibrium cycles an a manifestation of the
indeterminacy of equilibrium, and equilibria converging to they state generally exist among others.
The Hainmour (1 988a) example of deterministic motion on an invariant cycle, discussed in footnote 34
above, is also necessarily associated with indetenninacy of equilibrium, but this case does to some extent
involve intrinsically unstable dynamics, insofar as for almost all initial conditions there ate no equilibria
converging to the steady state.
32Bewley (1986) shows how deterministic equilibrium cyclesmay be possible in a model with two infinite
lived consumer types when no borrowing and lending are possible, where the beterogeneity has to do with
the timing of the consumers' endowments.
33Bewley (1982) and Yano (1984) provide turnpike theorems for economies with multipleconsumer types.
34Oreenwald and Stiglitz (1988) argue for the importance of financial constraints of this kind in the
generation and propagation of awegaze fluctuation The generalized model discussed below, in which non-

45
wealth of the entrepreneurs, which in turn can never be larger than thegross returns to the

existing capital stock, kF(kJ, where F(k) denotes aggregate production given a capital
stock k and the exogenous labor supply. Now if F is a sufficientlyconcave flmction (i.e.,
if there is not too much factor substitutability in production), kF(k) is decreasing in k, for
large k. As a result, large values of lçwill result in conditions that force lç+, to be low. One
case that is particularly simple to analyze is that in which the entrepreneurs have logarithmic

utility, in which case they consume exactly a fraction (1-5) of their wealth each period,
reganiless of the expected return on savings. Then the capital stock evolves according to

5kF(lç)
In the event that F is sufficiently concave, this map has a graph of the kind shown in Figure
I, and can result in an unstable steady slate and equilibrium paths that converge to a
deterministic cycle or that are even chaotic. The conditions for this tooccur in no way

depend upon a low value of for the entrepreneurs; indeed, for a given production
function F, raising makes the hump in Figure 1 steeper, making the steady state more
unstable and allowing more complex fluctuations. Nor do they have anything to do with the
rate of time preference of the workers.

In my ( 1989a) this example is extended to allow for endogenous labor supply and a
competitive market for debt issued by entrpreneurs and held by workers. Complete

fucial markets still do not exist if one assumes the existence of firm-specific productivity
shocks, that have no effect upon aggregate production possibilities because of the existence

of a continuum of firms with independent shocks, and that cannot be insured against
because their realization is private information. That is, entrepreneurs can finance

investment by issuing straight debt securities, but cannot issue securities contingentupon
the uncertain events that will affect the return upon that investment. Insolvency risk then
limits the extent to which entrepreneurs are willing to leverage themselves in order to invest
contingent debt contracts are possible but not seCurities contingent
closely with their analysis.

firm-specific risk, coincides

46
in ph>ical capital, even when the expected return on capital exceeds the real tate of return
at which they can borrow. As a result entrepreneurial wealth continues to be an important
determinant of the level of investment, making unstable dynamics possible in a similar

way.
My overall conclusion about the two types of models of endogenous fluctuations is
roughly the same. The most plausible conditions under which either sunspot equilibria or
determinate but unstable dynamics can occur would seem to be conditions under which

such equilibria are possible only because of market imperfections. As a result, endogenous
fluctuations of these kinds, if they occur, will indicate an inefficient phenomenon and a
flaw in the functioning of the competitive mechanism, even if it does not follow from that
that an intervention that succeeds in eliminating the endogenous fluctuations must

necessarily bring about an improvement. On the other hand, it is important to note that
equilibria of these kinds can result from a variety of kinds of market imperfections that are

often argued to be of importance for macroeconomics, and that-- once these imperfections
are granted -- the existence of the endogenous fluctuations is fully consistent with

optimizing behavior, rational expectations, and equilibrium. Whether these theoretical
possibilities are of any practical importance in explainingaggregate fluctuations will, of

course, depend upon the constnctjon of examples that are not only logically coherent, but
whose assumptions (including quantitative assumptions about parameter values) are
empirically realistic and whose predictions match actual time series.35

35For crude but illustrative examples of discussion of the empirical reaJism of the parametn values required
for endogenous fluctuapj
to exist, and comparison of quantitative properties of the predicted fluctuations
to actual business cycles, see my (1988a, 198th).

47
REFERENCES
Abel, A.B., N.G. Mankiw, LH. Summers, and LI. Zeckhauser [1986], "Assessing
Dynamic Effidency Theory and Evidence," NBER w.p. 2097, December.
Azariadis, C.

(1981], "Self-Fulfilling Prophecies,"

Journal of Economic Theory25: 380-

396.

_______ and It Guesnerie [1982], "Propheties Creatrices ci Persistance des Theories,"

Revue Economique 33: 787-806.

________ and ________ (1986], "Sunspots and Cycles," Review of Economic Studies
53: 725-736.

Balasko, Y. [19841, "Extrinsic Uncertainty Revisited," Journal ofEconomk Theory
31: 203-210.

________ and K. Shell [1980], "The Overlapping Generations Model, I: The Case of Pure
Exchange Without Money," Journal of Economic Theosy23: 307-322.
Barro,

It [1974], "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Folidai Economy 82:
1095-1118.

Benhabib, I.,

and K. Nishimura 11979], "The Hopf Bifurcation and the Existence and
Stability of Closed Orbits in Multisector Models of Optimal Economic Growth,"
Journal of Economic Theory 21:421-444.

_______ and _______ (1985], "Competitive Equilibrium Cycles," Journal of Economic
Theory3S: 284-306.
Benhabib, J., and A. Rustichini 119891, "Equilibrium Cycling with Small Discounting: A
Note," unpublished, New York University, May.

Bewley, 1. [19821, "An Integration of Equilibrium Theory and Turnpike Theory," Journal
ofMathematicai Economics 10:233-268.

________ [19861, "Dynamic Implications ofthe Form of the Budget Constraint," in H.F.
Sonnenschein, ed., Models of Economic Dynamics, New Yorlc Springer-Verlag.
Boldrin, M. (1989], "Paths of Optimal Accurnulation

in Two-Sector Models," in W.A.
Barnett, J. Geweke, and K. Shell, eds., Economic Complexity Chaos, Sunspots,
Bubbles, and Nonlinearity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

_______ and L. Montrucchio (1986], "On the Indeterminacy of Capital Accumulation
Paths," Journal of Economic Theoay4o: 26-39.

_____and M. Woodford [19901, "Equilibrium Models Displaying Endogenous
Fluctuations and Chaos: A Survey," forthcoming, Journal of Monetary Economics.
Cass, D., and K. Shell (1983], "Do Sunspots Matte??" Journal of PolidcsJ Economy9 1:
193-227 (1983).

48
_______and _______ [19891. "Sunspot Equilibrium in an Overlapping Generations

Economy with an Idealized Contingent-Claims Market," in WA. Barnett, I.
Geweke, and K. SbelI, eds. Economic Complexity: Chaos, Sunspots, Bubbles,
and Nonlinearity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Chiappori, P.-A., and It Guesnerie (1988]. "Self-Fulfilling Theories: The Sunspot
Connection," unpublished, Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales, Paris.
Diamond, PA. [1982], "Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium," Journal
of Political Economy 90: 881-894.

_______ and D. Fudenberg [19891, "An Example of Rational Expectations Business
Cycles in Search Equilibrium," Journal of Political Economy97: 606-619.

Farmer, R.E.A., and M. Woodford [19841, "Self-Fulfilling Prophecies and the Business
Cycle," CARESS w.p. no. 84-12, University of Pennsylvania, April. Published in
Spanish translation in Cuadernos Economicos de ICE (Madrid!, no. 35, 1987.
Grandmont, J.-M. [1985], "On Endogenous Competitive Business Cycles," Econometrica
53: 995-1046.
Greenwald, B.C., and I.E. Stiglitz 119881, "Imperfect Information, Financial Constraints,
and Business fluctuations," in M. Kohn and S.-C. Tsiang, eds., Finance
Constmints, Expectations, and Macroecon omics, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Guesnerie, R., and J.-J. Laffont 119881, "Notes on Sunspot Equilibria in Finite Horizon
Models," unpublished, Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociaies, Paris, July.

Hall, RE. 119891, "Temporal Agglomeration," NBER w.p. no.3143, October.
Hammour, M. [19881, "Increasing Returns and Endogenous Business Cycles,"
unpublished, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, October.
Howitt, P., and R.P. McAfee [19881, "Stabilityof Equilibria with Trade-Externalities,"
QuarterlyJournai of Economics 103: 26 1-277.

Kehoe, Ti., D.K. Levine, and P.M. Romer [19891, "Characterizing Equilibria of Models
with Externalities and Taxes as Solutions to Optimintion Problems," unpublished,
Research Dept., Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, April.
Lucas, RE., Jr., and N.L. Stokey 119871, "Money and Interest in a Cash-in-Advance
Economy," Econometrics 55: 491-5 14.
McCallum, B.T. [1983], "On Non-uniqueness in Rational Expectations Model& An
Attempt at Perspective," Journal ofMonetazyEconomics 11: 139-168.

Maskin, E., and I. Tirole [19891, "Markov Equilibrium," unpublished, Harvard
University.
Matsuyarna, K. [1 989aJ, "Endogenous Price fluctuations in an Optimizing Model of a
Monetary Economy," CMSEMS disc, paper no. 825, Northwestern University,

49
_______ [1989b], "Increasing Returns, Industrialization, and Indeterminacy Of
Equilibrium," unpublished, Northwestern University, June.
[1989c], "Serial Correlation of Sunspot Equilibria (Rational Bubbles) in Two
Popular Models of Monetary Economies," CMSEMS disc, paper no. 827,
Northwestern University, July.
May, R.B. [1976], "Simple Mathematical Models with Very Complicated Dynamics,"

Natwr26l: 459-467.

McKenzie, L.W. [1986J, "Optimal Economic Growth, Turnpike Theorems, and
Comparative Dynamics," in K.J. Arrow and M.D. Intriligator, eds., Handbook of
Mathenzatical Economic, vol.11!, Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Murphy, K.M., A. Shleifer, and R.W. Vishny [1988], "Increasing Returns, Durables, and
Economic Fluctuations," unpublished. University of Chicago, October.

________ ________ and ________ [19891, "Building Blocks of Market Clearing
Business Cycle Models," in S. Fischer, ed., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989,
Cambridge: M.I.T. Press.
Reichlin, P. [19861, "Equilibrium Cycles in an Overlapping Generations Economy with
Production," Journal of Economic Theory4O: 89-102.

Rogerson, It [19881, "Indivisible Labor, Lotteries, and Equilibrium," Jounzai of Monetary
Economics2l: 3-16 (1988).
Romer, P. [19861, "Increasing Returns and Long Term Growth," Journal of Political
Economy94: 1002-1037.

Rotemberg, I., and M. Woodford[l989], "Oligopolistic Pricing and the Effects of
Aggregate Demand on Economic Activity," unpublished, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, November.
Samuelson, P.A. [1957], "Intertemporal Price Equilibrium: A Prologue to the Theory of
Speculation," Weltwinschafthiches A.tcbiv 79: 181-219.

________ [19731, "Optimality of Profit, Including Prices under Ideal Planning,"
Proceedings ofthcNationalAcademyofscicnces(USA]70: 2109-2111(1973).
Sargent, Ti [1987], Dynamic Macroeconomic Theory, Cambridge: Harvard University

Press.

Scheinkman, J,A. [19761, "On Optimal Steady States of n-Sector Growth Models when
Utility is Discounted," Journal of Economic Theory 12: 11-30.
Shell, K [1977], "Monnaje et Allocation Intertemporefle," mijneo, Seminaire de E.
Malinvaud, Paris, November.

Shiller, RJ. [1978], "Rational Expectations and the Dynamic Stnicture of Macroeconomic
Models," Journal of Monetary Economics4: 1-44 (1978).

Spear, S.E. [1988], "Growth, Externalities, and Sunspots," unpublished, Carnegie-Mellon
University, May.

50
Townsend, KM. [1980), "Models of Money with Spatially Separated Agents," in J.H.
Kareken and N. Wallace, eds., Models ofMonetary Economies, Minneapolis:
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Woodford, M. [1984], "Indeterminacy of Equilibrium in the Overlapping Generations
Model: A Survey," unpublished, Columbia University, May.

_______

1986aJ, "Stationary Sunspot Equilibria in a Finance Constrained Economy,"
.Tourna) of Economic Theory4O: 128-137.

________ [I 986b), "Asset Bubbles and Fiat Money," unpublished, University of Chicago,
August.

_______ [1986c1, "Stationary Sunspot Equilibria: The Case of Small fluctuations Around
a Deterministic Steady State," unpublished, September.

________ 119871, "Fhree Questions About Sunspot Equilibria as an Explanation of
Economic fluctuations," American Economic Review77-2: 938-42.
________ El 988a], "Expectations, Finance, and Aggregate Instability," in M. Kohn and
5.-C. Tsiang, eds., Finance Constmints, Expectations, and Macroeconomics,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

_______ [l988b], "Self Fulfilling Expectations and Fluctuations in Aggregate Demand,"
unpublished, University of Chicago, May.

________ [1988c], "Monetary Policy and Price Level Determinacy in a Cash-in-Advance
Economy," unpublished, University of Chicago, December.
________ [1989a1, 'imperfect Financial Intermediation and Complex Dynamics," in W.A.
Barnett, I. Geweke, and K. Shell, eds., Economic Complexity Q,aos, Sunspots,
Bubbles, and Nonlinearity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

________ [1989b], "Learning to Believe in Sunspots," forthcoming, Econometric.a.
Yano, M. [1984], "The Turnpike of Dynamic General Equilibrium Paths and its
Insensitivity to Initial Conditions," found ofMathcmatiai Economics 13: 235254.

