                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE STOCK MARKET, PROFIT AND INVESTMENT




                               Olivier Blanchard

                                Changyong Rhee

                               Lawrence Summers




                            Working Paper No. 3370




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   May 1990




We thank the NSF for financial support, Robert Barro, Ben Bernanke, Peter
Boone, Yeeyoung Song and Lawrence Katz for useful discussions. This paper is
part of NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        Working Paper #3370
                                        May 1990


                    THE STOCK MARKET, PROFIT AND INVESTMENT


                                   ABSTRACT


     Should managers, when making investment decisions, follow the signals
given by the stock market even if those do not coincide with their own
assessments of fundamental value? This paper reviews the theoretical arguments
and examines the empirical evidence, constructing and using a new US time
series of data on the q ratio from 1900 to 1988. We decompose q - - the ratio
of the market value of corporate capital to its replacement cost - - into the
product of two terms, reflecting "fundamentals" and "valuation", the ratio of
market value to fundamentals. We then examine the relation of investment to
each of the two, using a number of alternative proxies for fundamentals. We
interpret our results as pointing, strongly but not overwhelmingly, to a larger
role of "fundamentals" than of "valuation" in investment decisions.




Olivier Blanchard         Changyong Rhee             Lawrence Summers
MIT                       University of Rochester    Harvard University
Department of Economics   Department of Economics    Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive         Rochester, NY 14627        Littauer 229
Cambridge, MA 02139                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   3




  In recent years economists have started to take seriously the idea that

the stock market does not always provide the best available estimate of

fundamental value. Theoretical and empirical studies along with the Crash

of 1987 have led to an upsurge of interest in theories of market

fluctuations that emphasize the role of poorly informed traders or bubbles.

If market movements do not all reflect changes in fundamental value, it is

natural to ask whether the economic response to market movements will

differ depending on their cause. This question takes on particular

importance in light of the failure of the collapse of investment, widely

predicted after the 1987 Crash, to materialize. This paper tries to sort

out the theoretical and empirical evidence on whether and how investment

responds to changes in fundamentals and in market value.

   In Section I, we take up the following question. Should managers, in

making investment decisions, follow --always, sometimes, never-- the

signals given by the stock market, or more precisely by q, the vaiuation of

their capital by the asset markets, even if their own valuation of those

investment projects does not coincide with the stock market's valuation?

This question takes on considerable importance given that there is

considerable evidence suggesting that stock prices may often deviate from

fundamental values. Bosworth (1975) argued that firms should disregard the

market when they think it is wrong. Fischer and Merton (1984) in contrast

argued that firms should respond to the market valuation, even if they do

not agree with it. We reexamine the question and conclude that neither

extreme theoretical view gives correct guidance to managers.   Furthermore,
                                    4

actual managerial behavior is an empirical question. We therefore turn to

the data.

   In Section II, we describe the data and layout our basic empirical

approach. We look at data for the US from 1900 to 1988; one of the

contributions of this paper is to construct a series for q for that period.

Our basic strategy is then to think of q as the product of two terms,

"fundamentals" -the expected present discounted value of profits- and

"valuation" -the ratio of the market value to fundamentals-, and to see

whether investment responds equally to both. If fundamentals were

observable, then testing whether investment is driven by market or

managerial perceptions would be straightforward: the first implies that

only fundamentals should matter, while the second implies that both terms

matter equally. The obvious problem is that fundamentals are not

observable, and one must rely on proxies. We explore two different

approaches.

  The first, developed in Sections III to V, relies on the use of proxies

for fundamentals in the investment equation. In Section III, we use

current dividends as a proxy for fundamentals. The rationale for using

dividends traces back to the work of Lintner (1956), and is based on the

idea that managers set dividends in line with their perceptions of

permanent earnings. In Section IV, we construct a series for the expected

present discounted value of profits under the assumption of rational

expectations; we do so by constructing the realized present discounted

value of profits and by projecting it on a set of instruments. Under both

approaches, the evidence is that firms react to both components of q, to
                                    5

fundamentals as well as to valuation, the ratio of market value to

fundamentals. Point estimates imply a stronger effect of fundamentals; the

difference is not however statistically significant.

  Both sets of results are however likely to suffer from a systematic bias

in the coefficients. The use of a proxy for fundamentals implies that some

information about fundamentals will be contained in the term we use to

measure valuation -the ratio of market value to our proxy for fundamentals.

Intuition suggests that this will lead to an underestimate of the

difference between the effects of fundamentals and valuation. In Section

V1 we formalize this intuition and characterize the size of the bias in

that difference as a function of how much information about fundamentals is

actually contained in the term we construct to measure valuation. We

conclude that under plausible assunptions, the bias may be substantial. If

so, our empirical results can be interpreted as suggesting a substantially

and significantly stronger effect of fundamentals than valuation on

investment.

  Our second approach, developed in Section VI, looks instead at two

specific episodes, the periods around the market crashes of 1929 and of

1987. It relies on the idea that, during those episodes, there was

widespread suspicion that the market value diverged from fundamentals.

Thus, if investment decisions depend mostly on fundamentals, one would

expect the relation between investment and market value to be weaker during

those periods. If instead investment decisions depend equally on

fundamentals and valuation, these episodes should not look abnormal.

Examination of the two episodes yields different conclusions. The 1929
                                   6

period just does not fit any simple hypothesis. The 1987 experience is

consistent with the idea that firms ignored valuation and followed

fundamentals. This finding in turn explains why the crash of 1987 was not

followed by a substantial fall in investment.
                                        7

Section I. The stock market and investment



   Should we expect a tight relation between investment and the stock

market? It is useful to start with an admittedly irrelevant but simple

benchmark case. Suppose that the profit function were linear in capital,

that firms had stable adjustment cost functions for capital, that managers

and asset market participants had access to the same information set and

that asset markets valued firms at their fundamental value. Then, it is

well known, from Hayashi (1982), that the ratio of investment to capital --

investment   for short- -   and the ratio of the market value of the firm to the

replacement cost of capital - -q for short-- would move together, both

responding in the same way to expectations of profits and required rates of

return. q would not cause investment in any useful sense, although

managers would probably find it convenient to rely in part on the valuation

performed in asset markets.

   A more interesting question arises when we allow for the possibility

that the valuation of investment projects by the managers of firms and the

market valuation of existing capital do not coincide. There is one well

known reason why this might be so, which is referred to in the literature

as the difference between marginal q, the shadow value of additional

capital, and average q, the value of existing capital. The two will be

different whenever marginal profit and average profit are different; the

classic example is an energy price shock that renders old capital

unprofitable to operate but encourages energy conserving investment. Other

cases include non constant returns in production, rents to non
                                    8

reproducible factors, rents in non competitive goods or factor markets, or

features of the tax system1. In our discussion, we leave this issue aside,

implicitly assuming marginal and average profit to be the same, in order to

focus on the issue we are concerned with, namely differences in the

valuation of a given investment project by managers and the market.

  We thus rephrase our question as: what should managers do if their

valuation of an investment project differs from that of the market? There

are three reasons why this may be so, and all three have been examined at

length in the recent literature. First, the market may have less

information than managers. Second, even if information sets are the same,

the market may not value assets at their fundamental value, and market

valuation includes a rational speculative bubble. Prices are high relative

to fundamentals simply because they are expected to increase, or low simply

because they are expected to decrease (Blanchard and Watson 1982). Third,

the market may be subject to fads which cause market valuation to deviate

from fundamentals for long periods of time. Although the expected excess

return from buy low-sell high strategies is positive, it is sufficiently

small and the risk sufficiently large that the market does not eliminate

the deviation (DeLong, Shleifer, Suinniers, and Waidman (1987)). Suppose

that for any of these reasons, the market value deviates from the managers'

evaluation of fundamentals. What should a manager then do? Should it

react differently depending on why the two differ?




  See Hayashi (1982), Abel and Blanchard (1986).
                                         9

   A first answer to that question was given by gosworth (1975), who argued

that managers should simply ignore the sideshow provided by the stock

market and act upon fundamentals as they perceived it. To discuss his and

other arguments, it will be convenient to rely on the special case of risk

neutrality and no costs of adjustment. For that case, define q as the

ratio of the market valuation to the replacement cost of capital, and q (m

for managers) as the present discounted value of marginal profits, as

assessed by managers, discounted at the riskiess rate. In that case,

Bosworth argues, managers should invest to the point where the marginal

product is equal to the riskiess rate, or equivalently where q 1,

whether or not at that point this is also true of q, the stock market

valuation.



   The argument would be correct if the stock market was indeed purely a

sideshow- -   that   is if its only function was to value existing projects and

if existing shareowners never sold their shares-- In this case, the firm

would finance itself by borrowing at the riskless rate and it would be

acting in the interests of its owners by ignoring the stock market's

assessment      But the stock market is also a market where firms can issue

new shares and where existing sharehowners can realize capital gains by

selling to potential buyers; the price that the market puts on these shares

is therefore relevant for investment decisions. The possibility of new

share issues was emphasized by Keynes (1936, p151), and was the initial

motivation given by Tobin for the q theory. It underlies the second answer
                                   10

to the investment-stock market relation, an answer articulated by Fischer

and Merton (1984). Fischer and Merton argued that investment decisions

should be based on the stock market valuation. Their argument is simple:

if the market is ready to accept a lower rate of return, the firm should

then invest until the marginal product of capital is equal to that rate of

return. In the case introduced above, assume that investment has proceeded

to the point where q is equal to 1. If, at that point, q exceeds 1 and

the market is ready to pay more than 1 for a share, the firm should issue

new shares and invest until q itself has been driven down to 1. At that

point q , as assessed by managers, will be less than 1, reflecting the

decrease in the marginal product of capital. But existing shareholders

will have made a profit on each new share which has been issued. Driving

investment to the point where the market valuation of capital is equal to

its replacement cost maximizes the wealth of existing shareholders. Thus,

Fischer and Merton argue, investment should respond to stock market

movements, whether or not these movements reflect managers' assessments of

fundamentals. This however is not the end of the story, and there are at

least three reasons why the Fischer-Merton argument is incomplete.

  First, within the logic of the argument, the best strategy for the firm

is indeed to issue new shares, but to use the proceeds not for physical

investment, but for lending at the riskiess rate, for example to buy

Treasury Bills. This is because investing in additional capital drives

down its marginal product below the riskiess rate, while lending at the

riskless rate is equivalent to investing in a constant returns technology.

Indeed, pushing this argument to its logical conclusion, the optimal
                                   11

 strategy if q exceeds q must be to issue an infinite amount of shares and

 invest the proceeds in the riskiess asset... But this leads to the second

 argument.

    The difference between q and q is unlikely to be invariant to the

actions of the firm, for example, the issue of new shares and the decision

whether to use the proceeds to buy Treasury bills or for physical

investment. Here, knowing why q and q differ is important. If the

difference comes from differences in information, one would expect issues

of new shares and the use of the proceeds to play the role of signals, and

to affect the market valuation. If the difference comes from speculative

bubbles or fads, we have no theoretical guidance as to what the action of

the firm may do to the difference between q and q .   Seeing a firm issue
new shares and use the proceeds to invest in outside opportunities might

well prick a bubble. Put another way, the bubble may be on the capital of

the firm than on the firm itself. For all those reasons, a firm may be

reluctant to change its investment plans to take account of what it

perceives as erratic differences between q and q 2

   Third, while the current shareholders benefit from the issuance of new

shares, it is clear that the issue of new shares by itself represents a

pure transfer. From whom the transfer comes depends again on why q and

differ. In the case of better information on the part of managers or in

the case of fads, the transfer is from the new shareholders to the existing



2 This paragraph summarizes the essential conclusion of a large literature
on the adverse signalling effects of new equity issues. See for example
Myers and Majluf (1984).
                                   12

ones. In the case of rational bubbles, the transfer is from future buyers

of the shares to existing shareholders: new shareholders are not worse off

in expected value, as they rationally expect to recover the high purchase

price by selling at an even higher price to others in the future. In

addition, in the case of fads, if the money from new share issues is used

for physical investment driving the marginal product down, the set of

existing and new shareholders as a whole is unambiguously worse off as a

result. Thus, the managers, who will in time be responsible to the new as

well as the old shareholders may be reluctant to engage in such behavior.

  While our discussion of the Fischer-Merton argunient has proceeded under

the assumption that firms were issuing new shares, similar issues arise

even when issuing or repurchasing shares is not an option. In that case,

current shareholders will realize their gains only if and when they sell

their own shares. Thus, what managers should do will depend both on their

perceptions of how long they expect market value to deviate from

fundamentals, and on how long they expect their shareholders to hold on to

their shares. Put another way, managers who are primarily concerned with

their long term shareholders should follow their own judgexnents rather than

the market's judgement in evaluating investment projects. But managers of

firms whose shareholders have short horizons should follow Fischer and

Merton and invest in relation to market valuation. They may indeed have a

strong incentive to do so to the extent that managerial compensation

(broadly defined) is tied in part to the market's judgement of their

performance.
                                    13

  Thus, when all is said and done, theory does not provide an unambiguous

answer as to whether firms should invest be based on market or managerial

perceptions.   We therefore turn to the data.




Section II. Methodology and data



The investment equation.

  We introduced a simple benchmark at the beginning of the previous

section. We assumed that marginal and average profit were equal, that

managers and the market had similar information sets, and that there was no

arbitrage failure and no bubbles. Under that benchmark, investment

depended on the expected present discounted value of profits accruing to an

additional unit of capital. The equality of marginal and average profit

implied in turn that this expected present discounted value of marginal

profits was equal to (F/K), where F, "fundamentals", was the expected

present discounted value of profits accruing to current capital. Finally,

our assumptions about asset markets implied that (F/K) would also be equal

to (V/K), where V was the market value of current capital.

  While maintaining the assumptions that marginal and average profit were

equal, we then allowed for either different information sets, or failures

of arbitrage, or bubbles. There was then no longer any reason to expect

(F/K), the managers' perception of the present discounted value of future

profits to equal (V/K), the market valuation, and the question became that

of whether managers would respond to (F/K) or/and to (V/K).
                                    14




  This motivates our basic approach to the investment equation. Note that

q can be written as the product of the two terms, (F/K), "fundamentals",

and (V/F), "valuation", the ratio of market value to fundamentals:

(1) q — (V/K) — (F/K)(V/F)
  This in turn suggests the following specification of the investment

equation, which allows both components of q to enter separately:

(2) ln(I/K) — c + a(L) ln(F/K) +   b(L)   ln(V/F) +   E



  Suppose that fundamentals, F, were observable. Then estimation of (2)

would be straightforward. The managerial perceptions hypothesis that firms

respond only to fundamentals as they perceive them would correspond to

b(L)—O. The alternative market perception hypothesis that firms respond to

movements in q no matter their source would correspond to a(L)b(L); a

weaker form of the hypothesis might be a(l)—b(l), that the sum of

coefficients on the fundamental and the valuation terms were equal.

  The obvious problem is that F is not observable. This leads us to follow

two complementary approaches. The first is to use an observable proxy for

F and estimate equation (2). In Section III, we assume that F is simply

proportional to dividends, D.   In Section IV, we construct F as the

projection of the ex post present discounted value of profits on

information available as of the time of the investment decision.     The use

of a proxy for fundamentals leads however to a systematic bias in the

coefficients. The nature of the bias as well as its potential size are the

subject of Section V. Our second approach focuses instead on specific

episodes. It is based on the idea that, at a few times in the past, 1929,
                                   15

1987, there has been widespread suspicion of deviations of the market value

from fundamentals; we therefore regress investment on q, thus forcing the

coefficients on valuation and fundamentals to be same, and examine the

residuals of the equation during those episodes.



The data

  We decided that the best data set for our purposes would be a long data

set, in which we could characterize the basic relation of investment to q,

profit, dividends and capital. Therefore we focused on annual data for the

US since 1900. This implied the construction of a q series for the period

1900 to 1958 (as a q series already exists post 1958). The details of

construction, as well as the q series for 1900-1988, are given in appendix

1. The appendix also gives sources for the other series used in

estimation. Series for profit are only available since 1916; all other

series are available from 1900 on. In all cases, we have tried to

construct variables which correspond to the private non financial corporate

sector of the economy.



  The basic time series are plotted in three sets of figures. Figure la

plots the ratio of investment to capital, (I/K), against q, the market



   We have also looked at the period 1952-1988 for which quarterly data
exist and thus quarterly regressions can be run. Another advantage of
looking at postwar data is that the information needed to go from the
differences between marginal and average q due to the tax system is
available. Because those data have already been examined at length by
other researchers, we do not report the results here. The results are in
general very similar to those reported in the text for the postwar sample,
using annual data and no tax correction.
         0
         11.3   I')   0                    0   'J
                                           I                    2                              0
                                           r.J.
                                                                I            I             I

                                      0
    m                                                                                  -
                                      U)


                                      0
H                                D
    "I
    a)
                                 I-
                                                                                                   S.-
    1
                                                                                                   :iz
                                 zD                                                                CD


    -t                                                                                             0
                                 CD


                                                                                                   CD
    U'
    a)
                                CD
                                                                                                   00
    C)
                                0                                        -
-   0)
C                               0,
C


    0)
                                                                                                   11
                                                    4————
1cD                              11
P0)
                                LD

                                                            I       I            I


                          (.3                                       -J           l.D
                                                   0
    —    0                      PU                 IPs)        0)
                                .                          .

    I                                                     •1   I    I
         -                                .
—                                             0
               ===.—_——=—--_-
-                                             U'

-
             ___




                                     .5
    II
                       0        —                            0                                         '4       0)    S..
                                                             IF.)            2       UI
                   0   0        0         0                  N)
                                                                     I       I       I        I        I          I
0
     -J                                               0)

     F',                                              F.,
                                                      0
     F.,
                                               C      F.-,
     UI                                        —S     2
                                                      F')
I    '                                         '--S   CD
                                                                                                                            -.5-
                                                      U
     1                                                I')
                                                      U
                                                      C)
     -J                                        :iz
                                                      2'
                                                                                 zTI!1                                      z
                                                                                                                            C
     2                                         0      0
     £                                         ci     2                                                                     -o
     UI
                                                      2
                                               —S
     2                                         -U     2
                                                      CD
                                                                                                                            0
     S.D                                                                                                                    -Ti
                                                      1JI        -
     U)                                        0      F.,
     U                                         '1                                                                           -4
                                                      U)                                                                    '-.5
     UI                                        -i     0)
     '4                                        -1
                                               '-.5   C)
     0)                                               0
                                                      C)                                                                    -S
     0)                                                                                                                     CD
     U)
                                                      U)                                                                    I-.
     0)                                               01                                                                    a)
     5.0
                                               CD      -4    .
C    '4                                               '4                                                                    c
-v   s                                         '-.3    -4                                                                   0,
     -1                                               01
     -4
                                               CD     CD
     0)                                        CD     0
                                                      0)
     0)                                                2'
                                                       01
                                                       CD
                                                                                                                             5
                                                                                          I       I         I                 5%

                                                 c           0
                                    (4)
           0'I-)           'S             -4     ,%                      2       0        £       0)
                                                                                                            -'4       - (J
           N)
                                    16

value of capital divided by replacement cost. Figure lb does the same for

first differences of (I/K) and q. Figure 2a plots (I/K), this time against

the ratio of dividends to capital, (D/K) and figure 2b plots first

differences. Finally figure 3a plots (I/K) against the ratio of after tax

profits to capital, (fl/K), and figure 3b plots first differences ; because

profit series are not available pre 1916, figure 3 covers only 1916-1988.

  Three characteristics emerge from these figures.

  First, the series for q confirms the picture of q given by postwar data

(see for example Summers 1981). Just as there is the puzzle of why q was

so low (absolutely, and in relation to investment) in the 1970's, there is

the puzzle of why q was so low in the 10's and 20's. The crash of 1929 and

its after-effects are clearly visible: q decreases sharply from a high of

1.25 in 1929 to a low of .35 in 1932. But perhaps the most surprising

feature of the q series is its sharp rebound from 1932 to 1936, so that by

1936, q stands at its highest value for the period 1900-1988. This comes

from both a sharp increase in the stock market and -in contrast to other

sharp movements in q over the period- a sharp decrease in the nominal value

of the capital stock. The Cowles Commission index of stock price increases

from 48 in 1932 to lii in 1936. With gross investment being close to zero

from 1930 to 1933, the capital stock of the non financial corporate sector

decreases from 121 billion dollars in 1929 to 95 billion dollars in 1936.

  There is a clear relation between (I/K) and either q, (D/K) or (fl/K).

But the relation is a not a tight one, especially at low frequencies. For

example, a given value of (I/K) is associated with a lower value of q in

the postwar period.   (D/K) and (fl/K) both exhibit postwar downward trends
                                   17

which are not reflected in (I/K). The plots of first differences show

that, in all three cases, the relation is stronger at high frequencies.

  It is not obvious from those graphs of first differences that (I/K) is

more strongly related to either q, (fl/K) or (U/K). The heteroskedasticity

in all four time series, with much smaller movements in the postwar period,

also makes the task of visually assessing fit difficult. Thus, as a way of

further describing the data, table 1 reports the results of simple horse

races.



  In each case, regressions are run in first differences, with A(I/K) as

the dependent variable and a constant term and a distributed lag of either

q, (D/K), (fl/K) as regressors4. We use first differences as estimation

in levels with first order serial correlation yielded estimates of the

degree of first order serial correlation insignificantly different from

one. In each case, the regression is estimated over the period 1900-1939,

1948-1988 (or 1916-1939, 1948-1988 when profit is used), and over each of

the two subsamples separately. Leaving WWII years in -or leaving WWI years

out- makes little difference to the estimates. In each case one lag on the

independent variables is sufficient, and the lagged first difference of

investment is insignificant if included. The table makes two points:



  These are first differences of levels, not of logarithms. The reason is
that profit is negative for a few years in the sample. Thus, we must use
the level of profit, and to allow for comparison of fits, use levels of the
other variables as well. Doing the regressions which include either D/K or
q in logarithms yields results similar to those in table 1.
Table 1. Investment, q, dividends and profits

Dependent variable : (I/K)



Sample                     Lq(-l)       DW           Chow test
                                                    (SF level)
Full          0.007       0.026        2.22   .27
             (1.4)       (4.9)
                                                        .56
Prewar        0.011       0.025        2.34   .27
             (1.4)       (3.2)

Postwar      -0.006       0.030        1.83   .26
            (-0.8)       (3.9)

                (D/K) A(D/K)(-l) DW           R2

Full           0.98       0.13         2.20   .28
              (5.5)      (0.7)
                                                        .22
Prewar         1.03       0.07         2.33   .34
              (4.5)      (0.3)

Postwar       -0.02       1.62         2.04   .12
              (0.0)      (2.7)

                (fl/K)    (II/K)(-1)    DW    R2

Full           0.13      0.18          2.09   .46
              (4.5) (5.7)
                                                       .67
Prewar         0.13      0.16          2.25   .55
              (3.1) (3.9)

Postwar        0.21      0.28          1.87   .25
              (2.5) (3.5)


Full sample : 1902-1939, 1948-1988 (1918-1939, 1948-1988 for profit
regressions); Prewar : 1902-1939 (1918-1939 for profit regressions);
Postwar : 1948-1988. t statistics in parentheses
                                         18

  All three independent variables are significant. The horse races are

close : the R2's of the regressions are similar for q and for dividends,

and somewhat higher for profit.

  The lag structures are sometimes different across subsamples. Lagged

dividends are highly significant prewar, current dividends highly

significant postwar. But in no case is there any statistically significant

evidence of subsample instability. Significance levels of the tests of

subsample stability range from .2 to .7

  We now turn to estimation of the investment equation along the lines

developed earlier.




Section III : Dividends as fundamentals



  Our first step is to use dividends as a proxy for fundamentals. The

rationale for this assumption comes from the work of Lintner (1956). From

interviews with managers, Lintner concluded that dividends were largely set

so as to be in line with permanent earnings as perceived by managers. The

model of dividends has often been used since, for example recently by Marsh

and Merton (1986) in their discussion of the work of Shiller. Using

dividends rather than earnings as a measure of fundamentals has the

additional virtue of avoiding issues relating to corporate liquidity

constraints, at least as compared with using earnings.

  The equation we estimate is

(3) ln(I/K) — c +    a(L)Lln(D/K)   +   b(L)1n(V/D)   +   e
Table 2. Investment, with dividends as fundamentals


Aln(I/K) ln(fl/K) óln(D/K)(-l) ln(V/D) ln(V/D)(-l)          DW    R2

Sample:
full        0.42       0.17        -0.02     0.32       1.61     .39
            (3.5)      (1.6)      (-0.3)    (3.5)

prewar      0.56       0.14         0.05     0.23        1.81     .46
            (2.8)      (0.9)       (0.4)    (1.3)

postwar     0.08       0.34        -0.11     0.23        1.87     .26
            (0.5)      (2.2)      (-1.6)    (2.8)

Significance levels of tests of the following hypotheses (full sample):
set of coefficients on D/K different from zero : .4 xl03
set of coefficients on V/fl different from zero : .4 xlO'2
sum of coefficients on D/K and V/D are equal    : .15


Full sample : 1902 to 1988; prewar : 1902-1939; postwar : 1948-1988



Table 2'. Investment, dividends and the dividend-price ratio


ln(I/K) ln(D/K) Lln(D/K)(-1) ln(PD) 1n(PD)(-1)         DW

Sample:
full        0.47       0.12        -0.10    0.32       1.59      .40
           (4.1)      (1.2)       (-1.2)    (3.5)

prewar      0.56       0.13       -0.00     0.27       1.75      .46
           (2.8)      (0.9)        (0.4)    (1.3)

postwar     0.10       0.25       -0.10     0.17       1.94      .23
           (0.6)      (1.5)       (-1.4)    (2.5)

Full sample : 1902 to 1988; prewar : 1902-1939; postwar : 1948-1988
                                   19

where first differences were imposed after finding that, when the equation

was estimated allowing for an AR(l) disturbance term, the degree of serial

correlation was not significantly different from one. Put simply, the

equation asks to what extent movements in investment are related to

movements in dividends or to movements in the dividend-price ratio (the

reason why this is not quite right is that V is not just the stock market

value, but the swn of the values of both stocks and bonds; we return to

this point below). The results are given in table 2, both for the whole

sample, and for the prewar and postwar periods separately (we leave war

years when using the whole sample, 1900-1988. Excluding them makes little

difference). At most one lag on each variable is statistically

significant.

  The results are that both fundamentals, measured by dividends, and

valuation matter. The sets of coefficients on fundamentals and valuation

are both highly significant. The elasticity of investment with respect to

dividends is equal to .59 for the whole sample, nearly twice the elasticity

with respect to the market value given dividends of .32.   .   But the sums

of coefficients on fundamentals and the sum of coefficients on valuation

are not significantly different: one can reject the hypothesis that

investment responds to movements in q independently of the source of the

movements only at the 15% percent level. Results for prewar and postwar

samples yield the same general conclusion.



  Table 2' takes a brief detour from our basic argument. As we mentioned

above, the regression reported in table 2 comes close to asking whether
                                           20

investment is more responsive to dividends or to the dividend-price ratio.

It does not quite do that however, as it uses -appropriately under our

assumptions- the total value of the firm rather than the stock market

value.     The results of regressions of investment on dividends and the

dividend-price ratio (using the Standard and Poor index) are reported in

table 2'   .   The specification is the     same as in equation (3) except for the
                                                                                         -


replacement of      (V/fl)   by the price-dividend ratio.     While we cannot think of

a structural interpretation for such            a regression, we report it for two

reasons.       First, it requires much less data construction than regressions

using market value, and thus may allow for easier cross country comparisons

later.     Second, a recent paper by Robert Barro (1989) has argued that ex

post rates of return on stocks -roughly the first difference of the

logarithm of the stock price- dominate changes in q in explaining changes

in investment.       The results of table       2'   are easily summarized: they are

nearly identical to those of table         2,   both in terms of fit and individual

coefficients.      This may not be great news for q, but indicates that our

findings are robust to the use of total market or stock market value.



  Returning to our basic argument, there are two reasons why dividends may

not be a good proxy for fundamentals.            First, our underlying model of

dividends may be wrong and dividends may not be set in line with permanent

earnings as perceived by managers (after having constructed the cx post

present discounted value of profits in the next section, we shall be in a

position to test whether and how well dividends help predict this present

discounted value, which they should if managers have rational expectations
                                    21

and set dividends in line with permanent earnings).    Second, even if they

are set in line with permanent earnings,   dividends will not capture changes

in the required rate of return which will affect fundamentals.    Under the

null hypothesis that only q matters, then any decomposition of q in the

product of two terms does not mstter and our estimates of the effects are

consistent.   But under the alternative hypothesis that the valuation term

matters less than fundamentals or does not matter at all, those problems

will likely lead to underestimating the effect of fundamentals relative to

valuation5.   This leads us to turn to an approach which, under the

assumption of rational expectations, takes care of the first of those two

problems.




Section IV.   Investment and the present discounted value of profits



  Our second step is to construct the expected present discounted value of

profits and use it as our proxy for fundamentals.

  More precisely, we first construct an ex-post present discounted value of

the ratio of after tax profits to the capital stock.   We construct it by



    There is a third reason why dividends may not be a good proxy for
fundamentals. We have disregarded the difference between marginal and
average q, a difference which may well be empirically important. This case
is however different from the other two.   In the other two, the variable
(V/K) is the appropriate one under the market perceptions hypothesis and
only our decomposition is wrong. In this case, the variable (V/K) is
inappropriate even under the market perceptions hypothesis. As a result,
our discussion of bias below does not apply to this case. Indeed, it is
difficult in this case to predict even the sign of the bias of the
coefficients on fundamentals and valuation.
                          (PROFJT/I) VS EPDV(PRQFJT/K)
  .5




  .9




     3




 .2



  I
                                            I.
                                        \
                                  ///
                            / /
                          I                                                     * .-. —
0.0



—I

         20 23 26   2   32 35 38 91 99 97 50 53 56   5   62 65 68 71 79 77 80 83 86

                                                                     LV
                                         22

  backward recursion, assuming that the ratio of profit to capital after

  1988, our last observation, was expected to remain equal to its 1988 value.

  As we are trying to measure the present discounted value of
                                                                      profits
  accruing in the future to the current capital stock, we use a discount rate

 of 20%, roughly the sum of the required rate of return and the depreciation

 rate. Varying the discount rate between 15% and 25% does not affect the

 results in an important way. We shall refer to the ex-post present

 discounted value as PDV(fl/K), or PDV for short.          Again as a descriptive
 statistic, the projection of the ex-post value on current and three lagged

 values of q, (fl/K), (D/K) is plotted in figure 4, together with (fl/K)

 itself. This projection can be thought of an estimate of the ex-ante

 present value.



    The results of the regression used
                                              to construct the projected series are
 themselves of interest :
                            q has no predictive value, while the sets of
 coefficients on both (fl/K) and (D/K)
                                         are highly significant. The
hypothesis that current dividends are a sufficient statistic for the

present discounted value of profits, a
                                              hypothesis corresponding to the
Marsh-Merton formalization of the Lintner hypothesis under rational

expectations, is strongly rejected : current and lagged profits are

strongly significant, even in the presence of current and lagged dividends.



  We then estimate the
                         following equation:
(4) ln(I/K) — c +
                    a(L)ln(pDV)   +   b(L)ln(V/pDV)    ÷
  Because we use the
                       ex-post present discounted value, the equation must be
estimated by instrumental variables. As the equation is in first
 Table 3. Investment and the
                                    present discounted of profits


 ln(I/K) ln(PDV) ln(PDV)(.1)
                                      ln(V/PDV) ln(V/PDV)(.1) DW
 Sample:
 Full       -0.07           0.62             0.07            0.30
            (-0.3)                                                  1.86       .43
                            (3.7)           (0.5)        (2.6)
Prewar       0.15           0.67             0.10        0.32
            (0.3)                                                   2.38   .58
                           (2.4)            (0.5)       (1.2)
Postwar     -0.39           0.56             0.00        0.27       2.04
           (-1.3)                                                          .27
                           (1.8)            (0.0)       (3.1)
Significance levels   of   tests of the
set of coefficients   on   PDV/K        following hypotheses        sample):
                                 different from zero : .2xl0
set of coefficients   on   V/PDV
                                 different from zero : .1x10
sum of coefficients   on   D/K and V/D are equal
                                                     : .36


Full sample: 1918 to 1988;
                              prewar: 1918-1939; postwar: 1948.1988
                                       23

  differences, any variable in the information set at time t-l is a

  legitimate instrument: we thus use lagged values of ln(q),
                                                                  ln(D/K) and of
  lI/K, with one to three lags. Note that we use the level rather than the

  logarithm of fl/K : this is because the value of fl/K is
                                                             negative in 1921 and
  in 1931-1933. This is not an issue for the ex-post PDV variable which is

  always positive in the sample, so that we can take its logarithm in

 equation (4).

    The results are presented in table 3, for the whole sample as well as for

 the pre- and post-var subsamples (standard
                                              deviations are adjusted to take
 account of the structure of the residual). The
                                                   image they give is
 surprisingly similar to that given in table 2. Both fundamentals and

 valuation matter: the set of coefficients on each is highly significant.

 Point estimates of the effects of
                                     fundamentals are larger (.55 for the
 whole sample) than those of the effects of valuation (.37 for the whole

 sample), but the difference between the two effects is still not

 significant. A surprising feature is the negative effect in the full and

 the postwar samples of the
                              current present discounted value, which however
 is insignificant and smaller in absolute value than the positive
                                                                  effect of
the lagged present value. This negative coefficient becomes larger (while
the sum of coefficients
                        remains roughly unchanged) as the discount rate
used to compute the
                      present discounted value becomes smaller.



  This second set of results
                               is very much dependent on the assumption of
rational expectations. It is also subject to the other problem
                                                               we
mentioned at the end of the
                              previous section, time varying discount rates.
                                         24

   In the next section, we focus on the nature and the potential
                                                                        size of the
   bias inherent in our approach.



  £ectlpn V. Proxies for fundamentals and bias.



       Using the dividend -or any other observable
                                                       variable, as a proxy for
  fundamentals implies treating all movements in the dividendprice
                                                                   as
  containing no information about fundamentals. This
                                                            is surely wrong, and
  leads to systematic bias. What is the
                                              nature and the potential size of the
 bias ? As usual, the answer
                                  depends on unobservable variables, but some
 progress can be nevertheless be made.

       Suppose that the true model is given by:

 (5) ln(I/K) — a Lln(F/i) + b ln(V/F) +
                                               r
       Compared to the equation which underlies
                                                estimation in the previous
 sections, equation (5) makes two siniplifjcatjons which will simplify the

 algebra. It ignores the constant term, and assumes away the lags. Assume

 further, and again only to simplify the algebra, that all terms are white

 noise, an assumption which is roughly true of their empirical counterparts.

   Now suppose that we use a proxy X for fundamentals, and estimate instead:

 (6)         ln(I/K) — a ln(X/K) +   fi 1n(V/X)    +
The question is then that of the bias in
                                         a and fi.        The answer depends on
the correlation structure between F, X and V. The arguments above
                                                                   suggest
that the main issue is that a proxy such as dividends will only
                                                                capture
only part of fundamentals, suggesting the
                                               following correlation structure:
  Assume that fundamentals have two
                                       components, only one being captured by
X, so that:
                                            25

     ln(F/K) — Aln(X/K) +     c

  where c is that component of the change in fundamentals not
                                                                        captured by X.
  In the absence of good reasons to the contrary, assume further that the two

  components of fundamentals are mutually uncorrelated, and that each is
 uncorrelated with the valuation term:

               p(ln(X/K),) —      p(ln(V/F),1n(X/1())   —   p(ln(V/F),e)     — 0

 Finally define x c[O,l] as the proportion of the change in the measured

 valuation term due to fundamentals (for example, when we use dividends, the

 proportion of the change in the dividend price ratio due to changes in

 fundamentals):

    x —
          Var(e)/(Var(e)+var(eIlfl(v/F))
 Simple algebra then yields the following formulas:

    E(a) — a    ; E() —   xa +    (l-x)b;   E(a-fl)— (l-x)(a-b)



   Thus, under the market perceptions hypothesis that
                                                              a—b, misallocating
 part of the fundamentals in the valuation term does not lead to bias. But

 under the alternative hypothesis that fundamentals matter more than

valuation, this misallocation will lead to an upward bias on the valuation

term, thus to a downward bias on the difference between a and b. Take for

example the results of table 2, which uses dividends as a proxy for

fundamentals. Taking a and 48      to   be equal to the sum   of   coefficients on
(D/K) and (V/D) respectively, yields a—.59, 48—.30, and thus a-fl—.29.

Suppose that half of the change in the dividend price ratio is due to

fundamentals, half to true valuation
                                            effects, bubbles, fads and the like.
Then, the above formula
                          suggests that the positive value of 48        is   due to
bias, that the true value of b is in fact equal to zero.
                                       26



    Thus, while we wish it were otherwise, the
                                                   conclusions one reaches
                                                                             depend
  on one's initial prior.

    Suppose that one believed that there were no fads or bubbles, that the

  market value always reflected fundamentals, and that the whole
                                                                 estimation
  exercise was useless. One would then
                                        expect that dividing V/K in two
 arbitrary components should lead to identical
                                                   point estimates on each of
 the two components. The evidence is that point estimates
                                                          are different but
 not significantly so. Thus the prior would be little affected
                                                               by the
 evidence.

   Suppose that one believed instead that there were fads or bubbles, and

 that the market perceptions
                               hypothesis were true. Then, estimated
 coefficients would be unbiased estimates
                                            of true parameters, and again, the
 evidence would not affect that prior very much.

   Suppose finally that one believed that there were fads or bubbles, that

the managerial perceptions hypothesis were true, and that the
                                                              constructed
valuation term contained information about fundamentals
                                                             Then, one could
interpret the results as strongly
                                    supporting the hypothesis. It is our
prefered interpretation, but we realize that it is only one of three.

  In our last section, hoping for
                                    stronger evidence, we focus on particular
episodes rather than on general time series evidence.




ctjon V. The crashes of 1929 and 1987
                                       27

 Looking at residuals

      The rationale for our last set of regressions is
                                                          straightforward and
 relies on a standard errors-in-variables
                                             argument. Suppose that the
 managerial perceptions hypothesis is correct, that managers react to

 fundamentals and ignore valuation. Then q will be a proxy for

 fundamentals, and its quality will depend on the size of the valuation

 term. In times when the valuation term     is   large, investment will respond
 less to q than would be predicted by a regression of investment on q,

 leading to a specific pattern of residuals.

   Again, the valuation term is unobservable. But there are at least two

 episodes during which there is widespread suspicion that increases in the

 stock market were not primarily reflecting
                                                 fundamentals, but also had an
 important bubble component6.

   The first is the increase in the stock market leading to the crash of

October 24, 1929. While there was was an increase in the stock market in

every year from 1922 on, the increase accelerated in 1928 and 1929 and it

is at that time that market analysts
                                       started referring to the possibility
of a bubble. Table 4 gives the behavior of the Cowles Commission index for

the period. The increase was associated
                                            with steady increases in the


6 A
     literature survey of magazines during 1929 turned up a number of such
statements.   For example, on september 7, 1929, Business Week warned
Security speculation has eaten nearly all of its credit cake. Stock prices
are generally out of line with safe earnings expectations, and the market
is now almost wholly
                      "psychological" -irregular, unsteady, and properly
apprehensive of the inevitable
   But for one such quote, one readjustment which draws near. .
                               can find in the same magazine others which
mock an unfounded apprehension of
                                   bubbles. Similarly, before the 1987
crash, many thought of the increase
                                     as a "catching up" effect from the
unrealistically low level of the 70's.
 Table 4: Stock Price Index

        Cowles Commission % Change
 Year    All Stock Index                        Standard & Poor's % Change
                                         Year    500 Composite
 1922          67.6                      1980          118.7
 1923          69.0            1.92      1981          128.0       7.8
 1924          72.8            5.50      1982          119.7
 1925          89.7                                               -6.9
                               23.2      1983          160.4
 1926          100.0                                              34.0
                               11.4      1984          160.4
 1927          118.3                                              0.0
                               18.3      1985          186.8
 1928          149.9                                              16.4
                               26.7
                                              (1985:1; 177.3)
        (August     : 148.3)
 1929          190.3                          (1985:2; 184.8)
                               27.3
                                             (1985:3; 188.3)
        (September: 225.2)
        (October : 201.7)                    (1985:4; 196.9)
                                         1986         236.3       26.4
        (November : 151.1)
1930         149.8                           (1986:1; 219.9)
                             -21.2
                                             (1986:2; 240.5)
        (December: 109.4)
1931                                         (1986:3; 241.1)
             94,7            -36.7
1932         48.6                            (1986:4; 243.6)
                             -48.6       1987         286.8
1933         63.0                                                 21.3
                              29.6
1934         72.4                            (1987:1; 279.3)
                              14.9
1935         78.3
                                            (1987:2; 293.2)
                              8.1
1936        111.0                           (1987:3; 319.3)
                              41.7
1937                                        (1987:4; 255.3)
            111.8             0.0
                                            (1988:1; 258.1)
                                            (1988:2; 263.1)
                                            (1988:3; 266.9)
                                            (1988:4; 274.9)
1. Figures are annual or quarterly averages.
                                          28

 price-earnings ratio arid   steady   decreases in the dividend price ratio. The

 PE ratio, which stood at 10.9 at the end of 1926, had increased to 17.6 at

 the end of 1928, decreasing to 13.3 at the end of 1929, after the crash.

 The dividend price ratio, which stood at 5.1 at the end of 1926 had

 decreased to 3.5 at the end of 1928, increasing to 4.5 after the crash.

   The second is the increase in the stock market leading to the crash of

 October 19, 1987. The stock market increased from 1984 on, accelerating in

 1987, trIggering talk of speculative bubbles during that year. Table 4

 gives the behavior of the S&P index for the period. Again, the episode was

 associated with sharp increases in the PE ratio, sharp decreases in the

 dividend price ratio. The PE ratio increased from 11 at the end of 1984 to

 20.3 in the third quarter of 1987, decreasing to 14.0 at the end of 1987,

after the crash. The dividend price ratio decreased from 4.8 at the end of

1984 to 2.7 in the third quarter of 1987, increasing to 3.5 at the end of

1987.

   To the extent that the managerial perceptions hypothesis is correct, that

managers were not responding, or not responding fully, to the increase, one

would expect -in a regression of the rate of change of investment on the

rate of change in q- negative residuals in the years leading to 1929, and

positive residuals as the market declined from 1929 to 1932, negative

residuals in the years leading to 1987, and positive residuals in 1988.

  The regression we run is therefore:

(5) ln(I/K) — c +    a(L)1n(q)   +    c

  We   run it both for the whole sample and separately for each of the prewar

and Postwar subsainples. The regressions and the residuals for 1925-1935
Table 5. Investment and q



Dependent variable : ln(I/K)

Sample          1n(q)       ln(q)(-1)          DW             R2       see
Full           0.14            0.38           1.72           .33       .12
               (2.2)           (5.6)

Prewar         0.25            0.37           1.97           .40       .15
              (2.5)         (3.7)

Postwar       -0.07            0.25           1.84           .26       .05
             (-1.1)         (4.0)

Residuals
estimation (full sample) (prewar)               (full sample) (postwar)
   1925       .00         .02          1985          .01               .03
   1926      .05          .04          1986     -    . 15*         -   .09*
  1927       .16*       - .15*
           - .10
                                       1987     -    .14*          -   .08*
  1928                 - .11
                                       1988     -    .02           -   .03
  1929     -.02        -.02
  1930     - .23*      - .19*
  1931     - . 26**    - .19*

  1932    - .19        - .10
  1933       .06         .03
  1934       .00       - .02
  1935    -.04         -.05
                                    29

 and for 1985-1988, from full and subsample estimation are given in table 5.

 The results of the regressions are very similar to those of table 1, which

 were run in first differences of levels rather than of logarithms. The

 regressions show a strong effect of lagged q, a weak effect of current q

 (actually negative but insignificant in the postwar sample). This implies

 that the timing of residuals we just discussed may be off by a year.

 Because investment responds in part to last year q, the regression may

 still underpredict investment even in the year after the crash. With this

 in mind, we look at the two sequences of residuals.

   Residuals are consistently negative from 1926 to 1932, with the largest

 residuals occuring in 1930-1932. The 1926-1930 period nicely fits the

hypothesis that there was a bubble, and that it was largely ignored by

managers. But the negative residuals in 1931-32 do not fit what one would

have expected under that hypothesis. Perhaps, the serious credit problems

of the early 30's are to blame; perhaps, fundamentals declined after the

crash even more than the market allowed for. And most of the decline in

the real value of the market occured not in 1929 but between 1930 and 1932.

Nevertheless, it is fair to say that the residuals do not fit any of our

simple hypotheses.

  The managerial perceptions hypothesis fares better during 1986-1988. The

residuals are large and negative in both 1986 and 1987 (one must go back to

1958 to find a larger residual in the full sample regression). The

residual from 1988 is still negative, but this
                                                 is easily explained by the
fact, reflected in the regression, that investment spending in 1988 was

still largely the result of decisions taken before october 1987.   (We have
                                    30

 not yet been able to construct the value of q for 1989, which
                                                                 would clearly
 be of interest here).

    We have checked whether the behavior of investment in 1987 and after

 could be explained by the tax reform of 1986 and the change in the relation

 between marginal and average q it introduced. To do so we Constructed two

 tax-adjusted q series for the postwar period; the two series are based on

 different assumptions about the effects of dividend taxation (see Poterba

 and Summers (1985)). The residuals from regressions using those tax

 adjusted q were similar to those in table 5.



Financing and investment.

   In section I, we argued that if managers were going to respond to market

valuation even when it exceeded their assessment of fundamentals, they were

likely to do this by issuing new shares as this is the simplest way of

effecting a transfer from new to existing shareholders. Thus, table 6

looks at the composition of investment finance for both the 1929 and 1987

periods.

  The evidence from the table is clear cut for each of the two episodes,

but the two episodes yield opposite conclusions. Net issues of stock were

indeed unusually large for 1928 and 1929, with net issues of stocks being

nearly as large as retained earnings as a source of finance in 1929. This

can be taken as evidence that managers thought their shares were overvalued

in the late l920s. and as evidence in favor of the market perceptions

hypothesis. The evidence from the 1987 goes mostly the other way. Since

1984, net issues of stock have been strongly negative, reflecting the
Table 6. Proportions of Total Financing by Particular Sources of Funds.

year     capital       retained        Net issues        Net issues         common
       expenditures    earnings         of stock        of cor. bond     stock issues

1925      8.72         7.53   (0.86)    2.30   (0.26)    2.79   (0.32)      0.61
1926      8.69         7.21   (0.83)    1.84   (0.21)    3.03   (0.35)      0.67
1927      7.93         6.18   (0.78)    2.26   (0.28)    3.55   (0.45)      0.68
1928      7.93         7.81   (0.98)    4.34   (0.55)    2.45   (0.31)      2.09
1929     10.06         7.82   (0.78)    7.48   (0.74)    0.66   (0.07)      5.06
1930      3.95         1.45   (0.37)    1.91   (0.48)    1.95   (0.49)      1.10
1931     0.88         -1.70   (-1.9)    0.61   (0.69)    0.22   (0.25)      0.19

1980    243.7         200.1   (0.82)    12.8   (0.05) 27.6 (0.11)         12.67
1981    286.5         239.4   (0.83)   -11.4   (-.03) 22.7 (0.08)         14.23
1982    256.4         242.3   (0.94)     6.4   (0.02)   18.6 (0.07)       13.40
1983    270.6         285.6   (1.06)    23.5   (0.09) 16.0 (1.06)         29.79
1984    370.6         336.2   (0.90)   -74.4   (-.20) 46.1 (0.12)          8.66
1985    342.3         352.2   (1.02)   -81.5   (- .23) 73.7 (0.21)        18.38
1986    331.4         357.4   (1.08)   -80.7   (- .24) 121.2 (0.36)       33.73
1987    361.3         352.7   (0.98)   -76.5   (- .21) 99.9 (0.28)        37.67

1. Figures are in billions of dollars. Figures in parentheses are ratios to capital
expenditures. Capital expenditures include fixed investment, change of inventories and
inventory valuation adjustment. Retained earnings include capital consumption
allowances. Net issues of stock include preferred stock as well as common stock.
2. Data before 1931 were constructed following table B-l9 in Goldsmith (1956). These
data include financial institutions, whereas data for 1980 and after refer to non
financial corporations, except for the last column.
 4. In the last column, the data before 1931 is series 515 in Historical Statistics of
the U.S. (1975). The data after 1980 are gross proceeds from primary public offerings
of conventional common stock in the various issues of Monthly Statistical Review, U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission. The two series are different in many respects, as
explained in p998 in Historical Statistics of the U.S. (1975). Moreover, the data
before 1931 is different from Goldsmith's on which the third column of the table is
based. Goldsmith estimated net issues of stock from individuals' saving through common
and preferred stock.
                                    31

 increase in share repurchases, takeovers, mergers and acquisitions.

 Obviously, these developments have other sources than the decisions we are

 focusing on7; there is however no evidence that net repurchases of stock

 slowed down in 1986 or 19878

   Thus, the evidence from the 1929 episode is mixed. Investment behavior

 points, with a few puzzles, in the direction of
                                                   managers largely ignoring
 the market, but the evidence on issues of new shares points the other way.

 In the 1987, both financing and investment behavior point support the idea

 that managers largely ignored market developments.



 Conclusion

   We have already admitted to having started this paper with a prior, that

managers probably largely ignored market valuation whenever that valuation

differed from their perceptions of fundamentals. We see the evidence as

consistent with that prior. But we also have to admit that the evidence is

not strong enough to sway those with different priors.    Somebody who

believed either that there were simply no fads or bubbles, or that firms

followed market valuation would hold roughly the same views after reviewing

the evidence we have presented.

  This general conclusion is shared by two other recent papers, Barro

(1989), and Galeotti and Schiantare].lj (1989). Barro uses a related



   Historically, mergers and acquisitions have happened in periods of high
stock prices and high values of q (Golbe and White 1988).
8 The
       evidence on gross issues of stocks does not show any clear pattern.
Gross issues were equal to 52b$ and 57$ in 1987 and 1986, up from their
values in 1984-5, but roughly the same as in 1983 (Securities Industry
Yearbook, various issues)
                                   32

approach and also looks at long time series for the US. One of his

findings is that the ex-post rate of return on the stock market dominates

the rate of change of q (Barro uses our q series). We find it interesting,

but have no ready explanation. Galeotti and Schiantarelli use our post war

quarterly data and a more formal, Euler equation, approach; they find no

evidence against the hypothesis that fads affect investment.

  Reaching clearer conclusions will therefore require either superior

procedures for separating fundamentals and valuation errors, or bringing

more information to bear on the problem. This could be done by using

either international data or information on individual firms.
                                   33

Appendix I: Data Sources for the Construction of q.



   We have constructed two series for g. The first is an annual series for

the period 1900-1958. The other is a quarterly series for the period 1952-

1988. The annual series for 1900 to 1988 used in the regressions is

composed of the annual series from 1900 to 1951, and the annual series from

time aggregation of the quarterly series thereafter.

   The series were constructed as follows:



1> Market Value of Equity

  The market value of equity of non-financial corporations was estimated by

dividing dividend payments by the common-stock dividend-price ratio.



 a> Dividends paid by non-financial corporations.

  1) For annual q: From 1922 to 1958, dividend payments by "all active

corporations" were retrieved from various issues of Statistics of Income.

Dividends paid by finance, real estate, and the related business sectors

were subtracted to get dividends from non-financial corporations. The real

estate sector was excluded since it could not be separated from the other

two before 1937. For the period from 1900 and 1922, the data cane from

table c-3l and c-6 in Studies of Saving in the United States, Vol I (1955).

In those tables, dividends from the banking sector (instead of the total

finance sector) are listed from 1900 to 1915. Financial corporations'

dividends were estimated by multiplying dividends from the banking sector

by 1.6 under the assumption that the banking sector accounted for almost 60
                                   34

per cent of the whole finance sector during this period. This assumption

is derived from the table 12 in Financial Intermediaries in the American

Economy Since 1900 (1958).

  2) For quarterly q: This paper used dividend payments data from the DRI

Flow of Funds data bank. Because of the recent NIPA data revision, which

has reduced the value of dividends paid, q in this paper is smaller than q

found in Furstenberg (1977) by roughly 0.1, even though both series are

constructed in the same way.



 b> Dividend price ratio:

  1) For annual q: Before 1930, the Cowles Commission common stock yields

were used. After 1930, Moody's common stock yields ratio series were used

(series x479 and x483 in Historical Statistics of the U.S. (1975)).

 2) For quarterly q: Standard and Poor's 500 common stock yields ratio was

used.




2> Market Values of Debt and Non-Interest-Bearing Assets.

  1) For annual q: Studies of Saving in the United States, Vol III (1955),

presents balance sheets of non-financial corporations for the years 1900,

1912, 1922, 1929, 1933, 1939, and 1945-1958. Short term debt was netted

out from non-interest-bearing assets (e.g., cash, consumer credit, accounts

receivable,..) to calculate the book value of net non-interest-bearing

assets. This book value in turn was assumed to be the same as their market

value. Likewise, interest-bearing assets were netted out from the

Counterparts in the liability side to calculate net long-term debt. Using
                                   35

linear extrapolation, the book value of net long-term debt in each year was

calculated. This book value was converted into a market value using the

series x494 in Historical Statistics of the U.s. (1975): It amounts to

using Moody's corporate Aaa bond yield rate assuming a 20-year maturity for

conversion.

  2) For quarterly q: The same method as in Furstenberg (1977) was adopted:

First, net non-interest-bearing assets ,   net   long-term debt and net short-

term debt were calculated. Second, the market value of short-term debt was

assumed to be the same as its book value. The book value of net long-term

debt was converted to the market value by capitalizing net interest payment

figures by the yield rate on Moody's corporate A bond. The equation (1) in

Von Furstenberg (1977, p357) was used for conversion, assuming a ten year

maturity. All the data came from the DRI Flow of Funds data base.



3> Replacement Cost of Tangible Assets

  1) For annual q: Studies of Saving in the U.S., Vol III (1955),

presents the replacement cost of total tangible assets in the U.S. from

1900 to 1958. By using the sectoral balance sheets (available for the 20

years listed previously), the proportion of non-financial corporations'

tangible assets to total tangible assets was extrapolated for the years in

which the balance sheets are not available. The ratios so calculated

ranged between 0.238 in 1900 and 0.287 in 1929. By multiplying this

proportion to the replacement cost of tangible assets in the U.S., the non-

financial corporations' tangible assets were calculated.

  2) For quarterly q: Data came from the DRI Flow of Funds data bank.
                                  36




4> Calculation of q

  q is defined as ( Market value of equity +   market value of debt - non
interest bearing assets)/Replacement cost of tangible asset. Note that

non-interest-bearing assets were subtracted from the numerator. This

differs from Von Furstenberg's method, which added them to the denominator

instead.



5> Investment.

  The annual data on investment by non-financial corporations on equipment

and structure (from 1832 to 1987) were obtained from the BEA wealth tape.

The seasonally adjusted quarterly data after 1952 came from the DRI Flow of

Funds data bank.
                                   37

The series for annual q is
               0         .607220
               1         .811250        45    .656740
               2         1.23872        46    .770330
               3         .986740        47    .581990
               4         1.08545        48    .525210
               5        1.28335         49    .438690
               6        1.18924         50    .495670
               7         .904690        51    .465040
               8         .925040        52    .483230
               9        1.05977         53    .468880
              10        1.03116         54    .528570
              11         .973690        55    .650610
              12         .987720        56    .637060
              13         .980030        57    .575100
             14          .790920        58    .604340
             15          .808830        59    .733930
             16          .775130        60    .708850
             17          .538430        61    .796050
             18          .396000        62    .752090
             19          .393370        63    .846550
             20         .389820         64    .915430
             21         .356480         65    .995050
             22         .462910         66   .902700
             23         .503410         67   .924860
             24         .495310         68   .965870
             25         .631000         69   .868950
             26         .679470         70   .704350
             27         .787210         71   .769610
             28         .980880         72   .829420
             29         1.25887         73   .761610
             30         1.11039         74   .513340
             31         .707600         75   .473150
             32         .357290         76   .509780
             33         .568460         77   .460330
             34         .905330         78   .418420
             35         1.16509         79   .375690
             36         1.28278         80   .385670
             37         1.15208         81   .396340
             38         .890620         82   .392380
             39         1.08110         83   .523530
             40         .823090         84   .524690
             41         .672990         85   .582360
             42         .508620         86   .720460
             43         .642890         87   .839250
             44         .632300         88   .742040
                                   38



Bibliography
Abel, A.B. and O.J. Blanchard (1986), "The Present Value of Profits and
Cyclical Movements in investment," Econoinetrica, 54-2, pp. 249-272

Barro, R., (1989) "The Stock Market and Investment", mimeo Harvard

Blanchard, O.J. and M. Watson (1982), "Bubbles, Rational Expectations and
Financial Markets," in Crises in the Economic and Financial Structure, ed.
by P. Wachtel. Lexington, Mass., Lexington Books.

Brainard, W., J. Shoven, and L. Weiss (1980), "The Financial Valuation of
the Return to Capital," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: p453-511.

Bosworth, B. (1975), "The Stock Market and the Economy," Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity 2: p257-300.

Delong, J.B., A. Shleifer, L.H. Summers, and R.J. Waldmanri (1987), "Noise
Trader Risk in Financial Markets," National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 2395.

Fazzari, S., R. Hubbard, and B. Petersen (1988), "Financing Constraints and
Corporate Investment," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1988:1, p141-
206.

Fischer, S. and R.C. Merton (1984), "Macroeconomics and Finance: The Role
of The Stock Market," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy
21, p57-108.

Galeotti, M. and F. Schiantarelli (1989), "Stock Market Volatility and
Investment: Do Only Fundamentals Matter?," inimeo, Boston University.

Golbe, D.L. and L.J. White (1988), "Mergers and Acquisitions in the U.S.
Economy: An Aggregate and Historical Overview," in Mergers and
Acquisitions, ed. by A.J. Auerbach, Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press.

Goldsmith, R.W. (1956), A Study of Saving in the United States, 3 vols.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
                (1958), Financial Intermediaries in the American Economy
Since 1900, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Hayashi, F. (1982), Tobin's Marginal Q and Average Q: A Neoclassical
Interpretation, Econometrica 50: p213-224.

Hoshi, T, A. Kashyap, and D. Scharfstein, (1988) "Corporate Structure and
Investment: Evidence from Japanese Panel Data," mimeo, M.I.T.

 Jorgenson, D.W. and ICY. Yun (1986), "Tax Policy and Capital Allocation,"
 The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 88(2), p355-377.
                                  39


Keynes, J.M. (1936), The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money,
London: MacMillan.

LeRoy, S., and R. Porter (1981), "The Present Value Relation: Tests Based
on Implied Variance Bounds," Econometrica, May, p555-574.

Lthtner, J.V. (1956), "Distribution of Incomes of Corporations Among
Dividends, Retained Earnings, and Taxes," American Economic Review
Proceedings, May, p97-118.

Marsh, T.A. and R.C. Merton (1986), "Dividend Variability and Variance
Bounds Tests for the Rationality of Stock Market Prices," American Economic
Review, June, p483-503.

Myers, S. and N. Majluf, "Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions when
Firms have Information that Investors do not Have", Journal of Financial
Economics, 1984, 187-221
Poterba, J.M. and L.H. Summers (1985), "The Economic Effects of Dividend
Taxation" in (Altman and Subramaynan ed.) Recent Developments in Corporate
Finance.

Summers, L.H. (1981), "Taxation and Corporate Investment: A Q Theory
Approach," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, p67-140.

Tobin, J. and W.R. Brainard (1977), "Asset Prices and the Cost of Capital,"
Economic Progress, Private Value, and Public Policy, ed. by Bela Balassa
and Richard Nelson, New York: North Holland.

Von Furstenberg, G.M. (1977), "Corporate Investment: Does Market Valuation
Matter in the Aggregate?," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: p347-
407.
</ref_section>
