                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          MORAL HAZARD IN PARTNERSHIPS




                                 Martin Gaynor
                                 Paul Gertler




                            Working Paper No. 3373




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   June 1990




We are grateful to Randy Ellis, Tom McGuire, Mark Pauly, Rob Porter, Louis
Putterman, John Strauss, and participants in seminars at Carleton University,
Johns Hopkins University, The RAND Corporation, the University of Toronto and
the RAND Conference on Health Economics for helpful comments. The usual caveat
applies. Special thanks are due to Chuanfa Guo for exceptional research
assistance. This paper has not been accorded the review given official NBER
publications. This paper is part of NEER's research program in Health
Economics. Any opinLons expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research. Caynor's work on this project was
partially supported by BRS Grant No. 01-90. This support is gratefully
acknowledged.
                                            NBER Working Paper #3373
                                            June 1990

                             MORAL HAZARD IN PARTNERSHIPS

                                        ABSTRACT


   In this paper, we ijuvestigate incentive structures within partnerships.
Partnerships provide a classic example of the tradeoff between risk spreading and
moral hazard. The degree to which firms choose to spread risk and sacrifice
efficiency incentives depends upon risk preferences, for which
data are typically unavailable. We are able to overcome this difficulty due to the
existence of a unique data set on a prominent form of professional partnership;
medical group practice.

   We consider a two-stage model In which agents choose effort in response to
incentives and in which the firm can choose two different Instruments to affect
incentives and to spread risk: the compensation method and the number of members.
There are two new theoretical results. First, relative to the compensation method
or group size which would be chosen in the absence of risk or risk aversion, the
best compensation method will be one which sacrifices efficiency incentives in order
to spread risk, and the best membership size will exceed the first best size for the
same reasons. Second, a further increase in risk or risk aversion leads the firm to
sacrifice more efficiency incentives in order to spread more risk. Hence, firms who
are more risk averse or face greater uncertainty pay larger risk premiums In terms
of sacrificed output due to shirking.

   The empirical results are striking and consistent with the theory. Firms which
report møre risk aversion have greater departures from first-best organizational
incentive structures. Specifically, increased risk aversion leads to compensation
arrangements which spread more risk through greater sharing of output and to
decreased group size in order to counteract diminished incentives. We also find
that compensation arrangements that have greater degrees of sharing of output across
physicians significantly reduce each physician's productivity, whereas reductions in
group size significantly increase productivity. The estimated premium associated
with risk aversion accounts for almost eleven percent of gross income, comparing the
most risk averse to the least risk averse physicians in the sample.




        Martin Gaynor                       Paul J. Certler
        Department of Health Policy         The RAND Corporation
        and Management                      1700 Main Street
        Department of Economics             Santa Monica, CA 90406
        Johns Hopkins University
        624 North Broadway, 6th Floor
        Baltimore, MD 21205
1. INTROOUCTION



   One of the primary contributions of economic theory in the last twenty years Is

the recognition that first-best efficiency incentives must be compromised in order

to spread risk In the presence of imperfect information. This was first realized in

the study of insurance', and has been extended to a wide variety of situations. One

prominent area of analysts has been the structure of incentives within an

organization.2 In this paper, we focus on the incentive structure within

partnerships. Partnerships provide a classic example of the tradeoff between risk

spreading and moral hazard. They form In order to split fixed costs and spread risk

due to uncertainty. Risk is spread through some degree of sharing of output    among

firm members. The greater the degree of output sharing, however, the stronger is

the incentive for members to shirk and thus free ride on the effort of other

members.

   Although there has been extensive theoretical analysis of this point, the

corresponding empirical literature is sparse. The existing empirical literature has

focused mainly on the impact of compensation method on firm performance, and has not

typically examined the determinants of compensation method. The studies In this

area have covered executive compensation, compensation of workers, and employee

profit-sharing.3 With the exception of Seller (1984), however, these papers do not

consider the impact of risk aversion on compensation method and efficiency.

   In this paper we theoretically and empirically analyze the tradeoff between risk

spreading and efficiency incentives in partnerships. The degree to which firms




           'The classic reference is Zeckhauser (1970).

       2See Holmstrdm and Tirole (1989) for an excellent survey.

         For example, on executive compensation see Jensen and Murphy (1990),
  Abowd (1990), Gibbons and Murphy (1989, 1990), leonard (1990). On worker
  compensation, see Pencavel (1977), Seller (1984), Brown (1990). On employee
  profit-sharing, see Fitzroy and Kraft (1987).
choose to spread risk and sacrifice efficiency incentives depends upon risk

preferences, for which data are typically unavailable. It is this data limitation

which has heretofore stymied attempts at empirical analysis. We are able to

overcome this difficulty due to the existence of a unique data set on a prominent

form of professional partnership; medical group practice. These data are unique in

that they contain detailed information on risk aversion, compensation arrangements,.

physician productivity, and other aspects of the internal organization of these

fins.

      We model partnerships as fins who use two instruments to affect incentives and

to spread risk: the compensation method and the number of members. To our

knowledge, this case has not been previously examined. Previous models of the

choice of Incentives under risk have considered the case where the fin has only one

choice variable: either compensation or membership. The agency literature has

examined the case In which the finn chooses compensation method, given a fixed

number of agents (e.g., I4olmstrm, 1982). These are models of team production,

which implies that the agents in an organization are jointly subject to a single

random shock. The consequence of this is that risk cannot be spread by adding

members; only by compromising incentives, or by diversifying production activities.

The literature on labor-managed firms (e.g., Ireland and Law, 1982) has concerned

itself with the opposite case; fixed compensation method (equal sharing) and

variable membership. The result here is that risk can be spread if members' random

shocks are not perfectly correlated.

      Professional partnerships share some aspects of both these models. Production in

professional partnerships is typically non-joint across members of the firm, i.e.,

the   members produce independently of one another. Partners also face demand curves
for   their individual services, Consequently there is less   than perfect correlation
between individuals' stochastic shocks, implying that risk can be spread by adding



                                            2
members. Professional partnerships also employ a variety of compensation methods.

   These institutional features Imply a model which leads to two new theoretical

results. First, relative to the compensation method or group size which would be

chosen in the absence of risk or risk aversion, the best compensation method will be

one which sacrifices efficiency incentives in order spread risk, and the best

membership size will exceed the first best size for the same reasons. Second, a

further increase in risk or risk aversion leads the firm to sacrifice more

efficiency incentives in order to spread more risk. Hence, firms who are more risk

averse or face greater uncertainty pay larger risk premiums in terms of sacrificed

output due to shirking. The specific way in which the compensation method and group

size are adjusted, however, is indeterminate. Both mechanisms could be used to

spread risk, or only one could be used to spread risk and the other used to mitigate

the inefficiency incentives.

   Our empirical results are striking and consistent with the theory. Firms which

report more risk aversion have greater departures from first-best organizational

incentive structures. Increased risk aversion leads to compensation arrangements

which spread more risk through greater sharing of output and to decreased group size

in order to counteract diminished incentives. We also find that compensation

arrangements that have greater degrees of sharing of output across physicians

significantly reduce each physician's productivity, whereas reductions in group size

significantly increase productivity. The estimated premium associated with risk

aversion accounts for almost eleven percent of gross income, comparing the most risk

averse to the least risk averse physicians in the saivçle.



  II. MEOICAL   GROUP PICTICE

  Currently     over 61% of U.S. physicians practice in some type of group setting,

(Gonzalez and Enviions, 1988) and this percentage has been increasing over time.



                                            3
Variation in practice setting and incentive structure have been shown to

significantly affect physician behavior.' This Is of specific interest to

policymakers because of concern that the financial incentives used In Health

Maintenance Organizations (HMOs) will encourage physicians to limit medical

services.   Indeed, Congress is considering specific aspects of a law scheduled to go

into effect in 1990 that would prohibit Medicare participating Kilos from adopting

financial Incentives whih would reduce the availability of medical care to

enrollees (U.S. General Accounting OffIce, 1988).

   Medical group practices tend to be relatively horizontal in structure. Most

physicians are owners of the group practice, and ownership rights tend to be

undifferentiated (Freidson, 1915). Held and Reinhardt (1919) report that 93% of the

medical groups in their sample are owned by the physicians, and Lee (1990) states

that 84% of physicians in another survey of group practices participate in

ownership. Most of these groups have some non-owner physicians, but these are

typically recent hires who are rapidly promoted to ownership. Indeed, Lee reports

that 87% of the finis permit ownership after two years, and none have a probationary

period longer than four years.

   Decision-making typically occurs collectively, rather than independently. In

fact, the empirical evidence shows that groups rather than individuals set fees and

make resource decisions. Held and Reinhardt find that individual physicians set

their own fees in only 10% of groups, hire nurses in 8%, and can purchase capital

equipment In less than 2%. Kralewski, Pitt, and Shatin (1985) report even lower

figures for independent physician decision-making: IS set their own fees, 4% hire

their own nurses and less than 1% purchase their own equipment. Lee also confirms



        'For example, see Newhouse (1973), Sloan (1974), Held and Reinhardt
   (1979), Gaynor (1989), Gaynor and Pauly (1990).

                                         4
these findings.

   The institutional literature suggests several reasons why physicians organize in

partnerships: to spread fixed costs and exploit economies of scale, to smooth work

schedules, and to exploit reputational economies of scale. Optimal scale in medical

practice has been studied extensively.5 Most of these studies conclude that, while

economies of scale exist in the production of physician services, they are exhausted

at relatively low levels. Nonetheless, the empirical distribution of   group sizes

appears to be inconsistent with these findings, in that groups are much larger on

average than is necessary to fully exploit (estimated) scale economies. Some

economies may also be achieved by combining different specialties In order to

minimize referral costs. In addition, anecdotal evidence suggests that physicians

form groups to smooth out irregularities In work schedules by covering for one

another. Finally, the importance of reputational economies of scale for medical

practices has been documented anecdotally in Getzen (1984).

   In this paper we argue that risk aversion is another major reason for physicians

to form partnerships. Partnerships allow physicians to spread risk through    sonie

degree of output sharing. One would expect more risk averse groups to have greater

output sharing and larger memberships in order to better spread risk. The greater

the degree of output sharing and the larger the group size, however, the greater the

incentive for individual members to shirk. Thus risk aversion is likely to be a

major factor In the organization and efficiency of medical group practices.

  We Investigate these issues using data from a survey of 6353 physicians in 957

medical group practices collected in 1978 by Mathematica Policy Research for the

National Center for Health Services Research. These data are unique in that they



       5For example, see Frech and Ginsburg (1974), Kimbell and Lorant (1977),
  Reinhardt, Pauly, and Held (1979), Harder and Zuckerman (1985).

                                         5
contain measures of physicians attitudes towards risk, group compensation methods

and organizational structures, and Individual physician productivity. Risk aversion

is measured by physician responses to a question about the importance of regular

income. The possible responses ranged from one to four, increasing with the

importance of regular income. The compensation scale varies between one and ten,

where one indicates no relationship between compensation and individual

productivity, and ten indicates a perfect relationship. Group size measures the

number of full time equivalent physicians in the fir, reported in six intervals.

We use the group mean of each value of the compensation scale and group size in the

analysis. Figures I, 2 and 3 present the frequency distributions of these

variables. They show substantial variation in risk preferences, compensation

methods, and group sizes.

   We get a preliminary idea of how risk preferences influence the organization of

medical group practices from Table 1, where the means of the compensation scale and

of group size are reported for physicians by their rankings of the importance of

regular Income. The compensation scale Is monotonically decreasing as the

importance of regular income increases, and group size moves in the same direction,

although non-monotonically. Thus, physicians that report themselves to be more risk

averse are in groups which have compensation methods with a greater degree of

sharing of output and which are smaller in size. This suggests that physicians use

the compensation method and group size to spread risk. In the rest of the paper we

investigate the degree to which partnerships use output sharing and group size tD

trade off efficiency incentives for risk spreading.



III. ThEORY

  We now   present a formal model of partnerships. The theory concerning choice of

                                          6
 incentives for an organization facing risk is well established. In this version,

 partners individually choose their own actions (which we call effort) in response to

 firm wide incentives, whereas firm incentives are collectively chosen by the

 partners, given each individual's reaction function. This is modeled as a two stage

game in which the firm is the leader, and individual partners are the followers.

Reaction functions for the partners are derived in section A, and the firm's choice

of incentives is analyzed in section B. Comparative statics are considered in

section C.



A. The Partners

   The partners in the firm are assumed to be utility maximizing agents who make

decisions over "work effort in response to the incentives present in the firm's

compensation method. The compensation structure is treated as fixed by any partner,

although it is endogenous as far as the group as a whole is concerned. Work effort

is defined as the total input to production by an individual partner. This

encompasses both time and intensity, where intensity can be thought of as how hard

an individual works.   In the medical model, work effort can be thought of as

spending more time with a patient and paying more attention to diagnosis and

treatment. More work effort, therefore, results in higher quality care, and higher

quality care raises the demand for physician services. There is a nonpecuniary

(disutility) cost to effort, since effort is the opposite of leisure on the job.

The benefit to additional effort is that it produces additional quality, which

attracts customers. Additional customers bring the partner additional income.

   Uncertainty is present in that each partner faces a demand curve for his services

which is subject to a stochastic shock. In the medical example, the number of

patients who demand a physician's services fluctuates with factors which cannot be


                                          7
perfectly observed by the physician. These factors include variations in patterns,

types, or severity of illness (e.g., seasonal or epidemiological effects).

variations in insurance coverage, problems In collecting revenues, and unexpected

reputatlonal effects of events such as medical malpractice suits. A partner's

demand is affected in a deterministic way by the price charged by the firm, the

quality supplied by the individual partner, and other factors. Formally, partner

i's demand Is




   q1 —q(P, z1 IX)       +c1, c —       F(O,   Of2),                    (I)

where


        s the quantity of output demanded from partner I,

   P • the price      per unit charged by the firm,

        •   the quality per unit of output supplied by partner i,

   X • exogenous      factors affecting demand, such as consumer

            characteristics, the qualities and prices of other firm members,

            and market level factors6, and

        • the stochastic shock, which has distribution function F with mean zero and

  variance          The c are assumed to be uncorrelated across partners.7

The deterministic portion of the partner's demand depends negatively on




     6This can be thought of as a residual demand function, which is conditional on
these "other factors." Thus, exogenous factors which determine the level of market
demand. the firm's market share, and the agent's share of firm demand are expressed
as X.

     TThe crucial assumption is that the error terms not be perfectly correlated
within groups. Extension to imperfectly correlated errors does not affect the
qual itative results.

                                                       B
price and positively on the quality produced by the partner8.

   Quality per unit of service is produced by the Individual partner with his own

effort, e1, and with other fixed factors, 9 (e.g., other labor, capital, ability),


      —
          z(e1 I°),                                       (2)

where z1 is quality per unit of output9, and z is assumed strictly concave.10

   (ff?rt shifts the partner's demand function via its effect on quality, and is the

only means by which the partner can influence demand. The partner is assumed to

choose effort to maximize utility, which depends directly on the partner's net

income and therefore on the level of effort applied.

   A mean-variance utility function is used to represent preferences in the     presence

of uncertainty. This model highlights the tradeoff between efficiency and risk-

spreading in a simple way, and is consistent with a broad range of preference

structures. Meyer (1981) shows that utility can be represented as a function of the

first two moments of the distribution of the random variable when the outcome

variable depends linearly on the random variable, as is the case in our model. As




     tThe partner's quality will affect demand in two ways: by increasing his
quality relative to that of others in the fini and thereby increasing his share of
firm demand, and by increasing the firm's quality and therefore its market share.
See Schmalensee (1977) for a complete exposition.

     cit is assumed that there are constant returns to scale in the production of
quality over units of quantity, i.e., total quality equals the product of per unit
quality and total output, q1.z1.

     101n practice, partners' quality production functions may not be completely
independent.   While the independence assumption does not affect the qualitative
results, it is testable.   We develop a formal test In the section on empirical
specification.

                                         9
we demonstrate later, this is a testable assumption)1

   The mean-variance utility function is further assumed to be additively separable

in money and actions (effort). Let partner i's utility be given by


        —      -       - v1(e1),                                                   (3)



where

        • i's utility,

        • the expectation of i's net income,

   B a a parameter indicating the impact of variation in income on utility. B is

            equal to one-half the measure of (constant) absolute risk aversion.

            • the variance of l's net income, and

        • the private non-monetary cost of effort.                 v1 is assumed to be strictly

            convex in e1.

   A partner's income Is determined by the compensation structure and the random

shock c. The compensation structure is represente&2 by


                                          n
        —                                      -
            oPq + (1/n)(1        a)P 2
                             -
                                                   (1/n)FC,                        (4)
                                         i—i


where



     "In addition, Chamberlain (1983) has shown that any member of the class of
symetric, spherical distributions will generate the mean-variance model as an exact
representation of preferences.    Epstein (1985) employs a formulation of decreasing
absolute risk aversion (DAM) to show that the mean-variance functional form of a non-
expected utility model is consistent with the postulates which follow from DAM.

     This form is highly simplified: in particular, the issue of cost sharing has
been treated in an extremely stark manner, and linearity is imposed. Nonetheless,
real world co4llpensatlon structures are often extremely simple, and linearity is the
norm, rather than the exception (see Holmstrom and Milgrom, 1987 for an analysis of
the optimality of linear incentives). This is the case with physician practices,
which we analyze in this paper.

                                                         I0
   a a the proportion of revenue generated by i that he keeps,                          (0,1],

   P •    the   price of output,

   n a    the   number of members of the finn, and

   FC •    fixed   costs.

Fixed costs are assumed increasing and concave in group size (e.g., the cost of name

plaques, offices, or examining rooms) so FC—FC(n), 9FC/øn>o, Ô2FC/8n2<O. The first

term in (4) Is the portion of revenue generated by i which he keeps, the second term

is his share froiii    the   finn's revenue sharing pool, and the third is his portion of

the fin's fixed costs.

   The objective function is obtained by substitutIng (2) into (1), then into (4),

and then into (3). Maximization yields the first order condition,



   3u1/8e1 —     ( + (I/n)(1    -
                                    a)]P(aajaz1)(az/8e1)   -
                                                               8v1/8e1
                                                                         —   0.   (5)




The solution to (5) for all partners i in the firm is a Nash equilibrium. Equation

(5) can be interpreted as indicating that the utility maximizing level of effort is

where the marginal revenue product of effort (the first term in (5)) is equal to its

marginal disutility (the second term          in (5)). The second order condition also
holds, given the concavity of the function z and the convexity of v1. Equation (5)

implicitly defines an effort supply function for each partner,



   e, — e1(a, P, n, X, O),                                                        (6)




where effort is a function of the compensation scale (a), price (P), group size (n),

demand factors (X), and other fixed factors (') Table 2 contaIns comparative

static derivatives for the effort supply function for the effects of changes in a,


                                                  11
P, n, X, or       on the optimal (for the partner) choice of e1. Factors which

increase the expected return to effort, a and P, increase its supply. The number of

members in the group decreases the return to effort by decreasing the size of an

individual share from the revenue sharing pool, and thus decreases effort. Neither

risk (as represented by the variance of income) nor risk aversion affects the supply

of effort. This result is directly due to the assumption of the additive

separability of demand Into its deterministic and stochastic components. We specify

a test for this assumption in Section IV.



B. The Group

   The group, or fin, makes a collective decision on the choice of incentives,

given the effort reaction functions of all the members of the firm. Since the

choice of incentive systems directly affects the variance of income, the group must

make an explicit tradeoff between incentives and risk spreading.

   Let there be a representative partner i whose preferences are decisive in the

collective decision-making process)3 Then the group#s utility function can be

written as this partner's utility function. This welfare function is written as



   W •
         u1   aPq(.) +    (I/n)(1   -
                                        a)PEq(.)   -
                                                       (1/n)FC
              -   Ba2P2     - B(1/n)2(I     -
                                                a)2P2 Zo2   - v1(.),   (1)




where the explicit expression for a,f2 is incorporated.



     "For example, the median voter under majority rule. Cave and Salant (1987)
prove the existence of a unique majority rule equilibrium for a game such as the one
examined here, even if preferences are not single-peaked. We employ this simple
representation since our data do not allow us to distinguish between alternative
models of group decision making. We do not assume that partners are identical within
groups since evidence from our data does not support such a conjecture.

                                                       12
      The group chooses a and n to maxImize (7), subject to the effort reaction

functions of the n partners, as sumarized in (5)14.15 Let the model be

synnetric.'6 Then the representative partner's utility function simplifies to



        —
            (+(1/n)(1-c)]Pq+((n-1/n)(I-o)pq
                                                          2   -
         -(1/n)FC(n)-[a 2÷(1/n)(1-a)21BP2                                      (8)


      Substituting for the partners' effort supply functions and the quality production

functions'7, the first-order conditions for a and n are



             —                         -
                 (P(aq/8z1)(az/ae)         (av1/ae)](ae/aa)
             -   28P2   a12(a + (I/n)(1    -   o)J       0,
                                                     —
                                                                               (9)
and


   8u1/Bn —      IP(80j8z1)(Oz/3e1)
                                       -
                                           (3v1/ae,)](8e1/an)+     (1/n2)FC
                 -
                     (1/nfl8FC/ön)   + (B/n2)(1 -        a)P2 qZ] —           (10)




     "We treat price as exogenous in order to focus on the choice of compensation
method and group size. The results derived in this section follow through when
price is treated as endogenous. The first-order conditions with , n, and P chosen
by the firm are contained in the technical appendix.

     '5TMs is the first-order approach. See Jewitt (1988) for a justification of
this approach which does not rely on convexity of the distribution function of
output.

     161f the distribution of preferences/abilities across agents in the firm is
syiimietric, then the median agent Is the mean agent. The first-order conditions when
the model is not necessarily synretric are contained in the technical appendix. The
qualitative results are identical to those obtained with the synmietric model.

     'We assume that an individual rationality or participation constraint is
satisfied so that no agent's utility is below his reservation level.

                                                         13
     The first terms in both equations indicate the incentive effects associated with

a and n, incorporating the reactions of the partners. The terms which are preceded

by B, the risk aversion parameter, indicate the risk spreading effects of              and n.

These indicate that a and n are set where the marginal utility of the marginal

revenue generated by the effort supply response to a or n is equal to the marginal

disutility of the same effort supply response plus the marginal utility of the

effect on risk. These tradeoffs imply that the optimal           E   (0,1)   and the optimal

n E   (0,   +   c).15


C.    Coarat1ve Statics
     Consider the choices of a and n in the absence of risk aversion (or risk). A

risk neutral collective of agents would choose a equal to one and set membership at

the size which fully exploits all scale economies, denoted n*. To see this, set the

risk preference parameter, B, equal to zero in equations (9) and (10). The

resulting first-order condition for the choice of a is equal to the partner's first-

order condition for choice of effort (equation (5)) when a—I, thus implying that the

optimal a equals one when 8—0 or        —   0.    The first-order condition for the choice

of n reduces to (I/n)FC —   arc/an,   thus group size is set so that marginal cost

equals average cost.

     When partners are risk averse (8>0), the a and n chosen by the firm will always

be respectively less than and greater than the a and n chosen by risk neutral

partners. When 8>0, additional terms related to risk are included in the first

order conditions. Since the term related to risk in (9) is negative, the a which is

optimal in the presence of risk aversion is less than the first-best a under risk




       "See the technical appendix for proofs.

                                                 14
neutrality. Similarly, the risk aversion term in equation (10) is positive, thus

the presence of risk aversion implies increased membership In the firm."

   Figure 4 illustrates the result that risk aversion leads to a<t and n>n*. The

combinations of a and n which satisfy the first-order conditions (FOC) evaluated at

6—0 and 6>0 are depicted. Since the a and n chosen are those which simultaneously

solve these equations, the equilibrium is located at the intersection of these

curves. A0A0 represents the locus of points at which the FOC for a is satisfied

when 3—0, and N0N0 is the locus for which the FOC for n is satisfied when 8—0. When

B—a the FCC for a does not depend on n and the F0C for n does not depend on a.

Therefore A0A0 is horizontal and NN is vertical. A,A, and N,N, are the loci of the

FOC for a and a when B>0. Since the values of a which satisfy the FCC for a when

3>0 are less than those which satisfy it when 6—0, A1A1 lies everywhere beneath A0A0.

Similarly, N,N1 lies everywhere to the right of N.N because the values of n which

satisfy the FOC for a when 8>0 are greater than the n which satisfy it when 6—0.

Taken together, this implies that the firm will choose ad and n>n in the presence

of risk aversion.

   It does not necessarily follow, however, that further increases In risk aversion

generate further decreases in a and further increases in a. Table 3 contains the

comparative static derivatives of the choice variables for the group. The

comparative static effects of 8 (risk aversion) on a and a are Indeterminate. the

reason is that increases in a generate increased efficiency incentives, but decrease

risk spreading. Analogously, Increasing group size decreases incentives, but

increases risk spreading. In general, any combination of effects on a and n are




     'We have assumed that a - • cov(c11c1) — 0 for ease of exposition. All that
is needed for this conclusion; 'however, is that a < 1. Obviously, however, the
greater is     the less effective is group size at spreading risk.

                                          15
possible which result in an increased tradeoff of incentives for risk-spreading. An

increase in a and decrease in n due to increased risk aversion is not possible,

however, since this implies a decreased tradeoff of incentives for risk-spreading.

   The possible combinations of an increase in risk aversion on a and n can be

fruitfully examined by inspection of a diagram showing how the curves representing

the FOC shift in response to a change in B. Figure 5 illustrates the three outcomes

which are possible. An increase in risk aversion always shifts both curves down and

to the right (to the southeast" of the original equilibrium point). If there is a

larger effect on the FOC for n, then both a and n can increase. This is illustrated

in panel A.   Panel B shows the case when there is a larger effect on the a FOC:

both a and n fall. Panel C illustrates the result if an increase in risk aversion

has roughly equal effects on the FOC for a and for n. In this case the classic

result obtains: a falls and n rises. The one outcome which does not obtain is an

increase in a and a decrease in n, since this would involve a point in the northwest

quadrant, which is inpos:ole in the diagram. This would imply an attenuated

tradeoff of incentives for risk-spreading in the presence of increased risk

aversion, which is inconsistent with the model.



 IV.     EMPIRICAL SPECIFICATION MD ESTIMATION HE1HOOS

   For the empirical work the theoretical framework is generalized to take account
of two important institutional factors: (1) that physician groups are not really

price takers, but rather participate in an imperfectly competitive market, and (2)

that the physician production of medical services involves more than just physician

input. Moreover, consistent with the institutional facts presented in section II,

we assume that the group rather than the physician makes decisions over price and

non-physician inputs.


                                          16
  The theoretical framework implies a five equation empirical model. Four

equations will represent the group's decisions about a, n, P and h (non-physician

labor), and one equation will represent the physician's output. The rest of this

section is used to derive the specification and present the estimation strategy. We

begin by specifying the group's decisions and then present the physician's problem.

   The first order conditions for the group's optimization problem can be solved for

the equilibrium values of the compensation system (a), group size (n), price (p),

and non-physician labor (h):



     —   a(B, X, •, W, EC,                                      (13)
     —   n(B,   X, 8, W, FC, a12),                              (14)

     —   NB, X, 9, w, FC,                                       (15)
                             c2),
   h — h(B, X, O, W, FC, 0Z)                                    (16)




Thus, the compensation system, group size, price, and non-physician labor are

functions of risk aversion (B), the variance of the fluctuations in physicians'

residual demand functions (a12), variables that shift the residual demand functions

(X), prices of inputs (W), fixed costs (EC), and characteristics of the physician

that may influence their productivity, such as experience or training (8).

   Given the group's decisions over the organization of the firm, the individual

physician then chooses effort. Since quality and effort are unobserved, the demand

function cannot be estimated directly.2° Instead, we substitute the effort supply

function into the quality production function, and then substitute that equation



     20Note that the parameters of the structural demand function cannot be
recovered, because they enter the demand function both directly and indirectly
through the functions z and e1.  This implies that when incentives affect
unobservable behavior, structural parameters cannot in general be recovered from
observed data. Gaynor and Pauly (1990) and Spulber (1989) have shown that this
point is also true with respect to the parameters of the technology of production.


                                          17
into the demand function to obtain a demand function conditional on the firm level

variables:



      —   g(P, a, n, h, X, °) +                                     (17)




The conditional demand function, then, is a function of price, the compensation

scalt, group size, exøgenous demand factors, and physician characteristics.

   Linear functional representations of equations (13) -   (16) and (11) form the
empirical model. The conditional demand function and the expressions for the firm's

choices of a, n, P. and h establish the link between risk preferences, incentives,

and production (and consequently, income). Risk preferences influence the firm's

choices of a, ii, P, and h, and these choices influence the physician's productivity.

Thus, equations (13) -   (16) identify how risk preferences influence the group's
choice of Incentive and organizational structure, and equation (17) permits

estimation of the effect of the incentive and organizational structure on

productivity.

   Since a, n, P and It are collectively chosen by the firm based in part on

physicians' effort responses to these choices, they may be correlated with the error

term in the conditional demand function. Therefore, least squares estimates of the

conditional demand function may suffer from simultaneous equations bias. Rather

than making arbitrary assumptions, we employ the exogenelty test of Hausman (1978)

and Wu (1973) to examine whether these variables can be treated as uncorrelated with

the error ten In the regression. The model is estimated by two-stage least

squares, instrumenting for those variables for which exogeneity is rejected.

   The empirical model is identified with a set of exclusion restrictions implied by

the theory. Specifically, the fin's choices of a, n, P, and h depend on risk

preferences, the variance in income, input prices, and fixed costs, whereas the



                                          18
 physician's choice of effort does not. As the empirical results indicate below,

 these identifying variables are significant predictors in the first-stage

 regressions, adding power to the exogeneity tests.

    The assumption that demand is additively separable into deterministic and

stochastic components implies that neither risk aversion (B) nor risk (a2) enter

the conditional demand function (18). Since the model is overidentified, this

assumption is testable. The assumption of an additive shock to demand Is rejected

if the variables representing risk aversion and risk are significantly different

from zero in the conditional demand function. Recall that additivity of the random

component is also a test of the mean-variance representation of utility.

   The assumption that production is non-joint In other partners' effort is also

testable. This assumption implies the null hypothesis that the characteristics of

other physicians in the group should have no impact on physician i's output. This

hypothesis is rejected if these variables are collectively significant in the

conditional demand function.



V. DATA



A. Sources

   The data utilized for this study come from a nationwide survey of medical group

practices conducted in 1978. The sample includes 957 groups and 6353 physicians

practicing in those groups. The sample was stratified by group size, type of group

(multispecialty or single specialty), physician specialty, and prepaid vs.

fee-for-service. Large group practices were oversampled in an effort to supply a

reasonable number of observations, and a census was taken of pre-paid groups, for

the same purpose. Further, five medical practice specialties were sampled: general

practice, internal medicine, pediatrics, general surgery, and obstetrics/gynecology.



                                         19
Approximately 60 percent of all office-based physicians practice in these

specialties.

   This data set also includes data measuring characteristics of the area in which

the group practiced and data on the hospital with which the group is affiliated.

The data on area characteristics were obtained fron many sources, including the

Mierican Medical Association, The County and City Data Book, and various other

sources. The hospital data were obtained from the American Hospital Association

Guide for 1978. For a complete description of all these data sources see 2oldin,

Carcagno, Held, Jamieson, and Wooldridge (1979).



B. Variables

   The model consists of five equations. The unit of observation for the

compensation system, group size, price and non-physician input equations is the

group, and the unit of observation for the conditional demand function is the

physician. We begin by describing the measurement of the dependent variables for

all five equations and then discuss the Independent variables. Exact definitions of

the variables are reported in Table Al in the Appendix, and descriptive statistics

are reported In Table A2.

   The measure of a is the "compensation scale," which takes on values one through

ten. A value of one indicates that the physician's compensation Is completely

unrelated to productivity and a value of ten indicates a perfect relationship.21

The variable Is divided by ten in order have it correspond directly to ,    which   is


theoretically bounded by zero and one. We Impose these bounds by taking a logit

transformation, ln(a/(I-a)), as the dependent variable In equation (13). The



     211he compensation scale is highly correlated with other measures of the
compensation system. The simple correlation between the compensation scale and the
percent of compensation which is based on productivity is 0.91. The correlation
between the compensation scale and the change In net income per $1000 of patient
billings is 0.96.

                                          20
dependent variable is retransformed into a predicted value of a for the second-stage

estimation of the conditional demand function.

   Physician output is taken to be the number of office visits per week for primary

care physicians,a for whom office visits are a large proportion of total practice.

The number of full-time equivalent physicians in the group corresponds to the

theoretical variable for group size, n. The log of the group's reported price for an

office visit is used to measure price, and the log of hours of non-physician medical

labor is used to measure non-physician Input. The logarithmic transformations of

price and hours are taken because their distributions are heavily skewed to the

right.

   The most important independent variable is the measure of physician preferences

for risk. For this, we use responses to a question on the importance of regular

income to the physician. The possible responses take on values from 1 to 4. with 4

representing the greatest importance attached to regular income. We use the within

group average of the responses to this question as a measure of the group's risk

preferences.

   Such self-reported measures have proven to be valid and reliable in a number of

other studies. Wolf and Pohlman (1983) show that self-reported risk preferences are

consistent with estimated risk preferences derived from actual choices. Granbois

and Sunners (1975) demonstrate that self-reported preferences are good predictors of

actual choices. Finally, flaw (1989) reports that self-reported risk preferences

are important determinants of labor market choices.

   The other independent variables in the compensation, group size, price, and non-

physician hours equations include physician characteristics that influence their



     We employ the retransformation suggested by Goldberger (1968), based on the
assumption that a is distributed lognormal.

     General surgeons were excluded from the analysis, since office visits are not
one of their primary outputs.

                                         21
productivity, the prices of other factors of production, fixed factors, residual

demand shifters, and the variance of demand. Characteristics that influence

productivity are the average experience of group physicians, experience squared the

proportion of nembers who are foreign medical graduates, and the proportion of

members in each of several medical specialties. The prices of non-physician inputs

are captured by the hourly wage rates of the various categories of non-physician

labor. Fixed factors are proxied by the number of examining rooms. Residual demand

shifters are represented by market area characteristics such as per capita income

and physicians per capita, among others. We do not have a direct measure of the

variance of demand but dichotomous variables indicating whether the group is an HMO

or a multispecialty group may serve as proxies, as well as specialty and the market

area characteristics.

   The exogenous independent variables in the conditional demand function include

exogenous determinants of physician demand and physician productivity

characteristics. The productivity characteristics include the physician's

experience and a set of dichotomous variables indicating the physician's specialty

and whether he is a foreign medical schoo' graduate or practices in a subspeclalty.

Demand shifters in both the group level equations and the conditional demand

function are measured by various indicators of market demand such as population

density, hospital beds per capita, income per capita. etc. The same variables that

measure shifts in demand across markets, however, also represent differences in the

variance in de.and across markets. The variance belongs only in the group level

-equations and not in the conditional demand function. Therefore, if these variables

only represent variance, then they will be important determinants of the firm's

choices of a, n, p. and h. but will not be significant In the conditional demand

function.




                                          22
VI. RESULTS



A. Specification Tests

   A number of the independent variables in the conditional demand function are

potentially endogenous. Specifically, we tested the exogeneity of the compensation

scale, group size, non-physician hours, and price. The exogeneity of the

compensation scale was rejected at the 1% level. The exogeneity of the other

variables could not be rejected.

   The specification test for additivity of the random shock consists of a test for

the joint significance of the variables representing risk aversion and the variance

of demand. The importance of regular income is our measure of risk aversion, but we

have no direct measure of the variance of demand. The market area characteristics

such as per capita income or physicians per capita may affect demand variance as

well as the level of demand. Consequently we tested for the significance of the

importance of regular income alone in the conditional demand regression, and jointly

with the market area variables. The importance of regular income is not

significantly different from zero at conventional confidence levels (t —   -1.28),   nor

is it jointly significant with the area characteristics (F   0.84). Therefore we

cannot reject the hypothesis that demand is additively separable in its

deterministic and stochastic components. This result also implies that the mean-

variance utility model cannot be rejected.

   The market area variables potentially represent the level of demand across

markets as well as the variance in demand.. Recall that the variables that indicate

the levels enter both the group level equations as well as the conditional demand

function, while the variance enters only the group level equations. The hypotheses

that the individual and joint effects of these variables are zero in the conditional

demand function could not be rejected. Therefore, we conclude that they represent



                                         23
indicators of variance as opposed to levels of demand.

   The variables representing characteristics of physicians in the group are not

(jointly) statistically significant (F—O.89) in the individual physicians'

conditional demand function. Therefore we cannot reject the hypothesis that

production is non-joint across physicians.

   Last, we checked for evidence of the desire to smooth work schedules by including

a variable measuring the importance of regular hours as a regressor in the reduced

form regressions for compensation scale, group size, price, and non-labor hours. It

was never significant, and was therefore ultimately deleted. The values of the

other coefficients were unaffected by the deletion.



B. Discussion

  The estimation results for the group level regressions are presented In Table 4

and the results for the conditional demand function are contained in Table 5. The

signs of the coefficients in all regressions are generally as expected. In

addition, the estimates are quite precise, as indicated by the t-statistics.

   The results of the first-stage estimations are as predicted by the theory. The

variable which serves as the measure of risk preferences is the importance of

regular income. Here "importance" is interpreted as the physician's subjective

assessment of the weight attached to these factors. The importance of regular

income is negatively related to the compensation scale, indicating that the more

important is regular Income to a physician, the more strongly related to

productivity is his group's compensation structure. This is consistent with the

interpretation of this measure as a metric for risk preferences, and indicates the




                                         24
Impact of risk aversion on compensation method.2'

   Group size is also negatively related to the importance of regular incoffle.   This

accords with the theoretical result that increased risk aversion leads to a smaller

group size if the incentive effects of decreased group size outweigh the decreased

risk spreading. Thus, variation in risk preferences can lead to an equilibrium with

many different group sizes, regardless of the nature of returns to scale. This is

compatible with the observed wide range of sizes of physician practices.

   Physician experience has a negative and decreasing effect on the compensation

scale and a positive and decreasing effect on group size, non-physician hours, and

price. The effect of experience on the closeness of the relation between

compensation and individual productivity is negative up to 3.54 years of experience.

Beyond that it is positive, although the total effect is negative. The negative

quadratic effect is consistent with findings of both a positive relationship between

age and the performance-relatedness of compensation for corporate CEO's (Gibbons and

Murphy. 1989) and a negative relationship (Barro and Barro, 1990). The positive

effect could be due to the presence of career concerns, as hypothesized by Gibbons




     24An alternative interpretation is that this variable Is measuring variance due
to sorting rather than risk preferences. Suppose all physicians have identical risk
preferences, but are of different qualities which are unobservable to the analyst.
Suppose further that physicians sort themselves among groups according to their
quality. High quality physicians will locate in groups with high a in order to
retain the returns to their quality, and low quality physicians will locate in
groups with low a in an attempt to free ride on others of higher quality. Thus1 the
observed distribution of a represents the distribution of physician quality rather
than a distribution of preferences toward risk. Since the variance of income is
increasing in a (see equation (1)). those in groups with a high value of a will be
subject to a greater variance of income, ceteris paribus, and vice versa for those
in groups with a low value of a. Physicians who are subject to a higher variance of
income may report a greater importance of regular income, and physicians with a
lower variance of Income would report a lesser importance of regular income. This
scenario generates a positive correlation between the Importance of regular income
variable and a. Since we find a negative relation to be the case, this alternative
interpretation cannot be true.

                                          25
and Murphy. The overall negative effect may be a way of compensating more senior

colleagues for providing "public goods' to the firm at the expense of their own

productivity. The positive effect of experience on non-physician hours nay indicate

that experience allows physicians to utilize labor more efficiently. The positive

effect on price may reflect consumers' valuations of experience.

  The other variables in the firm level regressions also have interesting

Interpretations. Fixed costs. as represented by the number of examining rooms, lead

to increased group size to spread the increased fixed costs, more sharing of output,

fewer non-physician hours, and lower price. An increase in the number of

competitors, as measured by the number of physicians per capita, has positive

effects on both group size and price. The presence of more competitors could lead

physicians to try and 'cartelize" by forming larger groups, which could increase

prices. Alternatively, more competitors ray lead to increased non-price

competition, and higher prices. If reputational economies of scale exist, increased

non-price competition will also increase group size. Multispecialty groups and

HF's have compensation more strongly related to individual productivity, and have

higher prices. The average physician characteristics in the group did not affect

compensation method, but did have significant impacts in some cases on group size,

non-physician hours, or price.

   The estimates of the parameters of the conditional demand function in Table S are

also strongly consistent with our theoretical hypotheses. The coefficient for one

of the main variables of interest, the compensation scale (a), is positive and

significant, as hypothesized. An increasingly strong link between compensation and

productivity leads to an increased number of offtce visits per week, Specifically,

unit increases in the compensation scale cause output to increase by ten percent.

Additionally, the number of physicians in the group has a negative and strongly


                                          26
significant effect. A ten person increase in group size decreases output by six

percent. This lends support to the hypothesis that, ceteris paribus, incentives are

diminished with increased group size. These are estimates of the effect of

incentives on moral hazard. An alternative interpretation is that these results are

due to physician self-selection by quality, however, there Is little support In the

data for the sorting across groups implied by this hypothesis!

   The estimates of the coefficients for some of the other variables are intuitively

appealing. The effect of price on output is negative, and statistically

significant. This indicates that the direct (and negative) effect of price on

demand outweighs its positive impact through supply of quality. A ten percent

increase in price decreases quantity demanded by 3.2 percent. Whether or not the

group is multispecialty or largely prepaid seems to have little effect on output.

   The number of examining rooms has a positive and significant impact on quantity,

consistent with Its increasing the marginal product of effort in the quality

production function. The same is true of hours of non-physician personnel.

Experience has a positive but diminishing effect, consistent with greater experience



     25As stated earlier, the observed negative relation between the compensation
scale and the reported importance of regular inco4lle is inconsistent with a situation
in which physicians have identical risk preferences and sort themselves among groups
based on their quality. In addition, if there were extensive sorting, then
physicians should be relatively homogenous within groups and therefore most of the
variation In the data should be across (between) groups. We examined the within and
between group variation in observed physician characteristics. In no case was the
variation within groups less than the variation between groups. Table A3 in the
appendix contains these results. As a further check on the degree of sorting, we
compared the variation in residuals from the conditional demand function within and
between groups. The residuals represent unmeasured or unobserved characteristics
plus noise. The variation within groups Is almost identical to the variation
between groups. Last, we could not reject the hypothesis that the distribution of
the group means (i.e., the distribution between groups) was drawn from the same
distribution as the sample distribution (Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic     0.093). If
there were extensive sorting then the distribution between groups should differ from
the sample distribution. Therefore we conclude that the data do not support an
hypothesis of pervasive sorting by physicians among groups.

                                          27
leading to greater productivity, but being counteracted by loss of skill with

increasing age.

   Table 6 contains calculations of the effects of changes in the measures of risk

preferences on production, thus providing an Initial look at the tradeoff between

incentives and risk-spreading. Varying the importance of regular income over its

full range (I to 4) leads to an decrease in the number of annual office visits by

872 (based on a 50 week year), or 22.64% at the mean. Evaluated at the mean price

for an office visit ($13.20), the result is decreased revenues of $11,999. This

means that the most risk averse physicians in the sample sacrifice this amount

compared to the least risk averse physicians. This is a measure of the risk premium

in these partnerships. It Is not a complete measure, however, because physicians in

these groups earn income from other sorts of services sold by these groups.

Consequently this figure serves as a lower bound.   It does account, however, for

10.76% of mean physician gross income in the U.S. in 1978, indicating that the

tradeoff between incentives and risk-spreading in these firms is substantial.

   Breaking the effect of risk aversion down by the source of the effect, it can be

seen that most of the impact on output (and consequently income) comes via the

compensation method. Groups do appear to attempt to compensate for the worsened

incentives by having fewer members and hiring more non-physician inputs, but the

magnitudes of the impacts of these variables is small. We hypothesize that the

reason is that they can only substitute in a partial, and very limited way, for

compensation method as an incentive device.



VII. SIJU!ARY NC CONCLUSIOIS

   Our goal In this paper has been to analyze the determinants of the internal

organization of partnerships and the consequent impacts on performance. We      focus

specifically on the impact of risk aversion on the choice of compensation method        and




                                          28
membership size In a partnership firm and the resultant effects on productivity.

Consistent with the institutional facts about professional partnerships, our

theoretical model allows the firm to choose both the compensation method and the

membership size. The predictions are that risk aversion will cause incentives to be

sacrificed. The effect of risk aversion relative to risk neutrality is to cause

groups to adopt compensation methods which are less closely related to individual

productivity, and to choose group sizes which exceed optimal scale. Further

increases in risk aversion, however, have different combinations of effects on

compensation method and group size, depending on the relative magnitudes of the

incentive versus the risk spreading effects of those variables. These combined

effects, however, all lead to a tradeoff of incentives for risk spreading.

   This is the first empirical study of incentives in organizations which

incorporates risk aversion. The evidence is highly consistent with the theory of

incentives and moral hazard for a partnership firm. We estimate a two-stage model

of the impact of risk aversion on medical partnerships' choices of compensation

method, group size, non-member labor, and price, and consequently on output. The

results are strongly supportive of theory that argues that firms adopt second-best

incentive structures in order to spread risk. Increased risk aversion leads

partnerships to choose compensation methods which are tess closely related to

individual productivity and to decrease the number of members. Productivity based

compensation has a substantial positive effect on physician productivity, and group

size has a negative impact. Last, our findings indicate that there is a substantial

premium paid to risk aversion: the most risk averse physicians in the sample

sacrifice almost 11% of gross income relative to those who are least risk averse.




                                         29
                                       REFERENCES

Abowd, John M., "Does Performance-Based Managerial Compensation Affect Subsequent
   Performance? Industrial and Labor Relations Review. February 1990, 43, 52-73.

Barro, Jason R. and Barro, Robert J. , "Pay, Performance, and Turnover of Bank CEOs,
   Working Paper No. 3262, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research,
   February 1990.

Boldin, Paul, Carcagno, George, Held Philip J., Janieson, Sandra, and Wooldrldge,
   Judith, "Group Practice Statistical File Documentation." Princeton: Mathematica
   Policy Research, Inc., 1979.

Brown, Charles, 'Firms' Choice of Method of Pay," Industrial and Labor Relations
   Review, February 1990, 43, 155-182.

Cave, Jonathan and Salant, Stephen W., "Cartels That Vote: Agricultural Marketing
   Boards and Induced Voting Behavior," in Public Reoulatiori: New Persøectives on
   Institutions and Policies, Elizabeth E. Bailey, ed.. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
   1987, 255-284.

Epstein. Larry G., "Decreasing Risk Aversion and Mean-Variance Analysis,"
   Econometrica, July 1985, 53, 945-962.

FitzRoy, Felix R. and Kraft, Kornelius, "Cooperation, Productivity, and Profit-
   Sharing," quarterly Journal of Econo&cs, 1987, 102. 23-35.

Frech, H.E. and Ginsburg. Paul B., "Optimal Scale in Medical Practice: A Survivor
   Analysis," Journal of Business, 1974, 47, 23-36.

Freidson, Eliot, Doctoring Tooether: A Study of Professional Social Control, New
   York: Elsevier, 1g75.

Gaynor, Martin, "Competition Within the Firm: Theory Plus Some Evidence From Medical
   Group Practice," Rand Journal of Economics, Spring 1989, 20, 59-76.

Gaynor, Martin and Pauly, Mark V., 'Compensation and Productive Efficiency in
   Partnerships: Evidence from Medical Group Practice," Journal of Political
   Economy, June 1990, 98, 544-573.

Getren, Thomas E., 'A 'Brand Name Firm' Theory of Medical Group Practice," Journal
   of   Industrial Ecormuics, 3984, 33, 199-215.
Gibbons, Robert J. and Murphy, Kevin J., "Optimal Incentive Contracts in the
   Presence of Career Concerns: Theory and Evidence," manuscript, Cambridge, MA:
   Massachusetts Institute of Technology, September 1989.

Gibbons, Robert J. and Murphy, Kevin J., "Relative Performance Evaluation for Chief
   Executive Officers," Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 1990, 43, 30-51.




                                          30
                                 REFERENCES (Cont'd.)

Glandon, Gerald 1. and Shapiro, Roberta J., "Trends in Physicians' Incomes,
   Expenses, and Fees: 1970-1979," Profile of Medical Practice. 1980, Gerald L.
   Glandon and Roberta J. Shapiro, eds., Chicago: American Medical Association,
   1980.

Goldberger, Arthur S., "The Interpretation and Estimation of Cobb-Douglas
   Functions," Econometrlca, July-October 1968, 35, 464-472.

Gonzalez, Martin and Eumiions, David, Socioeconomic Characteristics of Medical
   Practice in the U.S., Chicago: American Medical Association, 1988.

Hausman, Jerry A., "Specification Tests in Econometrics,TM Econometrica, November
   1978, 46, 1251-1277.

Held, Philip J. and Reinhardt, Uwe E., eds., Analysis of Economic Performance in
   Medical Grouo Practices," Project Report 79-OS, Princeton: Mathematica Policy
   Research, Inc., 1979.

HolmstrSm, Bengt, "Moral Hazard in Teams," Bell   Journal of   Econocics, Autumn 1982,
   13, 324-340.

Holmström, Bengt and Milgrom, Paul, "Aggregation and Linearity in the Provision of
   Intertemporal Incentives," Econometrica, March 1987, 55, 303-328.

I4olmstrbm, Sengt, and Tirole, Jean, "The Theory of the Firm," Handbook of
   Industrial Organization, Richard Schmalensee and Robert Willig, eds., Amsterdam:
   North-Holland, 1989.

Ireland, Norman J. and Law, Peter J., The Economics of Labour Managed Enterorises,
   New York: St. Martin's Press 1982.

Jensen, Michael C. and Murphy, Kevin J., "Performance Pay and Top-Management
   Incentives," Journal of Political Econo.v, April 1990, 98, 225-264.

Jewitt, Ian, "Justifying the First-Order Approach to Principal-Agent Problems,"
   Econocitrica, September 1988, 56, 1177-1190.

Kimbell, Larry J. and Lorant, John H., 'Physician Productivity and Returns to
   Scale," I4epltIi Services Research, 1977, 12. 367-379.

Kralewskl, John E., Pitt, Laura, and Shatin, Deborah, "Structural Characteristics of
   Medical Group Practices," Administrative Science Quarterly, 1985, 30, 34-45.

Lee, Robert H., "The Economics of Group Practice: A Reassessment," Advances in
   Health Econosics arid Health Services Research, Richard Scheffler and Louis
   Rossiter, eds., Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1990, in press.

Leonard, Jonathan S., "Executive Pay and Corporate Performance, Industrial arid
  Labor Relations Review, iggo, 43, 3-12.


                                          31
                                  REFERENCES (Cont'd.)

Marder, William D. and ZuckerTflan, Stephen, "Competition and Medical Groups: A
   Survivor Analysis," Journal of Health Econorics, 1985, 4, 167-176.

Meyer. Jack, Two-Moment Decision Models and Expected Utility Maximization,"
   kierican Economic Review, June 1987, 77, 421-430.

Newhouse, Joseph P., "The Economics of Group Practice." Journal of 4uman
   Resources, Winter 1974. 37-56.

Pencavel, John, "Work Effort, On-The-Job Screening, and Alternative Methods of
   Remuneration." Research •in Labor Economics, Ronald Ehrenberg, ed., Greenwich, CT.
   JAI Press 1971. 1, 225-258.

Reinhardt, Uwe E., Pauly, Mark   V., and Held, Philip J., "Financial Incentives and
   the Economic Performance of   Group Practitioners," Analysis of Economic
   Performance in #dical GrouD   Practices, Philip J. Held and Uwe E. Reinhardt,
   eds.. Project Report 79-05,   Princeton: Mathematica Policy Research, Inc., 1979.

Schmalensee, Richard, 'Comparative Static Properties of Regulated Airline
   Oligopolies," Bell Journal of Economics, 1977, 8, 565-586.

Seller, Eric, *Plece Rate vs. Time Rate: The Effect of Incentives on Earnings,
   Review of Econo,iics and Statistics, August 1984, 66, 363-375.

Shaw, Kathryn L., "An Empirical Analysis of Risk Aversion and Income Growth,"
   manuscript. Pittsburgh: Carnegie-Mellon University, 1989.

Sloan, Frank A., "Effects of Incentives on Physician Performance," Health ManDower
   and Pruductivity, John Rafferty, ed., Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath, 1914, 58-84.

Spulber, Daniel F., "Incentives and Costs in the Competitive Firm," manuscript, Los
   Angeles: University of Southern California, 1989.

United States General Accounting Office, "Medicare: Physician Incentive Payments by
   Prepaid Hea'th Plans Could Lower Quality of Care," Report GAO/HRD-89-29, December
   1989.

Wolf, Charles and Pohlman, Larry, "The Recovery of Risk Preferences from Actual
   Choices," Econometrica, 1983, 51, 843-850.

Wu, De-Min, Alternative Tests of Independence Between Stochastic Regressors and
   Disturbances." Econometrica, July 1973, 41, 733-750.

Zeckhauser, Richard, Medical Insurance: A Case Study of the Tradeoff between Risk
   Spreading and Appropriate Incentives," Journal of Economic Theory, 1970, 2, 10-




                                           32
                                          TABLE I


                   MEANS OF THE COMPENSATION SCALE AND GROUP      SIZE BY
                             IMPORTANCE OF REGULAR INCOME'

Importance of              Compensation
Recular Incomeb                Scale                         Grout Size
      1                         7.33                         24.22
                               (0.32)                         (1.76)
      2                         6.27                         24.42
                               (0.16)                        (0.83)
      3                         6.02                         23.11
                               (0.12)                        (0.60)
      4                         5.38                         22.79
                               (0.20)                        (0.94)




 Standard   errors reported In parentheses below    means.
 4—Very Important, 3—Important, 2—Somewhat Important, 1—Of Little or No Importance
                                            TABLE 2

                         COMPARATIVE STATIC EFFECTS ON


Variable    Comoarative Static Derivative'


a           h1/Ba —    -((1   -(!/n))Pôq/8z1)(Sz/8e1)}D                +



p           0e1/BP —   -([a   +   (1/n)(1   -
                                                a)18qfoz,)(az/3efl/D   +


                                                                       -
n           8e1/an —   ((1/n2)(1    -
                                        a)P8q/8z1)(8z/8e1)}/D

B                         0


                          0
cIa




'0 is the deteninant of the matrix forming the second order condition.

bNeither risk aversion nor risk (variance of income) affect the supply of
effort. This is due to the demand function being additively separable in its
deterministic and stochastic components.
                                              TABLE 3

                        COMPARATIVE STATIC EFFECTS FOR THE FIRM


                              Cpmparptiy! Static Deriyatiy


9/9B — (-(ö2u1/8n2)(a2u/aa8B) + (82u/aaan)(02u1/anaB)).IJITh



aa/J o1 — {-(82u1/8a2)(82u4/ana 2) + (82u4/Onöa)(82u1/öaS a12))JZO


        — (-(82u1/3n2)(a2u1/aaaP) ÷ (a2u1/asn)(a2u1,anap))+IJI> 0'



Bn/3B * (-(82u1/8a2)(a'u1/ôriaB) +        (82u1/9n3a)(82u1/8SB))J> 0


an/a        — (-(32u1/82)(a2u1/8no12)     +
                                              (82u1/an8n)(82u1/öaS o2)}+IJI 0


ön/8P   —
            (-(82u1/8c2)(82u1/BnöP)   +   (82u1/onaa)(82u1/aaaP)).IJI> a
                                               TABlE 4

                   FIRST-STAGE OLS COEFFICIENT ESTIMATES AND   T-STATISTICS

                    Log it
                    (Compensation                        Ln(Non-Physician
                    scaleic             Group size       hours)               Ln(Price)


Independent
Variables

Constant             6.47                    22.15***        393***               2.09*
                    (4.65)                   (6.10) .    (22.90)              (26.43)

Importance of       _0.61***                 -O.66           0.03**               0.003
regular incomed     (5.36)              (     2.15)      (   2.03)            (   0.45)

Preferred sized     0.04***                   0.76*          0.003***             O.003
                    (4.58)              (35.65)          (   2.59)            (   7.68)

Experienced         _0.12***                  0.40***        0.01
                    (2.81)              (     3.57)      (   2.49)            (   5.67)

Experience.          0.003***                -O.01           -0.0005          -
                                                                                  0.0003"
squaredd             (2.60)             (     4.85)      (   3.61)            (   4.65)

Foreign medical      -0.39                    4•73***        .0.32***         -   0.03
graduated            (0.67)             (     3.07)      (   4.50)            (   1.03)

Subspecialt?         -0.19                    2.36*          _0.17***             0.04***
                     (0.76)             (     3.58)      (   5.53)            (   2.71)

Percent general      -0.04                   -0.21           -0.0008          -
                                                                                  0.002
surgery              (5.53)             (     9.73)      (   0.83)            (   3.48)
Percent              -0.004                  0.02***         -0.002               0.0009
pediatrics           (1.36)             (     2.63)      (   5.40)            (   5.51)
Percent              -0.01"                  -0.01           -0.001             0.003***
obstetrics!          (3.59)              (    1.44)      (    2.67)           (18.91)
gynecology




•
           t-statistics are reported in parentheses below the parameter estimates.
      -
           Significant at 10% confidence level or better.
      -
           Significant at 5% confidence level or better.
      -
           Significant at 1% confidence level or better.
           The dependent variable is the ogit transformation of the compensation scale
           These are averages taken over physicians in each group.
                                         lADLE 4 (Cont'd.)

                  FIRST-STAGE OLS COEFFICIENT ESTIMATES AND TSTATISTICS

                   log It
                   (Compensation                     Ln(Non-Physician
                  scaler             GrouD size      hours                1n(Pric)
Independent
Variables

Percent            0.01               -0.08             O.001••*            0.oo2*t
internal          (4.57)             (10.67)           (4.26)             (15.71)
ned Ic I ne


Percent board     -0.002               0.03              0.002***          -0.000004
certified         (0.58)              (4.40)           (5.38)              (0.03)

Wage of a         -0.10                0.61***         0.009                0.01
registered        (1.38)              (3.06)           (0.94)              (2.46)
nurse

Wage of a         .0.41***             0.04           .0.08***             0.03***
licensed          (3.54)              (0.12)          (5.40)               (4.07)
practical nurse

Wage of a          0.05                0.07            0.0008             .0003**S
business          (3.64)              (2.22)          (0.52)              (4.27)
administrator

Wage of a          0.03               -0.13            0.05***             0.02***
certified lab     (0.37)              (0.64)          (5.39)              (4.13)
technician

Wage of an        _0.45***            .0.71*          _0.08***            .0.02*
uncertified lab   (2.99)              (1.74)          (4.53)              (1.78)
technician

Wage of a          0.04                j55***          0.009               0.01
graduate          (0.59)              (8.79)          (1.16)              (2.83)
physician assistant

Examining rooms   -0.003              0.06***         0.001               -0.0005
                  (2.36)             (16.46)          (7.08)              (6.63)

WlO                1.27**              1.34            0.34***            0.08**
                  (2.00)              (0.79)          (4.72)              (2.10)

Multispeclalty     l.51               0.20             0.03               QQ5*
                  (7.74)              (0.37)          (1.19)              (4.67)
                                           TABLE 4 (Cont'd.)

                  FIRST-STAGE 015 COEFFICIENT ESTIMATES AND T-STATLST1CS

                    Log it
                  (Compensation                         Ln(Non-Physician
                  scale)c            Grout size         hours)             Ln(Price)

Independent
Variables

Beds per capita    -0.14              0.15                0.001             -o.o2"
                   (2.52)             (0.98)             (0.21)             (6.38)

Physicians         0.05                0.72               0.02              0.02**
per capita         (0.30)             (1.77)             (1.25)             (2.30)

Rent               .002***             O.03***           -0.0007           _0.002*t
                   (4.97)             (2.20)             (1.16)             (6.12)

AFOC               0.20                O.71***           .0.03***            0.07
                    (3.92)            (5.29)             (4.34)            (22.80)

Population         0.0004***          -0.0002             0.0000!            0.00002
density            (2.96)             (0.65)             (0.71)             (2.15)

Per capita         0.00009            0.0005             -0.000005          0.00002
income             (1.01)             (2.26)             (0.51)             (3.37)

Education          0.20**             -0.93               0.02              0.005
                   (1.97)             (3.33)             (1.44)            (0.81)

                   0.10               0.60                0.11              0.45

                   11.49***           144.88             12.05***          80.37***

II                419                419                 419               419
                                           TABLE 5

         INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLE ESTIMATES OF THE CONDITIONAL DEMAND FUNCTION


    Indeoendent Variables                    DeDendent   Variable:   Ln(Office Visits)
    Constant                                                          3.86
                                                                     (9.18)
    Compensation Scal&                                                o.io*
                                                                     (3.24)
    Group size                                                       -0.QO6
                                                                     (3.67)
    Ln(Hours of non-physician personnel)                              o.1i
                                                                     (2 .   32)
    Ln(Price)
                                                                     (3.50)
    Exam Rooms                                                        O.00I*fl
                                                                     (2 .   52)
    Experience                                                        ØQ4***
                                                                     (5.06)
Experience, squared                                                  0.0o1**•
                                                                     (6. 00)
Foreign Medical Graduate                                             -0.11
                                                                     (1.25)
Sub Specialty
                                                                     (2.95)
Pediatrics                                                            0.19
                                                                     (2 .83)
Obstetrics/gynecology                                                -0.05
                                                                     (0.60)
Internal Medicine
                                                                     (4.78)
Board Certified                                                       0.02
                                                                     (0.35)
HMO                                                                  0.11
                                                                     (0.59)
Multispecialty Practice                                              -0.02
                                                                     (0.39)


N                                                                    1249


•
         t-statistlcs are reported in parentheses below the parameter estimates.
         The standard errors have been corrected for the use of instrumental
            variables.
         -
           Significant at 10% confidence level or better.
         -
           Significant at 5% confidence level or better.
         -
           Significant at 1% confidence level or better.
         Instrumental variable.
                                              TABLE 6

                     THE TRADEOFF BETWEEN MORAL HAZARD AND RISK SPREADING:

                ESTIMATES OF THE EFFECT ON AN INCREASE IN THE IMPORTANCE
                      OF REGULAR INCOME ON PHYSICIAN PRODUCTIVITY.'

                        Annua'        Office Visits                     Percent of
Source of Effectb       Change        Percent Change      Val uecd    Annual Inco5ec

Compensation              -992              -25.75%        -$13,094              -11.70%
  Scale

Group Size                + 46          +     1.19%       +     607          + 0.54%

Non-Physician             + 31          + 0.96%           +     488          +    0.40%
  Inputs

TOTAL                     -872          -22.64%            -$11,999              -10.76%




• Effect of change  in Importance of regular income from I to 4.
  Evaluated at the  means.
  Calculated based  on a SO week year.
  Calculated based  on a mean price of $13.20 per office visit in the data.
• Calculated based  on a mean annual gross income for physicians of $111,900
  in 1978 (Glaridon and ShapIro, 1980).
                                FIGURE 1




                 RISK PREFERENCES
               FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION
     Number of Responses
1200—

                            .
10oo.

eoo-                       .—---__.

                           470
400                   .1

200                    .




  0
           I               2               3      4
                   Importance of Regular Income
                            FIGURE 2

               COMPENSATION SCALE
               FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION
      Number of Responses
300
       203
260                                                      'pp

200

160

100
                                            04
                                       61 —
 60

  0   Uia ILEEIIiI
       2346                            0
                                             I
                                             1
                                                 I
                                                 8
                                                     I
                                                     9   10

                            Compensation Scale
                          FIw I
                        GROUP SIZE
               FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION
      Number of Responses
500


400


300


200


100


 0
         4        6.6       1t6       20       37   80
                        Number of Physicians
                                     FIGURE 4


              COJQARING THE FI4'S CHOICE OF COIWENSATION I€THOD AND
              GROUP SIZE UNDER RISK NEUTRALITY MD UNDER RISK AVERSION




                                   U B0
                        Nr.




                                                   N1,     0 >0
a*j, A0                                                             A0, U 0=0
                                                             I'.
                                                            ha B>0
      a




                                          I




                              N1

          0
                        nt
                   4,%
                                        $   6         4,
                                                     4'




S.'.



                                                S.




                                S.   4;.' t'a




                   SQ

           •
       0' •4




               0
                   *
                       S   I'
Appeol x
                                         TABLE Al

                            VARIABLE ACRONYMS AND DEFINITIONS


Yarlable               Definition

Office Visits          The number of office visits by the physician per week


Compensation Scale     A scale varying between 1 and 10, increasing with strength
                       of relation between compensation and productivity

Price                  The usual, customary and reasonable price charged for an office
                       visit by the group

Wage of a Registered   The mean wage paid to registered nurses In the group
Nurse

Wage of a Licensed     The mean wage paid to licensed practical nurses in the group
Practical Nurse

Wage    a Business     The mean wage paid to business administrators in the group
Administrator

Wage of a Certified    The mean wage paid to certified laboratory technicians in the Lab
Technician             group

Wage of an Uncertified The mean wage paid to uncertified lab technicians in the group
Lab Technicians

Wage of a Graduate     The mean wage paid to graduate physician assistants in the group
Physician Assistant

Group Size             The number of full time equivalent physicians in the group

1*10                   Duimiy variable indicating if 50 percent or more of the
                       group's revenues are prepaid

Examining Rooms        The number of examining rooms per FIE M.D.

Hours of Non-Physician Total hours of non-physician medical personnel per week
Medical Personnel

Experience              Number of years since the physician graduated from medical school

General Practice,       Physician specialty dunmiles for general practice, pediatrics,
Pediatrics, Obstetrics! and obstetrics/gynecology, respectively - internal medicine Is
Gynecology              excluded.
                                              TABLE Al (Cont'd.)

                                  VARIABLE ACRONYMS AND DEFINITIONS


 Variable                 Definition

Multispecialty            Dunmiyvariable for whether the group is multi- or
Group                     single-specialty

Presence of Graduate      Dui.iiy variable for whether there a graduate physician
Physician Assistant       assistant

Importance of Regular    Varies between one and four, increasing with importance
Income to Physician

Preferred Size           The group size preferred by the physician

Board Certified          Dumy variable indicating if the physician Is board
                         certified

Foreign Medical          Duimiyvariable indicating if the physician graduated from a
Graduate                 foreign medical school

Subspecialty             Duniny variable indicating If the physician practices on a
                         subspeci al ty

Percent general          Percent of physicians in the group in these specialties
surgery. percent
pediatrics, percent
obstetrics/gynecology,
percent internal
medicine

Percent board            Percent of the group who are board certified
certified

Beds per capita          Hospital beds per 1,000 population in the county in which the
                         group is located. Takes on integer values €(I,6]

Rent                     The median gross rent in the group's county

AFDC                     Percent of the population on AFOC in the group's
                         county, lakes on integer values E(1,6J

Population density       Population per square mile In the group's county

Per Capita Income        Per capita incone in the group's county

Education                Median number of years of education of the over 25 population In
                         the group's county

Physicians per capita    Non-federal active physicians per 1,000 population in the groups
                         county
                                            TABLE A2

                               VARIABLE MEANS AND STANDARD ERRORS

Variable                                                     Standard Error

Office visits                                  94.23         58.65
Compensation scale                              6.16          2.18
Group size                                     21.13          8.73
Price                                          13.20          2.30
Importance of regular income                    2.78          0.37
Hours of non-physician                         55.65         13.97
   medical personnel
Examining rooms                                56.40         49.55
Experience                                     19.88         10.70
Foreign medical graduate                        0.09          0.28
Subspecialty                                    0.29          0.45
Pediatrics                                      0.17          0.38
obstetrics/gynecology                           0.13          0.33
Internal/medicIne                               0.36          0.48
Board certified                                 0.69          0.46
KIlO                                            0.06          0.28
Multispecialty                                  0.65          0.48
Preferred size                                 12.13          6.88
Percent general surgery                         7.68          6.62
Percent pediatrics                             13.63         16.95
Percent obstetrics/gynecology                  12.12         15.53
Percent internal medicine                      28.37         17.88
Percent board certified                        77.39         16.05
Wage of a registered nurse                      4.87          0.57
Wage of a licensed practical                    3.68          0.44
   nurse
Wage of a business administrator               12.23          3.47
Wage of a certified lab                         4.82          0.69
   technician
Wage of an uncertified lab                      3.65          0.29
   technician
Wage of a graduate physician                    6.94          0.64
   assistant
Bedsper capita                                  3.43          0.74
Physicians per capita                           1.52          0.32
Rent                                          103.76         14.19
AFDC                                            2.86          0.87
Population density                            524.35        423.57
Per capita income                            4735.66        736.97
Education                                      11.81          0.55
                                           TABLE A3

             THE VARIATION IN INDIVIDUAL PHYSICIAN PREFERENCES AND CHARACTERISTICS

                                 WITHIN VERSUS 8ENEEN GROUPS


                                                           Standard Deviations

Variable                                                Within            Betwein

Importance of regular incone                             0.61              0.583

Importance of regular hours                              0.59              0.589

Preferred group size                                    17.724            17.34

Experience                                               8.929             6.801

Foreign medical graduate                                 0.208             0.127

Board certified                                          0.345             0.339

Subspecialty                                             0.323             0.334
                                                    TECHNICAL APPEM)IX


I.    First Order         Conditions           for the Asvm,etric Model

      The group objective function Is:


      V. u1 —        aPq(.) +        (I/nfl          -
                                                         a)P2q(.)         -
                                                                              (l/n)FC
                 -    2p2 g2 - B(I/n)2(I                     - a)2p2          Ic2
                 —                                                                                 (Al)

      The FCC    are:

             • Pq -             (l/n)PIq       +   aP(8aj8z)(az/ae)(oe/8a)                     +

                      (1/nfl         -
                                         a)PI(aaJ8z1)(3z/Oe1)(öe/8a)
                      -
                              26(aP2 a2 -          (l/n9(1        -
                                                                      a)P2     2]
                      -                                  •   0,                                    (A2)
                              (3v1/ae1)(8e/Ja)

and


      3u1/ôn —       P(8qjBz)(8z/3e)(Je/8n)                           +


                      (i/n)(l        -
                                         a)PZ(DaJaz1)(az/8e1)(8e1/an) +                       (I/n)(L-a)Pq.
                                 +   (l/n9FC
                          -
                               (1/n1)(l    -
                                               a)PZq) + (2B/n3)(l                   -
                                                                                        a)2P2 Ic121
                          -                                  2
                               B(1/n)2    (1-a)2

                      - (8v1/Se)(ae/an)                  — 0,                                      (A3)


where      and a                are the output and variance associated with the additional

member.

       The basic results of this model are the same as those of the synnetric

model. The variables a and n are set so that marginal revenue, and marginal

cost (including disutility), and marginal risk are balanced. If there is no

                                                                  A-I
 risk or risk aversion (e.g., 8—0) these reduce to conditions for the first-

best, thus a—i and n—n. Moving from risk neutrality (8—0) to risk aversion

 (8>0) leads to ad and n>n. This can be seen by inspection of (A2) and (A3).

Further increases in risk aversion can have any effect which leads to

increased risk-spreading and decreased incentives. The illustrations in

Figure 5 apply regardless of assumptions regarding synmietry.



II. First Order Conditions with Price Eridopenous fSv,itric Model)

      au/oo — (P(3q/Bz)(az/8e1)           -
                                              (ôv,/8e1)j(8e1/aa)
                       - 28P2 a12(a + (I/n)(I -    a)]   —   0,                 (A4)

and




      8u1/ön       (P(8oJ8z)(Oz/3e.) -        (8v1/8e1)](Oe./an)+   (1/n2)FC
                   -
                       (I/n)aFC/8n   + (B/n2)(i - a)2P2
                                                        cjZl
                                                             — 0.              (AS)



and



               —   [P(Ooj8z)(az/ae)      -
                                              (8v1/8e1)]3e1/aP
                   + q + P(aWDP) -                 +   (I/n)(I-a)2] — 0.       (A6)




      The first order condition for price equates the marginal revenue from

quality supply effects, marginal revenue from price effects, marginal

(disutility) cost from quality supply effects and marginal risk effects to

zero. Since the marginal risk effects are negative, when risk effects are

absent, price will be higher. The effects of further increases in risk

aversion are also indeterminate here, but the combination of aa/8B0, Jn/8B<0,

and aP/8B>0 cannot occur, since this results in increased incentives and less

                                                 A-2
risk spreading in the presence of increased risk aversion.



III. Proofs That ,         (0. IL          n e (1- + w. and P                   Elo. + C),1

     A.     Proposition Al: a*             (0,   1).

            Proof: By contradiction.

            I. —t.
                8u1/aaI
                                —   - 2BP2o 2c0,                :.ac   1



            2. a0.
                au/aaI

                           +(2/n) BP2a12>O, :.a*)0
                So, a E    (0,1).     II




       B.    Corollary Al:      If B or a              —   0,   then a* •   I

             Proof: IfBora12—Othen
             aU/8aI..0 (l_a)((n_l)/fl)P(8P/aZj(oZt/ae,)(3e1/a0)>O

             for all a <   I,
               a.i. U


       C.    Protosition A2: fl e (1, •

              Proof: By contradiction.

             1. n—i.

                 au,/anj_, —        Fc_(dF/On)+(l-a)28S                2 > , n*          1.




 1We thank Rob Porter for suggesting these proofs.



                                                       A-3
      2. n •    ic
            8u1/On     I,    — (1-a)P(3oJJa1)(8z1/3e) (8e1/ôn)<O,
                                   ne <   4e

            So, n*E(1, +



0.   Corollary *2:          If B or a 2 — 0, then n is set to achieve optnaI
                          sni e.

     Proof:   When       Borg12— 0, a— I. So
                   —    (1/n2)FC-(L/n)(aFC/øn)   —   0.


F. Prooosjtion *3: P E (0, + e)

     Proof:   By       contradiction.
                   —q       0,
     So   N > 0.
     8u1/aPI,_ — — + C

     So P< I-c.




                                           A-4
