NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE TERM STRUCTURE OF INTEREST RATE DIFFERENTIALS IN A TARGET ZONE:
THEORY AND SWEDISH DATA

Lars E.O. Svensson

Working Paper No. 3374

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1990
Part of the work for this paper was done while I was a Visiting Scholar at the
Research Department at the International Monetary Fund.
I thank the Reaearch
Department for its hospitality. During the different stages of the work for
the paper I have benefitted from discussions with, and comments from, Giuseppe
Bertola, John Campbell, Avinash Dixit, Michael Dooley, Bernard Dumaa, Peter
Englund, Harry Flam, Alberto Giovannini, Nils Gottfries, Lars Jonung, Gabriela
Mundaca, Torsten Persson, Peter Sellin, Paul Soderlind, Ingrid Werner,
participants in seminars at Norges Bank, Sveriges Riksbank, and Uppsala
University and, in particular, Harald Lang, who showed me how to apply Fourierseries analysis to the problem. I also thank John Hassler for research
assistance, Molly Akerlund for editorial and secretarial assistance, and
Sveriges Riksbsnk and the Finance Department at the Stockholm School of
Economics for providing data. Remaining errors and obscurities are my own.
This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Studiea. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not thoae of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3374
June 1990

THE TERN STRUCTURE OF INTEREST RATE DIFFERENTIALS IN A TARGET ZONE
THEORY AND SWEDISH DATA

ABSTRACT

The term structure of interest rate differentials is derived in a model of a small open

economy with a target zone exchange rate regime. The target zone is modeled as a
regulated Brownian motion. The interest rate differentials are computed as the solution
to a parabolic partial differential equation with derivative boundary conditions, both via a

Fourier—series analytical solution and via a direct numerical solution. Several specific
properties of the term structure of interest rate differentials are derived. For instance, for
given time to maturity the interest rate differential is decreasing in the exchange rate, and
for given exchange rate the interest rate differential's absolute value and its instantaneous

variability are both decreasing in the time to maturity. Devaluation/realignment risks

are incorporated and imply upward shifts of the interest rate differentials. Some
implications of the theory are found to be broadly consistent with data on Swedish
exchange rates and interest differentials for the period 1986-1989.

Lars

E.0. Svensson
Institute for International Economic
Studies
University of Stockholm
S-106 91 Stockholm
SWEDEN

1

1. Introduction

After the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system, several countries have for many

years maintained target zone exchange rate regimes, rather than completely fixed
exchange rate regimes. In these target zones the exchange rate is allowed to float more or

less freely within a specified band, but foreign exchange interventions prevent the
exchange rate from moving outside the band. The European Exchange Rate Mechanism
within the European Monetary System has exchange rate bands for the member countries
of

percent, except Spain which has a *6 percent band (Italy's band was recently

reduced from

to

The Nordic countries outside EMS have unilateral target

zones; Sweden, for instance, has a band of *1.5 percent. Actually, most historical fixed
exchange rate regimes were in practice target zones, although with narrower bands: even

the Gold Standard had gold points, with a narrow band in between (see Yeager (1976,
p. 19—21, 322)).

The existence of target zone exchange rate regimes gives rise to many questions. For
instance, do target zone regimes with relatively narrow bands differ in essential ways from

completely fixed exchange rate regimes? Does the width of the exchange rate band
matter, and if so for what? Is there an optimal band? Do target zones give central banks
some degree of monetary independence, even if there is relatively free capital mobility?

With regard to the last question, it has indeed been argued that the Swedish target zone

gives Sveriges Riksbank some control over domestic interest rates. For instance, if the
Bank moves the krona close to the strong edge of its band, the krona can only depreciate

and not appreciate, and expectations of a depreciation within the band will increase

domestic interest rates above foreign interest rates (see for instance Jä.rnhäl.1 and
Lindenius (1989)).

The traditional theoretical literature on exchange rate regimes does not distinguish
narrow target zones from completely fixed exchange rates. Fixed exchange rate regimes

have traditionally been modeled as having completely fixed exchange rates, with free

2

capital mobility resulting in zero differentials between home and foreign interest rates
(absent devaluation risks) and a complete loss of monetary autonomy for small economies.

This framework is clearly inadequate for a discussion of the questions mentioned above.

Only very recently have researchers started to rigorously model and understand the
details of exchange rate determination within an explicit target zone.

Krugman (1988) presented the first model of an explicit rational expectations target
zone for the nominal exchange rate, using the framework of regulated Brownian motion.

He assumed infinitesimal foreign exchange interventions at the edges of a band for a
'fundamental,' the (log of the) ratio of money supply to money demand, preventing the
fundamental from moving outside the band. He showed that this implies an exchange rate

band which is narrower than the fundamental band (the 'honeymoon effect'), hence there
is an inherent stabilizing effect of a target zone. The reason for this inherent stabilizing is

that a weak currency implies expectations of future interventions to reduce the money
supply and strengthen the currency, and expectations of a future appreciation leads to an

immediate current strengthening of the currency. Krugman (1988) also extended the
analysis to an imperfectly credible target zone regime, where the regime collapses once
and for all to a free float with a given probability when the exchange rate reaches the edge
of its band.

A rapidly growing literature has since extended the analysis of target zones in various

directions.2 As a step in the understanding and evaluation of target zones it is important

1

Krugman (1987) was a discrete-time forerunner.

Before the development of the nominal exchange rate target zone model Dumas
(1989a) specified a two-country general equilibrium model with physical capital

movements where the real exchange rate moves in a band exactly like a target zone.
2
The exchange rate target zone model based on regulated Brownian motion has been

extended by Miller and Weller (1988, 1989a,b,c), Flood and Garber (1989), Froot and
Obstfeld (1989a, b), Klein (1989a, b), Krugman (1989), Bertola and Caballero (1989), and
Delgado and Dumas (1990). Pesach and Razin (1990) test the theory on Israeli data.
Harrison (1985), Dixit (1989a, b) and Dumas (1989b) discuss solution techniques for
problems with regulated Brownian motion. Dixit (1989a, b) also give references to the

rapidly growing literature in which the techniques of regulated Brownian motion are
applied to economic problems other than target zones, notably problems of irreversible
investment and hysteresis.

3

to understand the relation between exchange rate and interest rate determination. A
small economy's trade-off between the width of the exchange rate band and the variability

of interest rate differentials was examined in Svensson (1989). There I found that, for

reasonable parameters, the interest rate differential's asymptotic (unconditional)
variability is not monotonic but increases with the exchange rate band for narrow bands,
reaches a maximum, and then slowly decreases for wide exchange rate bands. In contrast,

the interest rate differential's instantaneous (conditional) variability is monotonic and

always decreasing in the exchange rate band. A devaluation/realignment risk was
incorporated and shown to imply an upward shift in the interest rate differential.3

The negative trade-off between the exchange rate band and the interest rate
differential's instantaneous variability implies that narrow target zones have the largest
instantaneous variability of the interest rate differential. An exchange rate band of about
*1 percent is in this aspect quite different from a completely fixed exchange rate regime,

with a zero variability of the interest rate differential. With a il.5 percent exchange rate

band, for reasonable parameters the interest rate differential's instantaneous standard

deviation is about 3 percent per year. (The expected time before the exchange rate
reaches the edge, starting form the middle of its band, may for such a narrow exchange

rate band still be almost a year (see appendix), so the instantaneous variability is
certainly relevant.)

The analysis in Svensson (1989) only concerns the instantaneous interest rates, say

overnight interest rates. The implications for longer term interest rates are at least as

important. For instance, it is often argued that the three-month interest rate has the
largest effect on short term capital movements. Most borrowing and lending is certainly

not at overnight interest rates. There is also reason to expect that longer interest rates
behave differently from shorter ones. For instance, since in the longer run (at least with
credible bands) the exchange rate variability is bounded by the band, the exchange rate
3

1 also showed that an endogenous risk premium is sufficiently small as not to matter,

in particular for narrow exchange rate bands, and that therefore uncovered interest
arbitrage seems to be a reasonable approximation for narrow bands.

4

variability per unit of time to maturity decreases with the time to maturity. Therefore,
we might expect both the variability and absolute value of interest rate differentials for
long terms to be less than for short terms.

In the present paper, the interest rate differentials for arbitrary terms are derived and

examined. That is, we compute the complete term structure of interest rate differentials
and derive its properties. This task is complicated by the fact that the exchange rate ina
target zone is in theory a complicated non-linear and heteroscedastic stochastic process.

We will see that the term structure of interest rate differentials can be expressed as the

solution to a so-called parabolic partial differential equation with derivative boundary
conditions (smooth pasting conditions).

This equation is a variant of the partial

differential equations arising in option pricing theory (cf. Merton (1973)). The solution to

the equation will be computed in two different ways: via the analytical Fourier-series

solution (using methods described in Churchill and Brown (1987)) and via a direct

numerical method (using methods described in Gerald and Wheatley (1989)). The
solution is then used to derive some testable implications about the term structure of
interest rate differentials. We also consider the effect of devaluation/realignment risks on

the term structure.

Data on the term structure of Swedish interest rate differentials are examined, and
some implications of the theory are found to be broadly consistent with the data.
There exists an extensive and elaborate literature on theory and empirical estimates of

the term structure of interest rates (see for instance the surveys by Shiller and McCulloch

(1987) and Singleton (1987)).4 The theory of the term structure of interest rate
differentials developed here should of course be seen as complement and not a substitute

to that theory: For a small open economy which faces an exogenous term structure of
world interest rates, the domestic term structure of interest rates follows from the term
structure of interest rate differentials. The term structure of interest rate differentials is

4

Ekdahl and Warne (1990) provide a study of the Swedish term structure of interest

rates.

5

related via interest parity conditions to the term structure of expected currency
depreciation, if domestic and world capital markets are sufficiently integrated. The term
structure of expected currency depreciation can be explicitly characterized in an exchange

rate target zone. This way, the route via the term structure of interest rate differentials
offers a shortcut.

Simultaneously, the term structure of world interest rate may be

determined according to the established theories, and the term structure of the domestic
interest rates may also fulfill the equilibrium conditions of the established theories.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents Krugman's (1988) target zone

model. Section 3 derives the interest rate differential for different terms. Section 4

discusses the interest rate differentials' variability.

Section 4 incorporates a

devaluation/realignment risk. Section 5 presents the empirical results. Section 6 includes
a summary and conclusions. An appendix specifies the expression for the expected time to

bit the edge of an exchange rate band, a variant of the Feynman-Kac formula for
regulated Brownian motion, the analytical Fourier-series solution to the resulting partial
differential equation, and the direct numerical solution to the partial differential equation.
The appendix also includes a discussion of the interest rate differential's variability.

2. The Exchange Rate

We use the basic loglinear model of the exchange rate. The log of the exchange rate

at time r, e(r), is equal to a 'fundamental,' f(r), plus a term proportional to the expected
change in the log exchange rate,
(2.1)

e(r) = f(r) + cEtde(r)]/dr, a> 0,

where Eis the expectations operator.5

This exchange rate equation can be seen as a general asset-pricing relation. It can
also be seen as the result of a simple monetary exchange rate theory for a small open

S

E[de(r)]/dr denotes lim3

{Ele(r + s)} - e(r)}/s.

6

economy. In this case the fundamental is the sum of two components,

f(r)=m(r)+tr),

(2.2)

(the log of) the domestic money supply, m, and (the negative of the log of) a composite
money demand shock, v, called velocity. Velocity is given by

t.(r) =

(2.3)
Here

- y(r) + q(r) -

p*(r) + ai*(r) + ap(r) -

is the elasticity of money demand with respect to output, p is the log of home

output, q is the log of the real exchange rate, p is the log of the foreign price level, is
(the absolute value of) the semi—elasticity of money demand with respect to the home

nominal interest rate, i'

is

the foreign nominal interest rate, p is an exogenous risk

premium which equals the interest rate differential less the expected exchange rate
depreciation, and f is a money demand disturbance.

In what follows, velocity will be an exogenous stochastic process whereas the money

supply will be a stochastic process under direct control by a monetary authority.
Together these stochastic processes will determine the endogenous stochastic process of
the exchange rate via equation (2.1).
The saddle—path solution to (2.1) can be written

r) = ETJ

(2.4)

{e[-(s -

the expected present value of the path of future fundamentals over

where Er

denote

, discounted

by 1/a,
expectations conditional upon information available at time r. The

saddle-path solution excludes bubbles. The expected value of a bubble would grow
exponentially in the present model. Since we are going to discuss exchange rates which
are restricted to a target zone, it makes particular sense to exclude bubbles. Henceforth

6
The exchange rate is measured in units of home currency per unit of foreign currency.
The model consists of the money demand function, m - p =
- ci + e, the definition of

the real exchange rate, q = e + p - p, and the definition of the risk premium, p =
- - Ede]/dt. Elimination of p and i, assumed to be endogenous and flexible, gives
(2.1)-(2.3).
See Froot and Obstfeld (1989a) for an interpretation in terms of a two—country model.

See also Miller and Weller (1988, 1989b) for an interpretation in terms of Dornbusch's
overshooting model.

7

we shall therefore only discuss saddle-path solutions to (2.1).?

In order to model a target zone for the exchange rate, we assume that foreign
exchange market interventions, which directly affect the money supply, are undertaken to

prevent the fundamental to move outside a specified band for the fundamental. As we
shall see this will imply a well defined band for the exchange rate.5

Hence we assume that there are lower and upper bounds for the fundamental,

f and [, such that the fundamental fulfills

f ( f(r) 1.

(2.5)

With interventions affecting the money supply, the stochastic process for the fundamental
obeys

(2.6)

df(r) = dm(r) + dt(r),

where we now let dm represent the effect of foreign exchange market interventions on
domestic money supply. Velocity is assumed to follow a Brownian motion with drift p

and instantaneous standard deviation c (this obviously involves conditions on the
components in (2.3),
(2.7)

dv(r) =

dr + udz(r),

where (r) is a Wiener process with Eldz] = 0 and E[dz2j = dr. Inside the band, there are
no interventions, dm = 0, and the fundamental follows
(2.8)
1

df(r) = dt(r) = pdr + ad2(r).

A bubble to (2.1) is a stochastic process B(r) that can be added to the solution (2.4)

and produce another solution. Such a bubble must obviously fulfill B(r) =
cE7.[dB(r)]/dr, that is, it has an expected growth rate equal to lick. Any stochastic
process of the form dB(r) = [B(r)/ck]dr + a(r)dz(r) will do (with z(r) a Wiener process,

and where o-(r) could be a function of B(r)). A special case is the deterministic
exponential B(r) = B(0)exp(r/ck).

Since > 0 in the present model, the expected value

of a bubble would grow indefinitely.

As Flood and Garber (1989) and Froot and Obstfeld (1989a) have emphasized, it is
not sufficient to just specify that interventions will occur when the exchange rate reaches

the edges of the band. This is because there are several different ways to intervene to
defend a given exchange rate band. In order to have a determinate equilibrium it is
therefore necessary to specify exactly how the interventions are undertaken.
As argued in Svensson (1989), if an exchange rate band is announced together with

the rule that interventions will be infinitesimal and undertaken at the edges of the band
only, a unique fundamental band can be inferred from the exchange rate band also if the
fundamental band is not explicitly announced.

8
At the edges of the band, there are infinitesimal interventions to prevent the fundamental

from moving outside the band.9 These interventions can be represented by lower and
upper 'regulators,' L and U, such that

dm(r) = dL(r) — dU(r),

(2.9)

where dL and dUare nonnegative, dL represents increases in money supply and is po

only if f = 1 and dUrepresents reductions in money supply and is positive only if f = f.
Once the fundamental moves inside the band, the interventions cease. This implies that
the fundamental is a regulated Brownian motion.'°

The saddle-path solution to the differential equation (2.1) under these circumstances
will be a twice differentiable function of the fundamental, e(r) = e(f(r)). More precisely,

it is given by

f

e(f) = + ap + A1exp(A1f) + A2exp(A2f),

(2.10)

where A1 and A2 are the roots to the characteristic equation in A,

(2/2)A2 + apA —1 = 0,

(2.11)

and where the constants A1 and A2 are determined from the much discussed "smooth
pasting" conditions,
(2.12a)

ej(I) = e1(fl = 0,

that the function e(f) should be flat at the edges of the fundamental bandit The smooth
pasting conditions and (2.10) then imply
(2.12b)

1 + A1A1exp(A1f) + A2A2exp(A2f) = 0 and

1 + A1A1exp(A1fl +

A2A2exp(A2fl = 0,
from which the constants A1 and A2 can be solved. 12

(2.12c)

9

Flood and Garber (1989) extend the target zone model to include finite interventions.

10

See

Harrison (1985) for the theory of regulated Brownian motion.

11

See

Krugman (1988), Dixit (198gb) and Dumas (1989b) for further discussion of the

smooth pasting conditions. As emphasized by Dumas (198gb), the smooth pasting

conditions here is really an infinitesimal value-matching condition, arising for any given
infinitesimal regulator. This condition should be distinquished from "higher-order
contact" conditions resulting from optimizing.
12
Application of Ito's lemma on Elde(f)]/dr in (2.1) results in the ordinary differential

9

The function e(f) thus derived can be shown to be increasing, and the exchange rate
will have lower and upper bounds given by

e = e(J) and =

(2.13)

The familiar S-shaped graph of the exchange rate function is shown in Figure 1. The

smooth pasting conditions imply that the exchange rate curve is tangent to the edges of

the exchange rate band. The parameters are = 0, zero fundamental drift;

= .1, which

corresponds to an instantaneous standard deviation of the exchange rate of 10 percent per

year under free float; and a = 3, which corresponds to a money demand interest rate
elasticity of .3 with a 10 percent nominal interest rate. The bounds for the fundamental

in Figure 1 are 9.4 percent (f = -f = .094), which under zero fundamental drift
corresponds to symmetric bounds for the exchange rate equal to 1.& percent ( = e =
.015), the width of the Swedish exchange rate band. This is the set of parameters for
which all diagrams below will be constructed.

3. The Intert Rate Differential

Let i*(r;) denote the foreign nominal interest rate on a pure discount foreign currency

bond purchased at time r, with term (time to maturity) t, that is, maturing at time r + t,

0. These foreign interest rates are given for our small open economy. The foreign
interest rates may be stochastic processes (derived, say, as in Cox, Ingersoll and Ross
(1985)) or deterniimstic —

as

long as they are exogenous to our small open economy. Let

equation e(f) = I +ape1(f)+oa2e11(f)/2. The solution to this differential equation is
(2.10).

In the case of a zero fundamental drift and a symmetric fundamental band, p = 0
and f = -[, there is a neat symmetric solution. Then the roots and
can be written

= - < 0 and A2 =\ > 0, where A =

/a. The constants A1 and A2 fulfill A1

= A > 0 and A2 = -A < 0, with A = 1/[2Acosh(Af)J. The target zone exchange rate
can then be written as e(f) = f - sinh(Af)4Acosh(A[)]. (We recall that the hyperbolic
sine and cosine fulfill sinh(z) = [exp(z) - exp(-x)J/2 and cosh(z) = [exp(z) + exp(-x)]/2.)

10

us also assume that we can disregard any risk premium between home and foreign nominal

bonds, and assume uncovered interest rate parity.13 Let i(f ,r;t) denote the nominal

interest rate on a home currency pure discount bond, purchased at time r with the
fundamental 1(r)

equal

to 1 and maturing at time r + t, t > 0. Then we assume the

following approximate form of uncovered interest rate parity:
(3.1)

Ele(f(r + t)) 1(r) = 11 - e(f)
i(f,r;t) — z*(r,t) = _______________________________

The difference between the home term-t interest rate and the foreign term—t interest rate

equals the expected change in the (log) exchange rate (the expected depreciation until
maturity) divided by the time to maturity. Since the exchange rate and fundamental are

Markov processes, the right-hand side of (3.1) depends only on the level of the
fundamental at the time of purchase, f, and the term, t, not on the time of purchase of
the bond, r. Therefore, the interest rate differential, the left-hand side of (3.1), which we

will denote by E(f ;t), also depends only on f and t. Since both sides of (3.1) are
independent of the purchase time, we can set the purchase time equal to zero and define
the interest rate differential as
(3.2a)

cS(f;t) =

Ete(f(t))

I

f(0) = fJ

-

e(f)

, t> 0.

The interest rate differential for instantaneous bonds, 5(f;0), will then be given by

(3.2b)

ö(f;0) = lim

t - 0+

ö(f;t) = Elde(f(r))}/dr.

The instantaneous interest rate differential equals the expected rate of change, the drift, of
the exchange rate.

The interest rate differential for very long terms approach zero, since the numerator
on the right-hand side in (3.2a) is bounded,

13 The risk premium should be very small in narrow target zones, as shown in Svensson
(1989,1990), so uncovered interest arbitrage should be a good approximation.
Note that it is the foreign exchange risk premium for the same domestic and foreign

term that is assumed to be small. There may very well be significant term premia

between foreign currency bonds of different terms, This would show up in the exogenous
foreign interest rates ;*(r;t). With uncovered interest parity the same risk premia would
then show up between home currency bonds of different terms.

11

(3.2c)

(f; ) = urn (f;t) = 0.

3.1 Free Float

Before further consideration of a target zone, let us briefly consider a free float,
meaning an exchange rate regime without any interventions.

First we specify what the exchange rate is under a free float. We assume that under a

free float the money supply m is held constant at, for simplicity, a zero level, m = 0.

Then the fundamental is simply equal to velocity, I = v. Velocity and hence the
fundamental follow the Brownian motion (2.8). This implies that the probability

distribution of f(s) at times, conditional upon 1(r) = f at time r, s > r, is normal with

mean f + (s - r) and variance i2(s - r). By directly integrating (2.4) we see that the
solution to the exchange rate equation (2.1) is simply
(3.3)

e(r) = 1(r) + c.

It then follows from (3.2) that the interest rate differential fulfills
(3.4)

5(f;t)=p,

t0.

The interest rate differential is equal to the constant expected rate of change of the

exchange rate, the expected rate of depreciation of the home currency, and it is
independent of the term and the fundamental.

3.2 Target Zone

Next we shall consider the target zone exchange rate regime, described by the

stochastic process for the fundamental, the regulated Brownian motion (2.2) and
(2.5)-(2.9), and the stochastic process for the exchange rate, described by (2.10)—(2.12).

For zero term, the instantaneous interest rate differential is by (3.2b) and (2.1) easy to
compute as
(3.5)

ö(f;0) = [e(f) - f]/a.

For positive terms, it is more difficult to compute the interest rate differentials (3.2a).

The difficulty lies in computing the expected exchange rate at maturity on the right-hand

12

side of(3.2a),

h(f;t) = Ekf(t)) 1(0) = 11.

(3.6)
This

is difficult since the exchange rate is a complicated nonlinear heteroscedastic

stochastic process, with variable drift and instantaneous standard deviation.
Application of a finite-horizon variant of Harrison's (1985) infinite-horizon version of

the Feynman-Kac formula for regulated Brownian motion (see appendix for details)
shows, after some manipulations, that the function h(f ;t) defined in (3.6) will be the
solution to the partial differential equation,
(3.7a)

ht(f;t) = zhj(f;t) + (1/2)2h11(f;t), f I

f, t> 0,

with the initial condition
(3.7b)

h(f;0) = e(f),

/ I 1,

and the derivative boundary conditions

(3.7c)

h1(J;t) = 0 and h1(f;t) = 0, t

0.

Equation (3.7a) is a so-called parabolic partial differential equation, similar to those
that arise in option pricing problems (see Merton (1973)). The initial condition (3.7b) is

obvious. The derivative boundary conditions (3.7c) are smooth pasting conditions like

(2.12a). (For equal to zero the partial differential equation is identical to the so-called
heat equation in physics which describes thermal diffusion; see Churchill and Brown
(1987).)

The intuition for the smooth pasting conditions for the expected maturity exchange
rate is similar to, although somewhat more involved than, the smooth pasting conditions

for the exchange rate: For a fixed future date T, define the the stochastic process
Ff(r),r) according to
(3.8)

F(f,r) = h(f;T- T),

r

T.

That is, F(f(r),r) is the expectation at cakndar time r, given the value of the
fundamental at time r, of the exchange rate at a fixed future date T (h(f;t) is a function

of term). Let us express (3.7) in terms of Ff,r). It is shown in the appendix that (3.8)
and Ito's lemma implies that (3.7a) is equivalent to

13

EdFf(r),r)] = 0,

(3.9a)

J f(r) f, r

that is, the expected change in Ff(r),r) is zero. The initial condition (3.7b) is now
equivalent to a terminal condition,

FJ,T) = e(f).

(3.9b)

Since by (3.8) F1(f,r) = h1(f;T- r), the smooth pasting conditions (3.7c) for h(f;t) are
equivalent to the smooth pasting conditions

Fj(f,r) = 0, and Fj(f,r) = 0, r

(3.9c)

T,

for Ff,r).
Let us now propose that there exists a solution h(f;t) to (3.7a) and (3.7b) that does

not fulfill the smooth pasting conditions (3.7c) for all t 0. Then there also exists a
solution F(f,r) fulfilling (3.9a) and (3.9b) but not the smooth pasting conditions (3.9c).

This solution is also the (mathematical, but not economically meaningful) solution to

(3.9a) and (3.9b) under a free float when no interventions are undertaken and the
fundamental is allowed to drift freely outside the fundamental band. (We then interpret
the function e(f) in (3.9b) as referring to the mathematical extension of the exchange rate

function (2.10), with (2.11) and (2.12), to values of the fundamental outside the
fundamental band.) Suppose that Ff,r) instead of fulfilling the smooth pasting condition

is increasing at the upper edge of the fundamental band, Fj(f,r) > 0, for a particular

r<

T.

Such an Ff,r) is illustrated in Figure

by the dashed curve, increasing at

point Y at the upper edge of the fundamental band. Under a free float, at point Y the
fundamental can either decrease and move inside the band or increase and move outside

the band. We know that F(f,r) fulfills (3.9a) for f =

[

under a free float. If we impose

the band, interventions prohibit the fundamental from taking values above f. Then, at

point Y, the fundamental can either stay the same or decrease, never increase. Since

F(f,r) is increasing, it follows that it must now be the case that EtdFf,r)] <

0,

in

violation of (3.9a). Hence the proposed F(f,r) and h(f;t) cannot be a solution with the
band. The only case when F(f,r) and h(f;t) can be a solution both with and without the
band is when they are neither increasing or decreasing at the edges of the band, that is,

14

the smooth pasting conditions (3.7c) and (3.9c) must be fulfilled. Such an P1f ,r) is
illustrated by the solid curve through point X in Figure 2. This completes the discussion
of the intuition of the smooth pasting conditions.

The partial differential equation (3.7a) with initial condition (3.7b) and boundary
conditions (3.7c) can be solved in (at least) two different ways. First, it has an analytical

Fourier-series solution, which can be derived with methods described in for instance

Churchill (1963). This series involve a summation of infinitely many terms, and in
practice this analytical solution has to be computed numerically as a summation of a
truncated series. The Fourier—series solution is presented in the appendix. Second, the
partial differential equation can be solved in a direct numerical way, using for instance the

so-called explicit method described by Gerald and Wheatley (1989). This method of

solution is also presented in the appendix.

It is reassuring that both methods of

computing the solution give the same result.

The numerical solution to the expected maturity exchange rate h(f;t) is illustrated in

Figures 3a-c, for a zero fundamental drift.

Figure Sa shows the expected maturity

exchange rate as a function of the fundamental, for terms equal to 0, 1, 3, 6, 12, and 60
months. For zero term the expected exchange rate, of course, coincides with the current

exchange rate, the solid curve. For positive terms the expected maturity exchange rate
has a similar but flatter S-shape, still increasing in the fundamental and flat at the edges.

The expected maturity exchange rate lies between the current exchange rate and the
exchange rate's unconditional mean. (With a symmetric band and zero fundamental drift,

the exchange rate's unconditional mean is zero.) The further into the future the maturity,
the closer the expected maturity exchange rate is to the unconditional mean. This is seen

also in Figure b, which shows the expected maturity exchange rate as a function of the
term for given levels of the fundamental equal to zero, * half the fundamental band, and *
the full fundamental band (that is, f equals 0 %, *4.7 %, and *9.4 %). The solid curve

corresponds to the fundamental and the exchange rate being at their lower edges. The
expected exchange rate five years ahead or more is practically equal to the unconditional

15

mean.

Figure Sc shows a three-dimensional graph of the expected maturity exchange rate as
a function of both the fundamental and the term.

Given the behavior of the expected maturity exchange rate h(f;t), it is then straightforward to compute the interest rate differential for positive terms as
(3.10)

5(f;t) =

h(f;t)- e(f)

, for I > 0.

The interest rate differential for a given positive term can be found in Figure 3a, first, by

taking the vertical signed difference between the corresponding expected maturity
exchange rate curve and the current exchange rate curve and, second, by dividing the

difference by the term. The interest rate differential is illustrated in Figures 4a-d.
Figure a shows the interest rate differential as a function of the fundamental, for the
same terms as in Figure 3a, that is, 0, 1, 3, 6, 12, and 60 months. The solid curve is the
instantaneous (zero-term) interest rate differential, ö(f;0), which coincides with the drift

of the exchange rate and the expected instantaneous depreciation of the currency, and

which can easily be computed according to (3.5). The properties of the instantaneous
interest rate differential are extensively examined in Svensson (1989). Here it is only
necessary to note that it is decreasing in the fundamental. In the left and lower part of

the fundamental and the exchange rate bands, that is when the currency is strong,
expectations of future interventions to increase the money supply imply expectations of a
depreciation of the currency and hence a positive interest rate differential. Conversely, in

the right and upper part of the fundamental and exchange rate band, expectations of
future interventions to reduce the money supply imply expectations of an appreciation
and a negative interest rate differential. The instantaneous interest rate differential does
not fulfill the smooth pasting conditions.'4

'

The

instantaneous interest rate differential is, in the case with zero drift and

symmetric bands, by footnote 11 and (3.5) given by 5(f;t) = -sinh(\f)/[a.\cosh(.[)].

The interest rate differential's derivative with respect to the fundamental is then given by

51(f;t) = -cosh(\f)/[oosh(A[)], and the derivative at the edges are oj(J;t) =

16

For positive terms the interest rate differential curves are flatter than for zero term,

except for very short terms and in the middle of the band. In contrast to the
instantaneous interest rate differential, positive—term interest rate differentials fulfill the

smooth-pasting conditions and are flat at the edges of the band.' This implies that the

derivative of the interest rate differential with respect to the fundamental, j(f;t), is
discontinuous at t =

0.

Figure b shows the interest rate differential as a function of the

term for the same levels of the fundamental as in Figure 3b (zero, half the fundamental

band, and the full fundamental band). The solid curve corresponds to the fundamental
and exchange rate being at the lower edges of their bands. The interest rate differential is

decreasing in the term, except for very short terms and intermediate levels of the
fundamental, where it is approximately flat. For long terms the expected maturity
exchange rate is close to its unconditional mean, and the absolute value of the interest
rate differential is approximately the distance between the exchange rate's unconditional
mean and its current level, divided by the term, which will be decreasing in the term. For

shorter terms, the difference between the exchange rate's expected maturity value and
current value (the vertical difference between the corresponding curves in Figure 3a) is
increasing in the term, which effect goes the other way. Except for very short terms and
intermediate levels of the fundamental, the effect of dividing by the term dominates.

We also see that for very long terms, the interest rate differential approaches zero, in
accordance with (3.2c).

Figure jc shows a three-dimensional graph of the interest rate differential as a
function of both the fundamental and the term.

Figure (d shows the interest rate differential as a function of the exchange rate rather

than the fundamental, for given terms. We note that for positive terms, the relationship
is approximately linear, and more so for longer terms.

= -1/cr < 0.
'5 The interest rate differential fulfills the smooth pasting conditions for positive
maturities, since by (3.13) 6 = (h1 - e1)/t and both h(f;t) and e(f) fulfill the smooth

pasting conditions.

17

We see that we get very specific conclusions about the properties of the interest rate
differential for different terms. These specific properties certainly invite empirical testing

of the target zone model, in particular the relations between the term structure of interest

rate differentials and the exchange rate depicted in Figure 4d. We shall return to Figure
4d when we look at some data. But first we shall deal with devaluation risk.

4. Devaluation risk

So far the target zone exchange rate regime has been assumed to be perfectly credible.

Let us now extend our analysis of the term structure of interest rate differentials by
allowing for a devaluation/realignment risk.

There are several ways of modeling devaluations/realignments. We follow Svensson

(1989) and model devaluations as reoccurring with some given constant probability,
regardless of where in the band the exchange rate lies. This will allow a simple analytic
solution of the exchange rate equation. Also, some real world devaluations seem indeed to

occur when the exchange rate is in the interior of the band.16 More precisely we model

devaluations as occurring according to a Poisson process Mr) with constant parameter
u> 0, meaning that during the interval dr the process will take at least one jump of unity

with probability vdr + o(dr) and remain unchanged with probability (1 - zidr) + o(dr).17
Then Mr), taking integer values, can be interpreted as the number of devaluations that
have occurred up to and induding time r.
A devaluation is then modeled as a simultaneous shift of the same magnitude g in the
lower and upper bounds for the fundamental as well as in the money supply. (A positive g

corresponds to a net devaluation, a negative to a net revaluation.) Then a devaluation

16
For instance, when Sweden devalued in September 1981 and October 1982 the Krona's
value was above previous minimum values.
See Miller and Weller (1988, 1989a) and Bertola and Caballero (1989) for an analysis
of repeated realignments that occur with a given probability at the edge of the band.

'7

We let

o(dr) denote terms of order higher than dr, that is, limdT o(dr)/dr =0.

18

maintains the fundamental's position relative to the fundamental band. More precisely,

the lower and upper bounds for the fundamental are functions f(N) and [(N) of the
number of devaluations given by

=4) + gN and [(N) =

(4.1)

where 4) and

+ 9N,

are constants. After N devaluations, the fundamental is restricted to

fulfill

I [(N).

(4.2)

The upper and lower bounds thus change according to

df = gdN and d[= gdN,

(4.3)

where dN is unity with probability vdt and zero with probability (1 - vdt). Similarly, the
money supply is now given by the process in = L

- U + gq, that is,

dm = dL - dU+ gdN,

(4.4)

where L and U are the lower and upper regulators described in section 2.

The exchange rate still fulfills the exchange rate equation (2.1) (we continue to
disregard the risk premium), but it will now be a function e(f,N) of both the fundamental

and the number of devaluations. It is easy to show (see Svensson (1989)) that the
exchange rate equation is given by
(4.5)
where

f

e(f,N) = + p + &vg + A1exp[A1(f -

gN)] + A2exp[)\2(f -

and 2 are the roots of the characteristic equation (2.11) and the constants A1

and A2 are given by (2.12) with 4) and

Comparing (4.4) for N =

0

substituted for f and [.

with the solution without devaluation risk, (2.10), we

realize that the only modification of the exchange rate function is the addition of the
term iug,

times the rate of expected devaluation. Indeed, the exchange rate functions

with and without devaluation risks are related by

(4.6)

e(f,N) = e(f -

gN)

+ gN + wg.

In Figure 1, for instance, the only modification is that the curve corresponding to the
target zone exchange rate is shifted up by avg. When a devaluation occurs, the curve is
shifted each time up and to the right by the magnitude g, hence every point on the curve

19

is shifted on a 45 degree line northeast in the figure.

Let 5(f,N 1) denote the term-t interest rate differential, given the current level of the
fundamental and number of devaluations. It is given by

5(f,N;t) =

(4.7)

hf,N;t) -

where

h(f,N;t) = Efe(f(t), N(t)) I f(0) = f, N(0) = N]

(4.8)

is the expected maturity exchange rate. We observe that the expected maturity exchange

rate can be written
(4.9)

h(f,N;L) = E[e(f(t) — gf) I f(1) = f, N(t) = VI + LgN() N(0) = NI

+ vg =

= h(f-gN;1)+gN+zigt+avg.
The first equality follows from (4.6) and the fact that the expected maturity exchange

rate can be decomposed into the expected movement inside the band absent any
devaluations (the first term on the right-hand side of the first equality) and the expected

devaluations (the second term on the right-hand side of the first equality). The second
equality follows from the definition of h(f;t) in (3.6) in the absence of a devaluation risk,
and from the properties of a Poisson process.
Substitution of (4.9) and (4.6) into (4.7) gives

(4.10)

o(f,N;1) =

h(f -

9N

;t) + ugi - e(f -

= E(f - 9N;t) + i'g,

where the second equality follows from the definition of the interest rate differentials
(3.10) in the absence of any devaluation risk.

Hence, with a devaluation risk the only modification of the interest rate differentials is

that a constant equal to the rate of expected devaluation, ug, is added for each term.
Otherwise, the interest rate differentials depend on the term and the fundamental relative

to the current fundamental band as without devaluation risk. In particular, for very long

terms the interest rate differential does not approach zero but the rate of expected
devaluation,

20

(f,N; ) = ug.

(4.11)

In Figures 4a-d, the only modification is that all graphs are shifted up by ug.

5. Empirical Results: Sweden 1986-1988 18

Sweden

has had a unilateral exchange rate target zone since 1977. The band for the

krona is specified in terms of an index for a currency basket of trade-weighted currencies,

with double weight for the dollar. The krona was devalued 1981 and 1982 by 10 and 16

percen. respectively. At the last devaluation the central parity was set at 132. The
width of the band was initially kept secret at *2.25 percent. During the Spring of 1985
there were considerable capital out-flows, the krona depreciated, and the index rose above

132. This may have caused increased uncertainty about the exchange rate band. Interest

rate differentials rose to very high levels. In June 1985 the band was reduced to *1.5
percent and publicly announced. During the Fall of 1985 the interest rate differentials fell

considerably and capital flows stabilized.'

During the winter 1989-1990, after

considerable nominal wage increases, interest rates rose dramatically and devaluation
rumors started to circulate.
I have chosen to examine the period February 1986-October 1989 because this appears

to be a rather stable period for the Swedish target zone, after the unrest of 1985 and the
regime shift of June 1985 and before the unrest of the winter 1989—1990.

Monthly data (last day of month quotations) of the exchange rate index, Swedish
Treasury Bill interest rates, and Euro interest rates have been collected for terms 1, 3, 6,

12 and 60 months. From the Euro interest rates a foreign interest rate index has been
computed with the same weights as in the currency basket. The interest rate differentials

are then the difference between the Swedish interest rate and the foreign interest rate

I thank Nils Gottfries for many discussions on this section (and exempt him from any
responsibility).
19
See Hörngren and Viotti (1985) and Ringström (1987) for details.
18

21

index. (The sample of 60 month Euro interest rates is incomplete. Some national bond

interest rates have been added. The corresponding currencies make up only about 50
percent of the currency basket.)

The exchange rates and the interest rate differential data is plotted for the period
February 1986-February 1990 (months numbered 2-50) in Figure 5a. The exchange rate

is measured in percentage deviation from the central parity, and the interest rate
differentials are measured in percent per year.

Figure 5b shows the interest rate

differentials for 1, 3, 6, 12 and 60 months shifted up 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4 percent, respectively.

Summary statistics for the period February 1986-October 1989 are collected in Table 1.
The correlation coefficients are displayed in Table 2.

We initially note in Figure 5 and Table 1 that the exchange rate during 1986-89
fluctuated between the lower edge (-1.5%) and the middle of the band (0%) and never

went far into the upper half of the band. This raises the possibility that the Riksbank
during the period actually defended an implicit band consisting of the lower half of the
explicit band.20 We will return to this possibility below. With regard to the issue of any
drift in the fundamental, a positive drift would imply that the exchange rate were most of

the time away from the lower edge of the band. In Figure 5 the exchange rate is fairly
evenly distributed in the lower part of the band, which is not inconsistent with a zero
fundamental drift. Let us tentatively condude that the hypothesis of a zero drift cannot
be rejected.

Let us recall Figure 4d, which summarizes the theoretically derived relations between

the exchange rate and the interest rate differential for different terms, with zero
fundamental drift and in the absence of a devaluation risk. In the theory, the mean of the

interest rate differentials is zero, absent any devaluation risk. In the data, we see in
Figure 5 and Table 1 that the mean i positive and between 1.2 and 2 for all interest rate
differentials, alerting us to the possibility of a devaluation risk. In the theory, the interest

20

See

Horngren and Viotti (1985), Ringstrom (1987) and Klein (1989a) on implicit

bands inside the official band.

22

rate differentials are negatively correlated with the exchange rate. In the data, Table 2

indeed displays a clear negative correlation between the exchange rate and the
differentials.

In the theory, the band for each interest rate differential should be decreasing in the

term, as is apparent from Figure 4d. In the data, Table 1 shows that the interest rate
differentials' minimum is increasing in the term (except for the 60-month interest rate

differential), and that the maximum is decreasing in the term. Hence, the interest rate
differential bands defined this way are indeed decreasing in the term. In the theory, the
(unconditional) standard deviations of the interest rate differentials are decreasing in the

term. We see in in Table 1 that this is also the case for the data. Even if the differences
in the standard deviations may not be significant, we note that there are no reversals in
the order.

It has often been observed that the variablitiy of long term interest rates is less than
the variability of short term interest rates (see Shiller and McCulloch (1987)). Here we

see a similar result with respect to the interest rate differentials. The similarity is only

superficial, though. The theoretical explanation for the result on the differentials is
completely independentent of the variability of interest rates; it has only to do with the
variability of expected future exchange rates.

Hence, we see that the theoretical results on the interest rate differentials are indeed
consistent with some summary statistics of the data. Let us however look a bit closer at
the data. In Figure 4d, the theoretical relations between the interest rate differentials and

the exchange rate are fairly linear (especially for longer terms). Let us consider a linear

approximation to the relation the interest rate differentials and the exchange rate, for
given terms t:
(5.1)

r;t) = a(t) + b(t)e(r) + e(r;t).

The coefficients b(t) are negative and increasing in term, according the theory. Absent
fundamental drift, the constants a(t) should be zero if there is no devaluation risk. We

take the error terms e(r;t) to have zero mean and to be uncorrelated with theexchange

23

rate. Then it is appropriate to do a linear regression of the interest rate differentials on
the exchange rate, for each term, in order to estimate a(t) and b(t).

OLS regressions reveal low Durbin-Watson statistics and hence possible serial
correlation of the error terms. I have therefore used Hansen and Hodrick's (1980) version

of 0MM (General Methods of Moment) together with Newey and West's (1987)
modification which makes sure that the estimate of the variance-covariance matrix is
positive semidefinite. This method allows serially correlated and heteroscedastic errors.

In the particular case considered here, the GMM estimator coincides with the OLS
estimator, whereas the standard errors are computed differently.a1

The results from the GMM regressions are reported in Table S. The estimates of the
constants and the coefficients of the exchange rate are displayed in columns (2) and (3).
I have also run iterated GLS regressions under the assumption that error terms are AR(1)

(using a modified Cochrane-Orcutt procedure which includes the first observation). The
GLS regressions give similar results and are not reported here.

The estimates of the constants are all significantly positive. Under the maintained

hypothesis of zero fundamental drift, we can therefore reject the hypothesis of no
devaluation risk. The estimates of the coefficients for the exchange rate are negative as in

the theory. They are significantly less than zero except for a 60 months term. The
coefficients are decreasing in the term, as in the theory. Even if each decrease in that
slope is not significant, we note that there are no reversals in the order. The regression
lines are plotted in Figure 6. Except for the differing intercepts, the similarity between

the theoretical Figure 4b and the empirical Figure 6 is striking. The steepest line
corresponds to a 1 month term, the second steepest line to a 3 month term, etc., exactly
as in the theory. The slope of the 60-month term line is not significantly different from
zero. In the theory it should be very flat.

Let us go on and discuss the estimates of the constant terms in the regressions. A
21
I am grateful to John Campbell and Bernard Dumas for suggesting the use of GMM.
Further details on GMM are given in Hansen (1980), Cumby, Huizinga and Obstfeld

(1983) and the survey by Hodrick (1987).

24

constant in the regression equation might (according to (4.10) and the theoretical analysis

in section 4) be interpreted as an estimate of an average devaluation risk, measured as the

expected rate of devaluation, the probability per unit of time of a devaluation times the
size of the devaluation. (For instance, a 10 percent probability per year of a 20 percent

devaluation results in an expected rate of devaluation of 2 percent.) The constants
correspond to the intercepts of the regression lines in Figure 6, that is, the levels of the

regression lines for a zero exchange rate. Looking at the intercepts in Figure 6, we see
that the devaluation risk is about 1.2 percent.

Suppose, however, that the exchange rate band has actually been only the lower half

of the official &1.5 percent band. Then the relevant estimate of the average devaluation
risk is not the intercept in the middle of the official band, at a zero exchange rate, but the

level of the regression lines in the middle of the lower half of the band, that is for an

exchange rate equal to - .75 percent. Then we see from Figure 6 that the average
devaluation risk is about 1.9 percent for a 1-12 month horizon, and about 1.2 percent for a

60 month horizon. We recall that the sample of 60-month Euro interest rates is
incomplete, which may be one reason why that differential appears to be an outlier.

A considerable proportion of the total variability of the interest rate differentials
remains unexplained by the exchange rate and is instead explained by serial correlation in

the error terms. (The R-squared of the regressions is between .2 and .4, for 1-12 months
term, see column (4) in Table 3.) A rather reasonable interpretation of these error terms

is that they are serially correlated devaluation risks. It makes sense that the perceived

devaluation risk might vary over the period, and it also makes sense that it would be
serially correlated. The estimates of the constants referred to above are then the averages

of these time-varying devaluation risks. If time-varying devaluation risks actually enter

the error terms, it is important that they are uncorrelated with the exchange rate.
Otherwise the estimates of the coefficients b(t) are biased. Since the exchange rate has

been rather stable in the strong half of its band during this period, it does not seem
impossible that any devaluation risks actually have been uncorrelated with the exchange

25

rate.
Any non-zero correlation between devaluation risks and the exchange rate is bound to

be positive rather than negative (increased devaluation risk should if anything depreciate

the currency). Such positive correlation would make the estimates of the slopes of the
regression lines biased towards less negative slopes and more positive slopes. Even with
such possible bias the estimated slopes are still negative and significantly different from
zero (except for a 60 months term). Any bias would therefore actually seem to strengthen
our results.

Miller and Weller (1988, 1989a) and Bertola and Caballero (1989) have developed

models where devaluations occur with a given probability at the upper edge of the
exchange rate band. In such models there may arise a positive relation between the
interest rate differential and the exchange rate.22 Whereas there is some evidence for such

a positive relation for Franc-Deutschmark and Lire-Deutschmark interest rate
differentials (see Bertola and Caballero (1989) and Bodner (1989)) our results show that

there is no evidence for this in Swedish data from the period February 1986 - October

1989. Our results on a negative relation between interest rate differentials and the
exchange rate indicate that any devaluation risk is at most weakly and possibly not at all

correlated with the exchange rate. It may very well be the case that the Swedish target

zone has operated quite differently from the French and Italian target zones in the
European Monetary System.

Another interpretation of the serially correlated error terms is that they are shadow

taxes, or transactions costs, due to remaining exchange controls. Swedish exchange
controls have been gradually dismantled during the last few years, and were (almost)
completely abolished only in July 1989. The effects of the exchange controls in the last
few years have been much discussed. The general view seems to be that they have hardly
been binding during the period and probably had very little effect.

22 As shown by Bertola and Caballero (1989) the positive relation occurs when the
exchange rate function has a reversed S-shape.

26

A third interpretation of the serially correlated error terms is that they might be
time-dependent serially correlated foreign exchange risk premia, as discussed in the
survey by Hodrick (1987) and by Hörngren and Vredin (1988). However, for relatively
small target zones (like the Swedish one) Svensson (1989, 1990) finds that in eory such
risk preinia should be insignificant, at least with limited devaluation risks.

I conclude from this look at the data that, although the error terms need further

explanation, and the theory need further elaboration (for instance to include more
sophisticated devaluation risks than the ones considered in section 4), the theory and the
Swedish data for the period examined are consistent to a considerable extent, for instance
as summarized in Figures 4d and 6.

6. Summary and Condusions

We have computed the term structure of interest rate differentials in a narrow target

zone, as a function of the fundamental's and the exchange rate's position in their bands.

The computation has been done in two different ways, via an analytical Fourier-series

method and via a direct numerical method. Both methods give the same results. In
diagrams we have illustrated both the qualitative and quantitative behavior of the interest
rate differentials.

The interest rate differentials' qualitative dependence on the position in the band is

quite intuitive. For a given term, the interest rate differential is decreasing in the
fundamental and the exchange rate.

In the lower part of the exchange rate and

fundamental bands, that is, when the currency is strong, expectations of future
interventions to increase money supply imply an expected future depreciation, which in

turn imply positive interest rate differentials; vice versa in the upper part of the
fundamental and exchange rate bands. In contrast to the instantaneous interest rate
differential, finite-term interest rate differentials fulfill smooth pasting conditions at the
edges of the band. The relation between interest rate differentials and log exchange rates

27

is rather linear, especially for longer terms.

The interest rate differentials' qualitative dependence on the term

also quite
intuitive. The interest rate differential is determined by expected depreciation until
is

maturity, divided by the term. For a given position in the fundamental and exchange rate

bands, for medium and long terms the interest rate differential's absolute value is
decreasing in the term, since the expected depredation until maturity is bounded by the
exchange rate band and not much affected by changes in the term.

We have also shown how devaluation/realignment risks can be incorporated. For the

particular assumptions used here, for instance that the devaluation risk is independent of

the exchange rate's position in the band, a devaluation risk simply implies a constant
upward shift, equal to the expected rate of devaluation, of all interest rate differentials.
An examination of Swedish data shows broad consistency between some implications

of the theory and the data. The theory's prediction that the interest rate differentials are

decreasing in the exchange rate, less so for longer terms, and that the interest rate
differentials' bands and standard deviations are decreasing in the term are all confirmed in

the data. On the other hand, a limited proportion of the total variability of interest rate
differentials are explained by variations in the exchange rate.
As possible factors explaining the remaining variability of interest rate differential and

serial correlation of error terms, we have noted serially correlated devaluation risks,
remalning exchange controls, and risk premia. The possibility of distinguishing these will
be subject to further theoretical and empirical work.

That interest rate differentials are decreasing in the exchange rate supports the
assumption that devaluation risks in the Swedish target zone do not increase when the

Krona depreciates within the band. In this respect the Swedish target zone may differ

from how the French and Italian target zones have operated within the European
Monetary System, where it appears that interest rate differentials increase when the Franc

and Lira depreciate relative to the Mark, as discussed by Bertola and Caballero (1989)
and Bodner (1989).

28

In the introduction we remarked that the the theory of the term structure of interest

rate differentials developed here is a complement and not a substitute to established
theories of the term structure of interest rates. One way to combine the two would be to

use the relations derived in this paper as additional restrictions in empirical tests of the
established theories of the term structure of interest rates.

Let us also briefly comment upon some real or only apparent limitations of the
analysis. A most obvious limitation is perhap8 the simplifying assumptions about the
behavior of velocity shocks, and the assumption about infinitesimal marginal interventioas

only. These two assumptions imply that the fundamental follows a regulated Brownian

motion with reflecting barriers, that is, with constant drift and instantaneous standard
deviation inside the band. Intramarginal interventions, that is, interventions inside the
band, can be incorporated to a considerable extent, though. If they lead to a process for
the fundamental with mean reversion, or more generally to any process with a variable

drift that depends on the level of the fundamental, 4f), the exchange rate function e(f)
can always be solved numerically.23 The numerical solution to the exchange rate function

can then be used in our procedure to solve the interest rate differentials numerically. Our
partial differential equation (3.7a) is a bit more complicated, with a variable ji, but it can

always be solved with the direct numerical method should the Fourier—series method
become cumbersome. I believe that the relation between interest rate differentials and the

exchange rate illustrated in Figure 4d is rather robust and should appear also with other
specifications. Clearly, data on central bank interventions would be extremely helpful in
deciding which stochastic process is the best representation of central bank behavior. 24

Finite interventions rather than infinitesimal can be handled and the exchange rate
function can then still be solved analytically, as demonstrated by Flood and Garber (1989)

23 Actually, if the drift function p(f) is linear, an analytical solution to the exchange
rate function exists, namely the so-called confluent hypergeometric function (see

Dumas (1988) and Froot and Obstfeld (1989b)).
24 Mundaca (1989) uses intervention data to model interventions of Norges Bank and the
effect of interventions on exchange rate volatility in the Norwegian target zone.

29

and Bertola and Caballero (1989). Our numerical method of determining interest rate
differentials would, it seems, still work; only the smooth pasting conditions would be
replaced by so called value-matching conditions (see Dixit (1989b) and Dumas (1989b) for

a discussion of the relation between smooth pasting and value-matching conditions).
Again, data on central bank interventions would be extremely helpful in deciding whether
finite or infinitesimal interventions are the best approximation.

30

Appendix

A.1 The Expected Time to Hit the Edges of the Band

The fundamental is a regulated Brownian motion fulfilling (2.5)-(2.9). Using results

in Harrison (1985), it is not difficult to find the expected time EtIf)] for the
fundamental to hit the first time either of the edges, starting at the level f, J f < f. It
is given by

-

-

(Ala)

f)J = U

(A.lb)

1 - exp[-2(f 1 - exp[-2i(f -

Consider

for p= 0, and

j)/2]

2 ([-J)-U-f)}/ for 0.

the zero drift case. With f =

-J = .094 and = .1

per year, EtT(f)] is

about 10.6 months for f = 0.

A.2 The Finite-Horizon Feynman-Kac Formula for Regulated Brownian Motion
We use a finite-horizon variant of Harrison's (1985, p. 83) infinite-horizon FeynmanKac formula for regulated Brownian motion:

Consider a regulated Brownian motion Z. (r is calendar time) with lower and upper
bounds a and b,

Z = X + Lr - U

E [a,b].

The stochastic process X. is a Brownian motion with drift

and instantaneous variance

and L and U are the lower and upper regulators, respectively. Let n(r,r) and g(z,r)
be

given twice continuously real-valued functions [a,b} R - R and let T, i,

c

and r be

given constants. Assume g1(a, I) = c and g(b, fl = r. Consider the integral
(A.2)

;r) = E{ J
for

a x b and r

e1T)[u(Z3,s)ds

-

cdL8

+ rdU8] + e TT)zT 'fl I

=

T. Then the finite-horizon Feynman-Kac formula for regulated

Brownian motion says that, under some regularity conditions, Fx,r) is the unique

31

solution to the partial differential equation
(A.3a)

DF(r,r) - qFTz,r) + u(z,r) = 0,

a z b, r T,

with the terminal condition

Fr,7) = g(;T)

(A.3b)

and the derivative boundary conditions (smooth pasting conditions)

F1(a,r) = c and F(b,r) =

(A.3c)

r,

r

7'.

Here D denotes the differential operator

DFx,r) = F(x,r) + pF(z,r) + (1/2)a2F11(x,r).
If we restrict 17 to be positive, let T go to infinity, delete the function (•) and the

terminal condition, assume that the function u(.) does not depend on r, observe that then

Fr.) will not depend on r, and for convenience set r = 0, we get Harrison's (1985, p. 83)
formulation (with t = s, A = i, a =

0,

and h(x) = Fr,t)).

If we instead let a and b go to minus and plus infinity, respectively, delete the
regulators and the smooth pasting conditions (that is, we consider an unregulated
Brownian motion, Zr = Xv), we get the formulation in Duffle (1988, p. 226) (with t =
V(x,t)

= Fz,t), p(x,t) = i, p(z,t) = p, and c(z,t) = a).

In order to solve (3.6), we can define, for a given constant 7',

Ff,r)=E[e(fT)
That is, in (A.2) we have Z. =

4=f] r T.

f, x = 1 a = f, b = [, u(.)

Then it follows from (A.3) that Ff,r)

is

0, and 17

= C = r=

the unique solution to the partial differential

equation
(A.4a)

F(f,r) + pFj(f,r) + (1/2)a2F11(f,r) = 0,

with terminal condition

F1f,T) = e(f)

(A.4b)
and derivative boundary conditions
(A.4c)

Fj(f,r)=0 and Fj(f,r)=0,

for / I [ and r T.
We now set the term t =

7' -

r for r

0.

T, that is, t 0. We then define h(f,t)

32

F(f,T - t), in which case we have h1(f,t) Fj(f T -

1)

and h(f ,t)

T - t).

Then (3.7) follows from (A.4).

By Ito's lemma we have EtdFf(r),r)] = DF(f(r),r)dr.

Therefore, (A.4a) is

equivalent to

EIdF(f(r),r)] = 0,
that is, (39a).
A.3 The Analytical Solution to the Partical Differential Equation (3.7)

The analytical Fourier-series solution to the partial differential equation (3.7) can be
derived with methods described in, for instance, Churchill and Brown (1987). For p = 0,

the problem is identical to the boundary value problem for the temperature h(f;t) in an
inflrute slab of material, bounded by the planes f= f and f= 1, when the slab's faces are

insulated and the initial temperature distribution is the prescribed function e(f) (see
Churchill and Brown (1987, p. 36_42)).25
Let

a=

([ - f)/ir,

x= (f - f)/a, (x) = e(az-i- J), and (r,t) = h(az+ f;t).

Then (3.7) implies the partial differential equation for g(x,t)

= pg + agJ2,

(A.5a)
(A.5b)

z,0) = e(x), and

(A.5c)

g(O,t) = g(ir,t) = 0,

for 0 x 'r and t 0, with p =

p/a and a = a/a. Separation of variables, x,t) =

X(z)7t), leads to two ordinary differential equations,
(A.6)

T(t) + It) = 0

and a version of the so-called Sturm-Liouville problem,
(A.7a)
(A.7b)

X1(x) + 9X(z) + \(O/p)X(x) = 0,
X(0) = X1(r) = 0,

where 0 = 2p/a2 and ,\ is a constant.

There is a countable infinity of real numbers .\,
25

i' 2'' eigenvalnes, of the

am grateful to Harald Lang for showing me how to compute the solution.

33

parameter

A for each of which the Sturm-Liouville problem has a solution not identically

zero fulfilling (A.7). The corresponding solutions X0(z), X1(r),.. are called eigenfanctions.

The eigenfunctions are orthogonal with weight factor exp(Ox), the integrating factor of
this Sturm-Liouville problem.

The differential equation (A.6) for 1(1) is solved by 1(1) = exp(-At) for each A. Then

any solution to the partial differential equation (A.5) can then be written as the Fourier
series

g(r,t) =
where

c X(z) exp(-At),

the constants c are determined by the initial condition (A.5b) according to

=

J exp(0z) e(z) X(z)dz / J exp(Ox) I X(z) I 2dz.

Given this, with a fair amount of algebra it can be shown that the solution to (3.7)
can be written (with 0 = 2p/ci2):
(A.8a)

h(f;t) =

c y(f) exp(-At), f (f f, t 0,

where

y(f) = 1,

(A.8b)
(A.8c)

(f) = exp[-O(f-J)/2] {2n cos[n(f-J)/aJ + Oa sin[nf-f)/a1}, n? 1,
1

(A.8d)

(A.8e)

c0=J1e(f)df
c0 =

,

for=0,

Jf exp(Of) e(f)df exp(O[) - exp(Of)

c = J1e[f-f)] e(f) y(f)df
(A.8g)

,

for jz

0,

1,

)Aa2/2'

A0 = 0,

and
(A.8h)

A = (n2/a2 + 02/4)i2/2 >

0,

n?1.

For p = 0 this solution coincides with the solution reported in Churchill and Brown

34

(1987, p. 41)).

We see that h(f;t) -.
rate. When p =

0,

for

t -+

T. Indeed, c0 is the unconditional expected exchange

the unconditional (that is, ergodic) probability distribution is uniform,

# 0 it is truncated exponential, with density function ,(f) =
Oexp(Of)/[exp(91) - exp(Of)], J f [ (see Harrison (1985)).

whereas for

Since the function e(f) in our case by (2.10) is a sum of linear and exponential terms,

the integrals in (A.8d-f) are exact and c0 and c can actually be solved explicitly. (The

solutions are not reported here.) When e(f) is such that explicit solutions of

and c

cannot be found, (A.8d-f) can still easily be computed numerically.

We note that it follows from (A.8) that h(f;t) can be written

h (f;t) =

(A.9a)

J e(g) (f,g ;t)dg,

where

(A.9b)

expjO(f -J)]
(f,g ;t) = (g) +

(f)
n=1

\a2/a2

(A.9c)

(g) = 1/Cf - f) for p = 0,

(A.9d)

(g) = 9exp(g) / [exp(8[) - exp(9f)]

exp (_At),

for p # 0.

Here (f,g ;t) is the transition densityoff(t) = g at time t, given 1(0) =

fat time 0.

Given this, the transition densities of the exchange rate, interest rate differentials,
etc., can all be computed. The exchange rate's transition density is for instance given by
(A.10)

(e0,e;t) = (f(e0),f(e);t) / 1(f(e)), e < e <

,

where f(e) denotes the inverse of e(f).

A.4 The Numerical Solution to the Partial Differential EQuationjfl
We like to find the twice continuously differentiable function u(z,t): [x,J
that is the solution to the parabolic partial differential equation

(A.lla)
with initial condition

u(r,t) = pu(z,t) + (1/2)c2u(z,t),

[0,) - R

35

(A.llb)

u(z,O) =

x)

(where e(x): [x,z] -. R is twice continuously differentiable and fulfills e1(r) = e(3) =
and the derivative boundary conditions

0)

u(z,t) = 0 and u1(,t) = 0.

(A.llc)

We follow the so-called explicit method described in Gerald and Wheatley (1989,
Chapter 8), where further details are discussed.
First, we define an I x Jgrid for (r,t). For a given positive integer I, let

z= (i - 1)zx+ z, for i= 1,.., 1, with zx= (— z)/(I- 1).
For a given positive integer J and a given positive real time-step t, let

j = 0,.., J— 1.

= jLt,
We then define

u=u(rt)

0j

for

Second, we approximate the derivatives

and u2 by central differences and the

derivative u by a forward difference:

u(z t) = (u.1+i u(z,t2)

=

- 2w+ t1)/(Lx)2, and

U(z ,t) =

(v -

Third, we substitute these approximations of the derivatives into (A.8a) and get the
difference equation

-

- _i)/(2r) + (1/2)12(u - 2u+ _i)I(z)2.

u)/t =

This difference equation can be rewritten as

(A.12a)

= (. + s)u

(A.12b)

+ (1 - 2r)u + (r - s)u1, with

r= azt and

2Lx
Fourth, the difference equation (A.9) is defined for the interior of the z-band, 2 i

2(Az)2

I-

1,

but we also need to find the difference equation for the boundaries, I = 1 and i = I.

We then incorporate the derivative boundary conditions by adding an x-point below and

above the previous i-grid,

36

x0=z-Az and
The conditions (A.8c) can then be expressed as

u(rtj) = (u - u)/(2zz) = 0

=

and

(u1 -

= 0,

that is,

=

(A.13)

u

=

and

t41.

Fifth, we can now substitute (A.13) into (A.12a) for i = 1 and i =

I in order to define

the difference equation also on the boundaries. The we get the system

uJ+l = (1 - 2ru + 2ru;

u1 = (r+ s)r+i + (1- 2r+ (r- )-i' 2< 1< 1- 1; and
=

We

2ru1 + (1 - 2r)u

can write the system more compactly by defining the tn-diagonal I 'J matrix A =

(ad)

such that

= 0 for all i and j

except

a11 =

(A.14a)

that

1- 2r, a12 = 2r;

(A.14b)

a2,2_i=r_s,a=1_2r,a,+i=r+s for 2iI—1; and

(A.14c)

a111 = 2r, a11= 1 - 2r.

We let

denote the I-dimensional column vector (u)1. Then the system can finaliy

be written
(A,15a)

?71=A?1forj=O,i,.,,J-l,

with the initial condition
(A.15b)

=

(u')1 = (e(x))1.

This system is straightforward to solve numerically by forward iteration. In order to

ensure stability of the system, zx and t must be chosen such that r defined in (A.10)
fulfills

(A.16)

r

.5.

A.5 The Interest Rate Differential's Variability

For given positive term t > 0 the interest rate differential at time r, E(r;t), will be an

Ito process with drift p5(f;t) and instantaneous standard deviation o(f;t), given by the

37
stochastic differential equation
(A.17)

dE(r;t) = p5(f;t)dr - a5(f;t)d2(r).

(Since we know that the interest rate differential is negatively correlated with the
fundamental, we write a minus sign before the Wiener component, in order to define
c8(f;t) as positive.) The drift inside the band for the interest rate differential is by Ito's
lemma given by
(A.18)

ji(f;t) = p81(f;t) +

The instantaneous standard deviation is given by
(A.19)

c5(f;t) =

the product of the absolute value of the derivative of the interest rate differential and the

instantaneous standard deviation of velocity. For zero term, the stochastic differential
equation for the instantaneous interest rate differential also includes the effect of the lower

and upper regulators in (2.9). This is because the instantaneous interest rate differential
does not fulfill the smooth pasting conditions.26

The interest rate differential's instantaneous standard deviation as a function of the
fundamental is shown in Figure Al, for different terms (0, 1, 3, 6, 12, and 60 months).
The solid curve corresponds to zero term. We note the discontinuity between finite and
zero term at the edges, corresponding to the discontinuity of the derivative bj(f;t) at t =
0,

which we have discussed above. Positive-term instantaneous standard deviations are

largest in the middle of the band, and fall to zero towards the edges of the band, in
contrast to the zero-term instantaneous standard deviation. This is because the positiveterm interest rate differentials fulfill the smooth pasting conditions, which is not the case

26 By Ito's lemma we have dr;t) =

81(f;t)df+ (1/2)511(f;t)df2 =
= 81(f ;t)(dv + dL - dU) + (1/2)511(f;t)u2dr =
= [p51(f;t) + (1/2)c2Sjj(f;t)]dr + ö(f ;t)dL - 51([;t)dU+ 61(f;t)adz.
= 0 for positive maturities,
By the smooth pasting conditions, we have 51(f;t) =
51(f;t)
and the terms including dL and dU vanish, which gives (A.18) and (A.19). For zero
maturity, the terms including dL and dUremain.

38

for the zero-term interest rate differential. We also see that the instantaneous standard
deviations are decreasing in the term, except for small terms and intermediate values of
the fundamental.
The asymptotic (unconditional) variability of the interest rate differentials are easy to

compute numerically.

The asymptotic probability density function ç(f) for the

fundamental is derived in Harrison (1985). It is uniform with zero drift and truncated
exponential with nonzero drift. Then the asymptotic probability density function for the

term-t interest rate differential, tt)(6), is given by
(A.20)

t)( = f(5;t))/o1(f(5;t)), 5(f;t) < 5< J;t),

where f(5;t) denotes the inverse of b(f;t) with respect to I (because of the smooth pasting

conditions, the probability density function (A.20) is only defined on the interior of the
interest rate differential band). These probability density functions can easily be plotted

for different terms. The interest rate differentials' asymptotic standard deviations can
then be computed numerically.21

27 The instantaneous interest rate differential's asymptotic standard deviation can
actually be computed exactly even though its probability density function can only be
computed numerically (see Svensson (1989)).

39

Referen
Bertola, Guiseppe, and Ricardo J. Caballero (1989), "Target Zones and Realignments,"
Working Paper.

Bodner, Gordon M, (1989), "Target Zones and Euro-Rates: A Model of Eurocurrency

Interest Rate Differentials in the European Monetary System," Working Paper,
Princeton University.

Churchill, Ruel V., and James W. Brown (1987), Fourier Series and Boundary Value
Problems. Fourth Edition, New York: McGraw-Hill.

Cox, John C., Jonathan E. Ingersoll, and Stephen A. Ross (1985), "A Theory of the
Term Structure of Interest Rates," Econometrica 53, 385-407.

Cumby, Robert E., John Huizinga, and Maurice Obstfeld (1983), "Twa-Step Two-Stage

Least Squares Estimation in Models with Rational Expectations," Journal of
Econometrics 21, 333-355.

Delgado, Francisco, and Bernard Dumas (1990), "Monetary Contracting Between
Central Banks and the Design of Sustainable Exchange Rate Zones," Working Paper,
Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.

Dixit, Avinash (1989a), "Analytical Approximations in Models of Hysteresis," Working
Paper, Princeton University.

Dixit, Avinash (198gb), "A Simplified Exposition of the Theory of Optimal Control of
Brownian Motion," Working Paper, Princeton University.
Duffie, Darrell (1988), Security Markets: Stochastic Models, San Diego: Academic Press.

Dumas, Bernard (1988), "Perishable Investment and Hysteresis in Capital Formation,"
Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.

Dumas, Bernard (1989a), "Pricing Physical Assets Internationally: A Non Linear
Heteroscedastic Process for Equilibrium Real Exchange Rates," Working Paper,
University of Pennsylvania.

40

Dumas, Bernard (198gb), "Super Contact and Related Optimality Conditions:
A Supplement to Avinash Dixit's 'A Simplified Exposition of Some Results
Concerning Regulated Brownian Motion'," Technical Working Paper No.77, National
Bureau of Economic Research.

Ekdahl, Ossian, and Anders Warne (1990), "Likelihood Ratio Tests of Cointegration and

the Rational Expectations Model of the Term Structure of Interest Rates," Working
Paper, Stockholm School of Economics.

Flood, Robert E., and Peter M. Garber (1989), "The Linkage Between Speculative
Attack and Target Zone Models of Exchange Rates," Working Paper No. 2918,
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Froot, Kenneth A., and Maurice Obstfeld (1989a), "Exchange—Rate Dynamics Under
Stochastic Regime Shifts: A Unified Approach," Working Paper.

Froot, Kenneth A., and Maurice Obstfeld (198gb), "Stochastic Process Switching: Some
Simple Solutions," Working Paper No. 2998, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gerald, Curtis F., and Patrick 0. Wheatley (1989), Applied Numerical Analysis, Fourth
Edition, Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.

Hansen, Lars Peter (1982), "Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments
Estimators," Econometrica 50, 1029- 1054.

Hansen, Lars Peter, and Robert J. Hodrick (1980), "Forward Exchange Rates as Optimal

Predictors of Future Spot Rates: An Econometric Analysis," Journal of Political
Economy 88, 829-853.

Harrison, J. Michael (1985), Brownian Motion and Stochastic Flow Systems, New York:
John Wiley & Sons.

Hodrick, Robert J. (1987), The Empirical Evidence on the Efficiency of Forward and
Futures Foreign Exchange Alarkets, London: Harwood.

Horngren, Lars, and Staffan Viotti (1985), "Capital Flows and Monetary Policy: An
Analysis of Capital Flows during the Spring 1985," Skandinaviska Ensk-ilda Banken
Quarterly Review, No. 2, 46-54.

41

Hörngren, Lars, and Anders Vredin (1988), "The Foreign Exchange Risk Premium in a
Currency Basket System," Chapter 4 in Vredin (1988).

Jãrnhäll, BjOrn, and Christina Lindenius (1989), "Monetary Policy and Exchange
Deregulation," Sveriges Riksbank QuarterlyRemew 1989:2, 12-17.

Klein, Michael W., (1989a), "Big Effects of Small Interventions: The Informational Role
of Intervention in Exchange Rate Policy," Working Paper, Clark University.

Klein, Michael W., (1989b), "Playing with the Band: Dynamic Effects f Target Zones in
an Open Economy," Working Paper, Clark University.

Krugman, Paul (1987), "Trigger Strategies and Price Dynamics in Equity and Foreign

Exchange Markets," Working Paper No. 2459, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Krugman, Paul (1988), "Target Zones and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Working Paper
No. 2481, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Krugman, Paul (1989), "Target Zones with Limited Reserves," Working Paper, M.I.T.

Merton, Robert C. (1973), "The Theory of Rational Option Pricing," Bell Journal of
Economics and Management Science 4, 141-183.

Miller, Marcus, and Paul Weller (1988), "Target Zones, Currency Options and Monetary
Policy," Working Paper, University of Warwick.

Miller, Marcus, and Paul Weller (1989a), "Exchange Rate Bands and Realignments in a

Stationary Stochastic Setting," in M. Miller, B. Eichengreen and R. Portes, eds.,
Blueprint,s for Exchange Rate Management, New York: Academic Press, 161-173.

Miller, Marcus, and Paul Weller (1989b), "Exchange Rate Bands with Price Inertia,"
Working Paper.

Miller, Marcus, and Paul Weller (1989c), "Solving Stochastic Saddlepoint Systems: A
Qualitative Treatment with Economic Applications," Working Paper No. 308, Centre
for Economic Policy Research.

42

Mundaca, B. Gabriela (1989), "A GARCH-Switching Simultaneous Equations Model:
The Effect of Official Interventions on the Exchange Rate Volatility," Working Paper
No. 1989/10, Norges Bank.

Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West (1987), "A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite,
Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix," Econometrica
55,

703—708.

Pesach, Shula, and Assaf R.azin (1990), "Targeting the Exchange Rate: An Empirical
Investigation," Working Paper, International Monetary Fund.

Ringström, Olle (1987), "The Exchange Rate Index: An Instrument for Monetary and
Exchange Rate Policy," Sveriges Riks bank Quarterly Review 1987:4, 16-26.

Shiller, Robert J., and J. Huston McCullogh (1987), "The Term Structure of Interest

Rates," Working Paper No. 2341, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Forthcoming in Benjamin Friedman and Frank Hahn, eds., Handbook of Monetary
Economics, Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Singleton, Kenneth J., (1987), "Modeling the Term Structure of Interest Rates in
General Equilibrium," in S. Bhattacharya and G. Constantinides, eds., Advances in
Financial Economics.

Svensson, Lars E. 0. (1989), "Target Zones and Interest Rate Variability," Seminar
Paper No. 457, Institute for International Economic Studies, University of Stockholm.

Svensson, Lars E. 0. (1990), "The Foreign Exchange Risk Premium in a Target Zone
with Devaluation Risk," Working Paper, Institute for International Economic Studies,
University of Stockholm.

Vredin, Anders (1988), Macroeconomic Policies and The Balance of Payments,
Stockholm: Stockholm School of Economics.

Yeager, Leland B. (1976), International Monetary Relations: Theory, Hi3tory and Policy.
Second edition, New York: Harper & Row.

43

Table 1. Snmmry Statisti
Variable

Mean

e

-0.78

0.46

-1.48

0.24

5(1)

2.03

0.88

0.16

3.73

5(3)

1.90

0.76

0.22

3.36

5(6)

1.89

0.64

0.28

3.18

5(12)

1.94

0.54

0.38

3.06

5(60)

1.24

0.54

-0.34

2.17

Std Dev

Minimum

Maximum

5(t) denotes the interest rate differential for t months term.

Table 2. Corrdation Coedents
Variable

e

e

1.00

5(1)

5(3)

5(6)

5(12)

5(1)

-0,60

1.00

5(3)

-0.63

0.96

1.00

5(6)

—0.63

0.92

0.98

1.00

5(12)

-0.48

0.76

0.82

0.89

1.00

5(60)

-0.22

0.48

0.50

0.58

0.75

5(60)

1.00

44

Table 3. General Method of Moments Regressions of 5 on e
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Dependent
Variable

Constant

Coefficient

R2

DW

Autocorrelation

5(1)

1.13**

(0.21)
5(3)
5(6)

5(12)
5(60)

1.08**

- 1.16**

0.36

0.90

0.54

0.40

0.72

0.64

0.39

0.72

0.64

(0.19)
— 1.05**

(0.23)

(0.21)

1.22**
(0.22)

- 0.87**

1.50**
(0.25)

- 0.56k
(0.19)

0.23

0.72

0.64

1.04

- 0.26
(0.23)

0.05

0.51

0.76

(0.29)

(0.19)

Standard errors are given in parenthesis. We use ** (*) to denote significance at 5%
(10%) level. The number of nonzero autocorrelations of the errors has been set to 8. The
standard errors are not very sensitive to changes in this number. Column (6) shows the
estimate of the autocorrelation of the error terms.

Figure 1

Figure 2

F(f,T)

fZ

Figure 3a

h(f,t)

0

V

0

--

-

—--

0

—
—8 —6 —4 —2

0

t=0,1,3,6,12,60 months

Figure 3b

f=(—1 —.5,0.5,1 )fbcr

2

4

6

fZ

8

10

Figure 3c

h(f,t)
N
-z

Figure 4a

6(f,t)
N

0

—8

—6 —4 —2

0

t=0, 13,6,12,60 months

2

4

6

17.

8

10

Figure 4b

o(f,t)
N
(N

0

/
0

20

30

40

f(— 1—5,0.5,1 )fbar

Figure 4c

50

60

t months

70

Figure 4d

ó(e,t)
N

0

—1.2 —0.8 —0.4 —0.0

0.4

0.8

eZ

= 0,1,3,6,1 2,60 months

1.2

1.6

Figure 5a

e(T), 6(T,t)

/

'1/
(N

/ \...

I—,

\1

0

(N _______

'0

5

10

VV
I

15

20 25

30

t= 1,3,6,1 2,60 months, 8602—9002

e

I

I

35

40

45

50

T months

Figure 5b

e(T), â(T,t)

'0

5

10

15

20 25 30

35

t=1,3,6,2,60 months, 8602—9002

40

45

50

T months

Figure 6
0

ö(e,t)

(0

0
<N

d

0
I

—1.2 —0.8 —0.4 —0.0

0.4

t=1,3,6,12,60 months, 8602—8910

0.8

1.2

1.6

eZ

Figure Al

6(f,t)

I
I

I

N

//

/ //

-

\

- ——

-

/ /// ,

I / //

IIIji
/

\\

\ \ \\

1/

——
o j//
I/I —
o L.° —8 —6 —4 —2

-\

'

———

0

t = 0,1,3,6,12,60 months

2

4

6

fZ

" \\I

8

10

