                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  BUSINES3 CYCLE PROPERTIES OF SELECTED U.S. ECONOMIC TIME SERIES, 1959   -   1988




                                 James H. Stock

                                 Mark W. Watson




                            Working Paper No. 3376




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   June 1990




The authors thank Robert Barro, Geoffrey Carliner, Robert Hall, Bert Hickman,
and Greg Mankiw for helpful suggestions. This research was supported in part
by the National Bureau of Economic Research project on the coincident and
leading economic indicators and in part by National Science Foundation grants
no. SES-86-18984 and SES-89-l0601. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #3376
                                                     June 1990


    BUSINESS CYCLE PROPERTIES OF SELECTED U.S. ECONOMIC TIME SERIES, 1959 - 1988


                                               ABSTRACT

   This   paper catalogs the business cycle properties of 163 monthly U.S. economic time series
over the three decades from 1959 through 1988. Two general sets of summary statistics are
reported. The first set measures the comovement of each individual time series with a
reference series representing real economic activity. These statIstics focus on comovements at
business cycle horizons. The second set of statistics examines the predictive content of each of
the series for aggregate activity, relative to different sets of conditioning (or predictive)
variables. These statistics are constructed and presented in a way that facilitates comparisons
across series and across conditioning sets. They also provide new lists of leading indicators
based on predictive content for overall economic activity. Some of the results confirm
previously recognized empirical regularities, while others provide new or different insights into
the business cycle properties of various series.




       James H. Stock                               Mark W. Watson
       Kennedy School of Government                 Department of Economics
       Harvard University                           Northwestern University
       Cambridge, MA 02138                          Evanston, IL 60208
                                      I Introduction


   This study documents the relation between 163 aggregate monthly U.S. time series and
measures of monthly aggregate economic activity over the three decades from 1959 through
1988.   The objective of this research is to catalog the properties of these variables in a way that

is consistent and thus comparable across series and that provides a useful characterization of the
comovements of these time series with overall macroeconomic conditions. This purpose is
similar in spirit to the descriptive research initiated by Wesley Mitchell, Arthur Burns, and their
colleagues at the NBER fifty years ago (e.g. Mitchell and Burns [19381, Burns and Mitchell
[19461, and more recently Moore and Shiskin [1%7]) and continued in association with the
Bureau of Economic Analysis in the U.S. Department of Commerce (e.g. Zarnowitz and
Boschan [19751, Moore [1990]). Burns and Mitchell's work involved the examination ofmany
U.S. time series (for example, Mitchell and Burns [1938] used 487 series), and provided
enduring insights about the historical comovements of aggregate time series with the business
cycle. The tabulations presented here reflect some of the advances in time series methodology
that have occurred over the intervening decades. We hope that this catalog, like Burns and
Mitchell's, provides a useful resource for the development of theories of aggregate fluctuations.
   The series that have been chosen are ones that enter into some theory of aggregate
fluctuations, that measure dispersion and concentration of aggregate fluctuations across industry.
or that historically have been viewed as important leading or coincident indicators of economic
activity. The series fall into 13 categories: output and capacity utilization; consumption, sales,
and income; inventories, orders, and vendor performance; housing and construction; money and
credit (quantity variables) stock prices and volume; interest rates and spreads; aggregate
employment and labor force participation; employment by sector; productivity and wages;
prices; exchange rates and foreign trade; and miscellaneous government and other series.
                                         -1-
    This study reports two sets of statistics that address different aspects of the relation between
 each series and aggregate activity. The first set of statistics summarizes the business cycle
 properties of the series as measured by the strength and timing of the relationship between each
 of the series and a monthly measure of overall economic activity. This requires an operational
 definition of what is meant by the business cycle. Burns and Mitchell (1946) defined the
 business cycle in terms of a reference series, which was an average of several key aggregate
time series. Their measures of cyclicality for individual series were then constructed with
respect to this reference cycle; these measures included average leads or lags at peaks and
troughs and an index of conformity (related to a sign correlation coefficient). Our definition of
a business cycle is similar we use the Index of Coincident Indicators (ICI) described in Stock
and Watson (1989a) as our measure of monthly economic activity. This index isa weighted
average of four monthly time series (employment, industrial production, manufacturing and
trade sales, and personal income), and is quantitatively similar to the Index of Coincident
Economic Indicators currently maintained by the U.S. Department of Commerce. We interpret
comovements over business cycles in terms of whether series are correlated with this index at
business cycle frequencies, interpreted here as periods of 1.6 years. Thus our measures of
comovement and timing are the coherence and cross-correlation of each of the series with
aggregate output at business cycle frequencies.
   The second set of statistics addresses a somewhat different question: of these series, which
have the greatest predictive content for measures of economic activity over the short and
medium run? This question is of practical interest for at least two reasons. The first relates to
a weakness in the traditional NBER scheme for classifying a series as leading, coincident, or
lagging even if a series is leading, say in terms of leads at business cycle turning points, it
does not follow that this series is useful for forecasting output once lagged values of output are
taken into account. The second reason is that measures of marginal predictive content can


                                        -2-
provide insights into the types of theories that are consistent with observed economic behavior.
A leading example is the large literature on whether money has marginal predictive content for
output (i.e. whether money Granger-causes" output). In this literature, a typical question is
whether money has marginal predictive content once lags of some additional variables (prices
and interest rates) are included in a forecasting equation for output. The second set of statistics
therefore focuses on the marginal predictive content of each of these series for two measures of
monthly activity, the IC! and the index of industrial production. This marginal predictive
content is measured with respect to a variety of sets of forecasting variables.
   This catalog of empirical relations both confirms some existing results and provides some
new insights. For example, these findings accord with the observations that productivity is
procyclical, that employment slightly lags the business cycle, and that, at business cycle
frequencies, employment and output at the sectoral level typically move in tandem with overall
economic activity. Some results of this analysis that are perhaps less widely recognized are the
importance of public-private default spreads as predictors of economic performance and the
extent to which some measures of employment transitions, in particular the layoff rate and the
number of part-time workers, are useful leading indicators.
   The outline of this paper is as follows. The criteria for selecting the 163 series and for
choosing preliminary data transformations are discussed in Section 2. The next two sections
describe the statistical analysis without any attempt at interpretation. The first set of statistics,
summarizing the business cycle properties of each series, is presented in Section 3. Section 4
presents the second set of statistics, which summarize the marginal predictive content of each
series for aggregate activity. This section also presents some results for the 194&1-198&12

sample for those series for which the earlier data are available. One result of this analysis is

the identification of new lists of leading indicators; these lists are presented and discussed in
Section 5. Section 6 provides a partial discussion and interpretation of the results. Section 8

concludes.

                                         -3-
                       2. Series Selection and Preliminary Transformations


A_   Selection of a measure of aggregate activity.

     There are two alternative strategies for obtaining a time series that represents aggregate

economic activity on a monthly level: either adopt a single series as the variable of interest or
use a function of several variables. Both approaches have long traditions in empirical
macroeconomics. For example, the empirical literature on the monthly money-income relation
focuses on the predictability of monthly Industrial Production (IP; all mnemonics refer to the
list of definitions in Appendix A). Alternatively, Burns and Mitchell (1946) constructed a
reference series by averaging several different major aggregate time series; this reference series
was then used to date their reference cycles.

     The empirical analysis that follows adopts the second of these two approaches and uses an
index of several variables to represent overall macroeconomic conditions. There are two main
reasons that we use an index rather than a single series, say IP. First, all aggregate time series
are measured with error, and this measurement error is arguably more important at the monthly
level than at longer sampling intervals. For example, Miron and Zeldes (1987) describe the
difficulty of reconciling IP — a natural candidate for a single monthly series that describes
economic activity — with another measure of production derived from the monthly statistics on

inventories and sales. If measurement error is imperfectly correlated across series, then this
source of inaccuracy can in principle be reduced by using an average of several series. Second,
the business cycle is generally viewed as reflecting common movements in multiple series, not
just movements in a single measure of (say) output; see, for example, the discussions in Burns
and Mitchell (1946, p.3) and Lucas (1977). This leads to using the comovements in several


                                              -4-
series, not just the movements in an individual series, as the basis of an empirical measure of

aggregate activity.
   The specific index adopted here (the IC!) is computed as an estimate of the common
unobserved factor in a dynamic single-factor model of four key aggregate monthly time series:
IP, real personal income less transfers (GMYXP8), real manufacturing and trade sales (MT82),
and employee-hours at nonagricultural establishments (LPMHUADJ). The dynamic factor
model is a parametric, time-domain version of the nonparametric, frequency-domain models

considered by Sargent and Sims (1977), Geweke (1977), and Singleton (1980), Although the
procedure by which the IC! is constructed differs from the procedure used at the U.S.
Department of Commerce to construct its Index of Coincident Economic Indicators, it turns out
that the two series are quantitatively similar in growth rates, they have a contemporaneous
correlation of .95, and their average coherence for periods exceeding 8 months is .97. For
details of the construction and for a comparison with the Department of Commerce series, see
Stock and Watson (1988, 1989a).



B. Selection of individual rime series.

   Three general criteria were used to select the 163 individual monthly series. First, series
that enter some theory of macroeconomic fluctuations were included. Most of the included
series fall in this category. For example, this criterion led to the inclusion of output, labor
input, interest rates, aggregate prices, factor prices, consumption and investment, measures of
the quantity of money and credit, exchange rates, productivity, and measures of fiscal policy.
Second, some series that measure dispersion of economic fluctuations across sectors were
included, specifically measures of employment in different sectors of the economy. These two
criteria still omitted several series that have been featured prominently as leading indicators,
such as the index of vendor performance (the percent of manufacturers reporting slower


                                          -5-
deliveries from their vendors) published until recently by the Department of Commerce in
Business Conditions Digest, such series were included to facilitate comparisons with previous
work in this area.
   The complete list of series, definitions and sources are given in Appendix A. Of the 163
series, 108 were obtained directly from the Citibase data base, while the remaining series
involved some additional data collection, splicing, or construction. The analysis covers the
period January, 1959 to December, 1988. This starting point was chosen because several
important series are officially available on a monthly basis starting in January, 1959, in
particular measures of the quantity of money and credit. In a few cases, series that start in the
1960's were included if they were considered potentially important. For example, the Federal
Reserve Board's trade-weighted exchange rate is available only from 1967; to complement it,
four additional trade-weighted exchange rate series were constructed to cover the full period
from 1959 to 1988. An alternative to limiting the analysis to 1959-1988 would be to examine
the properties of each series over the full sample for which that series is available. However,
using a consistent sample period across series has the major advantage of producing directly
comparable results. A drawback of this relatively short sample is, of course, that it provides
only limited evidence on the cyclical co-movements of these series: during these 3 decades
there were only four complete business cycles.
   Plots of the series and summary statistics (mean, standard deviation, extrema) are given in
Appendix B. As is evident from the plots, many of the series exhibit slowly-changing trends
over this period. Several aspects of this empirical analysis assume that the series have finite
spectral densities. We therefore transformed many of the series prior to subsequent analysis.
Almost all of the transformations were of three types: no transformation, taking first
differences, or taking first differences of the logarithms (i.e. growth rates). In choosing the
transformations, we were primarily guided by historical tradition, assisted by some simple


                                        -6-
statistical tests for the presence of stochastic trends in the series. Series that measure real or

nominal quantities (labor, output, money supply, etc.) were in general transformed into growth
rates. Series that measure real or nominal quantities but that need not be positive (the trade
balance) were expressed as a percent of national income. Price indexes were expressed in
growth rates, Le. as the rate of inflation derived from that price index. Dickey-Fuller (1979)
statistics fail to reject the hypothesis that nominal interest rates and constructed estimates of ex-
ante real interest rates contain a unit root over this period; thus the monthly changes in nominal
rates were used. Interest rate spreads were used without further transformation, so the two
interest rates used to form the spread were implicitly treated as being cointegrated. There were
some series which did not fit into these general categories, such as the Index of Vendor
Performance and capacity utilization rates; for these, we relied on Dickey-Fuller test statistics
to suggest whether it was appropriate to difference the series or to leave it in levels. Finally,
although most of the series either have no seasonal component or are already seasonally adjusted
(indeed, many are available only on a seasonally adjusted basis), some of the series (for
example, auto sales) showed sharp seasonal patterns. Additional transformations were made to
these series. The transformation chosen for each of the series (growth rates, differences, none,
or some series-specific transformation) is given in Appendix B.




              3. Results 1 Measures of Comovement with Aggregate Activity


   This section presents two sets of summary statistics. The first set describes the univariate
properties of the 163 series, and the second set describes the comovements of each series with
our monthly measure of aggregate activity, the IC!.
   The task of quantifying comovements with the business cycle — as distinct from co-


                                        -7-
movements with aggregate activity in general — is conceptually difficult. Burns and Mitchell
(1946) quantified comovements in terms of leads or lags at turning points of each series relative
to the reference cycle and in terms of their index of conformity. More recent work has
focused on the second moments of the joint distribution of the series of interest and the

reference series. For example, Hymans (1973) summarized cyclical timing by estimating phases
in the frequency domain at business cycle frequencies, and Koch and Raasche (1988) quantified
comovement and timing of leading indicators in terms of the properties of estimated bivariate
transfer functions between the series and IP. This focus on second moments is appropriate if
one models the series as having a stationary jointly normal distribution, for in this case the first
two moments provide complete information about the joint distribution. To the extent that the
series are non-Gaussian and the relationships are nonlinear, one must hope that the first two
moments nonetheless summarize important links between the series.
   This perspective — focusing on second moment properties of the series — is adopted here.
We consider two different measures of comovements at business cycle frequencies, one in the
frequency domain and one in the time domain. In the frequency domain, a natural statistic to
consider is the coherence (a measure of R2 by frequency) at business cycle frequencies. (See
Sargent and Sims (1977) or Sargent (1987) for discussions of spectral interpretations of business
cycle fluctuations.) In the time domain, one strategy would be to examine cross-correlations
between the individual series and the IC!. However, these cross-correlations involve
comovements between all components of these series, not just those components that fluctuate at
business cycle frequencies. We therefore examined cross correlograms of smoothed versions of
the series. Each series was smoothed by passing them though a filter a(L) for a series
analyzed in differences or levels, the filtered series Z is Z = a(L)Y, while for a series
analyzed in growth rates or log levels, Z = a(L)ln(Y1). The cross-correlation between Z and
a(L)ln(IC!t) was then computed.


                                        -8-
   An ideal filter a(L) would eliminate all movements in the series other than those at business
cycle frequencies. Two practical problems arise in implementing this ideal filter, however.
The first is that the phrase "business cycle frequencies" is imprecise, that is, it does not delimit
a specific band of frequencies. The second is that, given an ideal passband, all finitely
parameterized filters are imperfect in that will be leakage from outside the passband. Thus the
choice of a particular filter is somewhat arbitrary, and the calculations reported here were
performed using two different filters. Both are bandpass filters that eliminate the high and
very low frequency components of the series. The first filter, a24(L), is the first difference of

a weighted 24-month compounded moving average: a24(L) = (1-LX1+L). The second filter is
the eighth order Butterworth filter with a design passband of (2ir/72, 2r/18), which corresponds
to periods of 1½ to 6 years (see for example Bose [1985, Ch. 31).

   The key property of these filters is their (frequency domain) gain Ia(e" these are plotted
in Figure 1, normalized so that their maximum is L Because the same filter is applied to both
the IC! and the trial series, the phase of the filter can be ignored, that is, filtering induces no
shifts in the lead-lag relation by frequency. The Butterworth filter aB(L) passes a lower
frequency signal than the 24-month moving average filter. The passband of a24(L) is 9 to 51
months, as measured by the full width at half-maximal gain; 90% of the gain is for periods
over 8 months, and more than two-thirds corresponds to periods from 1 to 6 years. Thus
a24(L) can be thought of as focusing on movements in the 9 month to 4 year range, while aB(L)
focuses on the 18 month to 6 year range.
   Both filters have a(1)=O (zero power at frequency zero) so that in steady state these filters
eliminate linear time trends. The filter a24(L) has finite order and the steady state is achieved
after two years. However, aB(L) is an infinite impulse response filter. To eliminate spurious
effects of initial conditions involving a linear trend component, each series was linearly

detrended before filtering by aB(L).


                                          -9-
 0     0.1   0.2    0.3       0.4     0.5      0.6     0.7   0.8   0.9

                          Frequency (fraction of pi)


                                    Figure 1


               Gains Ia24(eit5I and IaB(e )I for the

24-month moving average filter a24(L) and the Butterworth filter a3(L)

        Key: solid line: 1a8(e)I, dashed line: 1a24(e"51
        Statistics describing the univariate properties of the (unfiltered) series are presented in the
first six columns of Table L The first two statistics are the Dickey-Fuller t-statistics testing
the null hypothesis of a unit root in the untransformed series, against the alternative that the
largest root of the series is either explosive or less than one. Both statistics include twelve lags
of the changes of the indicated series; the DF statistic includes a constant in the regression,
and the DF statistic includes a linear time trend as well.
        The next four columns report estimates of the spectral density over four frequency bands.
respectively corresponding to periods of greater than 6 years, 2.6 years, 1-2 years, and less than
1 year. These estimates were obtained using an unweighted average of the periodogram
ordinates over the indicated frequency range. The estimates are expressed as a ratio of tL
periodogram estimate over the band to the average value of the periodogram over the interval

[-ar,   4 For example, for the growth of Industrial Production (series 2) the average value of the
periodogram for frequencies with periods between 2 and 6 years is 3.78 times ftc average value
of the periodograin over the entire frequency range, while the average periodogram for periods
less than one year (i.e. high frequencies) is only 74% of the overall average.
        The statistics in the remaining columns, in conjunction with the inal two columns of plots
in Appendix B, constitute our primary summaries of the comovernent and timing of the
individual series with the business cycle. The first four of th.se columns report the coherence
between the growth of the ICI and the transformed serie in question over different frequency
bands. The greater is the coherence in the 2-6 year range, the more closely does the series
move with the ICI over the 2-6 year horizon. The reported coherences are averages across the
indicated frequency band of pointwise estimates of the coherence at each frequency, where the
coherence at each frequency is estimated using a rectangular kernel with 8 periodogram
ordinates on either side of the frequency. Because the coherence is essentially a lag-adjusted
R2 by frequency, it does not provide information about the sign or timing of the comovements.


                                             - 10 -
   The final four columns address the timing of cyclical comovements. The first two of these
columns report the cross-correlations between the logarithm of the ICI and the series in
question, after both series have been filtered using the 24-month MA filter a24(L). The first
column gives the maximal cross-correlation (for lags in the range -18 to +18), the second
column gives the contemporaneous correlation, and the third column gives the lead or lag at
which the correlation is maximal. A maximal correlation of (say) 0.4 at -5 months indicates
that the filtered series at time t has a correlation of 0.4 with filtered IC! at time t+5. This lag
can therefore be interpreted as one measure of the number of months by which the series leads

(-) or lags (+) overall economic activity. The final column reports the lead or lag at the
maximal cross-correlation (in the range -18 to +18) between the filtered trial series and filtered
IC!, where the series are filtered using the Butterworth filter aB(L).

   More complete information is provided graphically in Appendix B. The Appendix presents
four plots for each series. The first plot portrays the historical time series. The second
presents the estimated spectrum of the transformed series, averages of which (with different
smoothing) are reported as the spectral density estimates in Table L The third plot presents the
coherence between the transformed series and the growth of the IC!; averages of these are the
coherences presented in Table 1. The fourth plots the cross-correlogram of the filtered series
with filtered log ICI; the maximal correlation, its lead or lag, and the value at lag zero
correspond to the final four columns in Table I The two cross-correlograms plotted in this
figure were computed using the 24-month MA filter a24(L) (solid line) and the Butterworth

filter aB(L) (dashed line).




                                        -   11   -
                     4. Results IL Predictive Content for Aggregate Output


   The cross-correlations and cross-spectra reported in the previous section provide one set of
measures of the comovements between these series and the ICI at different horizons. However,
a different and arguably more useful criterion of whether a series is a leading indicator of
future economic activity is whether movements in that series are useful in forecasting total
output. This section presents statistics that summarize the additional (linear) information
content of each of these 163 series, relative to three different sets of conditioning variables.
   Table 2 presents various summaries of the predictive content of the candidate series for ICI.
The conditioning variables in these regressions are lagged values of IC!. The first four columns
indicate whether lags of the candidate variable are significant in regressions that include 12 lags
of IC! growth and, respectively, 6 and 12 lags of the variable. The next six columns refer to
R2's from a regression of the growth of IC! over the next k months on 6 lags each of monthly
IC! growth and of the transformed series. That is, ln(ICIt+k/ICIt) is regressed on

ln(ICIt/ICI_i),.... ln(ICI5/ICIt), X                 and a constant, where    refers to the
value of the transformed series. The statistics presented are the R2's and their ranks among the
series for k =   1, 6,   and 12.

   The final four columns of Table 2 present statistics that examine the subsample stability of
the projection of future 6-month growth of IC! onto 6 lags each of IC! growth and of the series
under consideration. The first two of these columns refer to this regression, estimated over the
full sample period; the root mean square error (RMSE) is computed for the two subsamples
ending in September 1979 and starting in October 1979. The final two columns report the same
statistics, computed from the regression estimated through September, 1979. Thus the final
column simulates an out-of-sample forecasting experiment for the 6-month growth of ICI.
Although no formal test statistics are provided, a large increase in the out-of-sample post-1979


                                          - 12 -
 RMSE, relative to the in-sample post-1979 RMSE, points to an unstable reduced-form relation
 between IC! and the series.
    The statistics presented in Table 3 are the same as in Table 2, except that ICI is replaced
by IP, both as the variable to be forecasted and as the base variable in the conditioning set.
This table is included to facilitate comparisons with other research that has focused on IP, The
last two rows in Table 3 show the correlation and rank correlation between the respective
columns in Tables 2 and 3. These correlations are all large — particularly those for the R2's —

suggesting no major qualitative differences between the IC! and IP results.

   One of the objectives of this exercise is to identify series that previously might not have
been recognized as having important predictive content for aggregate activity. This suggests
examining the marginal predictive content of these series for output, given a conventional set of
predictive variables. Thus a larger conditioning set is used in Table 4. The base system
considered here includes IC! growth, the growth rate of real M2 (FM2D82), wholesale price
inflation (PW), and the 90-day Treasury bill rate (FYGM3), The main reason for examining
this system is that it is a now-standard "base" model for VAR analyses of macroeconomic series.
For example, with a different measure of output, this system is a typical starting point in the
money-income literature (Sims (1980a, 1980b)), and it forms the basis for recent investigations
of so-called structural VAR's (e.g. Blanchard and Watson (1986), Sims (1986), King, Plosser,

Stock and Watson (1987), and Shapiro and Watson (1988)), A second reason for considering this
system is that the results in Table 2 confirm that measures of the money supply, interest rates,
and inflation have substantial marginal predictive content for output when considered in
bivariate systems; a natural question thus is to see which series have substantial marginal
predictive content for output, given representative series from these groups.
   The statistics in Table 4 report the results of augmenting the base system by each trial
series; six lags of each variable enter the regression equations. The first four columns


                                       -13-
 summarize tests of whether all tags of the trial variable and real M2 (respectively) enter the
 regression equation for 1-month growth in the IC!. The next six columns present the R2's for
 various forecasting horizons and their ranks, where the R1s refer to a regression of the growth
 of the ICI over the next k months (k     1, 6, 12) against 6 lags each of the 5 transformed
 forecasting variables. The final four columns report subsample RMSE's from the regression of
 the 6-month growth in the IC! against six lags of each of the forecasting variables.
    Table 5 presents similar statistics for a different system, one in which the conditioning set
consists of lags of ICI and two additional variables: the spread between 6 month commercial
paper and 6 month Treasury bills (CP6_GM6), and a measure of the slope of the long-maturity
end of the yield curve (GlO_Gi). This choice of spreads has two related motivations. First,
these spreads individually exhibit strong predictive content for IC! growth both in Table 2 and
in Table 4. Second, in related work (Stock and Watson [1989aJ) we found that taken together
these spreads were two of the most potent leading variables from the perspective of six-month
ahead forecasts. In addition to the k-month R2's and split-sample RMSE's, Table 5 reports
tests for whether these two spreads significantly enter the four-variable regression.
   Although this study focuses on the 1959-1988 period, many of the series are available earlier
than 1959. Statistics concerning the bivariate predictive content of these series for IP over the
full 1948 - 1988 period are presented in Table 6 The statistics reported are the same as in

Table 3, except for the longer sample period. A comparison of Tables 3 and 6 indicates that
the difference in measures of predictive content, particularly the R2's, between the longer and
shorter samples is typically modest (The rankings in Tables 3 and 6 are not comparable
because Table 6 omits many of the series in Table 3.) In general, the R2's are lower over the
full sample, indicating that IP was less predictable in the 50's than subsequently, that the
reduced-form parameters have changed, or both.




                                         14 -
                            5. New Lists of Leading Indicators



    One natural way to organize the information in Tables 1-6 is to use these results to develop
 a list of series that appear to contain useful information about the direction of future economic
 activity, that is, to develop a list of leading indicators. These tables examine different concepts
 of predictive content — bivariate correlation, bivariate marginal predictive content, and

 multivariate marginal predictive content — each of which suggests a different list of leading

 indicators. As is argued below, lists based on bivariate correlation are conceptually similar to
 the traditional NBER approach to identifying leading indicators, while lists based on marginal
predictive content relate to more recent work focusing explicitly on the marginal forecasting
ability of each series, e.g. Stock and Watson (1989a).

   The first list of leading indicators is developed using the correlations reported in Table L
The filtered cross-correlations give an indication of whether, and how strongly, a trial series is
related to the IC! at business cycle frequencies. A candidate for the length of the lead or lag is
the lead at the maximal absolute correlation kmax, as reported in the final two columns of
Table 1 for the 24-month and Butterworth filters. A comparison of these leads for each series,
and in particular a comparison of the plots of the cross-correlations of the filtered series in
Appendix B, indicates that the choice of the filter typically does not have an important
qualitative effect on the lead kmax. This discussion therefore focuses on the lead identified
using the 24-month MA filter. A list of leading indicators based on Table 1 is presented in
Table 7. This list sorts the a24(L) results in Table 1 by length of lead and, within length of
lead, by the size of the maximal absolute correlation.

   The conditional analyses of the remaining tables provide alternate criteria for classifying a
series as a leading indicator based on marginal predictive content given a conditioning set. A


                                       - 15 -
list of 40 such leading indicators is presented in Table 8, in which the conditioning set is lagged
values of the series and lagged values of IC! growth. These are the 40 series with the greatest
marginal predictive content for IC! growth based on the results in Table 2, where marginal
predictive content is measured in two ways. The first ranking, given in column A, is by the
six-month ahead in-sample R2. The second, in column B, is by the 6-month ahead "out of
sample" RMSE, which is the RMSE for forecasts made over the period 79:10 - 8&12 using a
forecasting equation for six-month growth of the IC! estimated over 1959:1 - 1979:9.
   This approach to developing a list of leading indicators — picking the "top 40" series based
on their ability to forecast 6-month growth in the IC! — depends on the conditioning set. Thus
a final list, based on the conditioning set in Table 4 (IC! growth, money growth, inflation, and
the 90 day T-bill rate), is presented in Table 9.
   It is interesting to examine the series on these three lists, and in particular to compare these
series with classifications developed using more traditional techniques. The traditional NBER
approach to identifying leading indicators has its roots in the visual identification of cyclical
peaks and troughs in the individual series, which are often smoothed; the timing of the specific
cycle is then compared with the reference cycle (Mitchell and Burns [1938], Burns and Mitchell
[19461). Over the years this approach evolved, incorporating computer programs to identify
turning points (Bry and Boschan [19711) and more formal scoring systems to determine the
quality of the series as a reliable leader (Zarnowitz and Boschan [19751). Although the
performance of composite indexes of leading indicators has been examined from the perspective
of marginal predictive content (Zarnowitz and Braun [1989J), a central idea in this approach is
to classify according to unconditional measures, that is, not to condition on lagged values of the
reference cycle or other variables in developing a least of leading variables.
   Of our three categorizations, the one based on simple cross-correlations (Table 7) is closest
to this traditional approach to identifying leading series. In fact, the classification in Table 7


                                        - 16 -
 agrees well with previous classifications that used traditional techniques, such as those which
 appeared in the Business Conditions Digest. For example, several components of industrial
 production, such as IPI and IPC, move approximately contemporaneously with the IC! at
 business cycle frequencies, as do new orders and selected measures of the labor force such as
 new claims for unemployment insurance. New business incorporations (INC) and business
failures (FAIL) both lead overall activity, with a lead of 3 months; the leading correlation of
these series is substantially larger than the contemporaneous or lagged correlations.
   Series with leads of approximately six months include stock price indexes, measures of the
money supply, and several price series (the correlation between the filtered price series and
filtered IC! is negative at these leads). Perhaps surprisingly, these correlations also identify
exchange rates as leading by S months, although the correlation is weak.
   Interest rates also appear as leading indicators, with a longer lead: matched maturity private
- public
           spreads (CP6_GM6 and BAC_GM3) lead by eight months, while the longest leads are
given by long bond rates (inverted). This final observation is consistent Moore's (1990) recent
inclusion of long bond prices in a long-leading index.
   The list in Table 7 also identifies several series that are initially difficult to interpret. In a
few cases, this is probably a result of the rather simple mechanical procedure for developing

this list. For example, employment in mining (LPMI) leads by 11 months, with an increase in
mining employment associated with a future decline in economic activity. Because mining
includes the oil and gas industry, this relation is arguably driven mainly by the observation that,
over this period, an oil price increase has been good for the oil industry but bad for the
economy as a whole.

   Another interesting set of findings is that various measures of real wages in manufacturing
(LEHM82, RPWGMS, RPWGMDS) lead by 7 or 8 months, with a positive correlation.
Inspection of the corresponding plots of the filtered cross-correlograms and the series


                                        - 17 -
 themselves indicate that this is a rather pronounced feature of these real wage series. The
 nominal wage series (LEHM) also leads, but with a slight negative correlation, and the leading
correlation of price inflation is strong and negative; thus the positive leading pattern of the real
wage series over this period appears to be associated with changes in overall prices that are not
matched by changes in nominal wages, so that real wages exhibit a strong positive correlation at
substantial leads. That is, on average large price increases are associated with smaller nominal
wage increases and thus with real wage declines; this pattern proceeds a decline in real output.
   The list based on conditional predictive content in Table 8 differs in several ways from the
list in Table 7 and from the traditional NBER classification. A striking feature of Table 8 is

the dominance of financial series as leading indicators, in particular interest rate spreads and
measures of money and credit. Although stock prices (FSPCOM, FSPIN) have important
marginal predictive content as measured by the the 6-month ahead in-sample R2 (column A),
this is exceeded by several interest rate and monetary series. When the series are ranked in
order of the R2(6) statistic, the only two nonfinancial series that enter the top ten are new
housing building permits (HSBP) and the index of help wanted advertising (LHEL). Of the top
40 predictors, 28 are financial series (interest rates, money and credit, stock prices) or measures
of inflation. Of the remaining series, 5 are measures of labor market transitions, such as the
layoff rate (LHULLHEM) or the help wanted index (LHEL), The only measures of real
investment activity are those related to the housing market traditionally identified leading
indicators such as contracts and orders for plant and equipment (MPCON8) do not appear,
although a measure of negative inventories, unfilled orders (MNU82), does.
   Although the ranks change when the series are classified according to their out-of-sample
performance during the 1980's, the list of the "top 40' series remains similar. Stock prices
disappear from the list entirely, as do measures of the money supply, although measures of
credit and the federal deficit continue to appear.


                                        - 18-
   The final list of leading indicators is given in Table 9. The conditioning set now includes a
series from each of three of the categories that have substantial correlations as indicated in the
previous lists: the money supply (FM2D82), inflation (PW), and an interest rate (the 90 day T-
bill rate [FYGM3]). In this light, what is surprising is that Table 9 does not differ more from
Table 8. Interest rate spreads — both measures of the public-private spread and term structure
spreads — continue to have substantial marginal predictive content, as do measures of labor

flows, other measures of inflation, exchange rates, and credit. As in Table 8, stock prices
surface as important leading indicators when ranked by the in-sample R2, but their poor
predictive performance over 79:10 - 8&12 suggests that their relation to economic activity in the
80's differs from what it was during the earlier part of the sample; in any case, stock prices
appear in neither Table 8 nor Table 9 when ranked by out-of-sample RMSE.




                                 6 Discussion of Specific Series


   The statistics in Appendix B and in the tables confirm some existing results and provide
several new insights. This section discusses some of these findings.


1. Co-movements across sectors

   A key notion of the business cycle is that fluctuations are common across sectors. The 163

series include several measures of output and employment that are disaggregated by sector,
examination of the statistics for these series sheds some light on the extent to which sectoral
activity moves with aggregate activity at business cycle horizons. The distinct output measures
are industrial production of consumer nondurables (IPCN), consumer durables (IPCD), mining

(IPMIN), utilities (IPUT), and business equipment (IPE) (the other disaggregated output


                                            - 19 -
measures have some degree of overlap). The distinct sectoral employment measures are
employees in mining (LPMI), construction (LPCC), durable manufacturing (LPED), nondurable
manufacturing (LPEN), wholesale trade (LPTW), retail trade (LPFR), finance, insurance, and
real estate (LPFR), and government (LPGOV). A related composite is employees in the private
service sector (LPSPNGA).

   The coherences and cross-correlations in Appendix B and in Table 1 in general indicate a
striking degree of positive association between these series and ICI. With the exception of
output and/or employment in utilities, mining, government, and finance, insurance, and real
estate, the coherence of the growth of each of the series with ICI growth for periods in the 2-6
year range exceeds .6, and the contemporaneous correlation between the filtered series is

positive and large using either of the bandpass filters. According to the cross-correlogram and
the lead at the maximal correlation, the output series either are contemporaneous or (for the
consumption series) lead by one month; the employment series typically lag slightly. These
patterns are consistent with the notion that business cycle fluctuations occur across industries

approximately contemporaneously.
   The exceptions to this general pattern are utilities, mining, government, and finance,
insurance, and real estate. It is not surprising that government employment exhibits no
substantial cyclical movements and that that the comovements in utilities, while positive and
roughly contemporaneous, are not as strong as in other sectors. As mentioned in Section 5,the
historical time series and filtered cross-correlograms for mining indicates that increases in
employment in mining are associated with subsequent declines in economic performance. A
possible source of this negative correlation is that it arises in part from employment in the oil
and gas industry, which expanded during the contractions of 1974 and 1980 and which
contracted with the decline of oil prices during the expansion of the mid-1980's. The relative
lack of cyclical behavior of finance, insurance and real estate is noteworthy: although


                                       -20-
employment growth slowed during each recession, the only period since 1959 during which
employment in this sector actually declined was the 1974-5 recession.


2. Productivity and employment over the cycle

   These statistics confirm that productivity is procyclical; for example, the contemporaneous
correlation between filtered productivity (IPROD1) and filtered ICI is .91. In addition, most
measures of the number of employees either are contemporaneous or slightly lag ICI. For
example. total employees at nonagricultural establishments (LPNAG) has its maximal a24(L)..
filtered cross correlation at a lag of one month and has no marginal predictive content for
future activity for any information set considered.
   Some measures of employment, however, seem to lead the cycle, both in the sense of the
filtered cross-correlograms in Appendix B and in terms of having marginal predictive content
for future IC! and I?. For example, the number of people working part time for economic
reasons (LHNAGP and LHNAPS), the number of employees on layoff (LHUL), the layoff rate
(LHULLHEM), the help wanted index (LHEL and LHELX), and the number of new claims for
unemployment insurance (LUINC) each are either contemporaneous or lead IC! slightly and
have significant (at the 1% level) marginal predictive content for both IC! and IP when the
information set includes lags of ICI or IF, respectively.
   In some cases (in particular the help wanted index, the number of people working part time
for economic reasons, and the layoff rate), this marginal predictive power persists in the
regressions with expanded information sets. Indeed, the layoff rate exhibits the highest R2
among the 1-month growth regressions in Table 5, and is second highest among the 6-month
regressions. The R2 for the forecast of the 6-month growth of IC! from a regression with
lagged IC!, the two lagged interest rate spreads in Table 5, and the lagged layoff rate is 65%.
Although the final statistics in Table 5 suggest that this relationship is not particularly stable


                                          - 21 -
across subsamples for the layoff rate, there is less evidence of subsample instability for the
number of people working part time for economic reasons. In addition, the help wanted index
makes the greatest marginal contribution to the base macro model in Table 4. This is consistent
with Blanchard and Diamond's (1989) finding that the vacancy rate (in their case, LHELX
adjusted for trend following the procedure in Abraham [19871) has substantial predictive content
for new hires, given lagged unemployment and lagged hires.
   Taken together, these statistics arguably indicate that certain measures of employment — in
particular, temporary responses of firms such as reducing the hours of some workers, laying off
some employees, or changing the number of advertisements for job openings —lead future
activity both in the sense of cyclical timing and in the sense of having significant marginal
predictive content for future output given several different information sets.


3. Cyclical behavior of prices
   The series include a variety of measures of product and factor prices. The relation between
prices and fluctuations is not clear a-priori; demand shocks would tend to result in positive
correlations between innovations in prices and output and supply shocks could result in negative
correlations. Correlations between output and prices at business cycle frequencies depend not
only on the correlation of the innovations but also on the economy-wide adjustment to
innovations. We do not attempt to provide a complete model of the types of shocks that
impinge on different industries and stages of production. Nonetheless, the statistics presented
here suggest that different prices have been subject to somewhat different shocks or perhaps
have different adjustment mechanisms over this period.
   The filtered cross-correlograms exhibit two distinct patterns in the cyclical behavior of these
prices. In most cases — for example aggregate consumer prices and producer prices (PUNEW

and PW), producer prices for fuel (PWFC and PW1300), capital equipment (PWFP),


                                       -22-
manufacturing materials and components (PWIMSM), and intermediate materials (PWIMS) —
increases   in producer prices are associated with subsequent declines in economic activity during
this period. Moreover, these series tend to decline or to remain unchanged following an
increase in economic activity. On the other hand, prices of materials excluding fuel (PW1200
and PWCMP), spot commodities markets (PSCCOM), and sensitive materials (PSMC99A) tend to
rise preceding and subsequent to increases in economic activity.


4. Monetary aggregates as leading indicators

   Whether monetary aggregates lead output is one of the most researched questions in
empirical macroeconomics. The cross-correlograms document a pattern of money, particularly
measures of real money, leading output in the sense of cyclical timing. The preponderance of
effort in the literature has, however, focused on the more refined issue of the marginal
predictive content of money for output, given a variety of additional variables. The results in
Tables 2-5 systematically illuminate this relation.
   The main results from these tables pertaining to the money-income relation are four. First,
based on results for the full sample, each of the real monetary aggregates (base money, Ml, M2,
M3, and L) have significant marginal predictive content both for ICI growth and for IP growth,
given lags of the output measure. The real money variables are usually significant at the 1%
level, always at the 5% level. Some, but not all, broader measures of consumer credit also lead
economic activity in this predictive-content sense.
   Second, focusing on M2 (as has most of the literature), we find that money has significant
predictive content for output given virtually any other variable in this list. In Table 4, given 6
lags each of the IC!, inflation, the 90-day T-Bill rate, and each of the remaining trial variables
in turn, in 146 of 158 cases money continues to predict the IC! at the 5% level based on the
conventional F-statistics. In only three cases (the spread between rates on 6-month commercial


                                          - 23 -
paper and 6-month Treasury bills (CP6_GM6), the closely-related spread between 90-day
banker's acceptances and 90-day T-bills (BAC_GM3), and the index of help wanted advertising
(LHEL)) is M2 no longer significant at the 10% level using standard critical values. These
statistics apply to regressions with 6 lags of all variables; when 12 lags are included, the
statistical significance of money diminishes (e.g. see Stock and Watson [1989b] for a discussion)
This might be simply a result of reduced power when these additional restrictions are tested. In
any case, the overwhelming conclusion is that money has useful predictive content given any of
these information sets with only a few exceptions, based on the estimates made using the full
sample. Because similar results obtain using IP in place of ICI, these results appear not to be at
artifact of using a nonstandard measure of economic activity.
   Third, the relation between money and output seems to be unstable over subsamples that
exclude the 1980's. Friedman and Kuttner (1989) make this point in connection with the
instability of velocity and of money-output regressions. Based on the final four columns of
Table 4, the out-of-sample RMSE for 197910-198&12 is typically one-third larger than the in.
sample RMSE for this period, when the system is estimated using the full sample. The main
exceptions to this are again the systems with the public-private spreads, the help-wanted index,
and the layoff rate; the point estimates in these systems imply a smaller role for money and the
resulting models exhibit the lowest simulated out-of-sample RMSE's. Moreover, the out-of-
sample RMSE's are typically larger in Table 4 than in Table 2, indicating a deterioration of
forecasting performance over the 1980's when money is included.
   Fourth, the inclusion of both the public-private spread (CP6_GM6) and a measure of the
slope of the yield curve, the spread between 10-year Treasury bonds and 1-year Treasury bonds
(G10_G1) effectively vitiates the predictive content of any of the monetary aggregates. This is
consistent with the conclusions of Stock and Watson (1989a) and Friedman and Kuttner (1989).




                                        - 24 -
5. !iuerest rates and spreads
   The previous discussion points to the substantial predictive content in certain interest rate
spreads for future economic activity. The statistics in Tables 2-5 help to refine this observation
and suggest some preliminary interpretations about why this might be. This discussion focuses
on two distinct types of spreads: term premia, which measure the slope of the yield curve, and
risk premia, measured by spreads between matched-maturity private and public debt. These
spreads do not appear in the lists of leading indicators developed by Burns, Mitchell, and their
collaborators at the NBER, or in the list maintained by the Department of Commerce. Still, the
observation that they have substantial predictive content has precedents elsewhere in the
literature. It seems to be general knowledge, at least in the financial press, that an inverted
yield curve signals an impending recession, although the formal work on this proposition is
limited. Campbell (1987) and Fama and French (1989) find that measures of the slope of the
(short end of the) yield curve have predictive content for excess returns on a variety of
financial assets. Estrella and Hardouvelis (1989) document the predictive content of the slope
of the yield curve for output. Keim and Stambaugh (1986) find that public-private spreads
have predictive content for excess returns on stock portfolios. Bernanke (1983) (using interwar
data) and Friedman and Kuttner (1989) find that private-public spreads have substantial
predictive content for output.
   Consider first the yield curve spreads based solely on public debt instruments. The cross-
correlations between these spreads and ICI is modest, except for the spreads incorporating 10-
year bonds; these correlations, and visual inspection of the plots, indicate that inversion of the
long end of the yield curve is associated with subsequent declines in output. The statistics in
Tables 2 and 3 indicate that, of these spreads, only the slope of the long end of the yield curve
has significant predictive content for output.
   Although we do not propose a formal model to explain this property of the long end of the
yield curve as a leading indicator, in an economy with effective monetary policy and sticky
                                        - 25 -
prices it has a natural interpretation in terms of expected future short rates and inflation. If
short rates are expected to be temporarily high as a result of contractionary monetary policy an
if long term inflation is expected to subside as a result of decreased future demand, then an
inverted yield curve will be associated with future declines in output.

   The various public-private spreads each have substantial predictive content for output in
bivariate systems and in the multivariate system in Table 4. Inspection of these statistics and
the plots indicates, however, two interesting features of these spreads. First, the short term
spread between 90-day T-bills and the monthly average Federal Funds rate (GM3_FF) has
coherences, cross-correlations, and historical plots that suggest that this series behaves more like
a default premium than like a measure of the slope of the short end of the yield curve.
Moreover, the spreads between the Federal Funds rate and short term private instruments
(FF_CP6 and FF_BAC) exhibit positive comovements with output growth, both by visual
inspection of the series and by examination of the smoothed cross-covariances. The pattern of
these cross-covariances is less like an inverted measure of the short end of the term structure
(e.g. GM6_GM3) than like a measure of the private-public spread. These observations suggest
that market participants at times assign substantial risk premia to loans in the federal funds
market relative to 90-day T-bills, and perhaps relative to other private instruments such
commercial paper.
   Second, the spread between Baa-rated bonds and 10-year T-bonds indicates a distinct
upward trend over this period: the mean premium during the 1%O's is just over 1 percentage
point, while the mean since the 1982 recession has been over 2 percentage points. This is
consistent with an upward shift in the perceived riskiness of these private securities over this
period.
   The matched maturity public-private spreads can be thought of as measures of default
premia. Because the reported commercial paper rates are averages of rates on many individual


                                       -26-
projects, the average rate is a measure of the extent to which loans to individual firms are
deemed risky. This averaging thus serves to aggregate information on financial performance,
market conditions, and other firm-specific information that is used in setting the rate on each
loan. This interpretation of this spread as an aggregator of private information is consistent
with the striking fact (from Table 5) that information in this spread seems to be contained in
few of the other variables: CP6_GM6 is significant at the 0.1% level in 156 of the 159 models
in Table 5. The exceptions are regressions including two alternative, colinear measures of the
short-term private default risk (GM3_FF and BAC_GM3) and the index of help wanted

advertising (LI-IEL).
   The results reported for the full postwar sample in Table 6 suggest a reduced preditive role
for private-public spreads in the earlier period. Although CP6_GM3 cannot be constructed
through the entire 194&1 - 198&12 sample, BAC_GM3 can. Although its ranking at the 6-
month horizon is still good, the value of the R2(6) statistic drops from .450 over the shorter
sample to 221 over the longer sample. Because the out-of-sample RMSE for BAC_GM3 is
actually less in Table 6 than in Table 3, this suggests that this spread simply did not forecast
output as well in the 50's as it did subsequently, rather than indicating parameter instability.
These findings ought not be overinterpreted, however, since they are based on this single

bankers' acceptances spread.


6. Stock prices

   The stock market is conventionally viewed as a key leading indicator. A stock price index
was included in the original list developed by Mitchell and Burns (1938), and the Standard and
Poor's index of the prices of 500 stocks enters the index of leading indicators currently
maintained by the Department of Commerce. The cross-correlograms for various measures of
stock prices confirm that it leads output by approximately 6 months. Stock prices also are


                                        - 27 -
leading in the sense of having significant (at the 0.1% level) predictive content for IP and IC!
in bivariate systems. Indeed, of these series, the S&P 500 (FSPCOM) has the 14-th highest
for forecasts of the 6-month growth in IC!.
   In both the conditioning sets of Table 4 and Table 5, however, the marginal predictive
content of stock prices is substantially reduced: stock returns fail to be significant at the 10%
leveL While the findings of the first three tables are consistent with those in Fischer and
Merton (1984) (who find systematic predictive content in stock prices tor future activity), the
findings in Table 4 and particularly in Table 5 suggest instead that information in stock prices
is contained in other aggregate time series such as the risk premium on commercial paper.




                                    7. Conclusions


   It is important to keep in mind two cautionary notes when using these tabulations. First, by
focusing on second moments these statistics consider only linear relations among these series.
Nonlinear relations between a series and overall activity will be captured only to the extent that
they are reflected in the correlations between the series. If present, these nonlinear patterns
might better be summarized by other measures of comovement, such as sign correlations.
Casual inspection of the plots of the time series suggests that some series, such as the spreads,
might well be better described by a nonlinear than a linear model. In these cases, although the
summary measures presented here remain valid, one suspects that they might understate the
relationship between the series and overall economic activity.
   Second, the major advantage of this catalog — the ability to compare the cyclical and
predictive properties of different series on a common basis — brings with it special problems of
statistical inference. When assessing marginal predictive content, we have used conventional


                                        -28-
asymptotic distribution theory to provide p-values to gauge the significance of various test
statistics. While this measure of significance is useful if one considers only the performance of
that particular series, when statistics are compared across series the standard critical values and
p-values are in general inappropriate. For example, the null distribution of the maximal R2 in
a regression predicting the growth of industrial production among, say, 40 candidate regressions
differs from the null distribution of any one such R2. Were all the series independent under
some appropriate null hypothesis, it would be feasible to compute distributions that take this
into account. However, many of the series measure closely related concepts, and most are
arguably correlated at some lead or lag. Thus the various summary statistics are typically
dependent across series (i.e. across rows of the tables) and no practical distribution theory is
available to approximate their joint distribution. As a result, we have not attempted to quantify
this joint dependence and instead have simply reported the various summary statistics.
   This catalog summarizes some of the main features of the cyclical properties of key
aggregate time series. The statistics indicate some economically interesting relations that have
not been widely recognized, such as the robustness of the predictive content of money for
future output to changes in the information set (and its subsample instability) and the predictive
content of public-private default premia for future aggregate activity.




                                       - 29 -
                                        References


Abraham, K.G. (1987), "Help-Wanted Advertising, Job Vacancies, and Unemployment,'
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1989, 207-248.

Bernanke, B.S. (1983), "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the
     Great Depression," American Economic Review 73, no, 3, 257-276.

Blanchard, OJ. and P. Diamond (1989), 'The Beveridge Curve," Brookings Papers on Economic
     Activity 1:1989, 1-60.

Blanchard, OJ, and M.W. Watson (1986), "Are Business Cycles All Alike?' in RJ. Gordon
     (ed.), The A,nerican Business Cycle, University of Chicago Press: Chicago.

Bose, N.K. (1985), Digital Filters: Theory and Applications. New York: North Holland.
Bry, G. and C. Boschan (1971), Cyclical Analysis of Time Series: Selected Procedures and
     Corn puser Programs. New York: NBER.

Burns, A.F., and W.C. Mitchell (1946), Measuring Business Cycles. New York: NBER.

Campbell, J.Y. (1987), "Stock Returns and the Term Structure," Journal of Financial Economics
     18, 373-399.

Dickey, D.A. and W.A. Fuller (1979). "Distribution of the Estimators for Autoregressive Time
     Series with a Unit Root," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 74, no. 366,
     427-43L

Estrella, A. and G.A. Hardouvelis (1989), 'The Term Structure as a Predictor of Real Economic
     Activity," manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Fama, E.F. and K.R. French (1989), "Business Conditions and Expected Returns on Stocks and
    Bonds," manuscript, Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago.
Fischer, S. and R.C. Merton (1984), "Macroeconomics and Finance: The Role of the Stock
     Market," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 21, 57-108.

Friedman, B.M. and K.N. Kuttner (1989). "Money, Income and Prices after the 1980's," NBER
     Working Paper no. 2852.
Geweke, J. (1977) 'The Dynamic Factor Analysis of Economic Time Series," in DJ. Aigner and
     AS. Goldberger eds., Latent Variables in Socio-Economic Models, North-Holland,
     Amsterdam, Ch. 19.

Hymans, S. (1973), "On the Use of Leading Indicators to Predict Cyclical Turning Points,"
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 2, 339-384.



                                          -30-
Keim, D.B. and R.F. Stambaugh (1986), "Predicting Returns in the Stock and Bond Markets,"
     Journal of Financial Economics 17, 357-390.

King, R C. Plosser, J.H. Stock, and M.W. Watson (1987), "Stochastic Trends and Economic
    Fluctuations," NBER Discussion Paper No. 2229.
Koch, P.D., and R.H. Raasche (1988), "An Examination of the Commerce Department
     Leading-Indicator Approach," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 6, no. 2, 167-
     187.

Lucas, R.E. (1977), "Understanding Business Cycles," Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public
     Policy 5, 7-29.

Miron, J.A. and S.P. Zeldes (1987), "Production, Sales, and the Change in Inventories: An
    Identity that Doesn't Add Up," manuscript, NBER, Cambridge, MA.
Mitchell, W.C., and A.F. Burns (1938), Statistical Indicators of Cyclical Revivals, NBER
     Bulletin 69. New York: NBER.
Moore, G. (1990), Leading Indicators for the 1990's. Homewood, IL: Dow Jones - Irwin.

Moore, 0. and J. Shiskin (1967), Indicators of Business Expansions and Contractions. New
     York: NBER.
Sargent, TJ, and C.A. Sims (1977), "Business Cycle Modeling without Pretending to Have Too
     Much a-priori, Economic Theory," in C. Sims et al., New Methods in Business Cycle
     Research, Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Sargent, TJ. (1987), Macroeconomic Theory (second edition), Orlando, Florida: Academic
     Press.

Shapiro, M.D. and M.W. Watson (1988), "Sources of Business Cycle Fluctuations," NBER
     Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 3, M.I.T. Press, pp. 111-156.

Sims, C.A. (1980a), "Macroeconomics and Reality," Econometrica, 48, 1-48.

Sims, C.A. (1980b), "Comparison of Interwar and Postwar Business Cycles: Monetarism
     Reconsidered," American Economic Review, 70 (1980b), 250-257.

Sims, C.A. (1986), "Are Forecasting Models Usable for Policy Analysis?," Quarterly Review,
     Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Winter 1986, 2-16.
Singleton, K. (1980), "A Latent Time Series Model of the Cyclical Behavior of Interest Rates",
     international Economic Review 21, no. 3, 559-575.

Stock, J.H. and M.W. Watson (1988), "A Probability Model of the Coincident Economic
     Indicators," forthcoming in Geoffrey Moore and K. Lahiri, eds, The Leading Economic
     indicators: New Approaches and Forecasting Records, Cambridge University Press.

Stock, J.H. and M.W. Watson (1989a), "New Indexes of Coincident and Leading Economic
     Indicators," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1989. Cambridge: MIT Press, 351-393.
                                          - 31 -
Stock, J.H. and M.W. Watson (1989b), "Interpreting the Evidence on Money-Income Causality,"
     Journal of Econometrics 40, no. 1, 161-182.

Zarnowitz, V. and C. Boschan (1975), 'Cyclical Indicators: An Evaluation and New Leading
    Indexes,' Business Conditions Digest, May 1975, v - xxii.

Zarnowitz, V. and P. Braun (1989), 'Major Macroeconomic Variables and Leading Indexes:
     Some Estimates of their Interrelations, 1886 - 1982," manuscript, University of Chicago
     Business School.




                                          - 32 -
                                     Appendix A
                            Variable Definitions and Sources

    This Appendix provides a list of variable definitions and sources. The first line of the list
provides the variable number and mnemonic, and the total period over which it is available
(either in Citibase or by the authors' construction). The next lines provide a brief description
of the series. If no source is given, the series was obtained from the June 26, 1989 release of
Citibase. Series from sources other than Citibase, primarily those constructed by the authors,
are denoted by AC. Special sources are noted after the series mnemonic.

                                Selected Abbreviations
          FRB         Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
          BEA         Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Dept. of Commerce
          CRB         Commodity Research Bureau
          BCD         Business Conditions Digest
          SA          Seasonally Adjusted
          NSA         Not Seasonally Adjusted
          AR          Annual Rates
          EOM         End-of-month


                                    List of Series
  1 Id          (AC) 59:01        89:05
      Experimental Index of Coincident Economic Indicators (Stock and Watson
      (1988, 1989a)). Estimated contemporaneous value of unobserved single
      factor in dynamic factor model, based on IP, LPMHUADJ, MT82, and GMYXP8.
 2 IP                47:01         89:05
      INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION: TOTAL INDEX (1977—100,SA)
 3 IPC               47:01         89:05
      INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION: CONSUMER GOODS (1977—100,SA)
 4 IPCN              47:01         89:05
      INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION: NONDURABLE CONSUMER GDS (1977—100,SA)
 5 IPCD              47:01         89:05
      INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION: DURABLE CONSUMER GDS (1977—100,SA)
 6 IPD               47:01         89:05
      INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION: DURABLE MFG (1977—100,SA)
 7 IPN               47:01         89:05
      INDUSTRIAl. PRODUCTION: NONDURABLE MFG (1977—100,SA)
 8 IPMIN             47:01         89:05
     INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION: MINING (1977—100,SA)
 9 IPUT              47:01         89:05
     INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION: UTILITIES (1977—100,5A)
 10 IPE              47:01         89:05
     INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION: BUSINESS EQUIPMENT (1977—100,SA)
 11 IPMFG           47:01          89:05
     INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION: MANUFACTURING (1977—100,SA)


                                      -   33 -
 12 1PM             47:01          89:05
      INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION: MATERIALS (1977—100, SA)
 13 IPI             47:01          89:05
     INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION: INTERMEDIATE PROD (1977—lOO,SA)
14 IPF              47:01          89:05
     INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION: FINAL PRODUCTS (1977—100,SA)
15 IPX              67:01          89:05
     CAPACITY UTIL RATE: TOTAL INDUSTRY (% OF CAPACITY,SA)(FRB)
16 IPXDCA           67:01          89:05
     CAPACITY UTIL RATE: DURABLE MFG (% OF CAPACITY,SA)(FRB)
17 IPXMCA           48:01          89:05
     CAPACITY UTIL RATE: MANUFACTURING,TOTAL(% OF CAPACITY,SA)(FRB)
18 GMC82            59:01          89:05
     PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES: TOTAL, 82$
19 GMCD82           59:01          89:05
     PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES:DURABLE GOODS,82$
20 GMPY             46:01          89:05
     PERSONAL INCOME: TOTAL (BIL$,SAAR)
21 GMPY82           47:01          89:04
     PERSONAL INCOME:TOTAL IN 1982$ (BIL$,SAAR)
22 GMYXP8           47:01          89:04
     PERSONAL INCOME:TOTAL LESS TRANSFER PAYMENTS, 82$(BIL$, SAAR)
23 GMWS82      (AC) 59:01          88:12
     Real PERSONAL INCOME: WAGE & SALARY, SERVICE INDUSTRIES. Ratio of GMWS
     (PERSONAL INCOME: WAGE & SALARY, SERVICE INDUSTRIES) to total income
     price deflator, GMPY/GMPY82
24 MT82             48:01          89:03
    MFG & TRADE SALES: TOTAL, 1982$(MIL$,SA)(BCD57)
25 MSM8             67:01          89:03
    MPG & TRADE SALES:MANUFACTURING(BIL82$,sA)
26 WT8             67:01          89:03
    MFG & TRADE SALES :MERCHANT WHOLESALERS ,82$
27 RT8             67:01          89:03
    MFG & TRADE SALES:RETAIL TRADE,82$
28 RTR82         48:01          89:04
    RETAIL SALES: TOTAL, 1982$ (MIL$,SA)(BCD59)
29 RCARD           58:01          89:05
    RETAIL SALES: NEW PASSENGER CARS, DOMESTIC (NO.IN MIL. ;SAAR)
30 RCARTA     (AC) 59:01          88:12
    66:01-: RETAIL SALES:NEW PASSENGER CARS,TOTAL DOMESTICS+IMPORTS (RCART)
    (SAAR). 59:01-66:01: RETAIL SALES:NEW PASSENGER CARS, DOMESTICS (RCARD)
    (SAAR), scaled to equal RCART in 66:01
31 MPCON8         48:01         89:04
     CONTRACTS & ORDERS FOR PLANT & EQUIPMENT IN 82$ (BIL$ , SA)
32 MSOND8          48:01         89:04
    MPG NEW ORDERS: CAPITAL GDS INDUS.,NONDEF,82$(BIL$,SA)
33 MOCM82       48:01         89:04
    MPG NEW ORDERS: CONSUMER GOODS & MATERIAL,82$(BIL$,SA)
34 M082       (AC) 59:01          88:12
    MPG NEW ORDERS: Total,82$(BIL$,SA). Constructed as ratio of MFG NEW
    ORDERS: Total,(BIL$,SA) (MO) to seasonally adjusted PRODUCER PRICE INDEX:
                               -34-
    TOTAL MANUFACTURING (NSA) (PWM). PWM was seasonally adjusted prior to
    deflating by removing average monthly growth rates.
35 MD082           48:01         89:04
    MFG NEW ORDERS: DURABLE GOODS INDUSTRIES,82$(BIL$,SA)
36 MN082      (Ac) 59:01        88:12
    MFG NEW ORDERS: NONDURABLE GOODS INDUSTRIES,82$(BIL$,SA). Constructed as
    ratio of MFG NEW ORDERS: NONDURABLE GOODS INDUSTRIES(BIL$,SA) (MNO) to
    seasonally adjusted PRODUCER PRICE INDEX: NONDURABLE GOODS INDUSTRIES
    (NSA) (PWDMND). PWDMND was seasonally adjusted prior to deflating by
    removing average monthly growth rates.
37 MU82      (AC) 59:01        89:05
    MFG UNFILLED ORDERS: TOTAL MANUFACTURING (MIL$,SA) (MDU), deflated by the
    PRODUCER PRICE INDEX: TOTAL MANUFACTURING (NSA) (PWM). PWM was
    seasonally adjusted prior to deflating by removing average monthly growth
    rates.
38 KDU82      (AC) 59:01         89:05
    MFG UNFILLED ORDERS: DURABLE GOODS INDUSTRIES, TOTAL (MIL$,SA) (MDU),
    deflated by the PRODUCER PRICE INDEX: DURABLE MFG. GOODS (NSA) (PWDMD).
    PWDMD was seasonally adjusted prior to deflating by removing average
    monthly growth rates.
39 MNU82      (AC) 59:01         89:05
    MFG UNFILLED ORDERS: NONDURABLE GOODS INDUSTRIES, TOTAL (MIL$,SA) (MDU),
    deflated by the PRODUCER PRICE INDEX: NONDURABLE MFG. GOODS (NSA)
    (PWDMND). PWDMND was seasonally adjusted prior to deflating by removing
    average monthly growth rates.
40 IVMT82            52:01        89:03
    MANUFACTURING & TRADE INVENTORIES:TOTAL,82$(BIL$,SA)
41 IVM1D8     (AC) 59:01         89:05
    Growth rate (ln) of REAL MFG INVENTORIES: MATERIALS & SUPPLIES, ALL MFG
    INDUS: IVM1 (materials and supplies inventories) deflated by the total
    inventories price deflator, IVMT/IVMT82, where IVMT is total nominal mfg
    inventories. Growth rate in 82:1 is average of growth rates for 81:12
    and 82:2 to adjust for accounting change in 82:1
42 IVM2D8     (AC) 59:01         89:05
    Growth rate (1n) of REAL MANUFACTURING AND TRADE INVENTORIES: WORK IN
      PROCESS, ALL MFG INDUS (SA): IVM2 (work in progress inventories) deflated
      by the total inventories price  deflator, IVMT/IVMT82, where IVMT is total
      nominal mfg inventories. Growth rate in 82:1 is average of growth rates
      for 81:12 and 82:2 to adjust for accounting change in 82:1
43   IVM3D8     (AC) 59:01        89:05
      Growth rate (ln) of REAL MFG INVENTORIES: FINISHED GOODS, ALL MFG
      INDUSTRIES:    IVM3 (finished goods inventories) deflated by the total
      inventories price deflator, IVMT/IVMT82, where IVMT is total nominal mfg
      inventories. Growth rate in 82:1 is average of growth rates for 81:12
      and 82:2 to adjust for accounting change in 82:1
44   1VT82           48:01         89:03
      MFG & TRADE:INVENTORIES TO SALES RATIO,$82(SA)(BCD77)
45   VENDOR          59:01         89:01
      INDEX OF VENDOR PERFORMANCE (SOURCE: Nat'l Assn of Manufactrs and BEA)
46   HSBP            46:01         89:05


                                -   35 -
      HOUSING AUTHORIZED: INDEX OF NEW PRIV HOUSING UNITS (1967—100;SA)
 47 HSFR             47:01          89:05
      HOUSING STARTS:NONFARM(1947-58);TOTAL FARM&NONFARM(].959-)(THOUS. ,SA
 48 CONDO9           48:01         89:04
      CONSTRUCT.CONTRACTS: COMML & INDUS.BLDGS(MIL.SQ.FT FLOOR SF. ;SA)
 49 FM.BASE          47:01         89:05
      MONETARY BASE, ADJ FOR RESERVE REQ CHGS(FRB OF ST.LOUIS)(BIL$,SA)
 50 FMBASER     (AC) 59:01         88:12
      Ratio of nominal monetary base (FMZASE) to CPI - Total (PZUNEW)
 51 FM1              59:01         89:05
      MONEY STOCK: Ml(CURR,TRAV.CKS,DEM DEP,OTHER CK'ABLE DEP)(BIL$,SA)
 52 FM1D82           47:01         89:04
      MONEY STOCK: M-1 IN 1982$ (BIL$,SA)(BCD 105)
 53 FM2              59:01         89:05
      MONEY STOCK:M2(M1+O'NITE RPS,EURO$,G/P&B/D MMMFS&SAV&SM TIME DEP(BIL$,
 54 FM2D82           47:01         89:04
     MONEY STOCK: M-2 IN 1982$(BIL$,SA)(BCD 106)
55 FM3               59:01         89:05
     MONEY STOCK: M3(M2+LC TIME DEP,TERM RP'S&INST ONLY MMMFS)(BIL$,SA)
56 FM3R        (AC) 59:01          88:12
     Ratio of nominal M3 (FM3) to CPI - Total (PZIJNEW)
57 FML               59:01         89:04
     MONEY STOCK:L(M3 + OTHER LIQUID ASSETS) (BIL$,SA)
58 R1LR        (AC) 59:01         88:12
     Ratio of nominal L (FML) to CPI - Total (PZUNEW)
59 FCLN82           47:01         89:04
     COMMERCIAL & INDUSTRIAL LOANS: OUTSTANDING,82$(MIL$,SA)
60 FCBCUC           48:01         89:03
     CHANGE IN BUS AND CONSUMER CREDIT OUTSTAND. (PERCENT,SAAR)(BCD111)
61 FCBCUCY     (AC) 59:01         88:12
     CHANGE IN BUS AND CONSUMER CREDIT OUTSTAND. (PERCENT, SAAR) (FCBCUC)
     minus the annual percentage growth in total nominal personal income
    (GMPY)
62 FCLBMCY    (AC) 59:01        88:12
    Ratio of WKLY REPORTS OF LARGE COM'L BANKS: NET CHANGE IN COM'L & INDUS
    LOANS (BIL$, SAAR) (FCLBMC) to total nominal personal income (GMPY)
63 CCBPY           47:01        89:03
    RATIO, CONSUMER INSTAL CREDIT TO PERSONAL INCOME (%,SA)(BCD-95)
64 CCI3OM          48:01        88:09
    CONSUMER INSTAL.LOANS: DELINQUENCY RATE,30 DAYS & OVER, (%,SA)
65 FSPCOM          47:01        89:05
    S&P'S COMMON STOCK PRICE INDEX: COMPOSITE (1941-43—10)
66 FSPIN           47:01        89:05
    S&P'S COMMON STOCK PRICE INDEX: INDUSTRIALS (1941-43—10)
67 FSDJ            47:01        89:05
    COMMON STOCK PRICES: DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
68 FSVOL           47:01        89:05
    STOCK MRKT: NYSE REPORTED SHARE VOLUME (MIL.OF SHARES;NSA)
69 FYFF            55:01        89:05
    INTEREST RATE: FEDERAL FUNDS (EFFECTIVE) (% PER ANNUM,NSA)


                              -36-
70 FYGM3              47:01          89:05
    INTEREST RATE: U. S . TREASURY   BILLS ,SEC MKT, 3-Mo. (% PER ANN ,NSA)
71 FYGM6              59:01          89:05
    INTEREST RATE: U. S . TREASURY
72 FYCT1           53:01
                                     BILLS
                                 89:05
                                             ,   SEC MKT, 6-MO. (% PER   ,NSA)
    INTEREST RATE: U.S.TREASURY CONST MATURITIES,1-YR.(% PER ANN,NSA)
73 FYCT1O          53:01         89:05
    INTEREST RATE: U.S.TREASURY CONST MATURITIES,10-YR.(% PER ANN,NSA)
74 FYGL            47:01         89:05
    INTEREST RATE: U.S.TREASURY COMPOSITE,10 YR÷(LONG-TERM)(% PER ANN,NSA)
75 FYCP            47:01         89:05
    INTEREST RATE: COMMERCIAL PAPER, 6-MONTH (% PER ANNUM,NSA)
76 FYBAC           47:01         89:05
    INTEREST RATE: BANKERS ACCEPTANCES 3-MONTH (% PER ,NSA)
                                                 •

77 FYAAAC          47:01        89:05
    BOND YIELD: MOODY'S AAA CORPORATE (% PER ANNUM)
78 FYBAAC          47:01        89:05
    BOND YIELD: MOODY'S BAA CORPORATE (% PER ANNUM)
79 GLGM3     (AC) 59:01         88:12
   FYCL - FYCM3
80 G1OG].    (AC)     59:01         89:05
     FYGT1O - FYGT1
81 G1OGM3    (AC)     59:01         89:05
     FYGT1O - FYGM3
82 C1_GM6    (AC)     59:01         89:05
     FYGT1 - FYGM6
83 G1GM3     (AC)     59:01         89:05
     FYGT1 - FYGM3
84 GM6GM3    (AC)     59:01         89:05
     FYGM6 - FYGM3
85 GM3FF     (AC)     59:01         89:05
     FYGM3 - FYFF
86 CP6_CM6   (AC)     59:01         89:05
     FYCP - FYCM6
87 BACCM3    (AC)    59:01                89:05
     FYBAC - FYGM3
88 BAA Gb    (AC)    59:01                89:05
     FYBAAC - FYGT1O
89 BAA AAA   (AC)    59:01                89:05
     FYBAAC - FYAAAC
90 AAAGL     (AC) 59:01              88:12
     FYAAAC - FYGL
91 FFCP6       (AC) 59:01            88:12
     FYFF - FYCP
92 FFBAC       (AC) 59:01            88:12
     FYFF -   FYBAC
93 FFG1O     (AC) 59:01         88:12
     FYFF - FYGT1O
94 FYFFR     (AC)     59:01        89:05
     FYFF - INFLS, where INFLS is the 12-month inflation rate based on the
    CPI, all items (INFLS —
                              100*ln(PZUNEWt/PZIJNEWt12))
                                 - 37 -
95 FYGM3R     (AC)    59:01          89:05
     FYGM3 - INFLS
96 FYGM6R     (AC)    59:01          89:05
     FYGM6 - INFLS
97 FYCT1R    (AC)     59:01          89:05
     FYGT1 - INFLS
98 FYGT1OR   (AC)     59:01          89:05
     FYGT1O - INFLS
99 LPMHUADJ (AC) 59:01          89:05
      CITIBASE series LPMHU (EMPLOYEE-HOURS IN NONAGRIC.EST. (BIL.HOURS,SAAR)),
      adjusted for short sampling weeks in 70:9, 74:4, 79:4, 81:9, and 82:1.
      If the sampling week was short in month t, the adjusted series was
      computed as
 100 LHOURS          47:01         89:0
      MANHOURS OF EMPLOYED LABOR FORCE (HOUSEHOLD DATA) (HRS.PER
                                                                  WK;SA)
 101 LHEM            48:01         89:05
      CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE: EMPLOYED, TOTAL (THOUS.,SA)
 102 LHTNAG          48:01         89:05
      CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE:EMPLOYED IN NONAG,BOTH SEXES 16-19YRSçflIOU.,
 103 LHCH            47:01         89:04
      AVERAGE HOURS OF WORK PER WEEK (HOUSEHOLD DATA)(SA)
 104 LHNAGP          56:01         89:05
      PERSONS AT WORK: PART TIME FOR ECON REASONS,NONAG IND(THOUS,SA)
 105 LHNAPS          56:01         89:05
      PERSONS AT WORK: PART TIME ECON REAS-SJ.ACK WK,NONAG IND(THOUS,SA)
 106 LHNPVX          56:01         89:05
     PERSONS AT WORK: RATIO, VOLUNTARY/INVOLUNTARy PART-TIME EMPLOY(SA)
 107 LHUL            67:01         89:05
     UNEMPLOYED JOB LOSERS ON LAYOFF (THOUS,SA)
 108 LHULL.HEM (AC) 67:01          88:12
     Ratio of job losers on layoff (L}{UL) to total labor force (LHEM)
109 LHMUR            48:01         89:05
     UNEMPLOYMENT RATE: MEN, 20 YEARS & OVER (% * SA)
110 LPHRM            47:01         89:05
     AVG. WEEKLY HRS. OF PRODUCTION WKRS.: MANUFACTURING (SA)
111 LPHRD           47:01         89:05
     AVG. WEEKLY HRS. OF PROD. WKRS,: DURABLE GOODS (SA)
112 LPMOSA           56:01        89:05
     AVG. WEEKLY HRS. OF PROD. WKRS.: MFG. ,OVERTIME HRS. (SA)
113 LHU5            48:01         89:05
     UNEMPLOY.BY DURATION: PERSONS UNEMPL. LESS THAN 5 WKS (THOUS. ,SA)
114 LHU68O          48:01         89:05
     UNEMPLOY.By DURATION: AVERAGE(MEAN)DIJRATION IN WEEKS (SA)
115 LHEL            51:01         89:04
     INDEX OF HELP-WANTED ADVERTISING IN NEWSPAPERS (1967—100;SA)
116 LHEU(           48:01         89:04
     EMPLOYMENT: RATIO; HELP-WANTED ADS:NO. UNEMPLOYED CLF
117 LUINC           48:01         89:04
    AVG WKLY INITIAL CLAIMS,STATE UNEMPLOY.INS.,EXC P.RICO(TBOUS;5A)
118 LPNAC           47:01         89:05


                              -38-
     EMPLOYEES ON NONAG. PAYROLLS: TOTAL (THOUS. , SA)
119 LPMI            47:01         89:05
     EMPLOYEES ON NONAG. PAYROLLS: MINING (THOUS.,SA)
120 LPCC            47:01         89:05
     EMPLOYEES ON NONAG. PAYROLLS: CONTRACT CONSTRUCTION (THOUS. SA)
121 LPEM            47:01         89:05
     EMPLOYEES ON NONAG. PAYROLLS: MANUFACTURING (THOUS. SA)
122 LPED            47:01         89:05
     EMPLOYEES ON NONAG. PAYROLLS: DURABLE GOODS (THOUS. , SA)
123 LPEN            47:01         89:05
     EMPLOYEES ON NONAC. PAYROLLS: NONDURABLE GOODS (THOUS. ,SA)
124 LPTW            47:01         89:05
     EMPLOYEES ON NONAG PAYROLLS: WHOLESALE TRADE (THOUS,SA)
125 LPTR            47:01         89:05
     EMPLOYEES ON NONAG. PAYROLLS: RETAIL TRADE (THOUS. ,SA)
126 LPFR            47:01         89:05
     EMPLOYEES ON NONAG. PAYROLLS: FINANCE,INSUR.&REAL ESTATE (THOUS.,SA
127 LPSPA       (AC) 59:01         88:12
     EMPLOYEES ON NONAG. PAYROLLS: SERVICE-PRODUCING (THOUS. SA), adjusted for
     outlier in 83:8 by using the average of the 83:7 and 83:9 values for 83:8
128 LPGOV           47:01         89:05
     EMPLOYEES ON NONAG. PAYROLLS: GOVERNMENT (THOUS. , SA)
129 LPSPNGA     (AC) 59:01         88:12
     LPSPA - LPGOV
130 IPROD1      (AC) 59:01         88:12
     Ratio of IP to LPMHIJADJ
131 PLM             47:01         89:04
     INDEX OF LABOR COST PER UNIT OF OUTPUT, MFG (1967-'100;SA)(BCD62)
132 P11182      (AC) 59:01         88:12
     Real wage index: ratio of PLM (infg index of labor cost per unit of
     output) to PW (Producer price index: all commodities)
133 LEHM            47:01         89:05
     AVG HR EARNINGS OF PROD WKRS: MANUFACTURING ($,SA)
134 LEHM82      (AC) 59:01         88:12
     Real consumption wage in manufacturing defined as the ratio of LHEM to
     PENEW (CPI-W: all items (SA)).
135 RPWGMS      (AC) 59:01         88:12
     Real product wage in manufacturing defined as the ratio of LEHM to PWM,
     where PWM is the producer price index for manufacturers. PWM was
     seasonally adjusted prior to deflating by removing average monthly growth
     rates.
136 RPWGMDS     (AC) 59:01         88:12
     Real product wage in durables manufacturing defined as the ratio of
     LE6HMD (Avg. hourly earnings in durable manufacturing) to PWDMD (producer
     price index for durable manufactureres). LE6HM and PWDMD were seasonally
     adjusted prior to deflating by removing average monthly growth rates.
137 PUNEW           47:01        89:05
     CPI-U: ALL ITEMS (SA)
138 PZUNEW        47:01          89:05
   CPI-U: ALL ITEMS (NSA)

                              - 39   -
139 PW              46:01         89:05
      PRODUCER PRICE INDEX: ALL COMMODITIES (NSA)
140 PW1200          47:01         89:05
      PRODUCER PRICE INDEX: NONFOOD MAT. EXC. FUEL (NSA)
141 PW1300          47:01         89:05
      PRODUCER PRICE INDEX: CRUDE FUEL (NSA)
142 PWCMP           47:01         89:05
      PRODUCER PRICE INDEX: CRUDE MAT.EXC.FOOD,FEED,&FIBER (NSA)
143 PWFC            47:01          89:05
      PRODUCER PRICE INDEX: FINISHED CONSUMER GOODS (NSA)
144 PWFP            47:01         89:05
     PRODUCER PRICE INDEX: CAPITAL EQUIPMENTS (NSA)
145 PWFUEL         46:01         89:05
     PRODUCER PRICE INDEX: FUELS & RELATED PROD. & POWER (NSA)
146 PWIC           46:01         89:05
     PRODUCER PRICE INDEX: INDUSTRIAL COMMODITIES (NSA)
147 PWIMS            47:01        89:05
      PRODUCER PRICE INDEX: INT.MATS. ,SUPPL.&COMPONENTS (NSA)
148   PWIMSM         47:01        89:05
      PRODUCER PRICE INDEX: MATS.&COMPONENTS FOR MFG. (NSA)
149   PSMC99A (AC) 59:01          88:12
      Index of sensitive materials prices, in levels; constructed from PSMC99
      (change in sensitive mat'ls prices, %, 8CD99).
150   PSCCOM         48:01        89:05
      SPOT MARKET PRICE INDEX:BLS & CRZ: ALL COMMODITIES(67—l00,NSA)
151   EXRWT1    (AC)     59:01       89:05
      Real weighted exchange rate between U.S. and: Canada, France, Italy,
      Japan, U.K., and West Germany, constructed using consumer price indexes
      for each country (NSA) and shares of total real imports as weights.
152   EXRWT2    (AC)     59:01       89:05
      Real weighted exchange rate between U.S. and: France, Italy, Japan, U.K.,
      and West Germany, constructed using consumer price indexes for each
      country (NSA) and shares of total real imports as weights.
153   EXNWTI    (AC)     59:01       89:05
      Nominal weighted exchange rate between U.S. and: Canada, France, Italy,
      Japan, U.K., and West Germany, constructed using shares of total real
      imports as weights.
154   EXNWT2    (AC)     59:01       89:05
      Nominal weighted exchange rate between U.S. and: France, Italy, Japan,
      U.K., and West Germany, constructed using shares of total real imports as
      weights.
155   EXVUS          67:01        89:05
      WEIGHTED-AVERAGE EXCHANGE VALUE OF U.S. DOLLAR(MAR. 1973—100)
156   IMY1      (AC)     59:01       89:05
      Ratio of nominal total U.S. merchandise and trade imports to GMPY
      (nominal U.S. personal income). Imports: Through 1977:1, Citibase
      series FTM, after 1977:1, Citibase series F6TMD (U.S.MDSE IMPORTS:GENERAL
      IMPORTS CUSTOMS VALUE (MIL$,NSA))
157   EXY1      (AC)     59:01       89:05
      Ratio of nominal total nonmilitary U.S. merchandise and trade exports to
      GMPY. Exports: Through 1977:1, Citibase series FTE, after 1977:1,

                                -40-
      Citibase series F6TED (U.S.MDSE EXPORTS:DOMESTIC EXPORT EXC DOD
      F.A.S.VALUE(MIL$,NSA))
158   TB1        (AC)     59:01      89:05
      Ratio of nominal net merchandise and trade exports to GMPY. Nominal net
      exports are nominal exports as defined for EXY1, less nominal imports as
      defined for IMY1.
159   FBD           68:01        89:04
      FEDERAL DEBT: TOTAL AMOUNT OUTSTANDING (BIL$,EOM,NSA)
160   FBDY       (AC)     68:01      89:05
      Ratio of total nominal federal debt outstanding (FED) to total nominal
      personal income (GMPY)
161   FBYS       (AC)     69:01      89:05
      Total nominal monthly federal budget deficit (FE), seasonal differences,
      as percent of Nominal personal income (GMPY). Constructed as 12-month
      difference of FB/GMPY.
162   FAIL            48:01       88:12
      BUSINESS FAILURES: CURRENT LIABILITIES (MIL$,NSA)
163   INC             47:01       89:03
      NUMBER OF NEW BUSINESS INCORPORATIONS (NUMBER;SA)




                                -   41   -
                                       Appendix B
          Summary Statistics, Time Series Plots, Spectra, and Coherences of the Series
   This appendix presents summary statistics and various plots of features of these series.
Information on each series is provided in a panel, organized as follows:


 No.            Name        Trans.         Plot              Plot              Plot               Plot
                   sd.dev.(X)               #1                #2                #3                 #4
       min(X)        inax(X)              _______          _______           _______              _______

where No. is the    series number, Name is the series mnemonic, and Trans. is the transformation
applied to each series. Let Y refer to the levels of the original series and let X denote the
transformed series. The transformation codes are: DLN, X = 1n(Yt D, X = Yt; and N, X =
    The four summary statistics reported here are: , the sample average of the transformed
series, sd.dev.(X), the standard deviation of the transformed series, and min(X) and max(X),
respectively the minimum and maximum of the transformed series. The statistics are computed
over the period 1959.1-198&9 or over the period for which the data is available, whichever is
shorter. The four plots are:

Plot #L Historical plot of the time series. If the series transformation code is N or D, then the
         levels of the original series "1) are plotted. If the series transformation code is DLN.
         then the logarithm (ln(Yt)) is plotted.

Plot #2: Logarithm (base 10) of the estimated spectrum of the transformed series X, normalized
          so that the integrated spectrum is one. The spectrum was estimated using an AR(4)
          prefilter, the spectrum of the filtered series was estimated using a Fejer kernel with a
          width of 9 periodogram ordinates on each side. The horizontal axis is in radians and
           ranges from 0 to .   NOTE: The vertical scales used to plot the log10 spectra differ
          across series.

Plot #3: Estimated coherence of the transformed series X with the growth in the index of
         coincident indicators (ln(ICI this series is described in the text). The coherence was
         estimated using a rectangular kernel with 8 periodogram ordinates on both sides. The
         horizontal axis is in radians and ranges from 0 to .

Plot #4: Cross-correlogram of filtered series with filtered ICI, for the filters a24(L) (solid line)
          and aB(L) (dashed line), where a24(L)(l-LX1+L) and aB(L) is the Butterworth filter
          discussed in the text. For transformation codes N and D, let Y = Y, for
          transformation code DLN, let      = ln(Yt). For a24(L), the filtered series is Z =

                                         - 42 -
a24(L)Y, for aB(L), the filtered series is aB(L)Yt , where YT denotes
detrended by a regression against a constant and a linear time trend. The cross-
correlogram is defined so that an ordinate of, say, -6 is the correlation between Z and
a(L)ln(ICI+6). The estimation period for the cross-correlograms is 19612 -198&12 to
reduce the influence of initial conditions for the filtered series.




                            - 43 -
             DL.N                                                  6
1 ICI                                          I /
     .0025    .0063                                            -2
    —.0274    .0339                                            -6
                                                              -I   0
                           63 67     71   75   73 63 07                 -12



2   IP       DLN
                           /                                   IS
                                                                   B
                                                                                  12




                                                                   2
     .0031    .0097
                                                               —2

    —.0427    .0585                                            -6
                       •                                      -1 0




3   IPC      DLN
                           VTI
                           63 67 71       75   73   63 07

                                                               I0
                                                                   6
                                                                        /
                                                                        "12   0   12




     .0030    .0103
                                                               -2
    —.0424    .042 1                                           -6
                                                              -L   0
                           63 67 71       1 7       03 07               "12       Il
4 IPCN       DLN
                       j)9                                     1   0'
                                                                   6

                                                                   2
     .0028    .0075
                                                               -2
    —.0221    .0240                                            -6
                                                              -t   0
                       •r' 63   67   71   76   73   8J   07



5   IPCD     DU4
                                                                   6


     .0035    .0280
                                                               -2
    —.1306      1270                                           -6
                                                              'I   U
                           63   67   71   '75 73    61 07
                                                                    'U
                                                              /7
6 IPD            DLN
                          ::
      .0032       .0147
                                               /I
                                                                    -2              -I

     —.0662       .1029   ''   /                                    -8
                                                                   -l   0
                               63   6?   71   75   70   83 07

                                                                    10
7 1PM            DLN                                                    8

                                                                        2
      .0033       .0083
                          'I                                        -2
     —.0408       .0339                                             -6
                                                                   -I   0
                               63 81 71       75   76   03 07                            -12        0    2
                          IPT
8 IPMIN          DLN                                                    6

                                                                        2
      .0011       .0183
                                                                    -2
     —.   0925    .0814                                             -6
                                                                   —l
                               63 81 71       18   16   I]   87                          -12        0   12



9 IPUT           DL.N
                                                                        6


      .0032       .0135                                                 2
                                                                                                -
                                                                        2
     —.0416       .0493                                                 8
                                                                                           -->\
                                                                   -I   P
                           .p  63   87   71   75
                                               I   70   63   6?

                                                                    ID          —
                                                                                         -I?        0   2


10   IPE         DLN
                                                                        6

      .0041       .0124                                                 2
                                                                            -
                          'a
     —.0610       .0406
                                                                        2
                                                                                               /11.
                                                                        0   —
                                                                   -I
                               63 UI     II   75   70   61 8?
                          :u
                                                                 'U
11 IPMFG       DLN

       .0032    .0106
                                                                 -2
      —.0498    .0656                                            -b
                         63 67 71       7    73   83   01

                                                                  U

12    1PM      DLN                                                6



       .0028    .0146                                             2/\f\
                                                                  2

      —.0785    .1027                                             6
                                                            —t
                         63 17 71 75 73           6]   61


13    IPI      DLN
                                                             ID
                                                                  o
                                                                  6
                                                                              __
       .0032    .0103                                             2
                                                                  2
      —.0519    .0418                                             6

                                                            —t    0
                         63   67   71   73   75   63   67
                                                                              i
14    IPF      DLN
                                                                  6


       .0032    .0086                                             2
                                                                          -
                                                             -2
     —.0346     .03 14
                                                            —l
                                                                      -
                         63 87 71       75   71   6)   07
                                                                              :       -12   0   Il
15 IPX         D
                                                                 6

     —.0202     .7324
     —3.6000   1.8000
                                                             -b
                                                                 I)               -                  -
                         6)   61 71     7         6)   67
                                                                                  /              1
                                                                       LU
16 IPXDCA    D                                                              8

                                                                                                     1/
   —.0262    .9674
                          1                                            -2                     7----
  —4.4000   2.7000   •-                      1?                        -6-
                                                                   -l       0
                              63 61      71   75   75   83 01                                     -I?     0             2

                                                                       10
17 IPXMCA    D                                                              6             I
                                                                        2
    .0084    .8515                                                                                4/              \\
                                                                       -2                     —7-

  —4.0000
                                                                                              ,
            5.1000                                                     —6
                                                                                                                   \
                                                                  -L 0
                              63 67     ii    is   is   03   07
                                                                                                  -12     0             2


18 GMC82    DLN                                                         6

                                                                        2
    .0028    .0060
                                                                        2

  —.0220     .0175                                                      6
                                                                                \J\J\I
                                                                        0
                              83 87 71 15          7    03   07                                     12    0            2

                                                                        0
19 GMCD82   DLN
                                                                                          I

    .0042    .0304
                                                                   —2
                                                                                                              \
  —.1234     .1074                                                 -e
                              63   81 71      iS   75   03 07
                                                                  -I    0
                                                                                1vj       :
                                                                                         -8
                                                                                                  -I?     0        Il
20 GMPI     DLN
                                                                        6

    .0067    .0047
                                                                   -2
  —.0103     .0264                                                                                  7
                                                                   -6
                                                                  -I    0
                     HL       63   61   71    iS   10   Oi 81
                                              i:                                                          /        I'
                                                       IL)
21 GMPY82   DLN
                                                           2
    .0028    .0048
                                                       -2
   —.0126    .0236                                     -b
                                                      -I   0
                     /
                     13 67 7) 79 73 83           ei
                                                       ID
22 GMYXP8   DLN                                            6
                                                                                 /
                                                           2
    .0026    .0048
                                                       -2
   —.0128    .0179

                     13 17 71 75 71 83 87


23 GMWS82

    .0045
            DLN

             .0055
                     :9" v                             10
                                                           8


                                                                   V
                                                       -2              I
   —.0360    .0451                                     -1
                                                      —t
                     63   67   71   75   75 63 67                          -I?   I

24 MT82     DLN
                                                           6


    .0028    .0109                                             A
                                                       -2
   —.0340    .0338                                     -6
                                                      -I 0
                     63 67 75       7    73   83 87                        -12   0   12

                                                       I0
25 MSN8     DLN
                                                           &

    .0019    .0143                                         2

                                                       -2
  —.0555     .0482
                           1                           -6
                                                      'I   0
                     6J   1)1 71
                                    Vt
                                    7    75   8) 8)
26 WT8      DLN

    .0034    .0156

   —.0512    .0663
                                                        —
                                                            I
                     53 67     7    75 13 83 8?



27 RT8      DLN                                                 $

                                                                2
    .0027    .0134                                                     /\
                                                                2                -I
   —.0756    .0497                                              6
                                                                    \çJV\         :/\
                     63 67 71 75 71 83 67

                                                                U
28 RTR82    DLN                                                 $

                                                                2                 I
    .0025    .0134                                                         ,/\
                                                                2
  —.0734     .0560                                              6
                                                                    ,vw,
                                                        —I
                     83   67   II   75 73 63 67
                     :1 T
29 RCARD    DLN
                                                                6


    .0012    .1023                                              2

                                                            -2
  —.5473     .4676                                          -6
                                                        -L      S
                     63 67 71 75 73 83 67                                             -12

                                                            IS
30 RCARTA   DLN
                                                                S


    .0019    .0876                                              2

                                                            -2
   —.4410    .3655
                                                            -8
                                                        -I      0
                     63 67     71   75   77   $1   87
31 MPCONB    DLN
                                                                                                      1/       \\
     .0044     .0698                                                                                            \\\

    —.2095    .2089
                                                                 —t

                             63   6   it   is   i    03 01                                      -I?        0         2



32 MSOND8    DLN

     .0048    .0692

   —.2 188    •   2353
                                                                                                ./
                                                                                                :/\
                                                                —t
                         .   03 11
                             2vi[     II   iS 73 53        51                                                       12



33 MOCM82    DLN

    .0019     .0268                                                        -          -'   •"
   —.1081     .0916

                                                                -I 0
                             63 51    II 7      70   63   01

                                                                 to
34 14082     0124
                                                                      6

    .0022     .0203
                                                                 —2
   —.0780     .0699                                                            J\IJ
                                                                 -5
                                                                -t    0
                             63 07    71   75   73 63 01                                        -12

35 140082    DLN

    .0022     .0351                                  H°
   —.1003         1275

                                                                -L    LI
                             63 67 71      iS   73   61   lit
                                                                                                I
                                                                  I)
36   MN082     DLN
                                                                                      -ç
       .0021    .0121                                             -2
                                                                              /\rj\        //,       \——-

     —.0533     .0331                                             -6
                                                                 -I   0
                                                                                           -I?       12

                                                                  10
37   141.182   DLN                                                    6



       .0028    .0112
                         'I                                       -2
     —.0335     .0439                                             -6
                                                                 -    0
                              63 17 71       7$   73 63     Ii                        :0T
                                                                  to
38   14DU82

       .0029
     —.0299
               DLN

                .0114

                .04 33
                         If                                       —2

                                                                  -s
                                                                      6

                                                                      2




                                                                 -I   0
                              63 67 71       7S 73     6] 67                          2O1
                                                                  lIt
39   MNU82     DLN
                                                                      6
                         I.                                           2
       .0020    .02 32
                                                                  -2
     —.0878     .1547                                             -8
                                                                 -I   0
                          j4  63 67     it   iS
                                             f    73   6]   07

                                                                  ID
                                                                                           -12012
40 IVMT82      DLN
                                                                      S


       .0029    .0038                                                 2                                   N
                                                                  -2
     —.0124     .0131                                             -6
                                                                          -       -
                                                                  I   0
                              63   67   71   7,   73   03   87                             I!    U   Il
41. IVN1D8

       .0017
     —.0215        N::::
                            J1P'#4!4h'!i
                              1) ii      17         7S   79 $3 $7



42 IVX2D8         N

       .0027       .0065

     —. 0218       .02 19   .4

                                                                      —I
                                  $3   Il     71    7    73 $3 $7                  12    0       12


43   IVM3D8       N

      .0020       .0064                                                    -
                                                                                             ,\\\\
     —.0311       .0253

                                  $3 $7 Pt 7S 15 93 $7                         -I?       I
                                                                       2
44 1VT82

     1.5491
                  N

                  .07 17
                            ifr                                       0

     1. 4 100    1.7500
                                 $3 $7 71          iS 70 $3      $7


45   VENDOR       N

 54.6196        13.0787
 15. 9000       96. 8000
                                                                      •1
                                 $3 $7      71     •,   33 III   ñl            I        I)
46 HSBP          N

 119.0651      28.4467                                            0



     59.0000   208.5000                                          -2
                                                                 -J
                           63 67 1! 75            7    63   67                  -12               2

                                                                  2

47 HSFR          N


1559. 1341 342.5781                                               a
                                                                               —'
                                                                 —1
 837.0000 2494.0000
                                                                 -2
                            63    87    71   10   7D 83     I?                  -12              12

                                                                  ID
48   CONDO9     DLN                                                   8

                                                                      2
                                                                                      1//1
                                                                                        // \\\\\\
       .0025      .0911                                                          /              k
                                                                  -2
     —.2414      .3094                                            -6
                                                                               V
                                                                 —l
                           63 87       71    75   71   63   61                  -12          0   42


49 FMBASE       DLN
                                                                      y-
                                                                      6


       .0053                                                          2
                 .0033                                                0\
                                                                  -2       :
     —.0068      .0160                                            -6
                                                                 -L 0
                           63    67    71    iS 75 83       67                  -12          0

50   FMBASER    DLN
                          jiji'
       .0013     .0044
     —.0145      .0154
                                                                               T1
                          61     67    71    •/   15   OJ   67                                   I'
51 FN1           DLN

         .0048    .0050

     —.02 14      .0262
                                63 67 71 75 78 83 81
                                                    Ti                           -12       0    I?


52 FM1D82        DLN                                                    8

                                                                        2
         0009     .0061   I.'                                       -2
     —   .0309     0245                                             -6
                          I.                                       -I II
                                83 87 71 75 75 83 87                             -12            12



53   P112        DLH
                           •pii
         .0066    .0033

     —.0053       .0263                                                     i:
                                83 67     II   70   73 83 87                      12       41   Il
54 FM2D82        DU1
                                               Ii
         .0026    .0050

     —.0144       .0233
                                                                            :
                                                                                       -
                          Vf    8] 87     11   75   73   8]   87                 -12       0    12
                                                                                                \
55 FM3           DLN

         .0073    .0031

     -.0037       .0153
                                                                   -2
                                bi   67   71   IS 78     I    81                                If
                                                                  'U
56   FM3R      DLN

      .0033      .0045                                            -2
     —.0121      .0144                                            -6
                                                                 -l   0
                              63   67   Il   IS 73 03 87                  -12   0   2




57   FML       DLN

      .0070      .0027                                           0


                                                                 —l
                                                                          —*
     —.0008      .0142
                                                                 -2
                              63 61     71   76   11   03 07              -12   0   12



58   FMLR      DLN
                         L                   I                   ID


      .0031      .0038
                                                                  -2
     —.0104      .0111                                            -6
                                                                 -t   0




59 FCLN82      DLN
                              63 67     71   10   10   63 07

                                                                 to
                                                                          -\
                                                                          -12   0   12




       .0042     .0133
                                                                  -2
     —.1050      .1111                                            -6
                                                                 -t   0
                              63 67     II   15   70   03   01            -12   0   2




60   FCBCUC     N
                         2 T-
                         I.
                                                                 to

     9.5743    4.8846
     —9.0000   23.6000

                              63   67   II   7,   17   63   07
61   FCBCUCY    N                                                  3

                                                                   2
     1. 5367   6. 9876
                                                               -2
 —30.   6387   24.8652                                         -s
                                                              —l
                                13 67 71 75 71 63 67                               -12       0       12



62   FCLBMCY    N


      .0083      .0112     I
     —.0263      .0521
                                13 17 71 75 73 63 SI                               -12               12
                           :fl T
63   CCBPY     DLN

      • 0015    .0069

     —.0252     .02 36
                                                              —t
                               63 67   71   7    73 13 67


64   CCI3OM    DUJ
                                                                   S
                                                                                                 /   —----'-
      .0012     .0370                                                     A   AR
                                                               -2
     —.1447     .1239                                          -I
                                       L                      -I   S
                               53   67 71   75   71   63 67                        —12               2


65   FSPCOM

      .0045
     —.1341
               DLN


                .0355

                •   1102
                                            i                  ID



                                                               -2
                                                               -p
                                                                   6

                                                                   2
                                                                       L\j\\J\J\
                                                                                   f
                                                              -1 5
                               33 67 71 75 11 31         Ii                         2    I
                                                               II)
66 FSPIN          DLN

       .0047       .0365                                       -2
     —.1429        .1142                                       -6
                                                              -1 0
                           63   67   71   7 7       83 67            -I?   0     2




67 FSDJ           DLN


       .0036       .0361

     —.1446        .1001                                                       \ ,/
                                                              —I
                           63 67     71   7    71 03 67              -12   0    12



68 FSVOL          DLN

       .0105       .1807                                       0


                                                              —1
     —.5293        .6001
                                                              -2
                           63 61     71   73 73 63 67                -12   0     12




69 FYFF            D


       •   0178    .7078

     —6.6300      3.0600

                           63 67 71 iS         73   83   67          I2U
70   FYGM3         D


       .0150       .5733
     —4.6200      2.6100

                           63 67     II   75   73   81 67             I)   7    I,
71 FYGM6      D

    .0142     .5371

  —4.2300    2.1700

                            83 57 71 75 71 63           II
                                                                  I   0

72 FYGT1      D

    .0152     .5546                                                   2r\
  —3.9100    1. 9000

                           63 11 71 75 71 63 07                                               -
                                                                                    -I?   0       12


73 FYGT1O     D                                                       8

    .0144     .3239                                                   2
                                                                  -2
  —1. 7600   1.6100                                               -1
                           83 67 71       7    73   03 87                            12   0       12

                                                              I—
74 FYGL       D
                                                                      6

    .0146     .2778                                                   2

                                                              -z                :
  —1.4500    1.5200
                                                              •0


75 FYCP

    .0159

 —5.6400
             D

              .6333

             2.9000
                       /
                           63 67 71 75 71 53 67
                                                             —l



                                                              2




                                                              0


                                                             —1
                                                                      :   ---
                                                                                    -12




                                                             -7
                           51   57   71   75   71   53 0?                            Il   U       Id
76 FYBAC           0

       .0173       .6737

     —6. 0300     3.0900

                           63   67   II is    7   63   07                -12       0    12

                                                             to
77 FYAAAC          D

       •   0152    .2567
                                                             -2
     —1.1800      1.2900                                     -6
                                                            -1   0
                           63 87 71      76   70 03 07


78 FYBAAC          D
                                                             to
                                                                     ::  -12   0         2




       .0161       .2265
                                                             -2
     —1.0200      1.1500                                     -6
                                                                     1__
                                                            -L 0
                           63   07 71 70 70 83 87                        -LI   0        12

                                                             3
79   GLGM3        N                                          7

       .8936      1.3896
                                                             0
                                                            —l
     —3.6000      3.5700
                                                            -2       :


80   G1OG1        N
                           Mr1
                           83 87 71      75   70 63 07
                                                            -3
                                                                     :   -I?   0       Il

                                                                         N
       .5497       .9925
                                                             0

                                                            —I
     —3.0700      2.4500

                           03   07   7
                                                                         \     0       Il
81 G10_GM3    N


   1.2413    1. 24 19                                              0

                                                               -1
  —2.6500    4.4200                                            -2
                                                               -3
                          63 67 71       75   77   63    67


82 G1_GM6     N                                                        I—


    .5020         3485

                                                              —1
   —.3900    1. 6000
                                                              -2       :
                          83 67 71 76 77 83 67


83 G1_GN3     N

    .6916     .4661

   —.9400    2.9300

                         63 67 71       71    73   83   87                   12   0   12


84 GM6_GM3   N

     1897     .2273

  —1.0100    1.4500

                                                              -2
                         63 67 7) 75 77 83 87
                                                                            -12   0    2


85 G?43_FF   N


   —.682 3    .9032
                                                               0

  —5.3700    1.0800                                           —I



                                                              -2
                         63   67   71   iS 77 6)        62
                                                                            I)        Il
86 CP6_GM6        N

      •   5673                                                                            '4
                  .4964
                                                              —l
     —.2400      3.7800
                           . L                                -2
                           63 67     II   70   77   83   07                      -Il          0            12



87               N
                             I                                               /
     BAC_GM3                                                            ..                            ,-   -"

      .6666       .5543

     —.0200      4.3300
                           13   Il   71   70 73 81 07
                                                                        ::Y'_
88 BAA_Gb        N                                             2

     1.6433       .73 10                                       0
                                                              —l
      .2900      3.8200                                       -2
                                                              -3    .
                           61 67     71   75   77 03 07

                                                               3
                                                                                        \4/"
89   BAA_AAA     N                                             2


     1. 0617      .4864                                        0

                                                              —l
      .3200      2.6900
                                                              -2    •.                 \N_.
                                                                                        ,'        ,
                           63 87 77       75
                                           F   73   8]   87
                                                              -3

                                                               .1
                                                                    .:           -12       7)
                                                                                                  /        2


90 AAA_GL        N


      .9293       .4929                                                      \                                  -
                                                               0

                                                              —t
      .1700      2.1500
                                                               2

                                                              -3
                           l    0/   71   IS   /    dl   MI                      I?        I)
91 FP_CP6        N

      —.0747     .6947

                                                                    —L
     —1.5600    3.9800
                          •1

                               63 57 71        75   77 53 01



92    FFBAC      N

       .0157     .5264

                                                                   —1
     —1. 5900   2.8300
                                                                   .3
                               63 17 75       75    73 03 61


93 YP_GlO        N
                          :W                                        2


      —.5590    1. 7724


  —3.2800       6.5100

                               61   67   11   75    73   IJ   67


94 FYFFR         D

       .0084     .7528

  —6. 3047      3.1819

                                                                   —1
                               63 67     75   75    73   63   61         -52   0    52


95 FYGM3R       D

       .0056     .6413

 —4.2947        2.8300
                                                                         -2>
                               FH1
                               63 67 71       /S 75 83 8!                Il    I)
                                                               to
                                                                    0
96 FYGM6R       D
                                                                    2
                                                                                 A
    .0048       .6089                                          -2
  —3.9047      2.0600                                          -6
                          LU1
                          63 61      11    16   79   83 97
                                                               -0                    -;2   0    2



97 FYGT1R       D                                                   B

                                                                    2
    .0058       .6232
                                                                -2
  —3.5847      2.1000                                           -B      JJv
                                                               —I
                          13 67 71 76 19 83 91                                       T01
                                                                    U


98 FYGT1OR      D

    .0050       .4541                                                   \f-\r\
                                                                -2
  —1.5263      1. 72 18                                         -6
                                                                         vv\/v\J\              ;-
                                                               -1 0
                                                                                     -Il        12
                          63 67      Il    70   79 61 87

                                                                ID
99 LPMHUAIXJ   DLN

     .0018      .0049
                                                                -2
   —.0252       .0226

                                                               -t   0
                          63 67 1% 15 76 83               67


100 LHOURS     DLH

     .0016       .0079

    —.0391       .0394


                           63   67    11   76    7   01   67
                          UW
                                                                        I   0   —--—__________________—

101 LHEM         DU
        .0017     .0035
                                                                        -2
       —.0145     .0197                                                 -6
                                                                   -l       0
                                 63 47   71    75   7    03   07

                                                                    10
102    LHTNAG    DLN                                                        B                                     —           '-'

        .0019     .0176

       —.0556     .0717
                                                                   -I       S
                                63 67 71      14    73 63 67                                                -72                     12
                                                                    ::                                     ThT
103 UICH          D                                                                                               —-      '
       —.0031     .2564
      —1. 5000   1. 4000                                           —1
                                                                                                          -:/
                                                                   -2
                                63 67 71 75 iS 03 07                                                        -12       0             12


104    LHNAGP    DLN
                                                                            4


        .0022     .0470                                                     2                                             —7
                                                                    -7
       —.2120     .1618                                             -6
                                                                   -t       0
                                63 07 71      75    71 63 67                                                -72                     72


105    LHNAPS

        .0022
                 DLN

                  .0677    lO
                                                                                                          _
                           'a
       —.2401     .2839
                                                                   -I
                                63 67 71            II                                                       l     ft               Id
                                                                  0-

106   L.HNPVX      D


        .0024      .1844
                                                                       r\t'- A
                                                              -2            V\
      —.8300       .9000                                      -6
                                                             —L U
                           63 67      1) 75   fl   03   01
                                                                  0

107   LHUL       DLN                                              6



        .0029      .0875

      —.2685       .3121
                                                             —l
                           63 61 71 15        7    03 07


108   LHULLHEM    N                                           2



        .0103      .0049
        .0032      .0253
                                                             -3
                            63   47 71 75 75       II   47

                                                              3
109   LHI4UR

      4.8173
      1.9000
                  N


                  1.7443

                 10.1000
                                                             :;
                                                             -
                                                             -2

                           63 07 17 75 75 03 07
                                                                                 . T0":T
110   LPHRM       N

      40.3198      .6046                                                          —
      37.3000    41.6000                                     —L
                                                                                          \—-
                                                             -2                   —   -
                           Si    67   77   75 75   0)   07                                 72
111    LPHRD       N


      40. 9165     .7 128                                          0
                                                                           f
                                                                  —I

      37.9000    42.4000
                                                                  -2   .             t   -
                                 63 67 71 75 75 03 67



112 LPMOSA

      3.1877
                   N

                   .4798
                            lii
      2. 0000     4.1000
                                 13 67   ii   75 71 63 67                  '"Th'1
113 UIU5          DU4

        .0019      .0528

      —.1457       .2017

                                 63 67   71   71   75 63 67

                                                                   3
114 LHU680

   12.9405

      7.6000
                   N

                  2. 9382
                 21. 2000
                              f                                    2



                                                                   0

                                                                  —I
                                                                           —             -
                                                                  -2
                                                                  -3
                                 83 67 71     7S 75     63   67                -12


115 LHEL          DLN       'I
        .0032      .0295    'I
      —.1256       .0953
                                                                  —L

                                 63 67 11     •5   75   81   67
                            IT
116 LHELX      N

     .6050     .2647

     .1890    1.3600
                                                                     7
                       63 67 71 75          7   03   01

                                                               ID
117 LUINC     DLN

     .0002      0594
    — .2440    .2186
                                                           -t   0-


118 LPNAG     DLN

     .0020     .0026

   —.0090      .0127                                           i:
                                                          -1 0



119 LPMI      DLN
                       63 07 71 75 70 83
                                           I•                        //\        0   I
   —.0001      .0251
   —.1964      .2106

                       83 87 11 75         75   8)   8?                   -12   0   2


120 LPCC      DLN

     .0016     .0127
   —.0720      .0634
                                                           -8
                                                          -I    0    -—
                       81   87   11   15   17   83 67
121   LPEM      DLN

       .0005     .0056

      —.0294     .0189
                         63 67   Il   75   73   U   $7



122 LPED        DLN

       .0006     .0080

      —.0502     .0339
                                                         —I
                         63 17 71     71   73 63 07



123   LPEN      DLN                                           6
                                                              2
       .0003     .0036
                                                          -2
      —.0200     .0099                                    -S

                         63 67   fl   73   72   Ii 61    —I
                                                                          ..\N
                                                                           -12   0   Il
124 LPTW        Dlii                                          6


       • 0020    .0026                                                    :_/\\
      —.0067     .0161                                        S
                                                                  "fvVV   ../
                                      .-                 —1
                         63   67 71 75 73 63 07                            -12


125 LPTR

       .0025
                DLN

                 .0027
                                       I                  —2
                                                              6

                                                              2



      —.0116     .0107                                    -6
                                                         -l   0
                         3 67    71   75   73 83 07
                         /f
                                                            10
126 LPFR      DLN
                                                                2                    a-
     .0028     .0016                                                                                      -
                                                            -2
   —.0022      .0072                                        -6
                                                                                          I/_   /
                                                           -L 0
                        63   67   71   15   7    03 01                                    -12   5    Il
127 LPSPA     DLN

     .0026     .0017
   —.0073      .0114                                                                 1
                       :.;p
                        03 67     II   75 73 63 07
                                        T
128 LPGOV     DLN

     .0022     .0028
   — .0122     .0221

                        63 67 71       75   79   63   07



129 LPSPNGA   DLN

     .0027     .0020
   —.0094      .0153                                                                 j,-1
130 IPROD1

     .0013
              DLN

               .0082
                        61   01   71 15 73 03 67
                                                           —l



                                                            ID
                                                                6
                                                                                     :/   -12   0    12




                                                            -2
   —.0312      .0424


                        8]   61   7! IS     13   Ii   07
                                                            -6
                                                           -l   0   —-—------—   —
                                                                                          ,\.
                                                                                           1?   II   II
131   P114        DLN                                                         8

                                                                              2
          .0022    .007 6                                                     2


                   .0339                                                      5
      —.0329
                                                                         —I   0
                                      63 67 71        75   17 83 87                                  -17       0           12



132 P11482        DUJ                                                         S                  4
                                                                                                           /
                                                                              2
      —.0013       .0094
                                                                         —2

      —.0563       .0356                                                  -6
                                                                                  -              :
                                                                         -l
                                      83 11 71 75 11 83 87                                            17       0           12



133   LEHM        DL14


          .0044    .0040
      —   .0137    .0209

                                      83 57 71 7$ 77 51 87
                                                                                                 ---  l2       0           12



134   LE1D482     DIN                                                         6

          .0004    .0043                                                      2

                                                                              2       "VVV   V   :
                            •1   II
      —.0168       .0173     SW
                            .:        p63   57 71 75 77 53 •7
                                                       I                      S
                                                                                  \A                           7
                                                                                                                       -



135   RPWGMS       N

          .0846    .0073                                                                                           \
          .0676    .0967                                                                                               TI
                                       53   57   ii   7$   7$   Si   7                                Il       I
136   RPWGMDS   N                                               2


                 .0069                                          0
       .0872
                                                               -2
       .0694     .0970
                                                               -.4
                         UE   13   17 72   75 7$ 13 $7
                                           i:                   II
137   P*JNEW    DU4

       .0040     .0034
                                                                —2

      —.0046     .0179                                          -S
                                                               -t 0
                              $3 17 71 71 70 $3 $7


138   PZUNEW    DU4
                                                                               ,               ,
       .0040     .0035
                                                                              -,.

      —.0046     .0179
                                                               —t
                              63 07   72   73   75 63 07                            -22   0        22

                                                                 I   —


139W
       .0034
                DLJ

                 .0070
                              [                                      S


                                                                               .
                                                                                              's—-
                                                                 —2

      —.0170     .0563                                           -I
                                                               -l    0   SI
                              63 67 72     70   75                                  -22   0        22
                         •.LJ                        Ii 67
140   PW1200    DLN

       .0031     .0204
                         p.
      —.1022     .1010                                                        i
                              III11"T
                              63 61 71     7S   5    $1   6?                        '12
                                                                                    /     I        42
141 PW1300     DLN

       .0057    .0173

      —.0582    .0940   a,                                                              N:47
                                                                —1                S..         -t
                             63                                                               0         12
                             L    61 11     iS
                                            I    73 83 87                               -12



142 PWMP       DLN                                                   6
                        'S
       .0032    .0212   'I                                       -2
      —.0601    .1947                                            -5
                                                                -1 0
                             63 17     ii   76   73 63 87


143   PWFC     DLN
                        ILl
                        'S
                                                                 10
                                                                     S
                                                                             I.
                                                                                        (TT
                                                                     2             a
       .0033    .0067                                                    A
                                                                 -2                                -/
      —.0193    .0406
                                                                -I 0
                             $3 81 71       75   75   83 87                             -2    0          7



144 PWFP

       .0036
               DLN

                .0055
                        LI                                                                                   /
      —.0150    .0307
                        I.
                                                                —I
                             63 07 71 75 75 83 87                                       -12   0         12

                                                                 2
145   PWFUEL

       .0043
               DLN

                .0184
                        LI                                      0

      —.1305    .0899   a'                                      —l



                                                                -2
                             63   67        iS   77   63   67
                        "Ulli          ii
                                                                      10
                                                                          6
146 PWIC      DLN      ::
                                                                          2

     .0035     .0057                                                  -2
    —.0158     .0312                                                  -6
                              M
                       I J.            —1-
                                  63   Si   Il   75 75 63 07
                                                                     —1
                                                                              \/
                                                                              -12   0    12




147 PWIMS     DLN                                                         6

                                                                          2
     .0035     .0078
                                                                      -2                 —
    —.0541     .0541                                                  -6      -/
                                                                     -I   0
                                  13             iS 73 03       07            -12        12
                       E,1             ,, ii
148 PWIMSN    DLN

     .0035     .0064

    —.0097     .0361
                                  63 67 71       76   73   03   01



149 PSMC99A   DLN
                       E E[                                                   zi
     .0034     .0120

    —.0486     .0565

                                  63 67     II   75   76 63 67                -62        62


150 PSCCOM    DLN
                                  A                                                 7t
      .0029    .0223

    —.0667     .1331

                                                                                    II    2
                        :L IE     63 67 76 iS 71 63 01                        -Il
                                                               I0
151   EXRWT1   DLN

      —.0011    .0131
                                                               -2     .:
      —.0541    .0544                                          -6
                                                           —l
                         63 61   Il    iS       03   01
                                            i                              -Il       0   Il
152   EXRWT2   DLN

      —.0020    .0190
                                                                      -
      —.0829    .0642
                         63 17   ii    is ,s    03   II
153   EXNWT1   DLN

      —.0006    .0128

      —.0523    .04 76

                         63 67 71 75        7 03 67
154   EXNWT2   DLN

      —.0014    .0187

      —.0800    .0642
                                                          —I
                         03 07        70
                                                                    -I a
                                 Il         70 03 67                       -12   0       12


155   EXVUS    DLN
                                                                6
      —.0010    .0194
                                                           —2
      —.0625    .0537
                                                           -6
                                                          -1 0
                         63 67 II     70    73 0] 07                             I        1
156   11411        DLN       a.

       .0030        .0748                                                       \y
                             I,
      —.3768        .3317                                              -B
                                                                       -I 0
                                    Si It       IS         83    07                           -12   0   12
                             •JT                      I                2
                                                                                /
157   EXY1         Dlii                                                                   a

                                                                                          a
        .0022       .1015                                              0


                                                                       —I
      —.6760        .7792
                                  13 57 71 10 70 83              Ii
                                                                       -2


                                                                       2
                                                                                          .,
158 TB1             D


      —.0071         5049                                              0

                                                                       —t
      —2.1972      1. 7296
                                                                       -2
                                  i3 I?   it    iS    ia   03    07



159    FBD         Dlii                                                     &


                                                                            2
        .0080        .0077
                                                                        -2
       —.0176        .0365                                              -0
                                                                       -%   0        a.
                                  03 07 71      75    70 83 07                            -t0
160    FBDY        DLN

           .0007     .0094
       —   .0358     .0330

                                   0)   07 71    75   75    0i    07                           I?   0   12
161 FBYS            N
                                         .1]               'l.a1
       —.   0001    .0027
                                                               1]
                                                                    ¶
                                                1'
       —.0083       .0086
                                                                                  It
                              63 67 71         iS    7* 13 67                                  -12   0   12




162    FAIL        DLN
                                                                                                              S
                                                                                           I
        .0102       .43 10                                              0




      —1.6337      1. 8410
                                                                        -2
                             63   61   71 75         73   63    Si                             -12   0   12

                                                                        I .0      I       II
163 INC            DLN                                                       .6

                                                                             2        I
        .0036       .0356                                               -2
      —.1656         1709                                               -6
                              63 67 71         75    73 *3 *7                                  -12   I   12
                                                                  Table 1
                                                     Univariate Descriptive Statistics
                                     and Bivariate Correlations with the Index of Coincident Indicators

                                                                                   - - Comovernents with Index of Coincident Indicators - -
                                                                                                                  Filtered Cross-Correlation
                                            - -                         -   -     - - - - Coherence - -    -      - - -        - - -
                                                   Spectral Density                                                     a94(L)        aB(L)
Series          Trans.    DFt            >6 yrs 2-6 yrs      1-2   yrs <1 yr    >6 yrs 2-6 yrs 1-2 yrs <1 yr
                                 DF                                                                             rxy(kmax r(O) kmax knax
Output   arid   Caacitv Utjjjation
 1        ICI      DLN  -2.37    -0.75      1.80     4.37      1.58     0.70      1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00      1.00     1.00      0    0
 2         IP      DLN  -2.34    -0.99      1.34     3.78      1.69     0.74      0.98   0.99   0.98   0.89      0.99     0.99      0    0
 3        IPC      DLN  -2.53    -0.92      0.61     1.83      0.87     0.97      0.86   0.85   0.80   0.66      0.88     0.85     -1   -3
 4       IPCN      DLN  -2.49    -0.99      0.51     1.10      0.57     1.05      0.76   0.72   0.61   0.40      0.80     0.78     -1   -2
  5     IPCD       DLN  -2.64    -1.20      0.41     1.37      0.95     0.99      0.80   0.80   0.77   0.62      0.82     0.79     -1   -4
 6       IPD       DLN  -2.56    -0.79      1.18     3.13      1.40     0.82      0.97   0.97   0.96   0.82      0.98     0.98      0    0
  7      IPN       DLN  -2.39    -0.85      0.85     2.97      2.02     0.77      0.87   0.87   0.82   0.56      0.92     0.89     -1   -2
 8     IPMIN       DLN  -1.76    -2.06      0.51     0.63      0.83     1.05      0.45   0.46   0.46   0.35      0.48     0.45      2    3
 9      IPUT   DLN      -0.98    -3.71      1.51     0.31      0.43     1.09      0.40   0.41   0.38   0.18      0.46     0.46     -1    0
10       IPE   DLN      -2.88    -0.78      1.70     5.03      0.96     0.72      0.83   0.83   0.82   0.50      0.90     0.87      1     3
11     IPMFC   DLN      -2.47    -0.78      1.29     3.77      1.72     0.74      0.98   0.98   0.98   0.87      0.98     0.98      0    -1
12       1PM   DLN      -1.99    -1.26      0.84     2.69      1.86     0.81      0.95   0.95   0.93   0.78      0.96     0.96      0    0
13       IPI   DLN      -2.94    -0.42      0.95     3.38      1.13     0.83      0.92   0.92   0.90   0.63      0.93     0.9:     -1    -1
14       IPF   DLN      -2.69    -0.88      1.58     3,22      1.04     0.84      0.94   0.93   0.89   0.71      0.96     0.96      0     0
15       IPX     D      -3.60    -3.41      0.83     5.05      1.56     0.65      0.98   0.98   0.97   0.87      0.98     0.98      0    -1
16   IPXDCA      D      -3.68    -3.67      1.05     4.86      1.25     0.69      0.96   0.96   0.95   0.79      0.97     0.97      0     0
17    IPXMCA     U      -3.00    -2.88      1.03      3.85     1.65     0.75      0.96   0.96   0.96   0.86      0.96     0.96      0    -1
Consuiiotion. Sales and Income
18     CMC82   DLN      -2.57    -0.95      0.91     0.90      0.30     1.08      0.62   0.60   0.54   0.22      0.73     0.66     -2    -4
19   CMCD82    DLN      -2.77    -0.49      0.35      0.50     0.40     1.11      0.63   0.62   0.49   0.19      0.70     0.65     -2    -3
20      GMPY   DLN      -2.49     0,27      5.67      1.24     0.53     0.94      0.43   0.47   0.46   0.47     -0.51     0.42    -17   -17
21   GMPY82    DLN      -1.85    -1.50      1.74      1.64     0.37     1.01      0.70   0.72   0.73   0,44      0.77     0.77      0     0
22    CMYXPS   DLN      -2.67    -1.07      2,01      2.97     0,47     0.90      0,82   0.83   0.82   0.53      0,87     0,87      0     0
23    CMWS82   DLN       -1.86    0.23      2.07      0.71     0.35     1.06      0.35   0,34   0.31   0.16      0.45     0.45      0    -2
24      MT82   DLN       -2.60   -0.77      0.62      1.68     0.72     0.99      0.90   0.91   0.91   0.61      0.94     0.93     -1    -1
25      MSM8   DLN       -3.40   -0.65      0.56      1.66     0.62     1.00      0.90   0.90   0.88   0.63      0.93     0.93      0    -1
26       WT8   DLN       -2.72   -0.89      0.10      1.35     0.78     1.01      0.64   0.68   0.62   0.32      0.73     0.73     0     1
27       RT8   DLN       -3.00   -0.81      0.36      0.92     0.33     1.09      0.62   0.62   0.59   0.41      0.73     0.63     -2   -5
 28    RTR82   DLN       -3.28   -0.60      0.28      0.95     0.39     1.08      0.60   0.59   0.51   0.30      0.69     0.62     -2   -4
 29    RCARD   DLN       -2.96   -3.02      0.06      0.22     0.26     1.14      0.54   0.53   0.44   0.27      0.58     0.55     -1   -
 30   RCARTA   DLN       -2.87   -2.62      0.05      0.21     0.27     1,14      0.51   0,52   0,43   0.29      0,56     0,53     -1   -5
                                                          Table 1, continued

Inventories.  Orders, and Performance
31   MPCON8    DLN        -2.81 -1.26    0.14    0.41   0.19   1.14    0.70    0.67   0.48   0.15   0.76    0.75    -1    0
32   MSOND8    DLN        -2.88 -1.09    0.15    0.52   0.20   1.13    0.75    0.71   0.53   0.14   0.78    0.78    -1    0
33   MOCM82    DLN        -2.76 -1.70    0.41    1.35   0.73   1.02    0.78    0.77   0.73   0.47   0.89    0.82    -2   -3
34     M082    DLN        -2.80 -1.54    0.46    1.31   0.66   1.02    0.81    0.82   0.77   0.39    0.90   0.85    -1    -2
35    MD082    DLN        -3.21 -1.82    0.27    1.04   0.45   1.07    0.83    0.81   0.73   0.31    0.90   0.86    -1    -2
36    MN082    DLN        -1.94 -1.66    0.64    0.82   0.97   1.02    0.59    0.65   0.66   0.39    0.75   0.68    -2    -4
37     M1.J82  DLN       -2.55 -1.94     7.72    5.95   1.56   0.48    0.53    0.54   0.52   0.1]    0.64   0.63     2     5
38    MDU82    DLN       -2.83 -2.09     7.18    6.93   1.54   0.43    0.49    0.50   0.47   0.16    0.63   0.58     3    6
39    MNU82    DLN       -2.12 -0.90     1.42    4.51   2.73   0.59    0.61    0.60   0.62   0.23    0.73   0.63    -2    -4
40   IVMT82    DUJ       -1.01 -1.27     7.52    4.34   1.42   0.61    0.30    0.31   0.46   0.23    0.79   0.3]     6    8
41   IVM1D8      N       -4.99  -4.72    5.44   4.38    1.34   0.65    0.15    0.17   0.34   0.18    0.57   0.57     1    0
42   IVM2D8      N       -3.75  -3.60   11.09    3.90   0.87   0.62    0.29    0.28   0.30   0.10    0.43   0.41    -2    -2
43   IVM3D8      N       -5.14  -4.60   4.20     2.54   1.86   0.75    0.32    0.34   0.32   0.19    0.51   0.27     3     4
44    1VT82      N       -3.32  -2.99   33.90    6.25   0.53   0.05    0.41    0.41   0.37   0.14   -0.79   -0.69   -2    -4
45   VENDOR      N       -4.44  -4.41    7.03   12.90   1.28   0.06    0.37    0.37   0.40   0.17    0.67    0.58   -2    -3
Housing and Construction
46     HSBP      N       -3.42 -3,39    11.65   13.09   0.47   0.04    0.49    0.48   0.43   0.31   0.59    0.14    -6   -10
47     HSFR      N       -3.26  -3.18    9.99   12.90   0.59   0.07    0.50    0.49   0.44   0.26   0.59    0.21    -6    -9
48   CONDO9    DLN       -3.35 -2.71     0.07    0.43   0.24   1.13    0.75    0.77   0.59   0.10   0.82    0.82     0     0
Money and Credit: Quantity Variables
49   FMBASE    DLN       -3.81 1.74     12.24    2.10   0.71   0.73    0.07    0.09   0.14   0.14   0.18    0.11    -3   -18
50 FMBASER     DLN       -2.59 -1.34     8.86    3.23   0.86   0.71    0.33    0.34   0.40   0.18   0.62    0.40    -6    -7
51       FM1   DLN       -1.86 2.64      8.15    2.05   1.48   0.74    0.13    0.13   0.18   0.12   0.25    0.14    -3    -4
52   FM1D82    DLN       -2.06 -1.77     7.72    3.16   1.30   0.69    0.29    0.30   0.35   0.14   0.53    0.34    -4    -1
53       FM2   DLN       -1.96 -0.06     9.13   4.24    2.30   0.50    0.12    0.14   0.22   0.16   0.48    0.19    -5    -7
54   FM2D82    DLN       -3.09 -1.87     6.91    5.86   1.63   0.50    0.29    0.30   0.38   0.15   0.68    0.36    -6    -9
55       FM3   DLN       -1.73 -0.16    14.67    5.46   1.64   0.37    0.14    0.14   0.14   0.14   0.27    0.19    -3    -4
56     FM3R    DLN       -3.17 -1.73     7.51    6.20   1.40   0.49    0.33    0.32   0.36   0.14   0.59    0.40    -5    -8
57       FML   DLN       -2.03 0.55     20.59    3.77   1.05   0.42    0.20    0.19   0.16   0.15   0.24    0.24     0     3
58     FMLR    DLN       -3.25 -1.03     7.34    5.43   1.24   0.56    0.43    0.42   0.41   0.12   0.60    0.50    -4    -5
59   FCLN82    DLN       -1.78 -1.26     4.84    2.47   0.51   0.88    0.01    0.04   0.19   0.17   0.63    0.02    10    11
60   FCBCUC      N       -4.56  -4.52    3.29   10.39   1.23   0.31    0.43    0.41   0.46   0.20   0.67    0.61    -2    -3
61 FCBCUCY       N       -3.91  -3.82    4.05    3.64   0.83   0.78    0.15    0.09   0.18   0.36   0.42    0.37     2     0
62 FCLBMCY       N       -4.53  -4.54    3.13    7.18   1.35   0.51    0.06    0.09   0.26   0.22   0.63    0.63     0     2
63    CCBPY    DLN       -3.03 -1.66    4.11    4.95    0,69   0.71    0.26    0.23   0.23   0.36   0.57    0.35     6     7
64   CCI3OM    DLN       -2.56 -1.69    0.33    0.64    0.53   1.08    0.33    0.35   0.3/   0.16    0.52   -0.29   13    15
Stock Prices and Volunie
65   FSPCOM    DLN       -1.63 -0.13    0.68    1.74    1.94   0.86    0.03    0.08   0.26   0.16   0.55    0.09    -6    -8
66    FSPIN    DLN       -1.69 -0.08    0.64    1.75    1.97   0.86    0.03    0.09   0.26   0.16   0.54    0.09    -6    -8
67     FSDJ    DLN       -1.45 -0.22    0.97    1.77    1.84   0.87    0.03    0.09   0.27   0.15   0.51    0.07    -6    10
                                                         Table 1, continued

68    FSVOL   DLN      -2.36   -0.21    0.08   0.10    0.31   1.15    0.24    0.14   0.18   0.13   -0.29   -0.23    2     4
Interest Rates and Spreads
69     FYFF     D      -2.33    -1.83    0.64  1.37    1.79   0.90    0.54    0.55   0.48   0.17    0.59   0.56     1    -17
70    FYCM3     D       -2.12   -1.65    0.68  1.12    1.64   0.93    0.46    0.48   0.44   0.15    0.52   0.51     1    -18
71     FYCM6     D      -2.34   -1.72    0.71  1.15    1.52   0.94    0.46    0.49   0.45   0.16    0.53   0.51      1   -17
72     FYCTI     D      -2.36   -1.66    0.75  1.18    1.44   0.95    0.45    0.47   0.43   0.16    0.50   0.48      1   -17

73    FYGT1O     D      -2.63   -1.61    1.37  1.74    1.00   0.94    0.24    0.28   0.26   0.13   -0.41   0.24    -13   -15
74       FYCL    D      -2.60   -1.45    1.48  1.51    0.93   0.96    0.26    0.30   0.28   0.12   -0.42   0.25    -13   -15
75       FYCP    D      -2.41   -1.84    0.61  1.21    1.71   0.92    0.50    0.52   0.47   0.17    0.55   0.52      1   -16
76      FYBAC    D      -2.21   -1.73    0.61  1.12    1.72   0.93    0.50    0.51   0.46   0.18    0.54   0.52      1   -17
77    FYAAAC     D      -2.47   -1.57    2.09  1.85    1.02   0.92    0.12    0.17   0.20   0.16   -0.45   0.10    -12   -12
78    FYBAAC     D      -2.53   -1.60    3.67  3.08    1.37   0.77    0.06    0.07   0.16   0.14   -0.48   -0.10    -7   -10
79    CL GM3     N      -2.30   -2.10   25.26  7.02    1.14   0.11    0.24    0.23   0.27   0.15   -0.51   -0.51     1   -18
80    ClO Cl     N      -2.66   -2.63   20.24  8.52    1.05   0.11    0.25    0.25   0.30   0.18   -0.59   -0.59     0     3
81   GlO CM3     N      -2.71   -2.46   20.11  8.40    1.11   0.12    0.18    0.18   0.23   0.13   -0.52   -0.52     0     3
82    CIGM6      N      -3.59   -2.23   35.55  3.76    0.56   0.17    0.13    0.13   0.13   0.11   -0.23   -0.07    -8    -5
83    G1CM3      N      -4.39   -3.30   17.99  6.09    1.39   0.29    0.07    0.07   0.06   0.10    0.20   -0.12   -18   -18
84   GM6GM3      N      -4.39   -4.40    4.65  6.88    2.33   0.41    0.07    0.07   0.13   0.09    0.26   -0.14   -18   -18
85    Cr43 FF    N      -3.58   -3.19   17.09  7.91    1.02   0.22    0.49    0.48   0.48   0.15   -0.53   -0.46     2     5
86   CP6 Cr46    N      -3.67   -3.65    7.36  9.57    1.62   0.24    0.59    0.57   0.54   0.14   -0.48    0.34    -8     8
87   BACGM3      N      -3.49   -3.25   11.29  7.80    1.58   0.29    0.55    0.54   0.51   0.16   -0.44    0.31    -8     8
88   BAAdO        N     -3.57   -2.69   33.97  5.82    0.62   0.06    0.28    0.28   0,30   0.17   -0.74   -0.68    -2    -1
89   BAAAAA       N     -2.98   -2.19   38.12  4.84    0.59   0.05     0.34   0.34   0.35   0.16   -0.66   -0.57    -2    -2
90    AAA GL      N     -1.52   -1.86   44.84   3.10   0.49   0.04     0.29   0.28   0.27   0.18   -0.58   -0.47    -3    -2
91    FF CP6      N     -3.65   -3.10   20.98  6.29    0.61   0.29     0.26   0.25   0.29   0.12    0.43    0.41     1   -18
92    FFBAC       N      -3.95 -3.47    14.86  6.78    0.91   0.35     0.30   0.29   0.33   0.12    0.45    0.40     2     2
93    FFC1O       N      -3.05   -3.05  11.99 10.73    1.07   0.13     0.37   0.36   0.39   0.17    0.60    0.57     1     4
94      FYFFR     D      -1.94   -1.63   0.35  0.88    1.80   0.94     0.46   0.46   0.40   0.17    0.45    0.45     0    -1
95    FYCM3R      D      -1.88   -1.73   0.41   1.11   1.66   0.94     0.31   0.32   0.35   0.17    0.34    0.30    -2    15
96    FYCM6R      D      -2.06   -1.90   0.44   1.23   1.50   0.95     0.31   0.32   0.35   0.19   -0.35    0.28    ii    15
97    FYGT1R      D      -2.17   -1.91   0.44   1.28   1.39   0.95     0.30   0.31   0.33   0.19   -0.35    0.27    12    15
98   FYGT1OR      D      -2.46   -2.24    1.14  2.46   0.87   0.91     0.03   0.06   0.19   0.19   -0.50   -0.04    10    13

 Aggregate Employment and labor Fore Participation
 99 LPMHUADJ    DLN      -2.90   -0.17    1.51  2.50   0.77   0.91     0.94   0.93   0.92   0.69    0.96    0.94     1     2

100    LHOURS   DLN      -2.96    0.54    0.40  0.63   0.38   1.10     0.76   0.74   0.67   0.45    0.81    0.81     1     1
                DLN      -3.69     0.33   1.17  1.86   0.71   0.97     0.79   0.77   0.71   0.34    0.83    0.81     1     2
101       LHEM
102    LHTNAG   DLN      -1.19   -1.95    1.72  0.83   0.51   1.05     0.61   0.60   0.47   0.20    0.70    0.67     2     1

103       LHCH    D        0.22  -1.45    0.12  0.08   0.21   1.16     0.45   0.42   0.36   0.38    0.50    0.50     0    -l
104    L1-INAGPDU        -2.09   -0.59    0.73  0.66   0.58   1.07     0.79   0.77   0.64   0.25   -0.84   -0.83    -1    -1
                DLN      -2.40   -1.08    0.44  0.94   0.78   1.04     0.78   0.77   0.69   0.24   -0.86   -0.81    -1    -2
105    LHNAPS
       LHNPVX      D      -2.08 -1.85     0.79  0.54   0.49   1.08     0.71   0.69   0.55   0.17    0.77    0.77    -1    -1
106
                                                          Table 1, continued

                                                                               0.88   0.84   0.29   -0.89    -0.89    0    -1.
107     UIUL   DLN       -2.55    -2.41    0.75   2.14   1.10   0.91   0.89
                 N       -2.30    -2.40   32.69   6.99   0.67   0.02   0.22    0.22   0.33   0.30   -0.90    -0.90    0    -l
108 LHULLHEM
                                                         0.19   0.01   0.07    0.07   0.13   0.18   -0.93    -0.92    1     1
109    LHMUR     N       -2.14    -1.90   45.28   3.91
                 N       -2.85    -2.87   25.28   7.16   0.73   0,14   0.07    0.08   0.17   0.19    0.79    0.75    -1    -3
110    LPHRM
                                                  7.52   0.60   0.12   0.08    0.10   0.19   0.20     0.80   0.77    -l    -3
111    LPHRD     N       -2.94    -2.95   25.37
                 N       -3.07    -2.91   26.08   8.39   0.49   0.06   0.32    0.32   0.35   0.29     0.87    0.85   -l    -3
112   LPMOSA
                                                  0.33   0.27   1.13   0.61    0.63   0.63   0.20   -0.73    -0.66   -2     -3
113     LHU5   DLN       -1.77    -1.30   0.24
                 N       -2.64    -2.41   43.02   4.47   0.19   0.02   0.28    0.27   0.24   0.21   -0.88    -0.39    6      7
114   LHU68O
                                                  5.22   1.42   0.65   0.88    0.88   0.84   0.32     0.95    0.94   -1      0
115     LHEL   DLN       -3.25    -1.82    2.50
                 N       -2.53    -2.50   41.36   5.13   0.15   0.01   0.07    0.07   0.13   0.23     0.82    0.82    0      0
116    LHELX
                                                         0.88   0.99   0.78    0.77   0.76   0.39   -0.87    -0.78   -2     -3
117    LUINC    DLN       -2.31   -2.05    0.53   1.47
 Employment by Sector
                                                  5.77   1.35   0.56   0.89    0.88   0.88   0.68    0.92     0.89     1     3
118     LPNAG   DLN       -2.63   -0.14    5.37
119      LPMI   DLN       -1.35   -1.18    1.57   0.73   0.73   1.03   0.14    0.17   0.25   0.23   -0.41     0.09   -11   -12
                                           0.51   2.12   0.61   0.97   0.74    0.71   0.64   0.41    0.79     0.78     1     2
120      LPCC   DLN       -3.55   -0.65
                                                         1.66   0.55   0.92    0.92   0.92   0.61    0.96     0.93     1     2
121      LPEN   DLN       -2.15   -1.96    3.35   6.08
122      LPED   DLN       -2.28   -1.90    2.64   5.27   1.26   0.66   0.90    0.91   0.91   0.58    0.95     0.91     1     2
                                  -2.07    3.73   4.80   2.68   0.53   0.87    0.85   0.78   0.36    0.90     0.90     0     0
123      LPEN   DLN       -2.00
124      LPTW  Du         -3.41   -0.27    3.49   5.69   0.93   0.65   0.65    0.63   0.61   0.18    0.82     0.70     3     5
                                  0.20     5.41   3.54   1.18   0.73   0.75    0.76   0.71   0.39    0.79     0.78     1     1
125      LPTR   DLN       -4.07
126      LPFR   DLN       -4.58    0.12    9.26   5.92   0.79   0.53    0.40   0.37   0.34   0.18    0.44     0.42     2     5
127     LPSPA   DLN       -2.81   -0.19    8.84   3.49   0.74   0.71    0.69   0.68   0.67   0.33    0.76     0.70     2     4
                                          11.48   1.50   0.47   0.81    0.12   0.10   0.14   0.12    0.43     0.17    15    16
128     LPCOV   DLN       -1.39   -2.46
                                                                0.72    0.74   0.75   0.72   0.37    0.80     0.75     2     4
129 LPSPNGA     DLN       -4.60    0.78    6.31   3.88   0.81
 Productivity  and  Real Wages
                                           0.79   2.18   1.28   0.90    0.91   0.91   0.91   0.55    0.92     0.91    -1    -2
130   IPROD1    DLN       -2.38   -1.55
          P111  DLN               -0.55    5.34   1.92   0.77   0.88    0.66   0.66   0.69   0.55   -0.69    -0.63    -2    -5
131                       -1.98
                                           0.86   1.55   1.25   0.94    0.58   0.58   0.57   0.40   -0.53    -0.53     0     1
132     PLM82   DLN       -2.81   -0.13
133      LEHM   DLN       -2.35   -0.50   13.44   0.51   0.48   0.84    0.04   0.02   0.07   0.28   -0.31    -0.10    -7   -12
                                           1.57   1.68   0.63   0.98    0.38   0.40   0.47   0.26    0.47     0.41   -10    -8
134   LEHN82    DLN       -1.36   -2.21
135   RPWGMS      N               -2.26   40.23   4.93   0.34   0.03    0.06   0.06   0.06   0.15    0.52     0.19    -8   -10
                          -2.69
136 RPWGMDS       N       -2.37   -2.22   44.57   3.68   0.33   0.02    0.00   0.01   0.05   0.15    0.49     0.29    -7    7
 Prices
                                          26.30   3.39   0.49   0.39    0.27   0.27   0.30   0.13   -0.53    -0.31    -9   -10
137     PUNEW   DLN       -2.62   -0.20
                                  -0.44   23.79   3.10   0.46   0.46    0.28   0.27   0.30   0.13   -0.52    -0.32    -9   -10
138   PZUNEW    DLN       -2.79
                                                                        0.02   0.05   0.12   0.12   -0.48    -0.10    -9   -13
139        PW   DLN       -2.54   -0.54   11.31   2.72   0.77   0.70
                                           3.72   3.04   1.68   0.74    0.32   0.31   0.21   0.11   -0.55     0.29   -16   -17
140   PW1200    DLN       -1.93   -0.62
                                  -0.66   10.48   1.25   0.45   0.85    0.39   0.38   0.34   0.15   -0.46    -0.41    -4    -5
141   PWl300    DLN       -2.06
                                                                        0.29   0.31   0.25   0.11   -0.58     0.28   -18   -18
142     PWCMP   DLN       -2.19   -0.75    2.03   1.45   0.58   0.99
                                  -0.53   10.49   2.08   0.54   0.79    0.13   0.15   0.20   0.12   -0.46    -0.19   -10   -12
143      PWFC   DLN       -2.44
                                          12.35   2.83   0.80   0.67    0.34   0.36   0.35   0.10   -0.53    -0.42    -4    -5
144      PWFP   DLN       -2.89   -0.39
                                                             Table   1,   continued
145      PWFUEL   DLN     -1.59   -0.79     11.22   3.67   2.05   0.52        0.12    0.16   0.21   0.11   -0.47
146       PWIC    DLN                                                                                              -0.20    -9   -10
                          -2.43   -0.32     19.75   5.25   1.53   0.29        0.12    0.16   0.21   0.09   -0.53   -0.22    -8
147      PWIMS    DLN     -2.27   -0.25     10.00                                                                                -10
                                                    3.30   1.18   0.65        0.05    0.08   0.16   0.14
148                                                                                                        -0.54   -0.14    -8   -10
      PWIMSM   DLN        -2.55   -0.04     12.47   6.61   1.68   0.33        0.05    0.08   0.17   0.12   -0.57   -0.15    -8
149  PSMC99A DLN          -2.25    0.06      3.06                                                                                -10
                                                    7.02   1.08   0.55        0.54    0.54   0.45   0.13
150   PSCCOM                                                                                                0.55    0.55     0     2
               DLN        -3.20   -1.21      1.74   3.75   0.53   0.85        0.46    0.45   0.36   0.13   -0.48    0,45   -17   -18
 Exchange Rates and Foreign Trade
151    EXRWT1    DLN      -2.27   -1.37      2.85   1.87   1.34   0.87        0.12    0.08   0.11   0.11   -0.30
152    EXRWT2    DLN                                                                                               -0.14    -5    -7
                          -2.59   -1.35      2.75   2.08   1.52   0.84        0.14    0.09   0.09   0.12   -0.27   -0.15    -5    -6
153    EXNWT1    DLN      -2.20   -1.74      2.91   1.97   1.46   0.85        0.10    0.06   0.07   0,08   -0.26
154    EXNWT2    DLN                                                                                               -0.12    -5    -6
                          -2.47   -1.21      2.75   2.31   1.63   0.82        0.13    0.08   0.07   0.10   -0,24   -0.14    -5
155     EXVUS   DLN       -2.10   -2.10      3.11                                                                                 -4
                                                    2.06   1.73   0.81        0.01    0.06   0.08   0.12
156                                                                                                        -0.23   -0.04    11    18
         IMY1   DLN       -2.30   -0.59      0.11   0.15   0.19   1.15        0.49    0.46   0.34   0.17    0.54
157      EXYI   DL.N      -1.82                                                                                     0.48     2     4
                                  -1.23      0.13   0.09   0.05   1.17        0.16    0.17   0,16   0.16   -0.32    0.13   -16   -15
158       TB1      D      -3.00   -0.74      0.11   0.10   0.14   1.16        0.31    0.31   0.23   0.13   -0.36   -0.35
 Misc.:   cpvernnient and other                                                                                              1    18
159       FBD   DLN       -2.11    0.84     10.37   1.43   0.32   0.86        0.15    0.13   0.14   0.13   0.47
160      FBDY   DLN                                                                                                0.16     -8    -8
                          -1.51   -1.00     10.27   1.46   0.40   0.86        0.11    0.16   0.19   0.25   0.47    -0.08   -13   -11
161      FBYS      N      -5.63   -5.56      3.08   5.44   0.65   0.68        0.26    0.27   0.37   0.15   0.60
162      FAIL   DLN                                                                                                0.60      0   -2
                          -1.45   -0.07      0.07   0.02   0.07   1.18        0.24    0.24   0.23   0.12   -0.40   -0.30    -3   -6
163       INC   DLN       -2.77   -0.17      0.33   0.33   0.35   1.12        0.44    0.41   0.42   0.19    0.55    0.43    -3   -6
Notes:   The definitions of the series are given in Appendix A. The transformation codes are:
                                                                                               N — no transformation, D —    first
differences of the series, DLN —    first
                                        differences of the natural logs of the series
                                                                                      (i.e. growth rates).       refers to the
Dickey-Fuller t-statistic testing the null that the series contains a unit root, when a constant and time DF
                                                                                                            is included as a
regressor; DF refers to this statistic when time is excluded.
difference o?the series in question in the                       DFt and DF were computed including 12 lags of the first
                                             regression.  For variables witt transformation code
                                                                                                 DLN, the DF statistics were
computed after transforming the data to logarithms. The 10% (5%) critical values for the
the DF statistic, -2.57 (-2.86).                                                           DFt statistic are -3.12 (-3.41); for
   Thefour columns of univariate spectral estimates report the average value of the
ranges, normalized so that the average spectrum on [-s,r]                             periodogram for periods in the indicated
                                                             is
                                                              1. The next four columns report
                                                                                               average estimated coherences
between the transformed series and the 1-month growth in the ICI. The final 4
                                                                                columns present statistics based on the cross-
correlogram between filtered log ICI and the filtered series. Of these, the first three are based
                                                                                                    on the 24-month moving
average filter a4(L), and the final column is based on the Butterworth filter           See Appendix B and the text for a
description  of these final statistics and a discussion of the filters.         a(L).
                                                                    Table 2
                                   Bivariate Predictive Content for the Index of
                                                                                 Coincident Indicators (Id)


                                                                                                              Subsample Stability:    RMSE's
  Series                                                                                                         -   88:12     -
                 Trans.                                                                                                            79:9
                            F6      p6       F12    p12     R2(l)    rank    R2(6) rank      R2(12)    rank    -79:9 79:10- -79:9 79:10-
  Base Model               o.oo    0.000    0.00   0.000    0.258     -                -
                                                                             0.118           0.062             4.52 4.46      4.50 4,53
Output and Capacity Utilization
  3      IPC   DLN     0.73 0.625           1.67   0.073    0.288     79     0.154
  4     IPCN   DLN                                                                    111    0.202      54     4.48 4.22     4.45
                       2.01 0.065           1.69   0.069                                                                          4.39
  5                                                         0.290     72     0.149    117    0.128     94      4.45 4.34
        iPc DLN        0.87 0.521           1.44   0.148    0.275                                                            4.42 4.50
  6                                                                 123      0.133    140    0.143     83
         IPD   DLN     1.28 0.264           1.15                                                               4.49 4.38     4.47 4.49
  7
                                                   0.316    0.290    70      0.144   122     0.075    146
         IPN  DLN      3.66 0.002                                                                              4.35 4.61     4.31 4.79
                                           2.63    0.002    0.311    24
 8    IPMIN                                                                  0.211     56    0.121    101      4.25 4.27
              DLN      1.01 0.419          1.43                                                                              4.22 4.42
                                                   0.151   0.283     94      0.161   105
 9      IPUT  DLN      1.96 0.072                                                            0.127     96      4.44 4.25     4.42 4,41
                                           1.35    0.190   0.283     90
 10       IPE      DLN                                                       0.123   159     0.071    153      4.50 4.44
                          0.86    0.527    0.83    0.620                                                                     4.49 4.51
 11                                                        0.268    144     0.129    146     0.096    122
        IPMFG      DLN    0.57    0.756                                                                        4.50 4.39     4.48 4.54
                                           1.31    0.214   0.266    153     0.128    152
 12       1PM      DLN    0.91                                                              0.087     131      4.54 4.32     4.48 4.65
                                  0.491    1.69    0.068   0.301
 13                                                                  47     0.148    118    0.094     125
          IPI      DLN    3.09    0.006                                                                        4.39 4.49     4.37 4.60
                                           1.97    0.026   0.302     44     0.213
 14       IPF                                                                          53   0.205      51      4.24 4.26
                   D      0.42    0.867    1.00    0.446                                                                     4.21 4.42
 15       IPX                                              0.280    103     0.129    147    0.081     137
                     D    0.65    0.693                                                                        4.50 4.40     4.48 4.50
                                           0.87    0.577   0.308     31     0.169
 16   IPXDCA         D                                                                92    0.165      72      4.72 4,33     4.67 4.50
                          0.58    0.750    1.24    0.260
 17                                                        0.307     33     0.172     89    0.144      81
      IPXJ4CA        D    0.53    0.782                                                                        4.66 4.40     4.59 4.65
                                           1.25    0.248   0.266    149     0.132    142    0.089     130      4.52 4,33     4.48 4.51
Consumption Sales and Income
 18    GMC82  DLN     2.12 0.051            2.89 0.001
 19                                                        0.289     75     0.213     52    0.249      32
      CMCD82  DLN     1.11 0.354            1.61 0.089                                                         4.13 4.51     4.10 4.66
 20                                                        0.272    135     0.152    114    0.137
        GMPY  DLN     1.84 0.092                                                                       86      4.38 4.48     4,35 4.66
                                            1.14 0.329     0.282    102
 21   CMPY82  DLN                                                           0.182     74    0.174      65     4.43 4.10      4.41 4.26
                      0.72 0.635           1.66 0.074
 22                                                        0.266    150     0.140    126    0.107     114
      CMYXp8  DLN     0.30 0.938                                                                              4.38 4.57      4.34 4.79
                                           1.58 0.096      0.263    157     0.139
 23  GJS82                                                                           130    0.103     118     4,37 4.62      4.29 5.01
                  D   1.41 0.210           1.27 0.235      0.274
 24                                                                 129     0.162    103    0.132      91
        MT82  DI      1.26 0.276           1.83 0.043                                                         4,39 4.38      4.34 4.71
 25     MSM8                                               0.276    119     0.168     95    0.092     126     4.31 4.49
                  D   0.51 0.803           0.75 0.704      0.303                                                             4.28 4.67
26                                                                   42     0.169     94    0.107     113
           WT8    D       0.67    0.674                                                                       4.64 4.45      4.58 4.67
                                           1.46 0.140      0.301    48
27         RT8    DI                                                        0.175     85    0.156      74     4.63 4.42
                          1.82    0.096    2.52 0.004                                                                        4.61 4.52
28                                                         0.327     14     0.226    44     0.274      23
      RTR82       DLN     1.88    0.083    2.21 0.011                                                         4.46 4.32      4.43 4.44
29    RCD                                                  0.288     82     0.177     79    0.182      61
                  DL      0.95    0.458    2.13 0.015                                                         4.34 4.36      4.32 4.47
30                                                         0.280    107     0.129    148    0.108     112
      RCARTA      DU      1.18    0.316    2.45 0.005                                                         4.48 4.44      4.47 4.54
                                                           0.285     85     0.128    150    0.114     103     4.48 4,45      4.47 4.54
                                                       Table 2, continued


                      and Performance
 31    MPCON8   DLN     3.08 0.006    1.85     0.041    0.299    51   0.144   120   0.076   144    4.45 4.40
 32    MSOND8                                                                                                      4.43 4.48
                DLN     3.84 0.001    2.50     0.004    0.308    30   0.161   104   0.079   140    4.39 4.39       4.37 4.47
 33    MOCM82   DLN     2.62 0.017    2.43     0.005    0.294    57   0.189    67   0.152    75    4.25    4.46
 34      M082   DLN                                                                                                4.22 4.60
                       4.08   0.001    3.64    0.000    0.313    23   0.212    55   0.147    77    4.17    4.44   4.15   4.55
 35     MD082   DLN    3.39   0.003    3.09   0.000     0.306    35   0.173    87   0.120   102    4.354.37
 36     MN082   DLN    0.99   0.432                                                                               4.33   4.47
                                       1.26   0.245     0.273   130   0.197    63   0.103   116    4.164.59       4.13   4.72
 37      MU82   DLN    3.49   0.002    1.89   0.034     0.313    22   0.179    77   0.134    88   4.31 4.40
 38     MDU82   DLN                                                                                               4.29   4.52
                       3.06   0.006    1.81   0.045     0.306    34   0.172    91   0.143    82   4.35 4.37       4.33   4.48
 39     MNU82   DLN    6.95   0.000    3.91   0.000     0.338    10   0.321    12   0.173    66   3.64    4.56
 40    IVMT82   DLN                                                                                               3.56   4.94
                       2.65   0.016    1.73   0.060     0.289    74   0.178    78   0.142    84   4.28    4.49    4.19   5.06
 41    IVM1D8     N    1.67   0.129    1.23   0.263     0.289    73   0.223    47   0.171    70   4.09    4.50
 42    IVM2D8     N                                                                                               3.99   5.09
                       1.34   0.241    1.75   0.056     0.282   101   0.154   112   0.124    98   4.39    4.45    4.36   4.61
 43    IVM3D8     N    2.52   0.022    1.59   0.092     0.288    81   0.165    97   0.086   132   4.36    4.41
 44     1VT82     N    2.05                                                                                       4.29   4.94
                              0.059    2.09   0.017     0.288    80   0.203    60   0.141    85   4.17    4.51    4.08   5.03
 45    VENDOR     N    5.96   0.000    4.15   0.000     0.332    12   0.260    34   0.286    22   3.98    4.44    3.91   4.77
Hpusinz and Construction
 46     HSBP     N     5.52   0.000    3.33   0.000     0.325    15   0.342     9   0.328    15   3.96 3.71
 47     HSFR     N    2.46                                                                                        3.92 3.92
                              0.025    1.85   0.041     0.293    59   0.306    17   0.262    28
 48                                                                                               4.07 3.80       4.05 3.94
      CONDO9   DLN    1.60    0.146    1.02   0.428     0.283    96   0.139   129   0.078   142   4.44 4.45       4.43 4.52
Money and Credit: Quantity Variables
 49   FMASE    DLN     0.71 0.641      0.88   0.570     0.265   154   0.134   136   0.080   138   4.52    4.30
 50 FMBASER    DLN                                                                                                4.47 4.60
                       3.92 0.001      2.48   0.004    0.303     41   0.335    10   0.414     5   3.84    4.05    3.60 5.59
 51      FM1   DLN     1.61 0.145      0.95   0.498    0.275    125   0.149   116   0.080   139
 52   FM1D82                                                                                      4.44    4.37    4.32 5.41
               DLN     3.94 0.001      2.07   0.019    0.304     40   0.278    28   0.262    29   3.93    4.38    3.38 8.04
 53      FM2   DLN     3.03 0.007      1.59   0.092    0.291     65   0.271    30   0.234    41   3.91
 54                                                                                                       4.47    3.82 4.99
      FM2D82   DLN     5.52 0.000      3.09   0.000    0.322     17   0.417     5   0.493     2   3.42    4.15    3.30 4.73
 55       FM3   DLN    0.95   0.461    0.90   0.551    0.267    147   0.163   100   0.103   117   4.28
 56      FM3R   DLN    3.82                                                                               4.60    4.20 5.00
                              0.001    2.42   0.005    0.305     38   0.320    13   0.371    10   3.70    4.47    3.62 4.84
 57       FML   DLN    0.84   0.537    1.43   0.150    0.267    148   0.146   119   0.077   143   4.41
 58      FMLR   DLN    3.36                                                                               4.46    4.34 4.87
                              0.003    2.09   0.018    0.304     39   0.307    16   0.314    16   3.67    4.63    3.45 5.65
 59    FCLN82   DLN    4.66   0.000    2.55   0.003    0.300     49   0.199    61   0.160    73
 60    FCBCUC     N    1.71                                                                       4.43 3.93       4.40 4.14
                              0.119    1.46   0.138    0.273    132   0.173    88   0.146    79   4.43    4.18    4.34 4.71
 61   FCCUCY      N    1.13   0.343    1.06   0.393    0.272    134   0.133   139   0.067   156   4.45    4.48    4.41 4.71
 62   FCLBMCY     N    5.35   0.000    4.04   0.000    0.311     25   0.381     7   0.411     6   3.92
 63    CCBPY                                                                                              3.41    3.89 3.62
                DLN    1.24   0.286    0.94   0.510    0.275    122   0.133   141   0.073   151   4.44    4.50    4.41 4.68
 64   CCI3OM    DLN    1.03   0.407    1.21   0.276    0.268    143   0.137   132   0.129    93   4.43 4.49       4.36 4.90
                                                         Table    2,    continued
 Stock Prices and Volume
  65   FSPCOM   DLN     5.04     0.000    3.07   0.000    0.311          26    0.318     14    0.249     31   3.84 4.19       3.78 4.57
  66    FSPIN   DLN     4.96     0.000    3.06   0.000    0.310          28    0.313     15    0.245     34   3.86 4.20       3.79 4.59
  67     FSDJ   DLN     4.40     0.000    2.54   0.003    0.306          36    0.295     22    0.219     46   3.97 4.14
  68    FSVOL   DLN                                                                                                          3.90 4.51
                        0.23     0.967    1.32   0.207    0.262         160    0.125    156    0.084    134   4.49 4.45      4.48 4.54
 Interest Rates and Spreads
   69     FYFF     D     1.96   0.072    2.11    0.016    0.278        111     0.220    48    0.227     43    4.34 3.96
   70    FYGH3     D                                                                                                         4.17   5.99
                         1.93   0.076    1.68    0.070    0.277        112    0.164     99    0.166     71    4.52    4.03   4.42   5.14
   71    FYGM6     D     2.30   0.034    ].89    0.034    0.277        115    0.175     82    0.180     63    4.54    3.88   4.43
  72     FYGT1    D      2.24   0.039                                                                                               4.95
                                         1.85    0.040    0.276        116    0.187     70    0.190     58
  73                                                                                                          4.52    3.82   4.41   4.85
       FYGT1O     D      1.85   0.089    1.44    0.146    0.273        133    0.182     73    0.191     57    4.49    3.96   4.42   4.59
  74      FYCL    D      1.74   0.111    1.56    0.102    0.275        121    0.188     69    0.203     52    4.44   4.02    4.34
  75      FYCP    D                                                                                                                 5.38
                         2.70   0.014    2.48    0.004    0.283         91    0.245     40
  76                                                                                          0.239     37    4.31    3.80   4.17   5.21
         FYBAC    D      2.35   0.031    2.34    0.007    0.280        105    0.231     42    0.220     45    4.33    3.88   4.19   5.39
  77   FYAAAC     D      3.52   0.002     2.16   0.013    0.294         58    0.236     41    0.245     35    4.31   3.90
  78   FYBMC      D                                                                                                          4.16   5.86
                         3.73   0.001     2.13   0.015    0.298         52    0.280     27    0.271     25    4.15   3.85    3.93   6.36
  79   CLGM3      N     3.24    0.004     1.89 0.034      0.299         50    0.303     18    0.386      7    3.98   4.05
  80   G1OG1      N                                                                                                          3.69   6.11
                        4.25    0.000     2.25 0.010      0.308         32    0.350      8    0.431      4    3.87   3.84    3.70   4.93
  81 G1OGM3      N      2.58    0.019     1.59 0.093      0.292         60    0.282     26    0.350     12    4.05   4.08    3.88
  82  CIGM6      N      0.57    0.754                                                                                               5.2]
                                          1.18 0.300      0.266        152    0.133    138    0.074    150    4.49   4.38    4.46   4.79
  83  G1CM3      N      0.57    0.754    0.87 0.580       0.266        151    0.134    137    0.094    124    4.49   4.37    4.47   4.58
  84 CM6GM3      N      0.85    0.533     1.00 0.448      0.271        137    0.175     81    0.178     64    4.51   3.97    4.48
  85  GM3FF      N      6.44                                                                                                        4.26
                                0.000    3.46 0.000       0.340          9    0.457      3    0.454      3    3.28   4.04    3.20 4.50
  86 CP6GM6      N      8.46    0.000    5.01 0.000       0.366          2    0.525      1    0.385      8    2.95   3.98    2.91 4.19
 87 BACGM3       N      7.29    0.000    4.71 0.000       0.353          5    0.473      2    0.351     11
 88 BAA                                                                                                       3.20   4.04    3.16 4.23
         dO      N     4.46     0.000    2.49 0.004       0.310         29    0.206     58    0.133     90    4.17   4.48    4.05 5.15
 89 BAA AAA      N      6.68    0.000    3.61  0.000      0.333         11    0.192     65    0.114    104    4.27   4.39
 90   AAAGL      N      3.34    0.003                                                                                        4.19 5.09
                                         2.06 0.020       0.301         46    0.206     59    0.102    119
 91   FFCP6      N                                                                                            4.24   4.34    4.21 4.48
                       2.69     0.014    1.63 0.081       0.291         63    0.269     31    0.337     14    4.06   4.17    3.97 5.01
 92   FFBAC      N     2.63     0.017    1.76 0.054       0.291         64    0.297     21    0.372      9
 93                                                                                                           3.89   4.28    3.84 4.60
      FFC1O      N     4.93     0.000    2.58 0.003       0.323         16    0.439      4    0.532      1    3.44   3.91    3.32 4.80
 94     FYFFR    D     1.79     0.101    1.31 0.210       0.282         98    0.139    128    0.085
 95                                                                                                    133    4.55 4.20      4.38 5.85
      FYCM3R     D     2.12     0.051    1.47 0.133      0.283          95    0.125    157    0.066    158    4.47 4.50      4.06 7.55
 96   FYGM6R     D     2.63     0.017    1.72 0.062      0.286          84    0.125    155    0.066
 97                                                                                                    160    4.48 4.48      4.09 7.07
      FYGT1R     D     2.74     0.013    1.82 0.044      0.287          83    0.126    153    0.06/    155    4.51 4.40      4.18 6.62
 98 FYCT1OR      D     2.54     0.021    1.87 0.038      0.284          86    0.130    145    0.075    148    4.40 4.62      4.11 6.29
Aggregate Employment and Labor Force Participation
 99 LPMHUADJ   DLN     0.82 0.553 2.25 0.010       0.268               142    0.144    121    0.128     95    4.44 4.40      4.43 4.49
100   LHOURS   DLN     0.49 0.813 1.03 0.420       0.264               155    0.134    135    0.066    159    4.48 4.41      4.46 4 53
                                                         Table    2,    continued
101      LHEM   DLN     0.64    0.700    1.05    0.403    0.263         158               144    0.076   145
102   LHTNAG    DLN     2.24                                                                                    4.50 4.39      4.48 4.51
                                0.039    1.51    0.119    0.290          67               134    0.074   149    4.46 4.44     4.44 4.60
103     LHCH      D     1.09   0.370     0.93    0.516    0.268                   0.128   151    0.066   157    4.49 4.44
104   LHNAGP    DLN     4.82   0.000    4.02                                                                                  4.47 4.57
                                                 0.000    0.317          20       0.189    68    0.089   128
105                                                                                                             4.26 4.44     4.24 4.55
      LHNAPS    DLN     7.63   0.000    4.59     0.000    0.340           8       0.246    39    0.106   115    4.09 4.31
106   LHNPVX      D     2.91   0.009    2.86                                                                                  4.07 4.44
                                                 0.001    0.296          54       0.164    98    0.084
107                                                                                                      135    4.33 4.50     4.30 4.62
        LHUL    DLN     4.07   0.001    2.55     0.004    0.363              4    0.183    72    0.134    89    4.63   4.37
108 LHULLHEM      N     4.82   0.000    3.39                                                                                  4.59 4.51
                                                 0.000    0.364              3    0.257    35    0.241
109                                                                                                       36    4.374.23      4.24 4.86
       U4MUR      N     3.69   0.002    2.20     0.012    0.292         62        0.175    83    0.146    80    4.394.26
110    LPHRM      N     1.15   0.335                                                                                          4.27 5.28
                                        0.89    0.558     0.283         97                125    0.123   100
111    LPHRD      N                                                                                             4.444.45      4.41 4.63
                        1.78   0.103    1.20    0.283     0.288         76                131    0.126    97   4.45 4.44
112   LPMOSA      N     0.63   0.710                                                                                          4.42 4.59
                                        0.83    0.624     0.278        109        0.198    62   0.215     48
113     U1U5    DLN     2.61                                                                                   4.23 4.42      4.19 4.64
                               0.017    2.09    0.017     0.288                  0.168     96
114   LHU68O                                                                                    0.114    105   4.37    4.37   4.34 4.53
                  N    0.95    0.459    1.12    0.345     0.278        108       0.216     49   0.208     49   4.27    4.18
115     LHEL    DLN    12.72   0.000    6.91    0.000                                                                         4.16 4.95
                                                          0.408                  0.387      6   0.194     55   3.51
116    LHELX      N     4.91                                                                                           4.24   3.47 4.45
                               0.000    2.59    0.003     0.318         19       0.297     20   0.249     33   3.81 4.45      3.71 4.93
117    LUINC    DLN     5.84   0.000    3.90    0.000     0.302         45       0.250     37   0.171     69   4.04 4.39      3.95
Enwlovment by Sector
118    LPNAC   DLN     0.94    0.468    1.48    0.132     0.274        127       0.141    123   0.146     78   4.44 4.43
119     LPMI   DLN     2.92    0.009    2.73                                                                                  4.42 4•55
                                                0.002     0.311                  0.208     57   0.206
120                                                                                                       50   4.36 4.03      4.33 4.20
        LPCC   DLN     0.49    0.819    1.02    0.432     0.268                  0.130    143   0.068    154   4.46 4.48
121     LPEM   DLN     1.96    0.072    1.78    0.050                                                                         4.45 4.56
                                                          0.291         66       0.175     84   0.216     47
122      LPED   DLN    1.23    0.292    1.30                                                                   4.39 4.27      4.36 4.41
                                                0.220     0.282                  0.186     71   0.236     40
123      LPEN   DLN    3.58                                                                                    4.38 4.18      4.35 4.36
                               0.002    1.97    0.027     0.318                  0.181     76
124      LPTW                                                                                   0.109    111   4.31 4.40      4.29 4.50
                DLN    1.02    0.410    1.02    0.433     0.275        120       0.172     90   0.202     53   4.39 4.27
125      LPTR   DLN    1.11    0.354    2.11    0.016                                                                         4.36 4.45
                                                          0.271                  0.122    160   0.072    152   4.50 4.46
126      LPFR   DLN    0.78    0.588    1.07                                                                                  4.48 4.60
                                                0.385     0.269                  0.155    109   0.111    110
127     LPSPA   DLN    0.33    0.921                                                                           4.38 4.45      4.37 4.54
                                        0.42    0.955     0.262        159       0.122    161   0.078
128     LPGOV                                                                                            141   4.49 4.49      4.45 4.73
                DLN    0.72    0.637    1.52    0.115    0.262         161       0.140    127   0.089    129   4.53 4.25
129   LPSPNCA   DLN    0.55    0.774    0.41                                                                                  4.50 4.45
                                                0.961    0.263         156       0.141    124   0.124     99                  4.41 4.59
Froductivity and Real Wages
130   IPROD1   DLN     0.65    0.694    1.59    0.093    0.270         138       0.125    154   0.090    127
131       PIll DLN                                                                                             4.50 4.42      4.49 4.53
                       1.44    0.197    2.36    0.007    0.276         117       0.215     50   0.265     26   4.37 3.94
132     PLM82  DLN     1.71    0.118    1.15    0.319                                                                         4.33 4.18
                                                         0.283          93       0.157    108   0.096    123
133      LEHM                                                                                                  4.28 4.66      4.21 5.00
               DLN     2.34    0.032    2.00    0.024    0.294          56       0.224     46   0.172     67   4.20 4.27      4.17 4.44
134   LEHM82   DLN     1.80    0.099    2.44    0.005    0.276                   0.157    107   0.191     56   4.39 4.42
135   RPWGMS     N     2.21 0.042       2.03 0.021                                                                            4.34 4.71
                                                         0.277         113       0.224     45   0.237    38    4.08 4.53      4.01 4.86
136   RPWGMDS     N    3.04 0.007       2.36 0.006
                                                              Table 2, continued

 Prices
  137   PUNEW       DLN        3.47    0.002    2.58 0.003     0.302    43   0.260    33   0.313     17   4.19 3.96     4.16
  138  PZUNEW       DLN        2.47                                                                                               4.12
                                       0.024    2.06 0.019     0.295    55   0.252    36   0.300     21   4.18 4.05
  139       PW                                                                                                          4.16      4.18
                    DLN       2.51     0.022    1.74 0.057     0.290    69   0.247    38   0.258     30   4.07   4.35   4.04      4.52
  140 PW1200        DLN        1.61    0.143    1.54 0.108     0.275   126   0.152   113   0.181     62   4.39   4.47   4.34
 141  PW1300        DLN       2. 14    0.049                                                                                      4.81
                                               1.24   0.254    0.290    68   0.212    54   0.187     59   4.25   4.25
 142    PWCMP       DLN                                                                                                 4.21      4.48
                              1.78    0.103    1.38 0.174      0.277   114   0.128   149   0.100    121   4.49   4.43   4.47      4.53
 143     PWFC       DLN       1.48    0.186    1.12 0.347      0.284    89   0.215    51   0.236     39   4.23   4.28
 144     PWFP       DLN                                                                                                 4.21      4.39
                              3.08    0.006    2.09   0.018    0.297    53   0.285    24   0.221     44   4.01   4.14   3 .98     4.33
 145  PWFUEL        DLN       0.91    0.489    2.24   0.010    0.273   131   0.230    43   0.231     42   4.07   4.50
 146     PWIC      DLN                                                                                                  3.88      5.74
                              2.10    0.05 3   1.66   0.075    0.284    87   0.284    25   0.303     19     .
                                                                                                          3 90 4.37     3.   84   4.72
 147    PWIMS      DLN        2.54    0.020           0.091
                                               1.60            0.292    61   0.302    19   0.301     20   3.82 4.38     3. 78
 148  PWIMSM       DLN        4.68                                                                                                4.62
                                      0.000    2.58   0.003    0.316    21   0.332    11   0.340     13
 149 PSMC99A       DLN                                                                                    3.69 4.39     3.64      4.62
                              2.26    0.038    2.84   0.001    0.290    71   0.169    93   0.184     60   4.26 4.61     4.19      4.98
 150  PSCCOM       DLN        2.05    0.058    2.11   0.016    0.280   106   0.149   115   0.148     76   4.38 4.51     4.33      4.79
                          -
Exchange Rates and Fore'n Trd
                          -.  ..
151   EXRWT1   DLN    2.06 0.058               1.14   0.328    0.282    99   0.194    64   0.130     92   4.37 4.13     4.35 4.33
152      EXRWT2    DLN        1.67    0.127    1.10   0.361    0.275   124   0.174    86   0.112
153                                                                                                 109   4.44 4.15     4.42 4.27
         EXNw'rl   DLN        1.43    0.203    0.99   0.456    0.274   128   0.176    80   0.112    108   4.43 4.15
154      EXNWT2    DLN        1.20    0.307                                                                             4.41 4.28
                                               1.00   0.445    0.270   139   0.162   102   0.101
155       EXVUS                                                                                     120   4.46 4.20     4.45      4.31
                   DLN        0.80    0.575    0.70   0.755    0.305    37   0.181    75   0.135     87   4.67   4.32   4.65
156        IMY1    DLN                                                                                                            4.40
                              1.37    0.224    1.50   0.122    0.280   104   0.161   106
157        EXY1                                                                            0.113    106   4.34   4.50   4.31      4.67
                   DLN        2.04    0.060    1.42   0.154    0.284    88   0.155   110   0.112    107   4.3]   4.47   4.34
158                                                                                                                                .
                                                                                                                                  4 64
            TB1      D        0.56    0.764    0.97   0.474    0.269   140   0.123   158   0.06 3   161   4.50   4.46   4.47 4.68
Misc.:    Government and
159        FD DLN
                              oh
                              2.14 0.050       1.09   0.368    0.342     7   0.268    32   0.262     27   4.48 4.22
160       FBDY   DLN                                                                                                    4.30 5.12
                              2.68    0.016    1.47   0.136    0.352     6   0.293    23
161                                                                                        0.306     18   4.41   4.13   4.08 6.05
          FBYS       N        1.30    0.257    1.23   0.265   0.332     13   0.275    29   0.272     24   4.88   3.89   4.80 4.23
162       FAIL     DL.N       2.21    0.042    1.85   0.040   0.288     78   0.137   133   0.083    136   4.43   4.49   4.41 4.61
163         INC    DLN        1.49    0.181    1.46   0.137   0.278    110   0.163   101   0.075    147   4.30   4.56   4.27 4.74
Notes:  The first two columns
                               respectively report the F-statistic and p-value of the test of the
none of the six lags of the indicated series enter                                                  hypothesis that
                                                    into a regression of the growth of the Id on 12
growth and 6 lags of the trial series. The next                                                        lags of Id
series are used.                                  tw  columns report these statistics, when 12
                   The next six columns report the R of the k-month ahead                        lags of the trial
                                                                            forecast produced by regressing the k-
             of ICI on 6 lags each of
month2growth
the R (k) statistic is the rank of the th
                                           trial variable and the one-month growth     the ICI. The "rank" following
column.
                                        R (k) for that row variable                            f
                                                                    among all the R (k) statistics reported in that
         The final four columns report root mean
                                                  square errors (RMSE's) for forecasts computed from a
future 6-month Id growth on 6
                                lags each of ICI growth and the transformed variable. The                regression of
estimated for the full sample, then reestimated for                                         regressions were
                                                     the subsample through 79:9, to produce the two sets of RMSE's
                                                                     Table 3
                                    Bivariate Predictive Content for the Index of Industrial Production
                                                                                                        (I?)



                                                                                                               Subsample Stability:    RMSE's
                                                                                                                  -             -
 Series              Trans.                                                                    2
                                                                                                                      88:12         79:9
                                   F6     p6      F12    p12    R2(1)   rank   R2(6) rank     R    (12) rank    -79:9 79:10- -79:9 79:10-
 Base Model                      0.00    0.000   0.00   0.000                                 0.038             6.79 6.53     6.76 6.69
(hit-nut-   su-d              I1u-114.-4.-..
   3           IPC      DLN      1.08    0.374   2.46   0.004   0.241    46    0.132    98   0.200      49      6.68   6.17
   4         IPCN       DLN                                                                                                   6.63 6.45
                                 2.25    0.038   1.79   0.050   0.229    71    0.113   119   0.104      98      6.67   6.44   6.63 6.67
   5         IPCD       DLN      0.70    0.654   2.05   0.020   0.221    97    0.110   125   0.132      79      6.71   6.36
   6          IPD       DLN      2.85    0.010                                                                                6.68 6.58
                                                 2.19   0.012   0.253    31    0.124   109   0.059     136      6.49   6.71   6.44    6.94
   7          IPN       DLN      4.23    0.000   2.58   0.003   0.267    17    0.195    48   0.104      97      6.31   6.23
   8        IPMIN       DLN                                                                                                   6.27    6.45
                                 0.81    0.563   1.08   0.380   0.221          0.129   103   0.110      91      6.70 6.15     6.64    6.49
   9         IPUT       DLN      0.95    0.462   1.20   0.279   0.207   145    0.085   161   0.044     154      6.79
 10                                                                                                                    6.51   6.76    6.68
              IPE       DLN      0.67    0.674   0.76   0.687   0.204   152    0.096   145   0.090     109      6.76   6.44   6.72    6.68
 11         IPMFC      DLN       1.34    0.239   1.67   0.073   0.213   125    0.126   105   0.072     126      6.75
 12           1PM                                                                                                      6.08   6.68    6.46
                       DLN       0.72    0.633   1.32   0.205   0.245    41    0.127   104   0.096     103      6.60   6.42   6.57 6.59
 13           IPI      DLN       3.90    0.001   2.65   0.002   0.252          0.196    47   0.164      58      6.25 6.36
 14           IPF      DLN       0.41    0.873                                                                                6.18 6.73
                                                 1.11   0.355   0.233    61    0.097   144   0.053     145      6.73 6.49     6.70 6.66
 15           IPX         D      1.23    0.294   0.76   0.690   0.265          0.171    65   0.174      55      6.84 6.20     6.70 6.83
 16     IPXDCA            D      1.39    0.218   1.97   0.028   0.279    13    0.160    70   0.110      92      6.82 6.34
 17     IPXMCA                                                                                                                6.74 6.62
                          D      0.66    0.680   1.21   0.273   0.203   153    0.112   121   0.064     132      6.72 6.32     6.65 6.79
ConsuniDttofl.       Sales
 18      CMC82         DL.N      3.09    0.006   2.75   0.001   0.241    47    0.188    55   0.219     38      6.17 6.63
 19     GMCD82         DLN                                                                                                    6.11 6.93
                                 1.43    0.204   1.37   0.178   0.218   112    0.129   102   0.117     88      6.51 6.59      6.45 6.96
 20       CMPY         DU        2.51   0.022    1.69   0.068   0.227    79    0.140    87   0.154     71      6.64 6.16
 21     GMPY82         DLN                                                                                                    6.59 6.44
                                 1.38   0.222    2.27   0.009   0.213          0.108   127   0.078    119      6.57 6.72      6.49 7.15
 22     CMYXP8         DLN       0.78   0.587    1.88   0.036           127    0.109   126   0.072    124      6.53 6.79
 23     CMWS82         DLN                                                                                                    6.41 7.49
                                 0.52   0.795    0.94   0.506   0.204   149    0.115   116   0.098    101      6.63 6.49      6.55 7.04
 24       MT82         DLN       2.31   0.034    1.97   0.027   0.218   110    0.154    75   0.069    128      6.36 6.63
 25       MSM8         DUJ                                                                                                    6.29 7.04
                                 0.42   0.866    1.10   0.359   0.256    26    0.152    78   0.085    115      6.76 6.51      6.62 7.07
 26        WT8         DLN       1.34   0.242    1.83   0.044   0.270    16    0.161    69   0.133     78      6.74 6.45
 27        RT8         DLN                                                                                                    6.69 6.67
                                 2.20   0.044    1.97   0.028             9    0.218    39   0.254     25      6.45 6.32      6.37 6.61
 28      RTR82         DLN       2.43   0.026    1.94   0.030   0.229    73    0.158    71   0.163     61      6.45 6.38
 29      RCARD         DLN                                                                                                    6.41 6.61
                                 0.60   0.732    1.24   0.253   0.214   118    0.100   139   0.093    107      6.70 6.53      6.66 6.74
 30     RCARTA         DLN       0.46   0.835
                                                              Table 3, continued

 knyntorjes. Orders, and Performance
  31     MPCON8     DLN       4.03    0.001     2.41 0.005     0.242     44    0.112
 32      MSOND8                                                                         122    0.053   147     6.67 6.45      6.64   6.62
                    DLN       4.24    0.000     3.08 0.000     0.248     38    0.130    101    0.056   141
 33      MOCM82     DLN                                                                                        6.58 6.44      6.55   6.60
                              3.87    0.001     3.34 0.000     0.233     65    0.178     60
 34         M082    DL.N                                                                       0.136     77    6.28   6.52    6.22   6.83
                              4.84 0.000        4.50 0.000     0.254     29    0.205
 35       MDO82                                                                          44    0.130    80     6.13   6.52    6.08   6.77
                    DLN       4.38    0.000     3.76 0.000     0.245
 36                                                                      39    0.157     73    0.099   100     6.45   6.40
          MN082     DLN       1.59    0.149                                                                                   6.41   6.61
                                                1.83 0.043     0.221     99    0.189
 37        MU82                                                                          54    0.091   108     6.12   6.72    6.07   6.97
                    DLN       2.81    0.011     1.69 0.068
 38                                                            0.242     42    0.142     86    0.111    90     6.50
          MDU82     DLN       2.83    0.011                                                                           6.48    6.46   6.69
                                                1.94 0.029     0.239     49    0.136
 39       MNU82                                                                          93    0.124    83     6.56   6.39    6.53
                    DLN       7.08    0.000    4.87 0.000                                                                            6.58
 40                                                            0.287     10    0.303     10    0.154    70     5.40
         IVMT82     DLN       2.62    0.017                                                                           6.78    5.24   7.48
                                               1.74 0.058      0.228     77    0.152
 41      IVM1D8       N                                                                  79    0.140    76     6.43 6.49      6.30
                              1.55    0.160    1.05 0.406                                                                            7.37
 42                                                            0.227     78    0.194     49    0.160    64
         IVM2D8          N    1.25    0.282                                                                   6.17 6.55       6.01   7.53
                                               1.35 0.192      0.216    115    0.122
 43      IVM3D8          N                                                              112    0.108    94    6.60 6.49       6.55   6.78
                              2.50    0.023    1.78 0.051      0.231
 44                                                                      66    0.147     84    0.072   125
          1VT82          N    3.70    0.001                                                                   6.52 6.36       6.40   7.23
                                               2.66 0.002      0.241     48    0.205     43    0.142
 45     VENDOR       N        6.16                                                                      74    6.07 6.64       5.91   7.54
                                      0.000    4.39 0.000      0.273     14   0.248      28    0.293    17    5.90 6.47       5.78   7.06
Housing and Construçj
 46     HSBP    N   5.83             0.000    3.81    0.000   0.260
 47                                                                      23   0.318      8    0.315     14
        HSFR    N   3.64             0.002    2.69                                                            5.96 5.38      5.90 5.73
                                                      0.002   0.237      56   0.286     16    0.248
 48   CONDO9  DLN                                                                                       27    6.09 5.50      6.06 5.73
                    1.79             0.100    1.11    0.355   0.224      91   0.113    118    0.055    143    6.64 6.51      6.62 6.64
Money and Credit; Quantity Vartables
49      F?'thASE   DL.N      1.10    0.361     0.88   0.573   0.204     151   0.096
50     FMBASER                                                                         147    0.050    148     6.80 6.34     6.73 6.77
                   DLN       3.71    0.001     2.23   0.011   0.233
51                                                                       62   0.288     15    0.365      7
             FM1   DLN       2.07    0.057                                                                     5.81 6.15     5.42 8.64
                                               1.22   0.268   0.212     129   0.111
 52     FM1D82     DLN                                                                 124    0.054    144    6.69 6.41       6.53   7.84
                             3.95    0.001     2.03   0.021   0.238      54   0.239
 53          FM2                                                                       -32    0.226     35    5.92 6.54
                   DLN       3.79    0.001     2.18   0.012                                                                   5.06   12.27
 54                                                           0.233      64   0.243     30    0.216     39
        FM2D82     DLN       5.35    0.000                                                                    5.88 6.57       5.73   7.34
                                              2.95    0.001   0.260      22   0.390
 55          FM3                                                                         5    0.480      2    5.04 6.35      4.79
                   DLN       1.61    0.144    1.57    0.100                                                                          7.52
 56                                                           0.208    139    0.130    100    0.080    116
          FM3R     DLN       3.55    0.002    2.09                                                            6.44 6.75      6.33    7.35
                                                      0.017   0.239      51   0.291     14    0.348      9
57         FML     DLN                                                                                        5.51 6.70      5.34    7.48
                             1.29    0.260    1.75    0.055   0.208    143
58                                                                            0.107    129    0.056    140    6.64 6.58
          FMIJ     Dj        3.24    0.004    1.90                                                                           6.54    7.18
                                                      0.033   0.239      50   0.268     21
59      FCLN82     DLN                                                                        0.280     23    5.50 6.99      5.08    8.92
                             4,49    0.000    2.51    0.004   0.237      57
60      FCBCUC       N                                                        0.173     62    0.150     /2    6.66 5.66      6.60    6.05
                             3.23    0.004    2.21    0.011
61                                                            0.226      85   0.150     81    0.140     75
       FCBCLJCY      N       1.44    0.199                                                                    6.60 6.12      6.45    7.04
                                              1.61    0.088   0.208    140    0.102
62     FCLBMCY                                                                         132    0.046    152    6.67 6.57      6.58    7.09
                     N       5.30    0.000    3.83    0.000
63                                                            0.255     27    0.360      6    0.416      4
        CCBPY      DLN       1.10    0.361                                                                    5.82 5.08      5.75    5.56
                                              0.80    0.653   0.207    144    0.096
64     CCI3OM                                                                          146    0.041    158    6.67 6.64      6.60
                   DLN       1.54    0.163    1.45    0.143                                                                          7.04
                                                              0.209    137    0.105    131    0.113     89    6.65 6.59      6.56    7.15
                                                        Table 3, continued

Stock Prices and VoJ,
 65   FSPCOM   DLN    5.12      0.000    3.15   0.000    0.251     35    0.302     12       0.238     29    5.76 6.05     5.65
 66    FSPIN   DLN              0.000                                                                                             6.69
                      5.11               3.17   0.000    0.252     34    0.298     13       0.234     33    5.79 6.06     5,67   6.70
 67     FSDJ   DLN   4.75       0.000    2.69   0.002    0.251     36    0.283     17       0.208     45
 68    FSVOL   DLN                                                                                          5.90 6.00     5.79   6.67
                     0.37       0.900    2.05   0.020    0.198    158    0.094    149       0.065    130    6.74 6.51     6.71   6,69
Interest Rates and Soreads
 69     FYFF     0     2.14     0.049    2.15   0.014    0.212   131     0.179    58        0.208    44     6.50 5.99
 70      FYCM3       0   2.27   0.037    1.79
                                                                                                                          6.19 9.62
                                                0.049    0.214   119     0.124   107        0.146    73
 71      FYGM6       0   2.78   0.012
                                                                                                            6.77 6.03     6.62 7.62
                                         2.05   0.020    0.215   116     0.138    91        0.163    60     6.79 5.81     6.63 1.31
 72      FYCT1       0   3.19   0.005    2.22   0.011    0.221    98    0.153     77       0.176     54     6.75 5.69
 73     FYGTIO       D   2.82   0.011    1.77
                                                                                                                          6.58 7.25
                                                0.053    0.218   106    0.149     82       0.173     56
 74       FYCL                                                                                              6.73 5.81     6.61 6,96
                     D   2.59   0.018    1.76   0.053    0,217   113    0.156     74       0.187     51     6.67 5.86     6.50 8.14
 75       FYCP       0   3.72   0.001    2.97   0.001    0.226    86    0.209     41       0.224     37    6.43 5.75      6.18 8.16
 76      FYBAC       D   3.07   0.006    2.85   0.001    0.222    93    0.193     51       0.204     47    6.47 5.89      6.21 8.49
 77     FYAAAC       0   4.50   0.000    2.54   0.003    0.239    52    0.204     45       0.226     36    6.48 5.69
 78     FYBAAC       D   4.68   0.000                                                                                     6.21 9.06
                                         2.57   0.003    0.245    60              27
                                                                        0,251              0,249     26    6.22 5.69      5.79 10.19
 79     CL CM3       N   3.06   0.006    1.69   0.069    0.233    63    0.255     26       0.335     10    5.99 6,18
 80     Gb Cl        N   4.57 0.000      2.33 0.007                                                                      5,52 9.57
                                                         0.249    37    0.302     11       0.377      5    5.82 5,93
 81    GlO CM3       N   2.35   0.03].   1.37   0.178    0.225                                                           5,52 7,77
                                                                  88    0.236     34       0.303     15    6.10 6.18
 82     G1GM6        N   0.85   0.534    1.24   0.255
                                                                                                                         5.82 8.13
                                                         0.209   135    0.102    134       0.053    146    6.77 6.33
 83     C1CM3        N                                                                                                   6.70 7.07
                         0.37   0.897    0.76   0.692    0.199 157      0.100    138       0.072    123    6.77 6.36     6.71 6.84
 84    CM6GII3       N   0.40   0.879    0.81   0.639    0.201   156    0.140     88       0.163     62    6.79 5.78     6.73
 85     CM3 FF       N   5.97   0.000    3.44                                                                                    6.38
                                                0.000    0.280    12    0.432          3   0.436      3    4.82 6.20     4.64    7.08
 86    CP6 GM6       N   9.24   0.000    5.75   0.000    0.316     3    0.491          1   0.352      8    4.43 6.10
 87    BACCM3        N                                                                                                   4.32    6.53
                         7.28   0.000    5.32   0.000    0.295     8    0.450      2       0.320     13    4.69 6.21     4.57    6.70
 88    BAA G10       N   6.05   0.000    3.15   0.000    0.260    21    0.185     57       0.108     93    6.22 6.56
 89    BAA AAA       N   7.74                                                                                            6.04    7.55
                                0.000    6.22 0.000      0.281    11    0.167     67       0.090    110    6.35
 90    AAA CL        N   3.43   0,003    2.02 0.022                                                               6.50   6.20    7,65
                                                        0.237     58    0.178     59       0.074 122       6.35   6.35   6.31    6.62
 91     FFCP6        N   2.27   0.037    1.56 0.103     0.227     81    0.240     31       0.329 11        6.06   6.22   5.89    7.70
 92     FFBAC        N   2.40   0.028    1,80 0,047     0.228     76    0.270     19       0.368      6    5.83   6.34   5.73    6.91
 93     FFC1O        N   4.47   0.000    2.31 0.008               24
                                                        0.259           0.393      4       0.488      1    5,14 6.12     4.86 7.98
 94      FYFFR       0   2.09   0.054    1.35 0.188     0.219    104    0.099    140       0.056    142    6.81 6.28     6.55 8.76
 95     FYGM3R       0   2.37   0.029    1.52   0.116   0.222     96    0.092    150       0.042    157    6.68 6.67     6.11 10.95
 96     FYCN6R       0   2.80 0.012      1.68 0.069     0,223     92    0.090 154          0.042    156    6.70 6.64     6.16 10.29
 97     FYCT1R       D   3.28 0.004      1.91 0.033     0.229     72    0.091    153       0.042    155    6.76 6.51     6.28 9.71
 98    FYCT1OR       0   3.21 0.005      1,85 0.039     0.228     75    0.099    141       0.058    138    6.58 6.82     6.14 9.35
AAregate EmDboyaent and Labor Force Participptio
 99   LPNIIUADJ   DIll   1.11 0.358      2,46 0.004     0.213    121    0.091    152       0.090 112       6.77 6.47     6.74 6.66
100     LHOURS    DLII   0.25 0.958      0.90 0.546     0.195    161    0.089    156
lob               DLN    1.45 0.195                                                        0.041 159       6.77 6.51     6.73 6.72
                                         1.90 0.034     0.203    154    0.094    148       0 059 135       6.78 6.41     6.73 6.66
                                                               Table    3,    continued

                                                                                        0.098   143    0.049   150   6.73 6.48     6.69   6.71
  103       LHCH         D    0.68    0.663    0.71    0.746    0.197         160       0.085   160    0.040   160   6.78 6.53     6.74
  104   LHNAGP      DLN                                                                                                                   6.77
                              4.75    0.000    3.80    0.000    0.253          32       0.161    68    0,060   134   6.36 6.56     6.31   6.80
  105   LHNAPS      DLN       6.68    0.000    3.78    0.000    0.271          15       0.222    36    0.079   118   6.09 6.38
 106    LHNPVX                                                                                                                     6.05   6.62
                         D    3.17    0.005    2.79    0.001    0.236          59       0.139    90    0.058   137   6.45 6,62     6.41   6.84
 107      LHUL      DL.N      3.01    0,008    1.88    0.037    0.310              5    0.157    72    0.107    95   6.81
 108 LHULLiIEM                                                                                                            6.38     6.75   6.65
                         N    4.32    0.000            0.001    0.319          2        0.220    37   0.237     31   6.59 6.09     6.43   6.97
 109     LHMUR           N    4.02    0.001            0.012    0.229         70       0.136     94   0.127     82   6.61
 110     LPHRJ4                                                                                                           6.28     6.39   8.13
                         N    1.16    0.329    1.32    0.206    0.220        103       0.117    115   0.118     87   6.64 6.45     6.59   6.74
 ill     LPHRD           N    1.46    0.192            0.155    0.224         90       0.111    123   0.118     86
 112   LPMOSA        N                                                                                               6.68 6.43     6.64   6.69
                              1.30   0.257             0.117    0.227         83       0.197     46   0.233     34   6.21 6.43     6.14   6.82
 113      LHU5     DLN        1.47 0.188      1.47 0.134
 114
                                                                0.210 133              0.137     92   0,094    105   6.56   6.40   6.51   6.67
       LHU68O        N        1.14 0.339      1.55 0.106
 115
                                                                0.217 114              0.193     50   0.205     46   6,37   6.12   6.15   7.70
           LHEL    DLN       13.06   0.000            0.000     0.347          1       0.329      7   0.154     69   5.49   6.29   5.42   6.59
 116      LIIELX     N       4.94 0.000       2.66 0.002        0.257         25       0.268     20   0.237     30   5.72   6.58   5.55   7.41
117       LUINC    DLN        7.29   0.000    4.76 0.000        0.255         28       0.237     33   0.157     67   6.00   6.38   5.87
ipioynient by Sector
118    LPNAG   DL.N          0.63    0.709            0.039     0.213        123       0.102    133   0.129
119        LPMI                                                                                                 81   6.72   6.45   6.69   6.66
                   DLN       2.28    0.036            0.009     0.242         45       0.172     64   0.187     52   6.60   5.83   6.54   6.17
120        LPCC    DLN       1.05    0.395    1.97    0.026     0.209        136       0.100    137   0.047
121        LPEH                                                                                                151   6.68   6.58   6.64   6.7]
                   DLN       1.19    0.310            0.073     0.227         80       0.123    110   0.182     53   6.70   6.23   6.65
122        LPED    DLN       0.45    0.843    1.13                                                                                        6.54
                                                      0.335     0.220        102       0.132     97   0.210     41   6.72   6.08   6.65
123        LPEN    DLN       2.68                                                                                                         6.44
                                     0.015    1.66    0.075     0.254         30       0.151
124                                                                                              80   0.088    113   6.46   6.45   6.43   6.65
           LPTW    DLN       1.28    0.268    1.62    0.086     0.227         82       0.146     85   0.197     50
125        LPTR    DLN                                                                                               6,58   6.23   6.53   6.53
                             1,51    0.174    1.81    0.045     0.212        130       0.087    159   0.044    153   6.77   6.53   6.73   6.76
126        LPFR    DLN       1.31    0.254    1.41    0.162     0.206        146       0.124    108   0.101     99   6.58
127       LPSPA    DLN                                                                                                      6.52   6.55   6.69
                             0.69    0.657    0.63    0.817     0.203        155
128                                                                                    0.089    155   0.068    129   6.73   6.58   6.68   6.94
          LPGOV    DLN       0.64    0.701    1.73    0.u60     0.197        159       0.101    135   0.060    133   6.80
129     LPSPNCA                                                                                                             6.27   6.75   6.62
                             1,17 0.321       0.79    0.665    0.205         147       0.108    128   0.121     84   6.68   6.49   6.63   6.77
rPuctivity and Real Wages
130     IPROD1     DLN               0.358
                             1.11             2.46    0.004    0.213         120       0.091    151
131                                                                                                   0.090    111   6.77   6.47   6.74   6.66
           P111    DLN       1.79    0.100    2.62    0.002    0.212         128       0.190     52   0.261     24   6.49
132      PLM82     DLN                                                                                                      5.85   6.43   6.22
                             1.80    0.098    1.53    0.112    0.215         11/       0.125    106
133                                                                                                   0.080    117   6.41   6.88   6.28   7.53
          LEUN     DLN       1.95    0.073    1.93    0.030    0.231          68       0.206     42   0.157     66   6.20   6.35   6.15   6.63
134     LE11M82    DLN       1.16    0.326    2.03    0.021    0.205         148       0.i1     113   0.161     63
135     RPWGMS                                                                                                       6.60   6.56   6.52   6.97
                    N        2.91    0.009    2.55    0.003    0.221         101       0.186     56   0.214     40   6.13   6.74   6.02
136    RPWCMDS                                                                                                                            7.35
                                                           Table 3, continued

Prices
137     PUNEW      DLN       3.36   0.003   2.50   0.004    0.239    53   0.225    35    0.294    16    6.22   6.05   6.17
138    PZUNEW      DLN       2.33   0.032   1.74   0.057    0.230    69   0.219    38    0.282    22    6.22   6.13   6.16
139        PW      DLN       3.09   0.006   1.99   0.025    0.229    74   0.210    40    0.236    32    6.10   6.52   6.01
140    PW1200      DLN       2.62   0.017   2.08   0.018    0.225    89   0.115   117    0.156    68    6.62   6.53   6.54
141    PW1300      DLN       1.71   0.119   1.08   0.376    0.222    94   0.173    63    0.164    57    6.35   6.42   6.26
142     PWCMP      DLN       1.91   0.078   1.50   0.124    0.213   122   0.089   157    0.069   127    6.76   6.51   6./3   6.72
143      PWFC      DLN       1.48   0.183   1.22   0.267    0.218   109   0.177    61    0.209    43    6.32   6.43   6.26   6.77
144      PWFP      DLN       3.72   0.001   2.47   0.004    0.242    43   0.263    22    0.209    42    5.91   6.25   5.85   6.59
145    PWFUEL      DLN       0.76   0.600   1.81   0.046    0.208   142   0.189    53    0.200    48    6.13   6.69   5.81   8.87
146      PWIC      DLN       3.49   0.002   2.63   0.002    0.237    55   0.255    25    0.282    21    5.79   6.61   5.64
147     PWIMS      DU        3.10   0.006   1.91   0.032    0.235    60   0.273    18    0.285    19    5.70   6.57   5.59   7.10
148    PWIMSM      DU        5.83   0.000   3.04   0.001    0.266    18   0.305     9    0.326    12    5.49   6.56   5.38
149 PSMC99A        DLN       2.64   0.016   3.03   0.001    0.231    67   0.140    89    0.160    65    6.40   6.70   6.31
150    PSCCOM      DL.N      2.68   0.015   2.37   0.006    0.222    95   0.107   130    0.119    85    6.62   6.62   6.53   7.12

Exchange Rates and Foreign Trade
151   EXRWT1   DLN     1.88 0.083           1.35   0.191    0.218   108   0.153    76    0.095   104    6.60   6.10   6.55
152   EXRWT2   DLN     1.52 0.171           1.32   0.203    0.211   132   0.131    99    0.075   121    6.69   6.16   6.65   6.49
153   EXNWT1   DLN     1.35 0.233           1.34   0.195    0.210   134   0.133    95    0.077   120    6.69   6.13   6.65
154   EXNWT2   DLN     1.03 0.407           1.27   0.232    0.204   150   0.117   114    0.065   131    6.73   6.23   6.69   6.51
155    EXVUS   DLN     0.66 0.679           0.88   0.564    0.263    20   0.149    83    0.105    96    6.92   6.31   6.88   6.53
156     IMY1   DLN     1.15 0.335           1.57   0.098    0.218   107   0.122   111    0.094   106    6.56   6.59   6.51   6.86
157     EXY1   DLN     1.20 0.307           0.93   0.515    0.209   138   0.113   120    0.086   114    6.60   6.60   6.54   6.92
158      TB1     D     0.83 0.544           1.32   0.203    0.208   141   0.088   158    0.039   161    6.76   6.52   6.71   6.88

Misc.:   Government and other
159       FBD   D1.N    2.07 0.058          1.16   0.313    0.298     6   0.246    29    0.245    28    6.56   6.19   6.25 7.74
160      FBDY   DLN     3.01 0.008          1.80   0.050    0.313     4   0.259    24    0.283    20    6.53   6.10   6.01
161      FRYS        N       1.69   0.124   1.40   0.167    0.295     7   0.262    23    0.288    18    7.15   5.61   7.03 6.14
162      FAIL     DL.N       1.84   0.092   1.65   0.077    0.218   111   0.101   136    0.056   139    6.68   6.55   6.65
163       INC     DLN        2.26   0.038   1.91   0.033    0.226    84   0.133    96    0.049   149    6.47   6.64   6.42 6.92

Standard. Rank Correlations between columns in Tables 2 and 3
Standard Correlation 0.95     0.78   0.92   0.77   0.95   0.99            0.99    0.99   0.95    0.99   0.98
Rank Correlation        0.91  0.91   0.84   0.84   0.93   0.98            0.99    0.97   0.95    0.98   0.94

Notes:  The     statistics
                       are identical to the statisitics reported In Table 2 with Id
                                                                                      repaced everywhere by IP.
See the notes to Table 2 for detailed description.   The final two rows provide the correlation and rank
correlation of the respective colwnns in Tables 2 and 3.
                                                              Table 4

 Marginal Predictive Content for 1-month ICI growth, given lagged M2 growth, inflation, and the 90 day T-Bill rate


                                                                                                         - 88:12       - 79:9
 Series          Trans.                       F                     rank
                               F      p                     R2(l)           R2(6) rank    R2(12) rank   -79:9 79:10- -79:9 79:10-

 Base Model                  0.00    0.000   3.76   0.001   0.350    -      0.425    -             -
                                                                                          0.507         3.38   4.16   3.17 5.21

Output and   C'ii-r       Util i zati on
  3        IPC     DLN       2.840.010       4.10   0.001   0.383    27     0.428   151   0.521    58   3.33   4.22   3.04 5.55
  4       IPCN     DLN       2.59    0.018   3.72   0.001   0,380    34     0.437    90   0.531    28   3.38   4.03   3.12 5.40
  5     IPCD       DLN       2.51    0.022   4.83   0.000   0.379    41     0.440    77   0.510   136   3.26   4.23        5.30
  6      IPD       DLN       2.38    0.029   3.77   0.001   0.378    42     0.442    73   0.509   144   3.27   4.20        5.23
  7      IPN       DLN       3.12    0.006   2.66   0.015   0.386    23     0.457    47   0.515    88   3.30          3.10 5.03
  8    IPMIN       DLN       0.84    0.542   3.32   0.003   0.360   120     0.426   158   0.509   149                 3.17 5.26
  9     IPUT       DLN       1.34    0.238   3.72   0.001   0.366    84     0.427   152   0.516    76   3.38   4.13   3.06 5.99
 10      IPE       DLN       2.09    0.054   4.20   0.000   0.374    52     0.455    50   0.516    81   3.35   3.94        5.02
 11    IPMFG       DLN       0.97    0.449   3.47   0.002   0.362   104     0.430   128   0.509   150   3.35   4.16
 12      1PM       DLN       2.81    0.011   3.76   0.001   0.382    33     0.438    84   0.515    86   3.33          3.13 5.14
 13      IP1       DLN       1.28    0.267   2.75   0.013   0.365    92     0.43]    91   0.525    42   3.37   4.07   3.16 5.17
 14       1FF      DLN       1.64    0.136   3.42   0.003   0.369    72     0.431   124   0.520    67   3.40               5.56
 15      IPX         D       0.94    0.469   2.12   0.052   0.407    11     0.457    48   0.521    61   3.46   3.98        5.33
 16   IPXDCA         D       1.10    0.365   2.61   0.018   0.410       9   0.463    33   0.511   112   3.35               5.09
 17   IPXMCA         0       0.89    0.504   3.48   0.002   0.361   112     0.429   136   0.508   155   3.37   4.14   3.15 5.32

Consumption. Sales and Income
 18     CMC82  DLN     0,41 0.873            2.97   0.008   0.355   148     0.429   137   0.526    39   3.34   4.18        5.38
 19   CMCD82   DLN     0.20 0.977            3.47   0.002   0.352   157     0.435   102   0.508   158   3.36   4.11
 20      CMPY  DLN     0.65 0.687            3.64   0.002   0.358   139     0.428   142   0.512   107   3.33   4.22   3.02 5.63
 21   GMPY82   DLN     0.83 0.549            3.85   0.001   0.360   123     0.431   120   0.514    91   3.35               5.27
 22   CMYXP8   DLN     0,52 0.795            3.69   0.001   0.356   145     0.433   106   0.515    87   3.33   4.18        5.31
 23   GMWS82   DLN     0.68 0.665            3.92   0.001   0.358   138     0.437    89   0.526    38   3.34   4.12        5.19
 24      MT82  DLN     0.86 0.522            3.5]   0.002   0.360   121     0.427   153   0.512   104   3.37
 25      MSM8  DLN     1.49 0.183            2.87   0.010   0.416       7   0.469    26   0.513    96   3.43   3.92        5.08
 26       WT8  DLN     0.60 0.733            2.55   0.021   0.402    13     0.472    24   0.515    89                 3.03 5.16
 27       RT8  DLN     1.04 0.402            2.15   0.049   0.409    10     0.456    49   0.516    79   3,47               5.28
 28    RTR82   DLN     0.71 0.642            3.05   0.006   0.359   133     0.428   148   0.513    98   3.37               5.22
 29    RCA.RD  DLN     1.76 0.108            3.79   0.001   0.371    60     0.437    88   0.509   142          4.17   3.11 5.24
 30   RCARTA   DLN     2.38 0.029            3.91   0.001   0.378
                                                        Table 4, continued

Inventories Orders    and Perfnrm.n-,
 31   MPCON8  DLN       1.72 0.116       3.04   0.007    0.370    68    0.433   113    0.509   138   3.36    4.11   3.16     5.20
 32   MSOND8  DLN       2.43 0.026       3.01   0.007    0.378    44    0.449    59            129   3.32    4.04   3.13    5.06
 33   MOCM82  DLR       0.85     0.534   2.84   0.010    0.360   124   0.429    130            119   3.36    4.16   3.15    5.23
 34     M082  DLN       1.43     0.203   2.59   0.018    0.367    82   0.433    112            127   3.35   4.13    3.14    5.24
 35    MD082  DLN       1.34     0.237   2.53   0.021    0.366    85   0.431    123   0.511          3.36   4.13    3.15    5.24
 36    MN082  DLN       0.11     0.995   3.58   0.002    0.351   158   0.434    104   0.510    125   3.33   4.15    3.08    5.57
 37     MU82  DLN       3.58     0.002   3.04   0.007    0.391    19   0.460     40   0.520     63   3.22   4.13    3.03    5.01
 38    MDU82  DLN       2.75     0.013   3.27   0.004    0.382    31   0.458     44             53   3.27   4.06    3.08    4.98
 39     MNU82   DLN     3.95     0.001   2.49   0.023    0.395    17   0.498      7   0.518     71   2.95   4.25    2.71    5.21
 40    IVMT82   DLN     0.78     0.586   3.01   0.007    0.359   131   0.433    114             80   3.36   4.13    3.13    5.35
 41    IVM1D8     N     1.45     0.194   3.57   0.002    0.367    81   0.446     65             54   3.27   4.16    3.03    5.34
 42    IVM2D8     N     3.02     0.007   4.31   0.000    0.385    24   0.451     55   0.520     62   3.30   4.07    3.1].   5.07
 43    IVM3D8     N     1.16     0.325   2.85   0.010    0.364    97   0.441     75            118   3.30   4.15    3.01    5.66
 44     1VT82     N     0.81     0.567   3.46   0.003    0.360   117   0.429    129   0.508    156   3.38   4.11    3.09    5.70
 45    VENDOR     N     4.64     0.000   3.06   0.006    0.402    14   0.459     42   0.542     16   3.29   4.01    3.11    4.92
Housing and Con riiction
 46     HSBP     N    2 .60      0.018   1.90   0.081    0.380    38   0.469     27   0.532     25   3.32 3.85      3.11 5.01
 47     HSFR     N    0.89       0.504   2.08   0.056    0.361   114   0.466     30   0.522     52   3.30 3.92      3.09 5.05
 48   CONDO9   DLN    0.75       0.610   2.82   0.011    0.359   127   0.428    150   0.509    141   3.38 4.12      3.16 5.32
Money and Credit; Quantity Variables
 49 FMBASE DLN         0.28 0.948        3.24   0.004    0.353   156   0.448     61   0.533     24   3.26
 50                                                                                                         4.15     2.93 5.91
     FMBASER DLN       0.66 0.680        2.60   0.018    0.358   135   0.436     95   0.538     21   3.38   4.05     3.13 5.45
 51      FMI   DLN     0.94 0.465        3.15   0.005    0.361   110   0.429    131   0.514     94   3.34   4.20    2.90 6.95
 52   FM1D82   DLN     0.74 0.615        2.39   0.028    0.359   129   0.426    157   0.513     97   3.37   4.16    3.11 5.99
 53      FM2    DLN     1.25     0.278   2.34   0.032    0.365    91   0.436     97   0.510    128   3.28   4.24    2.94 5.88
 55      FM3    DLN     0.76     0.605   2.86   0.010    0.359   130   0.431    122   0.511    113   3.42   4.02    3.05 5.88
 56     FM3R    DLN     0.61     0.722   2.24   0.039    0.357   141   0.437     92   0.511    109   3.42   3.96    3.17 5.26
 57      FML    DLN     1.46     0.191   3.25   0.004    0.367    77   0.433    105   0.518     70   3.40   4.04    2.89 6.51
 58     FMLR    DLN     0.32     0.929   2.00   0.065    0.354   150   0.436     96   0.521     60   3.44   3.94    3.15 5.52
 59   FCLN82    DLN     3.47     0.003   2.99   0.007    0.390    21   0.476     19   0.570     7    3.41   3.59    3.15 5.11
 60   FCBCUC      N     0.72     0.633   3.70   0.001    0.359   132   0.432    116   0.526    40    3.40   4.04    3.15 5.36
 61   FCCUCY      N     0.57     0.753   3.76   0.001    0.357   142   0.433    110   0.525    41    3.36   4.12    3.12 5.41
 62   FCLBMCY     N     1 . 96   0.071   2.53   0.021    0.373    56   0.493      8   0.592     4    3.39   3.47    3.13 5.02
 63     CCBPY   DLN    0.34      0.913   3.56   0.002    0.354   152   0.429    132   0.513    99    3.37   4.12    3.15 5.30
 64    CCI3OM   DLN     1.31     0.251   3.99   0.001    0.366    87   0.437     87   0.527    34    3.35   4.10    3.16 5.12
Stock Prices and Volume
 65   FSPCOM   DLN      1.79     0.102   2.30   0.035   0.371    61    0.484    12    0.540    18    321    3.92    2.92 5.53
 66     FSPIN   DLN     1.83     0.093   2.36   0.030
                                                       Table 4, continued

 67     FSDJ   0114     1.61   0.143   2.42    0.027    0.369    71   0.474    23    0.529    31   3.23 3.98     2.94 5.57
 68    FSVOL   DLN      0.27   0.950   3.42    0.003    0.353   155   0.429   134    0.520    66   3.37 4.13     3.15 5.41

Interest Rates and Spreads
 69      FYFF    D      1.19   0.309    3,73   0.001    0.364    95   0.461    39    0.523    48   3.22   4.12   2.96   5.65
 71    FYGM6     0     0.46    0.836   3.58    0.002    0.356   144   0.429   135    0.510   131   3.39   4.10   3.16   5.46
 72    FYGT1     D      1.00   0.429   3.59    0.002    0.362   108   0.430   125    0.510   132   3.38   4.12   3.13   5.68
 73   FYGT1O     D     0.38    0.892   3.58    0.002    0.355   147   0.431   121    0.511   114   3.35 4.15     3.15   5.39
 74      FYGL    D     0.35    0.907   3.48    0.002    0.354   151   0.428   144    0.509   147   3.36 4.15     3.14   5.59
 75      FYCP    D     1.24    0.285   3.11    0.006    0.365    93   0.488     9    0.524    44   3.15 3.99     2.87   5.56
 76    FYBAC     D     1.71    0.117   2.97    0.008    0.370    67   0.486    11    0.521    59   3.12 4.06     2.85   5.51
 77   FYAAAC     D     0.52    0.791   2.78    0.012    0.356   146   0.433   111    0.508   153   3.36 4.12     3.15   5.27
 78   FYBAAC     D     0.72    0.635   2.05    0.059    0.359   126   0.441    74    0.511   111   3.32 4.11     3.10   5.30
 79   GL_GM3     N     0.93    0.474   2.88    0.010    0.361   111   0.461    38    0.560     9   3,34 3.90     3.10   5.37
 80   GlOCI      N     0.95    0.457   2.20    0.043    0.361   113   0.482    14    0.572     6   3.30 3.77     3.01   5.68
 81 C1OGM3       N     0.66    0.681   2.94    0.008    0.358   137   0.454    54    0.549    12   3.31 4.01     3.09   5.36
 82   C1GM6      N     1.03    0.406   3.73    0.001    0.362   106   0.427   155    0.509   151   3.39 4.11     3.09   5.88
 83   CIGM3     N      0.70    0.651   3.78    0.001    0.358   136   0.428   143    0.513   102   3.37 4,14            5.69
                                                                                                                 3.11
 84 CM6GM3      N      0.41    0.876   3.55    0.002    0,355   149   0.439    79    0.539    19   3.39 4.01     3.16   5.41
 85   GM3FF     N      3.59    0.002   2.05    0.058    0.391    18   0.540     4    0.607     3   2.99 3.76     2.78   5.02
 86 CP6GM6      N      5.52    0.000   1.55    0.162    0.411     8   0.582     1    0.554    11   2.67 3.89     2.55   4.44
 87 BACGM3      N      4.93    0.000   1.53    0.168    0.405    12   0.543     3    0.538    20   2.90 3.91     2.73   4.82
88 BAA GlO      N      2.74    0.013   2.77    0.012    0.382    28   0.460    41    0.514    90   3.24 4.09     3.03   5.39
89 BAA AAA      N      2.99    0.007   2.44    0.025    0.384    26   0.435   1.01   0.514    93   3.35 4.11     3.12   5.59
90    AAAGL     N      2.73    0.013   3.16    0.005    0.382    30   0.463     34   0.513    95   3.26 4.02     3.02   5.39
91    FF_CP6    N      1.29    0.260   3.42    0.003    0.365    94   0.455     52   0.581     5                        5.22
                                                                                                   3.38 3.87     3.17
92    FFBAC     N      1.00    0.426   3.18    0.005    0.362   103   0.476     18   0.615     2   3.29 3.84     3.09   5.07
93    FF_G10    N      2.79    0.012   1.92    0.077    0.382    29   0.530     5    0.620     1   3.07 3.73     2.86   5.02
94     FYFFR    D      1.44    0.199   4.09    0.001    0.367    80   0.462    36    0.527    35   3.29 3.98     3.11   4.99
95    FYGM3R    0      1.46    0.190   3.72    0.001    0.367    83   0.438    83    0.516    75                        5.60
                                                                                                   3.39 4.01     3.15
96    FYGM6R    0      2.02    0.062   3.91    0.001    0.374    51   0.439    80    0.517    74   3.40 3.99     3.16   5.40
97    FYGT1R    0      2.38    0.029   3.91    0.001    0.378    45   0.439    78    0.515    85                 3.17   5.26
                                                                                                   3.39 3,99
98 FYCT1OR      0      1.49    0.180   3.64    0.002    0.368    74   0.429   138    0.510   134   3.39 4.10     3.16   5.43

Aggregate Employment and Labor Force Participation
 99 LPMIIUADJ  0114    1.44 0.200    4.46 0.000         0.367    78   0.433   108    0.509   152   3.31   4.21   3.09   5.24
100   LHOURS   DLN     0.32 0.925    3.61 0.002         0.354   153   0.431   117    0.511                       3.16
                                                                                             116   3.37   4.11          5.22
101      LHEM  DLN     0.76 0.603    3.93 0.001         0.359   128   0.427   156    0.512   108   3.36   4.17   3.16   5.19
102   LHTNAG   0114    2.52 0.021    4.03 0.001         0.379    40   0.433   107    0.513   101   3.35   4.14   3.15   5.18
103      LHCH     D    0,86 0.522    3.67 0.002         0.360   118   0.438    86    0.509   145   3.34   4.10   3.16   5.09
104   LHNACP   DLN     2.47 0.024    2.96 0.008         0.379    39   0.447    62    0.510   124   3.30   4.09   3.11   5.08
105   LHNAPS  DLN      3.62 0.002    2.09 0.054
                                                       [able 4, Continued

106   LHNPVX       D     1.64   0.136   3.36   0.003    0.369    73   0.438    85   0.511   110   3.32 4.14     3.14   5.09
107     LHUL     DLN     2.94   0.009   2.02   0.064    0.437     3   0.477    17   0.516    77   3.46 3.82     3.10   5.10
108 LHULLHEM        N    3.49   0.003   2.47   0.025    0.444     2   0.505     6   0.559    10   3.30 3.80     2.91   5.32
109    LHMUR        N    1.95   0.072   3.68   0.001    0.373    54   0.435    99   0.520    64   3.35 4.11     3.12   5.38
110    LPHRM       N     2.13   0.050   3.88   0.001    0.375    50   0.431   118   0.523    50   3.37 4.12     3.17   5.20
111    LPHRD       N     2.57   0.019   3.88   0.001    0.380    37   0.431   119   0.524    43   3.35 4.15     3.16   5.15
112   LPMOSA       N     1.68   0.124   3.83   0.001    0.370    64   0.446    64   0.528    33   3.30 4.11     3.08   5.16
113     LHU5     DLN     1.92   0.077   3.87   0.001    0.373    55   0.436    93   0.516    78   3.37 4.08     3.16   5.18
114   LHU68O       N     1.07   0.384   3.72   0.001    0.363    99   0.439    81   0.529    30   3.38 4.03     3.15   5.23
115     LHEL     DLN     9.50   0.000   1.22   0.296    0.448     1   0.563     2   0.531    27   2.79 3.89     2.64   4,57
116    LHELX       N     2.40   0.028   2.48   0.023    0.378    46   0.469    25   0.519    69   3.14 4.19     2.94   5.06
117    LUINC     DLN     1.38   0.224   2.61   0.018    0.366    88   0.459    43   0.521    56   3.27 4.05     3.01   5.40

Eniolovinent by Sector
118      LPNAG   DLN     2.62   0.017   5.21   0.000    0.380    35   0.442    72   0.510   133   3.23   4.27   2.99   5.28
119       LPMI   DLN     2.91   0.009   3.42   0.003    0.384    25   0.429   139   0,518    72   3.40   4.08   3.15   5.41
120      LPCC    DLN     1.28   0.266   4.02   0.001    0.365    90   0.444    69   0.511   117   3.26   4.19   3.06   5.13
121      LPEM    DLN     3.32   0.004   4.54   0.000    0.388    22   0.434   103   0,532    26   3,37   4.10   3.15   5.17
122      LPED    DL      1.77   0.104   4.06   0.001    0.371    63   0.429   140   0.537    22   3.40   4.08   3.17   5.22
123      LPEN    DLN     4.43   0.000   4.06   0.001    0.400    15   0.457    45   0.516    82   3.28   4.04   3.11   4.96
124      LPTW    DLN     2.79   0.012   4.96   0.000    0.382    32   0.455    51   0.513   100   3.23   4.15   3.02   5.10
125      LPTR    DLN     1.49   0.183   4.00   0.001    0.368    75   0.429   141   0.515    84   3.36   4.15   3.15   5.22
126      LPFR    DLN     0.81   0.565   3.95   0.001    0.360   125   0.436    94   0.509   148   3.31   4.18   3.10   5.27
127     LPSPA    DLN     1.39   0.218   4.71   0.000    0.367    79   0.449    57   0.522    55   3.26   4.15   3.04   5.22
128     LPCOV    DLN     0.28   0.946   3.79   0.001    0.353   154   0.446    66   0.534    23   3.36   3.99   3.14   5.18
129   LPSPNCA    DLN     1.33   0.243   4.61   0.000    0.366    86   0.435   100   0.509   146   3.30   4,22   3.07   5.26

Productivity and Real Wages
130    IPROD1    DLN     1.68   0.125   4.09   0.001    0.370    65   0.435    98   0.510   130   3.31   4.20   3.03   5.47
131        PLM   DLN     0.99   0.430   3.79   0.001    0.362   107   0.428   145   0.523    46   3.40   4.08   3.07   5.64
132      PLM82   DLN     0.99   0.430   3.79   0.001    0.362   109   0.428   146   0.523    47   3.40   4.08   3.07   5.64
133       LEHM   DLN     1.79   0.101   3.91   0.001    0.371    62   0.444    71   0.512   103   3.39   3.96   3.14   5.33
134    LEHM82    DLN     2.33   0.033   4.88   0.000    0.377    47   0.465    31   0.510   122   3.24   4.03   3.04   5.06
135    RPWCMS      N     1.15   0.331   3.89   0.001    0.364    98   0.430   127   0.510   121   3.36   4.15   3.08   5.51
136   RPWGMDS      N     1.71   0.118   3.81   0.001    0.370    66   0.430   126   0.512   105   3.33   4.20   3.04   5.85

Prices
137     PUNEW    DL.N    1.05   0.394   3.25   0.004    0.363   101   0.432   115   0.510   126   3.31   4.21   2.96   5.89
138    PZUNEW    DLN     0.60   0.733   3.32   0.003    0.357   140   0.433   109   0.508   154   3.30   4,23   2.97   5.97
140    PWI200    DLN     2.25   0.038   3.89   0.001    0.376    49   0.476    20   0.521    57   3,22   3.97   3.04   5.00
141    PW1300    DLN     1,58   0.153   4.04   0,001    0,369    70   0.440    76   0.516    83   3.38   4.02   3.17   5.22
142     PWCMP    DLN     2.07   0.056   2.88   0.010    0.374    53   0.474    22   0.547    13   3.23   3.98   3.03   4.95
                                                        Table 4, continued

143        PWFC   DLN     1.13   0.347   3.63   0.002    0.363   100   0.445   68    0.514    92   3.21   4.27   2.98   5.36
144        PWFP   DLN     1.83   0.093   3.61   0.002    0.372    58   0.461   37    0.520    65   3.32   3.93   3.07   5.45
145      PWFUEL   DLN     1.20   0.304   3.96   0.001    0.364    96   0.454   53    0.509   140   3.24   4.13   2.87   6.14
146        PWIC   DLN     0.86   0.529   3.67   0.002    0.360   119   0.447   63    0.522    51   3.2]   4.16   3.03   5.31
147     PWIMS     DLN     0.56   0.764   3.40   0.003    0.357   143   0.475   21    0.540    17   3.11   4.18   2.89   5.17
148    PWIMSM     DLN     2.28   0.036   3.27   0.004    0.377    48   0.419    15   0.564     8   3.10   4.15   2.92   5.04
149   PSMC99A     DLN     2.55   0.020   3.26   0.004    0.380    36   0.483    13   0.524    45   3.19   3,97   2.99   5.04
150    PSCCOM     DL.N    1.61   0.145   3.18   0.005    0.369    69   0.449    58   0.511   115   3.35   4,00   3,15   5.05

Exchange Rates    and Foreign Trade
151   EXRWT1      DLN     0.97 0.443     3.13   0,005    0.362   105   0.449    60   0.517    73   3.30   4.07   3,09   5.17
152   EXRWT2      DLN     0.81 0.566     3.40   0.003    0.360   122   0.446    67   0.519    68   3.32   4.07   3.11   5.15
153   ExNWT1      DLN     0.95 0.463     3.56   0.002    0.361   115   0.457    46   0.526    36   3.29   4.03   3.07   5.08
154   EXNWT2      DLN     0.69 0.656     3.64   0.002    0.358   134   0.450    56   0.526    37   3.31   4.05   3.10   5.06
155    EXVUS      DLN     0.37 0.895     2.31   0.035    0.399    16   0.463    35   0.531    29   3.45   3,95   3.05   5.23
156     IMY1      DLN     1.50 0.178     3.79   0.001    0.368    76   0.428   147   0.510   123   3.37   4.15   3.16   5.23
157     ExY1      DLN     1.26  0,274    3.43   0.003    0.365    89   0.427   154   0.508   157   3,37   4.16   3.16   5.21
158      TB1        D     1.02 0.413     3.57   0.002    0.362   102   0.429   133   0.509   143   3.36   4.15   3.13   5.36

Misc.:    Government and other
159        FBD   DLN     1.52    0.173   2.26   0.039    0.430    4    0.467    29   0.528    32   3.57   3.92   2.97   6.26
160       FBDY   DLN     1,38    0.226   2.15   0.049    0.428     5   0.464    32   0.523    49   3.61   3.88   3.06   6.22
161       FBYS     N     0.94    0.469   2.09   0.056    0.425     6   0.478    16   0.544    14   3,79   3.76   3.29   5.41
162       FAIL   DU      1.77    0.105   3.59   0.002    0.371    59   0.428   149   0.512   106   3.37   4.15   3.17   5.19
163        INC    DLN    0.92    0.484   2.97   0.008    0.361   116   0.444    70   0.510   131   3,26   4.20   3.04   5.33

Notes:   All statistics refer to regression equations that include six lags each of five series:  the growth of
IP, the growth of real M2 (FM2D82), the growth of wholesale prices (PW), the change in the 90-day Treasury
bill rate (FYGM3), and the indicated trial variable, transformed as indicated.   The first two columns report
the F-statistic and p-value testing whether the lags of the trial variable enter the regression, and the next
two columns report these statistics for M2.   The remaining 10 columns are identical to the final 10 columns in
Table 2, except that the conditioning variables for the k-month ahead regressions are 6 lags each of
transformed FM2D82, PW, and FYGM3, in addition to 6 lags each of transformed ICI and the transformed trial
series.
                                                                       Table 5

                                           Marginal Predictive Content for 1-month ICI growth.
                                       given the lagged private-public interest rate spread CP6_GM6
                                              and given the lagged yield curve spread 010_Cl

                                                                                                                Subsample Stability: RNSE's
                                                                                                                      - 88:12        - 79:9
Series         Trans.           P,                                       R2(1) rank    R2(6) rank    R2(12) rank -79:9 79:10- -79:9 79:10-
                         F             Fcpgm   cpgm    FglOgl 1g10g1


Base Model              0.00   0.000   6.31    0.000   1.13   0.346      0.379         0.565         0.522         2.87 3.74     2.79 4.08

Output and Capacity Utilization
  3      IPC      DLN   2.29   0.035   6.25    0.000   1.26   0.277      0.404    32   0.567   148   0.559    24   2.88   3.71   2.77   4.18
 4      IPCN      DLN   1.98   0.068   5.93    0.000   1.14   0.340      0.400    47   0.571    95   0.548    44   2.86   3.69   2.78   4.05
  5     IPCD      DLN   1.67   0.129   6.26    0.000   1.28   0.264      0.397    63   0.568   135   0.539    63   2.86   3.73   2.75   4.19
 6       IPD      DLN   2.09   0.054   5.84    0.000   1.25   0.282      0.401    43   0.569   116   0.527   118   2.83   3.76   2.73   4.18
  7      IPN      DLN   2.78   0.012   5.45    0.000   1.12   0.348      0.409    25   0.594    23   0.537    74   2.83   3.50   2.73   3.96
 8     IPMIN      DLN   1.11   0.354   5.99    0.000   1.02   0.410      0.391    93   0.568   120   0.530    94   2.86   3.72   2.77   4.12
 9      IPUT      DLN   1.82   0.094   5.93    0.000   1.01   0.419      0.399    49   0.570   107   0.543    55   2.86   3.70   2.78   4.09
10       IPE      DLN   1.94   0.074   6.58    0.000   1.41   0.209      0.400    48   0.591    32   0.533    85   2.82   3.55   2.74   3.91
11     IPMFG      DLN   0.85   0.531   6.30    0.000   1.25   0.283      0.388   115   0.575    75   0.545    51   2.93   3.52   2.78   4.23
12       1PM      DLN   2.79   0.012   5.89    0.000   1.27   0.268      0.409    26   0.568   132   0.526   123   2.86   3.72   2.76   4.16
13       IPI      DLN   1.06   0.386   5.72    0.000   0.62   0.718      0.390    99   0.583    43   0.551    39   2.81   3.66   2.71   4.10
14       IPF      DLN   1.51   0.175   5.91    0.000   1.13   0.342      0.395    71   0.571    96   0.543    57   2.88   3.65   2.78   4.14
15       IPX        D   0.82   0.558   4.63    0.000   1.60   0.147      0.441    10   0.645     6   0.639     2   2.48   3.55   2.15   4.34
16    IPXDCA        D   1.15   0.333   4.68    0.000   1.87   0.087      0.446     7   0.645     7   0.624     6   2.40   3.63   2.10   4.29
17    IPXMCA        D   0.51   0.803   6.11    0.000   1.15   0.333      0.384   145   0.566   159   0.523   153   2.88   3.71   2.76   4.27

Consumption.     Sales and Income
18     GMC82      DLN    0.39 0.887     5.50   0.000   0.98   0.440      0.383   154   0.511    97   0.554    34   2.81   3.78   2.70   4.26
19   GMCD82       DLN    0.49 0.817    6.25    0.000   1.18   0.319      0.384   143   0.567   143   0.526   126   2.87   3.72   2.78   4.10
20      CMPY      DLN    0.67 0.671    6.00    0.000   1.04   0.401      0.386   133   0.566   149   0.531    92   2.86   3.74   2.79   4.08
21   CMPY82       DLN    0.67 0.675     6.35   0.000   1.06   0.385      0.386   135   0.566   150   0.543    56   2.84   3.77   2.72   4.30
22    CMYXP8      DLN    0.49 0.818     6.38   0.000   1,05   0.391      0.384   146   0.567   140   0.538    68   2.89   3.68   2.74   4.37
23    GMWS82      DLN    0.45 0.846     5.90   0.000   1.05   0.393      0.384   148   0.568   133   0.535    78   2.84   3.75   2.73   4.26
24      MT82      DLN    1,04 0.398     6.27   0.000   1.18   0.314      0.390    97   0.569   113   0.523   155   2.84   3,74   2.74   4.21
25      MSM8      DLN    0.98 0.442    4.81    0.000   1.73   0.114      0.444     9   0.650     3   0.614    10   2.43   3.56   2.17   4.24
26       WT8      DL.N   0.28 0.948     4.34   0.000   1.61   0.144      0.434    13   0.643    10   0.633     3   2.37   3.67   2.10   4.32
27       RT8      DLN     1.27 0.274    4.50   0.000   1.80   0.101      0.448     6   0.642    11   0.628    4    2.41   3,64   2.15   4.25
28     RTR82      DL.N    1.28 0.264    6.05   0.000   1.16   0.327      0.393    81   0.570   108   0.531   91    2.85   3.72   2.77   4.08
                                                             Table   5,    continued

29    RCARD      DLN    2.45   0.025   6.71   0.000   1.58   0.151        0.405   30    0.569   119   0.529   106   2.85 3.74     2.75 4.15
30   RCARTA      DLN    3.11   0.006   6.74   0.000   1.69   0.123        0.412   20    0.572    85   0.528   110   2.83 3.74     2.74 4.14

T.,',,'—,'s     Orders, and Performance
31   MPCON8      DLN    1.50 0.176 5.56       0.000   0.69   0.659        0.395    69   0.571    98   0.525   134   2.86   3.70   2.78 4.06
32   MSOND8      DLN    2.29 0.035 5.56       0.000   0.73   0.627        0.404    33   0.577    65   0.527   115   2.83   3.69   2.35 4.04
33   MOCM82      DLN    1.13 0.345 5.83       0.000   0.69   0.661        0.391    90   0.570   100   0.533    81   2.84   3.73   2.76 4.10
34     MO82      DLN    2.21 0.042     5.61   0.000   0.71   0.640        0.403    35   0.577    68   0.530   100   2.80   3.73   2.72 4.12
35    MDO82      DLN    2.09 0.055 5.92       0.000   0.67   0.672        0.401    41   0.572    87   0.528   107   2.84   3.71   2.76 4.07
36    MN082      DLN    0.32 0.926     5.91   0.000   1.07   0.380        0.382   159   0.573    83   0.524   142   2.81   3.76   2.70 4.28
37     MU82      DLN    3.44 0.003     5.34   0.000   1.03   0.408        0.415    15   0.602    16   0.546    47   2.64   3.76   2.52 4.27
38    MDU82      DLN    3.27 0.004 5.50       0.000   1.13   0.344        0.414    17   0.604    15   0.544    52   2.66   3.70   2.58 4.09
39    MNU82      DLN    2.86 0.010 4.17       0.000   1.00   0.426        0.410    24   0.605    14   0.531    90   2.58   3.82   2.43 4.38
40   IVMT82      DLN    1.14 0.340 5.90       0.000   0.71   0.639        0.391    91   0.574    80   0.532    86   2.84   3.71   2.73 4.18
41   IVM1D8        N    1.84 0.091     6.50   0.000   1.05   0.395        0.399    51   0.567   139   0.526   121   2.86   3.74   2.77   4.16
42   IVM2D8        N    2.03 0.062     5.63   0.000   1.61   0.144        0.401    44   0.575    77   0.526   122   2.84   3.69   2.76   4.03
43   IVM3D8        N    1.38 0.222     6.35   0.000   0.71   0.642        0.394    73   0.582    45   0.524   143   2.79   3.70   2.65   4.37
44    1VT82        N    1.11 0.355     5.63   0.000   1.02   0.410        0.391    89   0.577    69   0.529   104   2.80   3.74   2.69   4.24
45   VENDOR        N    5.71 0.000     6.59   0.000   1.15   0.331        0.437    11   0.594    22   0.545    49   2.78   3.59   2.70   3.95

Housing and Construction
46     HSBP     N    2.98      0.008   6.23   0.000   0.59   0.738        0.411    23   0.593    26   0.554    33   2.7] 3.63     2.68 3.98
47     HSFR     N    0.73      0.625   6.18   0.000   0.79   0.580        0.387   120   0.587    39   0.538    71   2.82 3.60     2.74 3.96
48   CONDO9   DLN    0.60      0.729   5.17   0.000   1.04   0.396        0.385   139   0.568   130   0.525   138   2.87 3.70     2.78 4.14

Money and Credit: Quantity Variables
49   FMBASE   DLN    0.41 0.872 6.39          0.000   0.89   0.506        0.383   155   0.573    81   0.523   154   2.83   3.73   2.72 4.19
50 FMBASER    DLN    0.81 0.561 5.92          0.000   0.77   0.594        0.388   112   0.579    60   0.567    19   2.76   3.79   2.53 4.92
51      FM1   DLN    0.76 0.602 6.21          0.000   1.07   0.382        0.387   118   0.566   151   0.528   111   2.86   3.75   2.67 4.89
52   FM1D82   DLN    0.78 0.587 5.75          0.000   0.86   0.523        0.387   119   0.569   112   0.525   132   2.83   3.77   2.49 5.94
53      FM2   DLN    0.64 0.701 5.52          0.000   0.95   0.462        0.386   130   0.576    71   0.534    80   2.80   3.75   2.67 4.46
54   FM2D82   DLN    1.03 0.405 4.80          0.000   0.83   0.548        0.390   101   0.581    50   0.578    16   2.75   3.78   2.59 4.54
55       FM3     DLN    0.63   0.709   6.15   0.000   1.27   0.270        0.386   134   0.582    46   0.530    97   2.77   3.74   2.63 4.44
56     FM3R      DLN    1.16   0.330   5.48   0.000   1.04   0.402        0.391    88   0.580    51   0.561    20   2.74   3.81   2.54 4.62
5]      FML      DLN    0.9]   0.444   6.14   0.000   1.28   0.266        0.389   105   0.576    74   0.527   114   2.83   3.68   2.71 4.24
58     FMLR      DLN    0.46   0.840   5.09   0.000   1.04   0.401        0.384   150   0.572    84   0.535    79   2.81   3.76   2.55 4.90
59   FCLN82      DLN    3.32   0.004   6.95   0.000   0.90   0.498        0.414    19   0:590    34   0.539    62   2.96   3.28   2.77 4.39
60   FCBCL.JC      N    1.09   0.370   6.59   0.000   0.97   0.447        0.391    94   0.582    49   0.556    30   2.88   3.54   2.76 4.05
61   FCBCUCY       N    0.76   0.604   6.25   0.000   1.02   0.409        0.387   123   0.579    56   0.540    61   2.88   3.57   2.77 4.04
62   FCLBMCY       N    2.11   0.051   5.94   0.000   1.17   0.322        0.402    39   0.592    29   0.570    18   2.95   3.31   2.78 4.16
63     CCBPY     DLN    0.72   0.635   6.44   0.000   1.14   0.341        0.387   125   0.592    27   0.545    48   2.85   3.49   2.74 3.96
                                                             Table 5, continued

64   CCI3OM     DLN   1.09 0.371      6,33 0.000     1.18 0.316     0.391    96    0.569   114   0.561    23   2.86 3.71       2.78 4.05
ct-tt'e Prices and Volume
65   FSPCOM     DLN   1.63    0.139   5.09   0.000   0.76   0.603   0.397    65    0.597    19   0.549    40   2.77   3.58     2.63   4.24
66     FSPIN    DLN   1.66    0.131   5.12   0.000   0.75   0.613   0.397    64    0.601    17   0.553    35   2.76   3.55     2.62   4.23
67      FSDJ    DLN   1.44    0.200   5.28   0.000   0.87   0.519   0.394     77   0.591    30   0.538    66   2.78   3.63     2.64   4.32
68     FSVOL    DLN   0.45    0.845   6.17   0.000   1.23   0.290   0.384    147   0.567   147   0.529   101   2.87   3.72     2.78   4.13


Interest Rates and Spreads
 69      FYFF    D    1.46    0.192   6.43   0.000   1.25   0.278   0.395     68   0.568   131   0.523   151   2.87   3.71     2.78   4.26
 70     FYCM3    D    1.42    0.206   6.54   0.000   1.19   0.309   0.394     80   0.572    88   0.525   136   2.86   3.69     2.77   4.25
 71     FYGM6    D    1.05    0.391   6.58   0.000   0.91   0.487   0.390     98   0.570    99   0.525   137   2.85   3.71     2.78   4.09
 72     FYGT1    D    0.78    0.588   6.55   0.000   0.84   0.541   0.387    126   0.569   115   0.524   149   2.85   3.72     2.78   4.07
 73   FYCT1O     D    0.64    0.700   6.46   0.000   1.05   0.393   0.386    131   0.568   129   0.524   150   2.86   3.72     2.79   4.08
 74      FYCL    D    0.91    0.488   6.46   0.000   1.20   0.304   0.389    108   0.566   152   0.525   133   2.87   3.72     2.78   4.31
 75      FYCP    D    0.95    0.462   6.41   0.000   0.85   0.529   0.389    103   0.567   144   0.525   135   2.86   3.73     2.79   6.12
 76     FYSAC    D    1.23    0.290   6.57   0.000   1.39   0.218   0.392     86   0.568   127   0.524   148   2.87   3.71     2.79   4.18
 77   FYAAAC     D    1.77    0.105   6.68   0.000   1.17   0.320   0.398     60   0.568   125   0.524   146   2.86   3.72     2.79   4.11
 78    FYBAAC    D    0.64    0.702   6.03   0.000   0.76   0.602   0.386    132   0.568   124   0.524   145   2.87   3.71     2.78   4.17
 79   CL CM3     N    1.56    0.158   6.48   0.000   1.58   0.154    0.396    66   0.576    72   0.527   119   2.83   3.69     2.73   4.25
 81 G1OCM3       N    1.79    0.100   6.48   0.000   2.05   0.059    0.398    59   0.588    36   0.538    70   2.75   3.70     2.66   4.19
 82   G1CM6      N    1.83    0.093   6.21   0.000   1.76   0.106    0.399    50   0.595    20   0.554    32   2.78   3.59     2.72   3.91
 83   G1GM3      N    1.79    0.100   6.48   0.000   1.81   0.097    0.398    57   0.588    37   0.538    67   2.75   3.70     2.66   4.19
 84 CM6CM3       N    0.86    0.527   6.54   0.000   1.26   0.276    0.388   113   0.567   138   0.530    93   2.87   3.72     2.61   5.24
 85   GM3 FF     N    0.79    0.580   2.64   0.016   0.88   0.509    0.387   124   0.585    42   0.597    13   2.81   3.64     2.73   4.12
 87  AC   CM3    N    0.73    0.624   1.31   0.253   1.12   0.351    0.387   121   0.573    82   0.530    96   2.82   3.75     2.73   4.18
 88 BAA Gb       N    2.01    0.064   3.95   0.001   1.10   0.363    0.401    42   0.578    62   0.526   131   2.83   3.68     2.77   3.95
 89 BAA AAA      N     3.74   0.001   4.50   0.000   1.12   0.348    0.418    14   0.582    47   0.538    69   2.79   3.71     2.71   4.09
 90    AAA CL    N     1.49   0.183   5.25   0.000   1.05   0.395    0.395    70   0.568   122   0.528   113   2.87   3.70     2.78   4.09
 91    FF CP6    N    0.63    0.708   5.53   0.000   0.97   0.447    0.386   129   0.580    52   0.593    14   2.86   3.61     2.78   4.0]
 92    FFBAC     N     0.43   0.862   5.29   0.000   0.96   0.453    0.383   153   0.583    44   0.613    11   2.85   3.58     2.77   3.98
 93    FFG1O     N     0.88   0.510   4.17   0.000   1.28   0.268    0.388   110   0.566   153   0.557    29   2.87   3.72     2.78   4.22
 94     FYFFR    D     1.41   0.210   6.07   0.000   0.83   0.548    0.394    74   0.566   154   0.524   144   2.86   3.74 .   2.77 4.29
 95    FYGM3R    D     1.22   0.294   6.37   0.000   0.40   0.881    0.392    85   0.570   109   0.528   108   2.86   3.70     2.74 4.42
 96    FYGM6R    0     1.58   0.154   6.47   0.000   0.49   0.819    0.396    67   0.569   111   0.527   120   2.86   3.71     2.75 4.37
 97    FYCT1R     0    1.73   0.114   6.25   0.000   0.66   0.685    0.398    58   0.568   121   0.527   116   2.86   3.73     2,75 4.30
  98 FYGT1OR      D    1.77   0.104   6.30   0.000   0.86   0.527    0.398    61   0.567   137   0.526   128   2.87   3.72     2.76 4.28


 Agrezate Employment   and Lahor Fore Particioation
 99 LPM}4UADJ   DLN    0.56 0.760   6.13 0.000     1.08     0.373    0.385   142   0.578    64   0.557    28   2.86 3.62       2.76 4.02
100   LHOURS    DLN    0.56 0.765   6.17 0.000     1.17     0.321    0.385   141   0.585    41   0.530    95   2.83 3.61       2.74 3.97
                                                               Table 5, continued

101     LHEM      DLN   0.36    0.902   6.17   0.000   1.12   0.351   0.383   156   0.571    94   0.529   103   2.84   3.72   2.75   4.11
102   LHTNAG      DLN    2.49   0.023   5.99   0.000   1.16   0.326   0.406    27   0.574    78   0.529   102   2.82   3.73   2.73   4.11
103     LHCH        D   0.81    0.562   5.94   0.000   1.22   0.293   0.388   111   0.580    53   0.524   147   2.84   3.63   2.77   3.96
104   LHNAGP      DLN   2.51    0.022   5.34   0.000   0.67   0.675   0.406    28   0.578    63   0.523   156   2.80   3.73   2.72   4.07
105   LHNAPS      DLN   3.33    0.003   4.87   0.000   0.54   0.775   0.414    18   0.590    35   0.523   157   2.77   3.67   2.68   4.01
106   LHNPVX        0   1.29    0.262   5.13   0.000   0.92   0.484   0.393    82   0.570   101   0.523   158   2.84   3.74   2.76   4.08
107     LHUL      DU    3.07    0.007   4.48   0.000   1.27   0.270   0.412     2   0.645     8   0.610    12   2.38   3.65   2.14   4.21
108 LHULLHEM        N   3.91    0.001   5.09   0.000   1.32   0.247   0.482     1   0.650     2   0.624     7   2.40   3.60   2.09   4.31
109    LHNUR        N   1.73    0.114   6.10   0.000   1.04   0.396   0.398    55   0.579    55   0.552    37   2.81   3.69   2.69   4.33
110    LPHRM       N    1.77    0.105   6.22   0.000   0.95   0.457   0.398    54   0.570   103   0.537    72   2.86   3.71   2.74   4.35
111    LPHRD       N    1.83    0.093   5.63   0.000   1.04   0.402   0.399    52   0.568   128   0.539    64   2.87   3.72   2.74   4.43
112   LPMOSA       N    1.42    0.205   6.63   0.000   1.06   0.386   0.394    76   0.579    58   0.547    45   2.81   3.69   2.fl   4.16
113     LHU5     DLN    2.19    0.044   6.26   0.000   1.23   0.289   0.402    38   0.571    93   0.528   112   2.87   3.68   2.78   4.07
114   LHU68O       N    0.56    0.759   6.22   0.000   1.32   0.247   0.385   138   0.613    13   0.583    15   2.80   3.36   2.68   3.90
115     LHEL     DLN    6.59    0.000   2.01   0.065   0.87   0.515   0.446     8   0.631    12   0.540    60   2.56   3.58   2.48   3.88
116    LHEL.X      N    1.39    0.217   4.03   0.001   1.28   0.264   0.394    79   0.582    48   0.526   129   2.77   3.74   2.67   4.21
117    LUINC     DLN    1.31    0.250   5.55   0.000   0.80   0.573   0.393    84   0.593    25   0.542    59   2.79   3.58   2.67   4.12

 EmDlovment by   Sector
118    LPNAC     DLN    1.30    0.259   6.04   0.000   1.19   0.310   0.393    83   0.571    92   0.553    36   2.86   3.69   2.76   4.11
119     LPMI     DL.N   3.06    0.006   5.78   0.000   1.37   0.227   0.412    21   0.572    90   0.549    42   2.86   3.68   2.76   4.10
120     LPCC     DLN    0.49    0.817   6.05   0.000   1.20   0.305   0.384   151   0.568   126   0.529   105   2.87   3.70   2.78   4.11
121     LPEM     DLN    3.03    0.007   4.97   0.000   1.65   0.132   0.411    22   0.577    70   0.559    25   2.83   3.68   2.72   4.18
122     LPED     DLN    2.18    0.045   6.19   0.000   1.18   0.318   0.402    40   0.575    76   0.559    26   2.84   3.69   2.74   4.13
123     LPEN     DLN    3.41    0.003   3.95   0.001   1.48   0.184   0.415    16   0.591    31   0.535    76   2.79   3.61   2.70   4.03
124     LPTW     DLN    1.75    0.110   6.30   0.000   1.25   0.280   0.398    53   0.577    67   0.552    38   2.84   3.67   2.75   4.06
125     LPTR     DLN    0.68    0.664   6.02   0.000   1.18   0.317   0.386   128   0.578    61   0.526   127   2.81   3.60   2.75   4.09
126     LPFR     DLN    0.58    0.745   6.09   0.000   1.08   0.374   0.385   137   0.570   110   0.543    58   2.84   3.74   2.75   4.15
127    LPSPA     DLN    0.36    0.905   6.20   0.000   1.11   0.355   0.383   152   0.567   136   0.528   109   2.85   3.75   2.75   4.20
128    LPGOV     DLN    0.34    0.916   5.99   0.000   1.20   0.308   0.382   158   0.587    38   0.561    21   2.80   3.63   2.70   4.10
129 LPSPNGA      DLN    0.46    0.840   6.33   0.000   1.09   0.366   0.384   149   0.576    73   0.561    22   2.86   3.65   2.75   4.13

 Productivity    and Real Wages
130   IPROD1      DLN    1.08   0.312   6.27   0.000   1.25   0.280   0.391    92   0.579    57   0.558    27   2.90   3.53   2.79   4.07
131       P111    DLN   0.86    0.522   6.31   0.000   0.99   0.429   0.388   117   0.586    40   0.573    17   2.81   3.63   2.71   4.07
132    PLM82      DLN    1.75   0.109   6.74   0.000   0.94   0.468   0.398    56   0.595    21   0.545    50   2.90   3.36   2.77   4.00
133     LEHN      DLN   0.98    0.437   5.42   0.000   1.17   0.323   0.390   100   0.510   106   0.527   117   2.83   3.76   2.73   4.24
134   LEHN82      DLN    1.44   0.198   6.39   0.000   1.34   0.238   0.395    72   0.568   123   0.535    77   2.87   3.71   2.78   4.12
135   RPWGMS        N    2.02   0.063   7.10   0.000   0.96   0.452   0.401    45   0.570   104   0.537    73   2.85   3.73   2.67   4.50
136 RPWCMDS         N    2.40   0.028   6.29   0.000   1.12   0.350   0.405    29   0.567   145   0.548    43   2.87   3.72   2.72   4.37
                                                             Table 5   continued

 Pr ices
                                      5.70   0.000   0.86   0.522      0.391    95   0.569   118   0.549    41   2.85   3.73   2.76   4.19
137      PUNEW   DLN   1.16   0.329
                 DLN          0.511   5.82   0.000   0.95   0.456      0.388   114   0.570   102   0.544    53   2.86   3.71   2.76   4.20
138    PZUNEW          0.88
                                      6.29   0.000   1.13   0.345      0.394    75   0.569   117   0.530    98   2.87   3.69   2.75   4.28
139         PW   DLN   1.38   0.224
                 DLN          0.024   6.70   0.000   1.68   0.126      0.405    31   0.593    24   0.525   139   2.81   3.56   2.73   3.93
140    PW1200          2.46
                                      5.82   0.000   1.02   0.412      0.389   107   0.566   155   0.526   125   2.86   3.74   2.75   4.29
141    PW1300    DLN   0.91   0.485
                              0.131   6.40   0.000   1.11   0.359      0.397    62   0.590    33   0.526   124   2.86   3.50   2.76   3.95
142      PWCMP   DLN   1.66
                 DLN          0.486   6.20   0.000   1.12   0.349      0.389   106   0.566   156   0.530    99   2.87   3.72   2.76   4.24
143       PWFC         0.91
                              0.724   5.06   0.000   1.13   0.346      0.385   140   0.574    79   0.533    83   2.83   3.72   2.74   4.13
144       PWFP   DLN   0.61
                 DLN          0.390   6.74   0.000   1.28   0.266      0.390   102   0.572    86   0.533    82   2.87   3,66   2.70   4.86
145    PWFUEL          1.05
                              0.711   6.01   0.000   1.22   0.298      0.386   127   0.567   141   0.547    46   2.86   3.74   2.72   4.42
146       PWIC   DLN   0.62
                 DLN          0.486   5.80   0.000   1.16   0.326      0.389   109   0.566   157   0.544    54   2.85   3.76   2.70   4.46
147      PWIMS         0.91
                              0.062   5.29   0.000   1.12   0.352      0.401    46   0.568   134   0.554    31   2.84   3.76   2.71   4.32
148    PWIMSM    DLN   2.02
                 DLN          0,044   5.77   0.000   1.30   0.257      0.403    36   0.597    18   0.539    65   2.83   3.48   2.72   4.03
149 PSMC99A            2.19
                              0.039   6.89   0.000   0.98   0.435      0.403    34   0.592    28   0.523   152   2,85   3.49   2.76   3.93
150    PSCCOM    DLN   2.24
 Exchange Rates and Foreign Trade                                                                           88   2.81   3.72   2.70   4.28
151   EXRWT1   DU4    0.91 0.485      6.45   0.000   0.82   0.553      0.389   104   0.577    66   0.532
                                      6.23   0.000   0.89   0.504      0.384   144   0.570   105   0.533    84   2.85   3.72   2.78   4.06
152   EXRWT2   DLN    0.44 0.850
               DLN                    6.42   0.000   0.82   0.554      0.385   136   0.579    59   0.532    89   2.81   3.70   2.71   4.16
153   EXNWT1          0.61 0.721
                                      6.24   0.000   0.90   0.495      0.382   157   0.571    91   0.532    87   2.85   3.71   2.77   4.09
154   EXNWT2   DLN    0.27 0.950
                                      4.72   0.000   1.45   0.197      0.435    12   0.644     9   0.626     5   2.37   3.66   2.10   4.30
155    EXVUS   DLN    0.34 0.913
                                      6.01   0.000   1.07   0.377      0.394    78   0.567   142   0.526   130   2.87   3,72   2.78   4.11
156     IMY1   DLN    1.36 0.229
                                      5.82   0.000   1.09   0.371      0.392    87   0.567   146   0.524   141   2.86   3.74   2.77   4.12
157     EXY1   DL1    1.22 0.295
                   D   0.85   0,536   6.15   0.000   1.17   0.324      0.388   116   0,566   158   0.524   140   2.86   3,73   2.78   4.14
158       TB1

 Misc.:    Government and other
                                      4.31   0.000   1.58   0.153      0.458     4   0.648     5   0.616     9   2.42   3.65   2.18   4.20
159        FBD   DLN    0.99 0.433
                                      4.24   0.000   1.35   0.235      0,456     5   0.648     4   0.617     8   2.44   3,64   2.20   4,19
160       FBDY   DLN    0.84 0,542
                                      4.00   0.001   1.50   0.179      0,461     3   0,679     1   0.677     1   2.57   3.35   2.20   4.15
161       FBYS     N    1.02 0.415
                                      6.34   0.000   0.88   0.511      0.402    37   0,580    54   0,536    75   2.81   3.70   2.73   4.03
162       FAIL   DLN    2.18 0,045
                                      5.81   0.000   1.06   0.386      0.387   122   0.572    89   0.522   159   2.84   3.72   2.76   4.07
163        INC   DLN    0.74 0.617
                                                                                        the growth of IP, CP6GM6, Gb_Cl, and
Notes: All statistics refer to systems that include 6 lags each of four series:
                                The first six columns report  the  F-statistic  and  p-value respectively testing whether the
the indicated trial variable.
                                             and (3) Gb_Cl   enter  the regression.     The remaining 10 columns are identical
lags of (1) the trial variable (2) CP6CM6,
to the final 10 columns  in Table 2, except that the conditioning   variables  for  the  k-month ahead regressions are 6 lags
                                                                         ICI  and  the  transformed trial series.
each of CP6GM6 and ClOd, in addition to 6 lags each of transformed
                                                          Table      6


                         Bivariate Predictive Content for the Index of Industrial Production (IP):
                                                         1948-1988

                                                                                                    Subsample Stability: RMSEs
                                                                                                       -   88:12      -   79:9
Series       Tratis.                                   R2(1)   rank      R2(6) rank   R2(12) rank    -79:9 79:10-   -79:9 79:10-
                          F6     p6      F12    p12

Base Model               0.00   0.000   0.00   0:000   0.202             0.085        0.074           8.72 6.58      8.71 6.68


Output and Capacity    Uttlizitjj
  3      IPC   DLN       2.55   0.019   2.98   0.001   0.239    21       0.145   43   0.207   27      8.46 6.22      8.44   6.37
  4     IPCN   DLN       2.79   0.011   2.59   0.002   0.239    22       0.131   53   0.170   40      8.50 6.43      8.48   6.54
  5     IPCD   DLN       1.98   0.067   2.50   0.004   0.226    44       0.114   65   0.143   53      8.59 6.42      8.58   6.56
  6      IPD   DLN       7.06   0.000   4 54   0.000   0.269     1       0.136   49   0.129   56      8.37 6.85      8.36   6.96
  7      IPN   DLN       4.70   0.000   3.3    0.000   0.261         3   0.218   11   0.202   29      8.04 6.17      8.03   6.27
  8    IPMIN   DLN       4.38   0.000   4.03   0 000   0.248    14       0.131   54   0.160   44      8.54 6.17      8.53   6.33
  9     IPUT   DLN       0.75   0.614   0.94   0,09    0.212    77       0.087   83   0.082   80      8.71 6.56      8.69   6.76
 10      IPE   DLN       0.39   0.883   1.08   0.3/b   0.207    81       0.123   59   0.132   55      8.51 6.56      8.49   6.73
 11    IPMFG   DLN       3.53   0.002   3.17   0.000   0.242    18       0.125   57   0.118   60      8.58 6.18      8.55   6.45
 12      1PM   DUJ       3,46   0.002   3.24   0.000   0 :36    25       0.13]   48   0.148   49      8.45 6.47      8.44   6.59
 13      IPI   DLN       5.91   0.000   3.33   0.000   0.2b:         2   0.204   20   0.186   35      8.05 6.51      8.02   6.81
 14      IPF   DLN       2.61   0.017   2.15   0.013   0.230    37       0.102   74   0.099   71      8.63 6.55      8.62   6.66
 17   IPXMCA     D       3.71   0.001   3.24   0.000   0.241    ].       0.118   61   0.105   65      8.56 6.46      8.52   6.97

Consumption. Sales and Income
 20      CMPY  DLN     1.15 0.332       1.27   0.231   0.213    71       0.12u   60   0.169   41      8.59   6.28    8.57   6.48
 21   CMPY82   DLN     2.72 0.013       1.62   0.084   0.220    56       0.116   .1   0.097   72      8.49   6.82    8.47   7.00
 24      MT82  DLN     0.85 0.532       0.82   0.630   0.210    79       0.117   6    0.091   75      8.53   6.63    8.51   6.80
 28     RTR82  DLN     2.06 0.057       1.55   0.102   0.229    40       0.134   50   U 160   45      8.47   6.42    8.46   6.56


Inventories. Orders, and Performance
 31   MPCON8   DLN     2.85 0.010       2.87   0.001   0.235    28       0.165   34   0.125    7      8.22 6.76      8.20 6.98
 32   MSOND8   DLN     4.86 0.000       3.74   0.000   0.259     4       0.204   19   0,150   4       8.01 6.68      7.99 6.88
 33   MOCM82   DLN     3.85 0.001       3.78   0.000   0.24]    15       0.207   18   0.180   38      ;' 00 6.62     7.99 6.79
 35    MD082   DLN     3.77 0.001       3.49   0.000   0.249    12       0.226    9   0.185   36      /.S 6.64       7.86 6.86
                                                            sauLc   U   L.UIILLLIUtU


Housing and Construction
 46     HSBP     N    4.22         0.000   3.31    0.000     0.251       11     0.313    1   0.336    1   7.58 5.58      7.56 5 .86
 47     HSFR     N     3.05        0.006   2.08    0.017     0.240       20     0.268    3   0.277    4   7.84 5.67      7.82 5.90
 48   CONDO9   DLN     3.13        0.005   2.72    0.002     0.235       27     0.130   55   0.103   67   8.47 6.59      8.46 6.69

Money   nd  Credit: Ouantitv Variables
 49     FMBASE   DLN     1.57  0.155       1.13    0.334     0.222       51     0.088   82   0.078   83   8.72   6.49    8. 70 6.65
 52     FM1D82   DLN     2.94  0.008       1.62    0.082     0.237       24     0.211   14   0.225   15   7.86   7.10    7.39   12.05
 59     FCLN82   DLN     1.71  0.117       1.68    0.068     0.222       50     0.171   32   0.201   30   8.38   5.88    8.35   6.24
 60     FCBCUC     N     2.14 0.048        2.04    0.019     0.233       31     0.214   13   0.218   16   7.95   6.66    7.89   7.22
 63      CCBPY   DLN     1.83  0.093       1.06    0.396     0.216       66     0.093   79   0.094   73   8.66   6.63    8.65   6.77
 64     CCI3OM   DLN     1.40 0.215        1.04    0.413     0.214       69     0.096   76   0.108   64   8.62   6.74    8.58   7.20

Stock Prices and Volume
 65   FSPCOM   DLN     4.52        0.000   2.60    0.002      0.254       5     0.252    4   0.216   18   7.80   6.29    7.75   6.83
 66    FSPIN   DLN     4.50        0.000   2 .60   0.002      0.254       7     0.245    6   0.210   24   7.85   6.29    7.80   6.82
 67       FSDJ    DLN      4.27    0.000    .
                                           2 34    0.007      0.252       9     0.234    7   0.190   34   7.94   6.22    7.88   6.78
 68      FSVOL    DLN      1.15    0.335   1.46    0.138      0.213      74     0.115   64   0.113   62   8.54    .
                                                                                                                 6 64    8.52   6.81

Tnlrt      Pjfpq ind    Soreads
 70      FYGM3      D       1.06   0.384   1.05    0.403      0.213      72     0.109   67   0.117   61   8.66   6.21    8.56   8.45
 74       FYCL      D       1.69   0.121   1.24    0.254      0.219      58     0.131   52   0.154   46   8.56   6.07    8.40   10.20
 75       FYCP      0       1.83   0.091   1.48    0.128      0.222      52     0.156   39   0.147   50   8.43   6.05    8.29   8. 56
 76      FYSAC      D       1.50   0.176   1.43    0.148      0.218      62     0.143   45   0.137   54   8.49   6.15    8.34   8.86
 77     FYAA.AC     0       2.75   0.013   1.67    0.071      0.230      39     0.157   38   0.184   37   8.44   5.93    8.   24 10.50
 78     FYBAAC      0       3.07   0.006   1.69    0.066      0.233      32     0.191   26   0.215   20   8.24   5.97    7.95   11.21
 79                 N       2.21   0.041   1.30    0.217      0.224      46     0.194   25   0.284    3   8.15   6. 30   7.95   9.04
        GL_GM3
 87   BAC GM3       N       3.65   0.002   3.41    0.000      0.231      35     0.221   10   0.201   31   8.06   6.00    8.04   6.25
 89   BAA AAA       N       5.83   0.000   3.21    0.000      0. 254      6     0.144   44   0.120   59   8.36   6.69    8.24   8.52
 90     AAACL       N       2.48   0.023   1.37    0. 176     0.223      49     0.129   56   0.103   68   8.52   6. 35   8.51   6.49

Areate       Employment and   Labor Force Participation
100     LHOURS    DLN       0.64   0.703   2.32    0.007      0.211      78     0.094   78   0.086   78   8.67   6. 56   8.66 6.68
101       thEM    DLN       1.27   0.271   3.44    0.000      0.222      54     0.106   70   0.105   66   8.63   6.43    8.62 6.5]
102     LHTNAC    DLN       3.02   0.007   4.14    0.000      0.232      34     0.107   69   0.089   77   8.60   6.57    8.59 6.71
103       LHCH      0       0.34   0.916   1.07    0.385      0.205      84     0.086   84   0.075   84   8.71   6.57    8. 70 6.70
109      LHMUR      N       1.14   0.338   1.9]    0.025      0.220      57     0.159   37   0.170   39   8.25   6.79    7.98 10.30
110      LPHRM      N       1.81   0.096   2.21    0.011      0.227      43     0.171   33   0.213   21   8.18   6.78    8.13 7 .29
111      LPHRD      N       1.77   0.104   1.81    0.044      0.224      48     0.162   36   0.206   28   8.26   6.67    8.22 7 06.




113       LHU 5   DLN       1.46   0.190   1.21    0.276      0.213      73     0.103   73   0.080   82   8.62   6.57    8.60 6.78
114     LHU68O      N       1.50   0.176   1.39    0.165      0.221      55     0.196   22   0.210   23   8.14   6.31    8.02 7.88
116      LHELX      N       4.06   0.001   2.68    0.002      0.248      13     0.230    8   0.266    7   7.82   6.82    7.74 7.58
                                                          Table 6, continued

117    LUINC    DLN        3.49    0.002   2.51   0.003    0.243    17   0.203   21   0,153   47   8.01 6.70     7.94 7.40

Employment bvSctor
118    LPNAG    DLN        1.12    0.349   1.96   0.026    0.216    64   0.151   42   0.210   25   8.37 6,46     8.36 6.58
119     LPMI    DLN        4.14    0.001   3.56   0.000    0.253     8   0.196   23   0.218   17   8.23 5.88     8.21 6.09
120     LPCC    DLN        1.89    0.082   2.59   0.002    0.216    67   0.096   77   0.090   76   8.65 6,60     8.64   6.71
121     LPEN    DLN        0.26    0.957   1.00   0,450    0.206    83   0.152   40   0.215   19   8.41 6.24     8.39   6,46
122     LPED    DLN        1.00    0.423   1.42   0.153    0.214    70   0.183   28   0.262    8   8.27 6.06     8.25   6.30
123     LPEN    DLN        2.89    0.009   1.88   0.035    0.238    23   0.132   51   0.123   58   8.47 6.51     8.46   6.62
124     LPTW    DLN        0.82    0.556   0.72   0.732    0.212    76   0.125   58   0.160   43   8.54 6.34     8.53   6.54
125     LPTR    DLN        0.54    0.781   1.37   0.175    0.207    82   0.103   72   0.083   79   8.60 6.65     8.58   6.86
126     LPFR    DLN        1.43    0.203   1.52   0.113    0.215    68   0.105   71   0.099   70   8.61 6.59     8.60   6.71
128    LPGOV    DLN        1.47    0.186   1.36   0.181    0.217    63   0.093   80   0.081   81   8.71 6.39     8.68   6.76

Productivity. and Real. Wages
131      PLM    DLN      1.01      0.419   1.90   0.032    0.216    65   0.183   29   0.276    5   8.31 5.88     8.29 6.07
133     LEHM    DLN      2.92      0.008   2.20   0.011     0.231   36   0.210   15   0.232   14   8.05 6.35     8.03 6.56

Prices
137     PUNEW   DLN        2.06    0.056   1.28   0.228     0.225   45   0.179   31   0.256   11   8.26   6.23   8.24 6.50
138    PZUNEW   DLN        3.08    0.006   1.86   0.037     0.232   33   0.180   30   0.256   10   8.24   6.28   8.22 6.52
139        PW   DLN        2.19    0.043   1.38   0.174     0.224   47   0.165   35   0.211   22   8.30   6.41   8.29 6.53
140    PW1200   DLN        2.83    0.010   1.89   0.034     0.230   38   0.109   66   0.145   51   8.57   6.62   8.55 6.95
141    PW1300   DLN        0.85    0.529   1.23   0.258     0.212   75   0.138   47   0.195   33   8.47   6.35   8.46 6.49
142     PWCMP   DLN        2.03    0.061   1.19   0.286     0.219   60   0.090   81   0.094   74   8.70   6.53   8.69 6.67
143      PWFC   DLN        1.46    0.190   1.13   0.331     0.219   59   0.143   46   0.196   32   8.44   6.34   8.44 6.43
144      PWFP   DLN        3.22    0.004   1.98   0.024     0.233   30   0.247    S   0.252   12   7.86   6.19   7.85 6.29
145    PWFUEL   DLN        0.91    0.490   1.60   0.089     0.210   80   0.151   41   0.209   26   8.30   6.79   8.17 8.43
146      PWIC   DLN        2.56    0.019   2.03   0.021     0.228   41   0.207   16   0.261    9   8.02   6.57   7.99 6.86
147     PWIMS   DLN        2.44    0.025   1.49   0.125     0.228   42   0.207   17   0.247   13   8.04   6.47   8.02 6.62
148    PWIMSM   DLN        3.08    0.006   1.89   0.034     0.236   26   0.217   12   0.270    6   7.99   6.44   7.98 6.57
150    PSCCOM   DLN        3.21    0.004   1.79   0.047     0.235   29   0.098   75   0.112   63   8.64   6.62   8.62 6.85

Misc    (vprnmnt-     nd   t-hpr
162     FAIL    DLN        1.74    0.110   1.79   0.047     0.222   53   0.109   68   0.101   69   8.56 6.68     8,54 6.94
163      INC    DLN        3.53    0.002   1.92   0.030     0.251   10   0.194   24   0.143   52   8.03 6.84     8.01 7.02

Notes:  The statistics are identical to those reported in Table 3, except that the sample period begins with
1948:1.  See the notes to Tables 2 and 3 for descriptions.
                                    Table 7
Leading Indicators, classified by lead at maximal absolute correlation (kmax)
        of  filteredseries a24(L)Y, as reported in Table 1, column 16

Rank Vble no. Name                           Rank Vble no. Name kax_y(kmaxl
                   kwax__y(kmaxl
Range of Lead: -1 Co -2 months               Range   of Lead:   -3 to -4 months
  1  115     LHEL    -1   0.95                 1      58      FMLR    -4    0.60
 2     24      MT82    -1    0.94              2      90    AA.AGL    -3   -0.58
  3    13       IPI    -1    0.93              3     163       INC    -3    0.55
 4      7       IPN    -1    0.92             4      144      PWFP    -4   -0.53
 5    130    IPROD1    -1    0.92              5      52    FMID82    -4    0.53
 6     34      M082    -1    0.90              6     141    PWI300    -4   -0.46
  7    35     MD082    -1    0.90              7     162      FAIL    -3   -0.40
 8     33    MOCM82    -2    0.89              8      55       FM3    -3    0.27
 9      3       IPC    -1    0.88              9      51       FMI    -3    0.25
10    112    LPMOSA    -1    0.87             10      49    FMBASE    -3    0.18
11    117     LUINC    -2   -0.87
12    105    LHNAPS    -1   -0.86            Range   of Lead: -5 to -7 months
13    104    LHNAGP    -1   -0.84              1      54    FM2D82    -6   0.68
14      5      IPCD    -1    0.82              2      50   FMBASER    -6   0.62
15    111     LPHRD    -1    0.80              3      56      FM3R    -5   0.59
16      4      IPCN    -1    0.80             4       46      HSBP    -6   0.59
17    110     LPHRM    -1    0.79              5      47      HSFR    -6   0.59
18     44     1VT82    -2   -0.79             6       65    FSPCOM    -6    0.55
19     32    MSOND8    -1    0.78              7      66     FSPIN    -6    0.54
20    106    LHNPVX    -1    0.77             8       67      FSDJ    -6    0.51
21     31    MPCON8    -1    0.76             9      136   RPWGMDS    -7    0.49
22     36     MN082    -2    0.75            10       78    FYBAAC    -7   -0.48
23     88   BAA_Gb     -2   -0.74            11       53       FM2    -5    0.48
24     18     GMC82    -2    0.73            12      133      LEHM    -7   -0.31
25     39     MNU82    -2    0.73            13      151    EXRWT1    -5   -0.30
26    113      LHUS    -2   -0.73            14      152    EXRWT2    -5   -0.27
27     27       RT8    -2    0.73            15      153    EXNWT1    -5   -0.26
28     19    GMCD82    -2    0.70             16     154    EXNWT2    -5   -0.24
29     28     RTR82    -2    0.69
30    131       PLM    -2   -0.69           Range of Lead: -8 to -10 months
31     45    VENDOR    -2    0.67              1     148    PWIMSM    -8   -0.57
 32    60    FCBCUC    -2    0.67             2      147     PWIMS    -8   -0.54
33     89   BAA AAA    -2   -0. 66             3     146      PWIC    -8   -0.53
34     29     RCARD    -1    0.58             4      137     PUNEW    -9   -0.53
35     30    RCARTA    -1    0.56              S     138    PZUNEW    -9   -0.52
36      9      IPUT    -1    0.46             6      135    RPWCMS    -8    0.52
37     42    IVM2D8    -2    0.43              7     139        PW    -9   -0.48
38     95    FYGM3R    -2    0.34              8      86   CP6_GM6    -8   -0.48
                                              9      159       FBD    -8    0.47
                                              10     134    LEHM82   -10    0.47
                                              11     145    PWFUEL    -9   -0.47
                                             12      143      PWFC   -10   -0.46
                                              13      87   BAC GM3    -8   -0.44
                                              14      82    G1GM6     -8   -0.23

                                             Range of Lead: -11 to -14 months
                                               1     160      FBDY   -13    0.47
                                               2      77    FYAAAC   -12   -0.45
                                               3      74      FYGL   -13   -0.42
                                              4      119      LPMI   -11   -0.41
                                               5      73    FYGTIO   -13   -0.41
                                     Table 8

Leading Indicators, classified by predictive content for ICI growth for the
   conditioning set of Table 2 (lagged series and ICI growth, 1959 - 1988

A. Classified by 6-ionth                 B. Classified by 6-month ahead
   ahead in-sample R                    "out-of-sample" RMSE (79:10-88:12)
Rank       Series            R2(6)           Series           RMSE

            86               0.53               62   FCLBMCY     3.62
   1             CP6_GM6
   2        87   BAC_GM3     0.47               46      HSBP     3.92
   3        85    GM3 FF     0,46               47      HSFR     3.94
   4        93    FF Gb      0.44              137     PUNEW     4.12
   5        54    FM2D82     0.42               59    FCLN82     4.14
   6       115      LHEL     0.39              131        PIll   4.18
   7        62   FCLBMCY     0.38              138    PZUNEW     4.18
   8        80               0.35               86   CP6_GM6     4.19
                  GlO_Gi
   9        46      HSSP     0.34              119      LPMI     4.20
  10        50   FMBASER     0.34              161      FBYS     4.23

  11       148    PWIMSM     0.33               87   ACGM3       4.23
  12        39     MNU82     0.32               20       GMPY    4.26
  13        56      FM3R     0.32               84   GM6_GM3     4.26
  14        65    FSPCOM     0.32              152               4.27
  15        66     FSPIN     0.31              153     EXNWTI    4.28
  16        58       FMLR    0.31              154     EXNWT2    4.31
  17        47       HSFR    0.31              151     EXRWT1    4.33
  18        79    GL_GM3     0.30              144       PWFP    4.33
  19       147     PWIMS     0.30              122       LPED
  20       116     LHELX     0.30                3        IPC    4.39

  21        92     FFBAC     0.30              143       PWFC    4.39
  22        67       FSDJ    0.30              155      EXVUS    4.40
  23       160       FZDY    0.29                8      IPMIN    4.41
  24       144       PWFP    0.29              121       LPEM    4.41
  25       146       PWIC    0.28               13        IPI    4.42
  26        81    G1OGM3     0.28                7        IPN    4.42
  27        78     FYBAAC    0.28               27        RT8    4.44
  28        52     FM1D82    0.28              133       LEHM    4.44
  29       161       FBYS    0.28              105     LRNAPS    4.44
  30        53        FM2    0.27              128      LPGOV    4.45

  31        91     FF_CP6    0.27              115       U-IEL   4.45
  32       159        FBD    0.27              124       LPTW    4.45
  33       137      PIJNEW   0.26               35      MD082    4.47
  34        45     VENDOR    0.26               32     MSOND8    4.47
  35       108   LHIJLLHEM   0.26               28      RTR82    4.47
  36       138     PZIJNEW   0.25               38      MDU82    4.48
  37       117      LUINC    0.25              141     PW1300    4.48
  38       139         Pw    0.25               90     AAAGL     4.48
  39       105     LHNAPS    0.25               31     MPCON8    4.48
  40        75       FYCP    0.25               99   LPM}IUADJ   4.49
                                       Table 9

      Leading Indicators, classified by predictive content for ICI growth
         for the conditioning set of Table 4 (lagged series, Id growth,
            money growth, inflation, 90-day T-bill rate), 1959 - 1988

A. Classified by 6-ionth                   B. Classified by 6-month ahead
   ahead in-sample R                      "out-of-sample" RMSE (79:10-88:12)
                                2                              RNSE
Rank       Series              R (6)           Series

  1          86     CF6 GM6    0.58               86    CP6 dM6    4.44
  2         115        LHEL    0.56              115       LHEL    4.57
  3          87                0.54               87    AC_GM3     4.82
                    BAC_GM3
  4          85                0.54               45     VENDOR    4.92
                     GM3_FF
  5           93               0.53              142      PWCMP    4.95
                     FF_G1O
  6          108 LHULLHEM      0.51              123       LPEN    4.96
  7           39      MNU82    0.50               38      MDU82    4.98
  8           62    FCLBMCY    0.49              105     LHNAPS    4.98
  9           75       FYCP    0.49               94      FYFFR    4.99
 10           66      FSPIN    0.49              140     PWl200    5.00


 11           76      FYBAC    0.49               46       HSBP    5.01
 12           65     FSPCOM    0.48               37       MU82    5.01
             149    PSMC99A    0.48               10        IPE    5.02
 13
              80               0.48               85     CM3_FF    5.02
 1.4                 GlO_Gi
             148     PWIMSM    0.48               93     FF_G10    5.02
 15
             161       FBYS    0.48               62    FCLZMCY    5.02
 16
             107       LHUL    0.48                7        IPN    5.03
 17
              92     FFBAC     0.48              149    PSMC99A    5.04
 18
              59     FCLN82    0.48              148     PWIMSM    5.04
 19
             140     PW1200    0.48               47       HSFR    5.05
 20

                      PWIMS    0.48              150     PSCCOM    5.05
 21          147
 22          142      PWCMP    0.47              116      LHELX    5.06
              67       FSDJ    0.47               32     MSOND8    5.06
 23
 24           26        WT8    0.47              134     LEHM82    5.06
  25         116      LHELX    0.47              154     EXNT2     5.06
                       MSM8    0.47               92     FF_BAC    5.07
  26          25
              46       HSBP    0.47               42     IVM2D8    5.07
  27
                     LHNAPS    0.47              104     LHNAGP    5.08
  28         105
                        FBD    0.47               25       MSM8    5.08
  29         159
  30          47       HSFR    0.47              153     EXNWT1    5.08

  31         134      LEHM82    0.47              106     LHNPVX    5.09
                        FBDY    0.46               16     IPXDCA    5.09
  32          160
                      IPXDCA    0.46              103      LHCH     5.09
  33           16
  34           90               0.46              107      LHUL     5.10
                      AAA_GL                                        5.10
  35          155      EXVUS    0.46              124      LPTW
               94      FYFFR    0.46               59     FCLN82    5.11
  36
                        PWFP    0.46               64     CC130M    5.12
  37          144
                      GLGM3     0.46              120       LPCC    5.13
  38           79
                        FYFF    0.46               12        1PM    5.14
  39           69
  40           37       MU82    0.46              152     EXRWT2    5.15
