                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           BEFORE THE ACCORD: U.S. MONETARY-FINANCIAL POLICY 1945-51




                               Barry Eichengreen

                                 Peter Carber




                            Working Paper No. 3380




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   June 1990




Prepared for the NBER Conference on Financial Crisis, Key Biscayne, Florida,
March 22-24, 1990. We thank Alex Mackier, Carolyn Werley, and Lauren
Auchincloas for research assistance, and Glenn Hubbard and Rick Miahkin for
helpful comments. This paper is part of NBER'a research program in Financial
Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #3380
                                       June 1990


          BEFORE THE ACCORD: U.S. MONETARY-FINANCIAL POLICY 1945-51


                                   ABSTRACT


     Thia paper analyzes U.S. monetary-financial policy in the period leading
up to the Treasury-Fed Accord. We model policy as an implicit target zone for
the price level and an explicit zone for interest rates, and the difficulties
on the eve of the Accord as an incipient run on a collapsing target-zone
regime. The regime was implemented to maintain the stability of the financial
system in a period when there was a serious maturity mismatch between the
assets and liabilities of the banking system.




    Barry Eichengreen                  Peter Garber
    Economics Department               Economics Department
    University of California           Brown University
    Berkeley, CA 94720                 Providence, RI 02912
1.   Introduction

     The 1951 Treasury-Federal Reserve Accord brought to a close an

extraordinary period in the monetary and financial history of the United States.

For nearly a decade, U.S. Treasury bond yields never rose above 2 1/2 per cent

(see Chart 1). Long-term interest rates may have been low, but short-term rates

were lower still: those on 12-month certificates of indebtedness were capped at

7/8 of 1 per cent to 1 1/4 per cent; for the first half of the period 90 day

Treasury bill rates never exceeded 3/8 of 1 per cent. Interest rates were low

despite an inflation rate that reached 25 per cent in the year ending in July

1947 (see Chart 2). They were stable despite swings from 25 per cent inflation

in 1946-47 to 3 percent deflation in the year July 1948-July 1949, to 10 per

cent inflation in the year March 1950-March 1951. These pronounced fluctuations

in ex post real interest rates did not undermine the stability of financial

institutions: there were only five bank suspensions between the end of 1945 and

the middle of 1950. The stability of interest rates and the absence of bank

fsilures in the turbulent aftermath of World War II seems all the more

remsrkable following a decade like the 1980's when the volatility of asset

prices was so pronounced and the difficulties of finsncial institutions were so

prevslentj

     This psper analyzes U.S. monetary-financial policy in the period leading up

to the March 1951 Treasury-Fed Accord. Our point of departure is Friedman and

Schwartz's notion that policy in this period was formulsted with reference to a

price-level target. As soon as the price level deviated sufficiently from its


      1Data on bank suspensions are provided by Simmons (1950), p. 12.
 Given the focus of the volume in which this paper sppesrs, this may be
 thought of as sn example of "the dog that didn't bark." But as shall be
 apparent momentarily, finsncisl instability figures prominently in the
 snslysis that follows.

                                       1
target range, policymakers were expected to intervene to prevent it from

straying further. We draw on the recent literature on exchange rate target

zones and collapsing exchange rate regimes to formalize this notion and to show

how its implications for interest rate behavior can be derived. We model policy

in the period as a target zone for the price level, and the mounting

difficulties on the eve of the Accord as an incipient run on a collapsing

target-zone regime. In the framework we employ, a target zone for the price

level plus an intervention rule imply a target zone for the interest rate.

Thus, the model provides s framework for analyzing Federal Reserve intervention

and an approach to understanding the singular behavior            interest rates.

      The model also helps one to understand the economic policies and

conditions that rendered the policy of capping interest rates sustainable

through 1949 but set the stage for its collapse in 1951.          In particular, it

directs attention to the financial and monetary objectives of the authorities

and the evolution of the real economy. The absence of dramatic real shocks

before 1950 minimized the burden on the monetary authorities, while their

credible commitment to the price-level target zone enhanced their capacity to

absorb those shocks that occurred. Subsequently, real interest rates rose

dramatically, intensifying the pressure for monetary policymakers to intervene,

while the advent of the Korean War increased the perceived costs of continued

adherence to the target zone regime.

      To understand pre-Accord policy --       specifically   policymakers' commitment

to a regime that entailed an explicit target zone for interest rates and an

implicit target zone for prices -- and the advent of the Accord in 1951, it is

essential to appreciate the threats to financial stsbility perceived by the

authorities and how those perceptions changed over time. Toward the beginning


                                           2
of the period the perceived threat to financial stability lay in the volatility

of inflation and interest rates. Hence the authorities' commitment to

stabilizing these variables. Toward the end of the period, these fears had

receded and policymakera' concern had shifted toward mobilizing the nation's

productive capacity for the Korean War. Hence the March 1951 Accord under which

the Fed could turn its attention from stabilizing interest rates to other

objectives.

      The rest of the paper is organized aa follows. Section II sketches the

background to the 1945-1951 period and presents a chronology of the principal

events. Section III presents the target zone model that provides the framework

for our subsequent analysis. Section IV shows how the events of the period can

be reinterpreted from a target zone perspective. Section V argues that concern

for the stability of the U.S. banking system accounts for the Fed's commitment

ro a target zone regime designed to stabilize prices and interest rates prior to

1951, and that shifts in the locus of concern asaociated with changea in

commercial bank portfolios and the advent of the Korean War account for the

collapse of the target zone regime and the Accord of 1951.



II. A Chronology of Events

      In this section we aketch the background to postwar monetary policy in the

United States and present a chronology of events affecting its formulation.

This aketch provides the reader unfamiliar with the epiaode an overview of

events. It also serves to indicate how the events of the period are

characterized in the existing literature. In Section IV we present a rather

different perspective and contrast it with the conventional interpretation

presented here.


                                        3
      This summary is also intended to bring out a limitation of existing

accounts, namely their emphasis on the role of fortuitous events in sustaining

the Fed and Treasury's low interest rate policy. The 1948-49 recession, for

instance, is portrayed as a fortuitous event relieving inflationary pressure and

demolishing inflationary expectations. There is remarkably little discussion of

the underlying economic environment or policy regime that rendered the low

interest rate policy viable. It is precisely such discussion that we seek to

add to the existing litersture in subsequent sections of the paper;

      A. Precursors of Wartime Policy

      The origins of pre-Accord monetary policy in the United States are

conventionally traced to World War II. The low interest rate regime is

portrayed ss a logical extension of wartime debt-management policies. In fact,

the origins of U.S. policy in the period 1945-SO go back further, specifically

to the monetary policies and problems of the l930s.

      For the Fed to pursue a policy of stabilizing bond prices, it had to have

the capacity to intervene in securities markets. That capacity was enhanced by

the passage of the Glass-Steagall Act of 1932 (not the 1933 Banking Act of the

same name). Glass-Stegsll permitted the Federal Reserve System to count

government bonds among the eligible securities required as backing for 60 per

cent of Federal Reserve notes. -   This permitted the Federal Reserve to hold
directly a much larger quantity of Tressury securities than had been possible

before.

     Two developments in the 1930's that encouraged the Fed to intervene to

stsbilize securities prices were rising interest rates and the problem of excess

reserves. Both continued to mold the conduct of monetary policy in the 1940s.

     Economic recovery after 1933 placed gentle upward pressure on interest


                                          4
rates. Investors began to anticipate inflation. In early 1935, Treasury

officials concerned that rising interest rates might prevent them from attaining

their debt management objectives inquired whether the Fed might intervene to

stabilize bond prices before the Treasury engaged in its March financing

operation. System officials resisted pressure to peg Government bond prices but

acceded to requests that they at least help to damp fluctuations in the market.

In the spring of 1935, to moderate the rise in interest rates, the Fed, for one

of the first times in its history, purchased long-term government bonds.

     If the Treasury was worried about debt management, the Fed was preoccupied

by excess reserves. By late 1933, these had reached $800 million, or more than

40 per cent of required reserves. By the end of 1935, they had soared to more

than $3 billion, or 115 per cent of required reserves.

      The Federal Open Market Committee's concern was that the growth of excess

reserves weakened monetary control. Few member banks had occasion to borrow

from the Fed. Hence an increase in Reserve Bank discount rates would be

incapable of reining in inflationary pressure. At the end of 1935, System

holdings of securities were only about $2.5 billion. Even if the FOMC sold off

the System's entire portfolio, it could not mop up the banks' excess reserves.

This concern led ultimately to three controversial increases in reserve

requirements in August of 1936 and March and May of 1937.

      These increases were not universally supported. Though mopping up excess

reserves might enhance monetary control, the higher interest rates it produced

might prompt a recession. To acquire reserves, banks would liquidate a portion

of their bond portfolios. The consequent rise in long-term interest rates might

abort the recovery. If the fall in bond prices was sufficiently severe, the




                                        5
solvency of banks which had invested heavily in bonds might be threatened.2

     Hence on April 4, 1937 the F0MC agreed to purchase $25 million of

government securities in the coming week as "may be necessary with a view to

preserving an orderly market.    Interest rates rose, and the Fed continued

purchasing long-term Governments. In pursuit of this so-called "flexible

portfolio policy," it acquired $200 million of long-term bonds in exchange for

$150 million of short-term bills and notes and $50 million of cash.4

      To some, such as George Harrison, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of

New York, open market purchases were counterproductive. The object of increaaed

reserve requirements was to reduce excess reserves; bond purchases, by

replenishing reserves, defeated the purpose. Harrison favored no open market

intervention to limit the fall in bond prices. Others, notably Marriner Eccles,

Chairman of the FOMC, favored large-scale bond purchases to "stabilize the

market."5 The policy adopted was a compromise between the two positions.6



      2 Annual Report of the Board of Governors Covering Operations for the
 Year 1937 (1938), p.6.

         Annual Report of the Board of Governors Covering Operations for the
 Year 1937 (1938), p.214.

         Annual Report of the Board of Governors Covering Operations for the
 Year 1937 (1938), pp.6-7.

        These are the Board's words in its Annual Report (1937), p.7. The
passage continued, "In recent years the bond market has become a much more
important segment of the open money market, and banks, particularly money-
market banks, to an increasing extent use their bond portfolios as a means
of adjusting their cash position to meet demands made upon them. At times
when the demands increase they tend to reduce their bond portfolios and at
times when surplus funds are large they are likely to expand them. Since
prices of long-term bonds are subject to wider fluctuations than those of
short-term obligations, the increase importance of bonds as a medium of
investment for idle bank funds makes the maintenance of stable conditions
in the bond market an important concern of banking administration."

      6 Friedman and Schwartz (1963), p.527.

                                       6
Long-term interest rates were allowed to rise, but only moderately. Excess

reserves were allowed to fall, but only moderately.

      Long-term rates rose from 2 1/2 to 2 3/4 per cent before peaking in April

1937. Excess reserves were reduced, temporarily, to less than half of System

holdings of government securities. The policy continued into 1939, although it

was not necessary for the Fed to conduct purchases on a significant scale.

     The importance of the flexible portfolio policy lay in the Fed's

acknowledgement of responsibility for what it came to refer to as "orderly

conditions in the Government securities market." The phrase became commonplace

in the resolutions of the FMOC starting in the spring of 1938.       In effect, the

Fed had assumed responsibility for preventing changes in bond prices that might

endanger financial and economic stability. In additiom as a result of this

experience changes in reserve requirements had become one of the leading

instruments of monetary control. They would be relied upon heavily in the

l940s.

         B. Wartime Changes

         In September 1938 a conference of Presidents of Federal Reserve Banks met

to consider options for wartime policy. By 1939 a consensus had emerged that

steps should be taken to stabilize the government securities market. There was

a desire to avoid a problem that had plagued European finance during World War

I: continually rising rates that induced investors to defer purchases of

government securities in anticipation of still higher yields. In April and June

the FOMC was authorized to buy government securities to prevent their prices

from falling.

         Following the outbreak of war in Europe on September 1, 1939, the System
purchased $500 million of bonds in the open market.7    No additional support by

the Federal Reserve System was required, however. The outbreak of hostilities

in Europe was not accompanied by a financial crisis comparable to the worldwide

collapse of securities markets in 1914. The Munich crisis in 1938 provoked more

of a security price decline in New York and London than the outbreak of fighting

in 1939. The advent of war came as no surprise. The autarchical policies of

the 1930's were ideal precautions against the financial interconnections among

belligerants that would have created a finsncial crisis.

     The gross public debt of the United States increased by 33 per cent between

June 30, 1939 and November 30, 1941.8 But the only instance in this period,

other than September 1939, when the Fed was forced to purchase Treasury bonds

was the spring of 1940, following the invasion of Norway, Denmark and the Low

Countries. Compared to European securities, U.S. Treasury bonds were regarded

as safe and attractive assets. The trade balance moved into strong surplus and

gold surged toward the U.S., augmenting the liquidity of the market.

Pearl Harbor, which augered budget deficits and inflation, transformed this

situation. Securities prices fell, impelling the Fed to purchase $50 million of

bonds and $10 million of bills. Within two weeks of the Japanese attack,

Treasury and Federal Reserve officials had agreed to stabilize interest rates.

      Though the Fed, compared to the Treasury, preferred higher interest


         The Fed invoked both the need to exert a steadying influence on the
 capital market, which was necessary for economic recovery, and the need to
 safeguard the stability of the banking system. As the Board described its
 policy, "While the system has neither the obligation nor the power to
 assure any given level of prices or yields for Government securities, it
 has been its policy in so far as its powers permit to protect the market
 for these securities from violent fluctuations of a speculative, or panicky
 nature. Annual Report of the Board of Governors Covering Operations for
 the Year 1939 (1940), p.S.

      8 Murphy (1950), p.30.

                                        8
rates, neither agency disputed the desirability of stabilization. Following

negotiations, the Fed agreed in March 1942 to support Treasury bill prices once

short-term rates reached 3/8 per cent. Reserve banks were ordered by the FOMC

to purchase all Treasury bills offered them at this price.9 No such formal

instruction was issued regarding Treasury bonds, but it was understood that long

rates would not be permitted to rise above 2 1/2 per cent)0 Wage and price

controls were relied on to prevent the ready availability of credit from

generating undue inflation.

     A 2 percentage point differential between short and long rates was almost

exactly the differential established previously by the market. Treasury

officials regarded it as a necessary premium to induce investors to hold

long-term bonds. Pegging short rates at less than 1/2 per cent was essential,

in their view, to prevent long rates from rising above 2 1/2 per cent. What

they neglected was the effect of intervention on portfolio preferences. As soon

as the Fed's policy was regarded as credible and interest-rate risk vanished,

investors came to regard Treasury bills and bonds as virtually perfect

substitutes. Investors sold bills for higher yielding bonds, forcing the Fed to

do the converse (as indicated by Charts 3 and 4). By the end of the war, the

Federal Reserve System held virtually the entire supply of Treasury bills.

Prior to the end of 194], it held negligible amounts of bonds, though the bond


         Since sellers of Treasury bills to the Fed were also given the
 option to repurchase at a 3/8% yield, the bill yield was effectively
 pegged.

     10 There is no convincing explanation of the decision to settle on 2
1/2 per cent. Britain had pegged consols at 3 per cent, and U.S. officials
argued that superior U.S. credit justified somewhat lower rates. 2 1/2 per
cent was close to the rate previously set by the market. It was an even
rate, not a "hat size" like 2 3/8 or 2 5/8. One Treasury official later
justified the rate as consistent with the yields required for solvency by
life insurance companies. Murphy (1950), chapter 8.

                                       9
yields remained at their ceiling from 1942 until the beginning of 1945.

     C. 1945-47: Inflation

     The cap on long-term interest rates did not bind immediately after the war.

Massive bond issues might have exhausted the Fed's willingness or ability to peg

long-term rates. But with the end of fighting, fresh sales of Government

securities were almost immediately limited to funding operations. The Victory

Loan issued in December 1945 virtually ended Treasury borrowing. The Federal

budget was balanced in 1946 and in strong surplus in 1947-48. With the danger

of capitsl losses removed, the two-point yield differential between short- and

long-term bonds rendered the latter increasingly attractive. At the end of 1945

the yield on long-term Governments was slightly more than 2.3 per cent. By the

following April it had fallen to less than 2.1 per cent.

     Starting in July 1946, the price level began to rise. The end of price

control in conjuction with European demands for American exports pushed up U.S.

wholesale prices by 25 per cent over the succeeding 12 months. In July of 1947

concern over inflation led the Fed, with the concurrence of the Treasury, to

abolish the buying rate for Treasury bills. Bowing to Treasury pressure, it

continued to support the rate on 9 to 12 month certificates at slightly more

than 3/4 per cent and bond yields at 2 1/2 per cent. Later in the year, it

gradually increased its buying rate for certificates to 1 per cent. Bill rates

fluctuated below this level. (Chart 1 plots these rate movements.)

     Inflation moderated temporarily, stimulating the demand for government

securities. It wss mainly the demand for Treasury bills that rose. The gap

between bond and bill rates was narrower than two years before, since the Fed no

longer supported Treasury bill prices. In addition, since May the Treasury had

sold $1.8 billion of bonds from its investment accounts. Treasury bond yields


                                       10
rose from 2.24 per cent in Sepcember to 2.39 per cent in December. The Fed was

forced to intervene with $2 billion of bond purchases in November and December

to limit the rise in yields.11 It purchased an additional $3 billion of bonds

in the first quarter of 1948. But the demand for Treasury bills was

sufficiently strong that the Fed was able to reduce its overall portfolio of

Treasury securities by $1 billion over the period (see Charts 35)J2

         By the second quarter of 1948, inflation had again become the dominant

fear. The Fed was forced to purchase bonds with cash. System holdings of

Treasury securities (the sum of bonds, bills and certificates) began to rise.

The Treasury resisted any measure to increase short-term rates. Only in August

1948 did it    finally   accede to an increase in the 12 month rate to 1 1/4 per

cent.

        D. 1948-49: Deflation

        Increasingly price stability and the prevailing level of interest rates

seemed at odds. Reserve requirements were raised in February and June to the

legal maximum of 24%. In August a special session of Congress called by

President Truman to consider anti-inflation legislation passed a bill

authorizing further increases in reserve requirements. The September increase

in reserve requirements to 26% led the banks to sell $2 billion of government

bonds, which the Fed purchased, increasing the supply of high powered money

commensurately. 13

     The 1948-49 recession brought a fortuitous respite. Wholesale prices

stopped rising in August 1948. Industrial production stopped rising in


        11 Chandler (1949), p.12.

        12 Friedman and Schwartz (1963), p.580.

        13 Friedman and Schwartz (1963), pp.604-605.

                                           11
November. As the demand for commercial and mortgsge loans softened, banks and

insurance companies once again began to purchase Treasury bonds.

     Monetary policymakera' dissatisfaction with interest-rate pegging was

compounded by the perceived need to sell government bonds during the recession.

The Fed had never formally committed itself to prevent interest rates from

falling. Nonetheless, the System sold $3 billion of bonds in the first half of

1949, the majority in exchange for cash. The action was widely criticized for

aggravating the recession.

     This unsatisfactory experience led the Fed to affirm that its primary

commitment was to price and income stability, not to the stability of interest

rates. Thus, in the Federal Reserve Bulletin for July 1949, the FOMC announced

its intention "to direct purchases, sales and exchange of Government securities

by the Federal Reserve Banks with primary regard to the general business and

credit situation. 14 The question was whether the Treasury would go along.

This question acquired new urgency once industrial production began to recover

in July 1949.

     E. 1950-51: Inflation

     Consumer prices resumed their rise in the second quarter of 1950.

Long-term bond yields anticipated the trend, bottoming out at the end of 1949.

The resurgence of inflationary pressure had an immediate impact on Federal

Reserve operations. In the second quarter of 1950 Federal Reserve holdings of

U.S. Treasury securities began to rise steadily. By June fighting in Korea was

underway. With market interest rates rising, System purchases of Treasury

securities continued at an accelerating pace. The Federal Reserve Board and the

FOMC continued to mouth their commitment to the maintenance of orderly


      14 Federal Reserve Bulletin (July 1949), p.776.

                                       12
conditions in the government securities msrket but also reaffirmed the priority

attached to curbing inflationj5 In private they pressed the Treasury for

higher interest rates. Treasury Secretary John W. Snyder reaiated; the

Treasury's autumn refunding loan was issued at 1 1/4 per cent. The Federal

Reserve System was forced to purchase the majority of it.

      By this time the public had grown concerned over inflation. Congressional

criticiam of Treasury policy had become increaaingly common. The Douglas

Committee, which reported in January 1950, criticized the Treasury's insistence

on pegging interest rates.16 In February Senator Douglas made a famous speech

critical of the Treasury. The specter of an inflationary crisis prompted a

series of staff-level conferences between the the Treasury and the Fed. On the

last day of February, Secretary Synder gave in. The Accord between the two

organizations was couched in general terms:


     "The Treasury and the Federal Reserve system have reached full accord with
respect to debt-management and monetary policies to be pursued in furthering
their common purpose to assure the successful financial of the Covernment's
requirements and, at the same time, to minimize monetization of the public
debt. ,17


     The exact provisions of the agreement between the Federal Reserve Board and

the Treasury were never published. Its essence limited the Fed's commitment to

support the 2 1/2 per cent Treasury bonds to $400 million. Other government

bond prices fell immediately. By March 13th, the funds to support the 2 1/2's

were exhausted, and for the first time their prices were permitted to fall below



      15 Annual Report of the Board of Governors Covering Operations for
 the Year 1950 (1951), p.2.

      16 See Subcommittee of the Joint Committee on the Economic Report
 (1950), pp. 213-247 and passim.

      17 Joint Committee on the Economic Report (1952), Part I, p.74.

                                       13
par. By the end of the year their yield had riaen to 2 3/4 per cent.

       F. Recaoitulation

       Thia review of eventa aa they are portrayed in the literature brings out

several important points. First, concern over the stability of the banking

system figured in the Federal Reserve System's decision to intervene in the bond

market at various junctures in the 1930s; this experience laid the groundwork

for similar intervention in the 1940s. Second, changes in reserve requirements

emerged as one of the principal instruments of monetary control in the 1930s;

once again, as a result of this experience the instrument was relied upon

heavily in the 1940s. Third, and most importantly from our perspective, the

existing literature does not provide a systemstic anslysis of the policy regime

that rendered the Fed's program of bond market intervention sustainable; it is

unclesr why investors willingly held Treasury securities at such low interest

rates in the 1940s, or why this willingness apparently evaporated at the

decade's end.



III.   The Analytical Framework

       One way to appreciate the problem this poses for analysis is in terms of

the implications of conventional models of interest-rate pegging. Assume that

the Fed simply commits to pegging nominal rates at a certain level. Assume next

that the rate demanded by investors rises relative to the rate maintained by the

Fed. Since bonds are yielding less than the required rate, investors begin to

sell them off. The Fed is forced to purchase them for cash. The increase in

money supply fuels inflation which places additional upward pressure on nominal

interest rates, leading to more bond sales, more monetary expansion and an

explosive inflationary spiral. Analogously, if market rates fall relative to


                                        14
the interest rste peg, investors purchase bonds from the Fed. This reduces the

aoney supply, creates expectations of deflation, lowers nominal rates and

provokea additional bond purchases, in an implosive spiral. Again, there ia

nothing to stabilize the financial system until the authorities have sold off

their entire bond portfolio and abandoned their interest-rate pegging policy.

      The conventional framework suggests that an interest-rate pegging policy

will be highly unstable, not remarkably stable as was the case from 1946 to

1950. Clearly, an alternative framework is required. Our's builda on a

previous analysis of the period by Friedman and Schwartz. When describing the

Treaaury-Fed bond price aupport program of 1945-51, Friedman and Schwartz asked

why the public did not attack the scheme by reducing ita holdings of liquid

balances in 1947-8 when inflation waa relatively high but attacked in similar

circumstances in 1951. They emphasized price expectations as the crucial factor

supporting the Fed's ability to maintain the program.

      "That factor was a continued fear of a major contraction and a continued
belief that prices were destined to fall. A rise in prices can have
diametrically opposite effects on desired money balances depending on its effect
on expectations. If it is intepreted as a harbinger of further rises, it raises
the anticipated coat of holding money and leads people to desire lower balances
relative to income than they otherwise would. In our view, that was the effect
of price rises in 1950.. . On the other hand, if a rise in prices is intepreted
as a temporary rise due to be reversed, as a harbinger of a likely subaequent
decline, it lowers the anticipated cost of holding money and leads people to
desire higher balances relative to income than they otherwise would. In our
view, that was the effect of price rises in 1946 to 1948....
     Despite the extant to which the public and government were exercised about
inflation, the public acted from 1946 to 1948 as if it expected deflation.
There is no real conflict. The major source of concern about inflation at that
time was not the evils of inflation per se... but the widespread belief that
what goes up must come down and that the higher the price rise now the larger
the subsequent price fall. In our view, this fear or expectation of subsequent
contraction and price decline reconciled the public to only a mild reduction in
its liquid asset holdings relative to its income and induced it to hold larger
real money balances that it otherwise would have been willing to. In thia way,
it made the postwar rise more moderate. l8


      18 Friedman and Schwartz (1963),    pp.583-584.

                                         15
       We can formalize Friedman and Schwartz's account by applying recent

research from the exchange rate target zone literaturej9 A simple amendment

to these models converts them into a model of a price-level target zone. Thus,

we interpret Friedman and Schwartz's description of the situation in 1948 in

terms of an implicit target zone model.

      Imagine that forces in the economy placed upward pressure on the price

level. Below the upper bound of the target zone, prices would be allowed to

rise. But once the upper bound of the zone was reached, a change in either

underlying real variables or policy would reverse the movement in prices. We

focus on the case where reaching the upper bound triggers intervention by the

Fed. Given this policy regime, it was rational to anticipate deflation in the

midst of rapid inflation. Similarly, there might be a lower bound on the price

level which would prompt intervention as it was approached. This regime

decouples inflation from inflationary expectations and nominal interest rates,

reconciling a volatile inflation rate with stable bond yields.

      A. The Basic Framework

      This target zone interpretation can be formalized using a straightforward

monetary model of the price level. We take real variables as exogenous and

concentrate on the relation between money and prices.20 The central



      19 Krugman (1987, 1988, 1989) initiated this literature. Other
 papers include Miller and Weller (1988), Froot and Obstfeld (1989), Flood
 and Csrber (1989), Svensson (1989) and Bertols and Caballero (1989).

     20 This is the usual simplifying assumption in the target zone
literature. Feedback from nominal to real variables would greatly
complicate the analysis of dynamics. Such a model would typically assume a
relation between real variables and a sluggishly moving price level. In
such a case, the price level becomes dependent on the path of the exogenous
variable. Miller and Weller (1988) explore several such models but find
that closed form solutions are not generally available. We do, however,
allude to such feedback informally in Section IV below.

                                          16
relationship is the standard money equilibrium equation:

                    m -   p — ay   -   b(r   + Edp/dt)
or

                     p — k +      bEdp/dt
where k — m     -
                     ay +   br.
is,   p    and y represent the logarithms of the money stock, the price level and

real income, respectively. r is the real interest rate, and Edp/dt is the

expected change in p. a and b are parameters.

          The problem is to determine the price level. Since real income and the

real interest rate are determined in the real economy alone and the money supply

is determined by policy, k is a forcing variable. k may be controlled by

intervention either at the boundaries or, more generally, inside the boundaries

of the target zone whose upper bound is u and whose lower bound is p1. In

general, while the price level remains inside the target zone, the variables a,

y, and r can evolve randomly with no control exerted over the price level.

Once k reaches some critical value, however, it is controlled through monetary

intervention. At this moment, changes in the money supply are directed at

maintaining the price level zone.

          We assume for simplicity that only the real interest rate r drives k

inside the boundary, and that r is a Erownian motion process with no

drift.21 Formally,



               dr—sdz



      21 The change in r should be thought of as representing the evolution
 of not only real interest rates but also other variables, such as y, that
 affect the demand for money and hence the price level.

                                                     17
where z is a Brownian motion process and s is the standard deviation of dr.

      This scenario is exactly that developed in Krugman's (1989) study of the

collapse of an exchange rate target zone defended with a limited aaount of

reserves. The process of collapse, which we study below, ia also the same as in

Krugman.

      If p rises toward its maximum pu because the real interest rate rises,

an intervention involving a decline in the money supply will occur. The decline

might be infinitesimal, aimed at offsetting infinitesimal increaaea in r.

Alternatively, the decline in money supply may he discrete and large. If the

price level tends to its minimum value p1 hecauae the real interest rate is

falling, the intervention would entail an increase in money supply.

      Given these assumptions, it is standard to write the solution for the

price level as a non-linear function of the forcing variable r. Since a large

literature now exists which presents this solution, we do not develop it here.

We simply depict it in Figure 1. Figure 1 applies to a broad range of

intervention policies. For a given money supply, curve I represents the price

level as a function of r. r is permitted to reach an upper bound ru before

intervention aimed at maintaining the zone occurs. Thus, as r rises, the

price level rises and then falls before intervention occurs. Intervention in

this case involves reducing the money supply discretely. Since this is a

credible policy, intervention comes as no surprise; there is no jump in the

price level at the moment it occura. Since r is exogenous, it does not change

from r" as a result of the intervention. The monetary contraction has the

effect of shifting the price level function from the curve labelled 1 rightward

to the curve labelled 2. The shift occurs by an amount which maintains price

level continuity when the new solution is evalued at ru. If r again moves up


                                       18
 to         then another contractionary intervention occurs, and the process

 repeats.

       Alternatively, the intervention may be infinitesimal. Such an

 intervention can be depicted in Figure 1 by setting ru equal to rmc, the

 argument at which the price level function represented by curve 1 is flat.

 Repeated infinitesimal interventions then slide the solution curve continuously

 rightward in the zone.

      B. A Ranse on Nominal Interest Rates

      As developed so far, the size of the intervention is srbitrary.

Associated with any specified zone on the price level, however, is a range of

nominal interest rates that depends on the size of interventions. If an

additional limit is placed on the range of the instantaneous interest rate, the

intervention rule becomes unique.

      The expected inflation rate can be depicted in Figure 2 as a function of

r. The expected inflation rate associated with the price level zone is a

aonotonically decreasing function of r, flat in the middle range of r but

highly nonlinear near the intervention trigger points. When r approaches its

maximum level, a situation which would normally be associated with rising price

levels, expected inflation is in fact at its lowest negative value. This is

because as r rises, intervention to reverse the movement of the price level

becomes increasingly likely.

      From the Fisher equation, the instantaneous nominal interest rate is:



      i — r+Edp/dt


The nominal interest rate as a function of r also appears in Figure 2. As        r


                                         19
rises linearly to ru, Edp/dt declines more rapidly. For s given resl interest

rste, the instsntaneous nominal interest rate will be at its lowest possible

value when r reaches its maximum value.

      Suppose that a policy consists of specifying bounds on both the price

level and the nominal interest rate. The lower bound on the instantaneous

interest rate occurs when r reaches ru. The upper bound occurs when r

reaches r1. A specified ceiling for longer term interest rates can be

consistent with limiting the movement of the shorter rates. Again, that range

is predetermined once ru and r1 are specified. When ru is reached, the

instantaneous nominal interest rate reaches its lowest level and future interest

rates would be expected to exceed the current instantaneous rate. We would

expect to have a rising term structure. If the longer rates are an average of

the instantaneous rates, they are controlled within the upper and lower bounds

given in Figure 2.

      Thus, we can model interest rate policy prior to 1951 as a a price level

target zone and a specific intervention rule. Events associated with

maintaining the interest rate cap can be interpreted in terms of this target

zone framework.22

      C. Collavse of the Tarset Zone


      22An alternative hypothesis, which we do not explore here, is that the
 U.S. commitment to peg the price of gold at $35 an ounce under the Bretton
 WOods System stabilized price expectations by placing implicit limits on
 the price level. While this hypothesis is readily incorporated into our
 target zone framework, we do not believe that it is the essence of the
 matter. Given the ample gold reserves the U.S. possessed after World War
 II, a very wide range of price levels (and hence persistent expected
 inflation and highly variable interest rates) were consistent with the $35
 peg. This was less the case in the 1960a, when U.S. gold reserves had
 declined relative to foreign dollar liabilities. Evidence supporting our
 view may be found in the fact that interest rates became much more variable
 after February 1951 even though the same Bretton Woods System and $35 gold
 price prevailed.

                                       20
      We have based our discussion of this regime on the assumption that the

 Federal Reserve is willing to contract the money supply to whatever extent was

 necessary to maintain the zone. We now presume that there is some minimum value

of the nominal money stock below which the Fed is unwilling to go. As the real

 interest rate rises, further contractionary interventions are required to

aaintain the target zone. As these interventions cumulate, the money supply

declines toward its minimum value. Eventually, everyone realizes that the

target zone regime will be abandoned.

      We utilize Krugman's (1989) analysis of how an exchange rate target zone

collapses to describe the events of 1951. Suppose that, as in Figure 3, r

rises to ru, triggering a decline in the money stock. Since r is exogenous,

intervention has the effect of sliding the price level function rightwsrd in the

zone. This is depicted in Figure 3 as a shift from curve 1 to curve 2.         If the

intervention policy is maintained, there is a shift in the upper bound on r at

which the intervention is triggered, from r" to r" .        Without a lower bound on
the money stock, this process can continue indefinitely.

      Imagine, however, that there exists such a bound. Suppose that when r

reaches r'' ,   the   money stock has declined to such a level that one more

intervention will push it exactly to its lower bound. The intervention policy

is still credible for one last time, so the price level will move along the new

target zone solution path indicated by curve 3.      If r continues to rise to

     intervention will occur as promised, but thereafter further intervention is

no longer credible. The price level solution will follow curve 4, the usual

linear function of fundamentals. Note that price level continuity will be

maintained at ru", the real interest rate associated with the regime shift.

     We can use this framework to explain the termination of interest rate


                                          21
pegging in 1951. The outbreak of the Korean War drove real interest rates

upward, requiring monetary contraction to maintain the price level zone. The

1949 contraction had already pushed the system toward its limit. Moreover, the

perceived costs of further monetary contraction had risen in 1951, given the

need to mobilize resources for the Korean War. Thus, the target zone regime was

abandoned, leading to negotiation of the Accord.



IV. Aoolvina the Tareet Zone Framework

    Our target zone framework can be used to analyze the evolution of U.S.

monetary-financial policy between 1946 and 1950 and to understand the coming of

the Accord in 1951.

      Given the focus of the theoretical model, we emphasize Federal Reserve

intervention designed to alter the money supply. The principal way in which the

Fed altered the money supply in this period was by changing reserve

requirements.   Increasing required reserves reduced loans, among other bank

investments, lowering the money multiplier. From February 1948 through August

1949, however, the required reserve ratio was changed five times. It was

altered again at the end of 1950 and the beginning of 1951. This reliance on

changes in reserve requirements can be seen as a logical outgrowth of the policy

veloped in the 1930s in response to the problem of excess reserves.23

      This is a change in focus from the conventional literature, which

emphasizes bond-market intervention. There the Fed is described as purchasing

bonds to limit the rise in yields when inflation accelerates. In our account,



      23 There were also other forms of intervention, as is clear from
 Ghsrt 6. We focus on changes in reserve requirements as the single moat
 important form of intervention, an interpretation we hope to justify in the
 remainder of this section.

                                         22
the Fed raises reserve requirements. There is no inconsistency. Higher reserve

requirements induced the banks to sell bonds along with other investments in

order to acquire reserves. The Fed purchased bonds for cash which the banks

used as the basis for reserves.24 Although the monetary base rose, broader

measures like Ml declined due to the fall in the money multiplier.

      We can use this approach to describe the course of events starting in

1946, when serious inflation pressures first surfaced.25 These preaaurea

reflected the interplay of several factors. First, the failure of the

anticipated postwar recession to materialize can be interpreted as a rise in the

real interest rate. Investment demand remained strong throughout 1946.

Managers attempted to add to capacity, given the exceptional buoyancy of aalea.

Automobiles, meat and other consumer goods in short supply were rationed by

higher real interest rates which encouraged consumers to defer expenditure.26

Higher real interest rates reduced the demand for money and placed upward

pressure on prices. Second, the supply of money expanded steadily over the

course of 1946. This reflected gold inflows and the rapid growth of virtually

all categories of bank loans. (Both gold inflows and changes in the lending

behavior of the banks are autonomous to our model.) Third, the Treasury retired

a conaiderabie quantity of debt over the course of the year (see Chart 6). This



     24 This combination of raising reserve requirements and buying bonds
had the effect of swapping interest yielding bank assets for reserves,
thereby directly reducing bank income and raising the coat of liquidity
across financial markets. Simultaneously, it benefited the Treasury; the
Fed acquired relatively high yielding bonds either by expansion of its
balance sheet or by partly sterilizing with sales of low.yielding bills and
certificates.                                                        -




     25Obvioualy, our analytical framework only applies to the period
following the removal of general price controls in June.

      26Fforde (1954), p.150.

                                      23
decline in private financial wealth can be thought of aa reducing the demand for

money, with further inflationary effecta.27

         Though concern over inflation mounted over the course of the year, it

never reached the point where the Fed felt compelled to intervene. Investors

apparently anticipated a deflation like that which had followed World War I;

they did not question the Fed's ability to maintain the current low level of

nominal short-term rates. As Coldenweiser (1951, p.199) characterizes the year,

"Federal Reserve policy was essentially static with little done to counteract

inflationary forces and little occasion to support the government security

market          In other words, prices had not yet risen to the point where they

threatened to violate the upper bound of the implicit price-level target zone.

      Worries mounted in 1947, however, as prices continued to rise. Various

measures were proposed to restrain inflation. In the autumn, President Truman

sent Congress a special message requesting the reimposition of price and wage

controls. Marriner Eccles, now Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, proposed

a Special Reserves Plan that would have required commercial banks, members and

nonmembers alike, to hold large new secondary reserves of Treasury bills.28

Neither program was adopted. Congress found Truman's controls unpalatable.

Others within the Fed, such as Allan Sproul, President of the Federal Reserve

Bank of New York, thought that Eccles's plan to discourage bank lending risked




      27 There is no contradiction with the stsndard logic that s reduction
 in the supply of debt pisces downward pressure on interest rates, since, as
 indicated in Figure 2, as k rises and the price level increases, expected
 inflation and therefore nominal interest rates decline.

      28 The amounts would have been 25 per cent against demand and 10 per
 cent against time deposits. See Joint Committee on the Economic Report
 (l948b), pp.139-144.

                                          24
initiating a receasion.29 As in the previous year, there was little Fed

intervention. According to Goldenweiser (1951, p.199), "the Federal Reserve was

still acting with great moderation." Again, the implication was that the price

level did not yet threaten to breach the upper bound of the zone.

        1948 provided the first teat of the Fed's commitment to limiting the level

of pricea.3° Continued inflation provoked criticiam of policy both within snd

outside the Federal Reserve Syatem.31 The Fed then reduced the money supply

by raising reserve requirements. In January reserve requirements for banks in

central reserve cities were raised from 20 to 22 per cent of net demand

deposits. Towards the middle of the year they were raised to 24 per cent. In

August the Board was given permission by Congress to raise reserve requirements

still further, which it did in September. Its press releaaea declared that, as

on the previous two occasions, the change was deaigned to combat inflation.32

Ml declined sharply between 1948-I and 1948-Il and again between 1948-Il and

1948-Ill (see Chart 7). This intervention can be thought of aa keeping prices

below the implicit upper bound of the zone.

        The tightness of money owing to the Fed's intervention is widely credited



      29 Treaaury Secretary Snyder also opposed Ecclea's plan. For
 Sproul'a viewa, see Senate Committee on Banking and Currency (1947),
 pp.228-230.

        30 Karunatilake (1963), p.108.

     31 See Subcommittee of the Joint Committee on the Economic Report
(1950), pp. 40-108 for views on the question. Another source of concern
was that nominal interest rates on long-term bonda rose to the cap
established by the Fed and the Treasury. Thia is not a problem for our
model, since immediately prior to an intervention to reduce the money
aupply short-term rates should be low but long-term rates can be relatively
high.

     32 Annual Report of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reaerve
System Covering Operations for the Year 1948 (1949), pp.85-86.

                                         25
with provoking or at least magnifying the recession that followed. The supply

of liquidity made available through the banking system declined abruptly.

Inflationary pressure subsided.

      Through most of 1949 prices continued to fall. The Fed continued to sell

bonds despite the decline of prices and interest rates. It is not clear why it

did so. Karunstilake (1963, p.111) suggests that at the beginning of 1949 "the

authorities were not keen to give up their policy of restraining inflation

unless a major recession occurred." In terms of the target-zone framework, one

can view them as intervening to push the pride level well below the upper bound

of the zone.

      Eventually the Fed began to intervene as if the price level was

approaching the lower bound of its implicit target zone. Reserve requirements

were reduced in early May and again sc the end of the fiscal year when the

temporary powers to incresse required reserves granted in the autumn of 1948

expired. Margin requirements on security loans were reduced to 50 per cent, and

consumer credit regulation was relaxed. These initiatives stabilized Ml despite

the continued decline of the monetary base. By the final quarter of 1949, Ml

had once again begun to rise. (Again, see Chart 7.)

     Ml rose steadily through 1950 and into early 1951 as commercial banks

expanded their loan portfolios. Growing government budget deficits associated

with the spprosch of the Korean war then began putting upward pressure on real

interest rates. Markets were characterized by "a boom psychology which was

unsurpassed since the end of the war in l945." It became obvious that

military expenditures would increase, and a wave of precautionary buying ensued

in anticipation of shortages of consumer goods. As James Tobin (1951, p.197)


          Karunatilake (1963), p.117.

                                        26
remarked, "To a nation ao recently schooled in che economics of war, Korea

foretold both inflation and the eventual rationing, official or unofficial of

civilian goods      All this implies rising real interest rates. As the demand

for money fell, the consumer price index began to rise more rapidly than it had

at any time since the end of 1947.

      The Fed affirmed its support for "the Government decision to rely in major

degree for the immediste future upon fiscal and credit measures to curb

inflation. 3L     took steps to limit the rise in prices. It joined with

other Federal and state supervisory agencies such as the Home Loan Bsnk Board,

issuing a statement requesting banks to restrict their lending activities. In

September, it agsin placed restrictions on consumer installment credit.

Finally, after some hesitation, it raised reserve requirements to 24%. Once

again the banks obtained the additional reserves by selling $2 billion of

government securities, most of which the System purchased.

      Owing in part to this hesitancy, doubts arose about the Fed's commitment

to maintain the price level within an implicit zone. Previously, when prices

had risen, the market was dominated by expectations that the Fed would adopt

measures to reduce them. These expectations of deflation, or at least of price

stability, stabilized nominal interest rates. Now there was the fear that the

imperative of mobilizing resources for the Korean War would preclude

deflationary initiatives. "On balance, the scale is tipped heavily toward

continued rapid inflation," commented Business Week in the first week of

l95l. Interest rates rose with inflationary expectations. The cap on



          Annual Report of the Board of Governors Govering Operations for
 the Year 1950 (1951), p.2.

          Business Week (January 6, 1951), P.28.

                                        27
interest rates was rendered inconsistent with foreign policy imperatives and

their fiscal implications. Hence the negotiation of the Accord in 1951, which

allowed the Fed to drop its interest rate target.



 V. Why Was the Fed Committed to a Price-Level Target Zone?

       At the core of our analysis is the notion that the Fed was committed to

 limiting variations in the price level and, by preventing the eaergence of

 persistent inflation, to stabilizing interest rates. But why ahould the Fed

 have been more concerned about price and interest rate stability in the

 aftermath of World War II than in other periods?

       A common answer, advanced at the time, was that the Federal Reserve

 System was forced by the Treasury to pursue policies consistent with low

 interest rates to minimize debt service costs. This accusation was vehemently

 denied by System officials. They repeatedly asserted that they themselves were

 strong supporters of the policy of stabilizing prices and interest rates.36

       An alternative explanation is that the monetary authorities feared that a

 rise in interest rates would cause capital losses on commercial bank bond

 portfolios, undermining the stability of the banking system. System officials

 recalled the drastic decline of bond prices in 1920 and the difficulties this

had created for the banks. They recalled also the deterioration of bond

portfolios, especially those heavily weighted toward low grade issues, in the



     36 See for example the testimony of Chairman McCabe in Subcommittee
of the Joint Committee on the Economic Report (1950), pp.21-90. Implicit
in the bureaucratic model of the Fed developed by Toma (1982) is the view
that the Fed was under pressure to compensate the Treasury for any increase
in debt-service costs due to increases in interest rates. While this
consideration may have figured in the particular 1947 episode with which
Toma is concerned, we question whether it provided the Fed's dominant
motivation over the entire period.

                                       28
1930s, and their contribution to the 1930, 1931 and 1933 banking crises. They

envisaged a criais scenario in which a audden rise in ratea and decline in bond

pricea led panicky invescors to throw their holdings on the market.37 As the

point was put in the Board of Governors' Annual Reoort for 1945:

     "A major consequence... of.. .increasing the general level of -interest rates
would be a fall in the market values of outstanding Government securities.
These price declines would create difficult market problems for the Treasury in
refunding its maturing and called securities. If the price declines were shatp
they could have highly unfavorable repercussions on the functioning of
financial institutions and if carried far enough might even weaken public
confidence in such institutions. 38

     Or as Whittlesey (1946) put the point, "The Reserve authorities would

hsrdly dare to sell heavily in the open market or force up interest rates, for

fear of depressing securities of the types held by member banks to such sn

extent as either to weaken the banks or to create undue alarm.         Others

wsrned sgainst even moderate sales. "The impact effects of a falling bond

msrket. .   could   well be dangerous. Even a moderste fall would be unsettling to

banks and might set off disorderly selling. ,,40

      Goncern over cspital losses on bond portfolios was no new phenomenon.



         See for example Board of Governors, Annual Reoort (1945), p.7;
Federal Reserve Bulletin (January 1948), p.11; Joint Committee on the
Economic Reoort (1986), pp.140, 620; Joint Gommittee on the Economic Report
(1948), p.101-102.

     38 Annual Report of the Board of Governors Covering Operations for
the Year 1945 (1946), p.7.

          Whittlesey (1946), pp.343-344. Sproul emphasized potential
implications for credit supplies and economic activity. "A decline in
prices of long-term Treasury bonds more than fractionally below par, under
existing conditions, would throw the whole market for long-term
securities - - corporate and municipal, as well as federal -- into
confusion. . .flotations of long-term securities would be made very difficult
if not impossible, until the market became stabilized at a new level."
Joint Committee on the Economic Report (1948a), p.101.

     40 Seltzer (1945), p.73.

                                           olq
The Fed had invoked this concern to help justify its bond market intervention

 in the 1930s. But the banking system had grown increasingly vulnerable to

declining bond prices as a result of its massive investments in government

securities over the course of World War II. Moral suasion had been used to

induce the banks to absorb debt issued during the war, while wartime

disruptions had limited the scope for alternative investments. On June 30,

1945, the banks' government securitiy holdings came to $82 billion, of which

$27.7 billion consisted of maturities of over five years. (See Table 1 for end-

year figures.) Bank capital was only $8.6 billion.    Thus, even a relatively

smsll rise in interest rates could wipe out the banks' capital funds.

      Table 1 shows bsnk holdings of government securities st the end of esch

yesr between 1945 and 1950. It is evident that the banks reduced their

vulnerability to this source of interest rate risk as the period progressed.

The value of insured commercial bank holdings of Treasury securities fell

absolutely, from nearly $90 billion at the end of 1945 to little more than $60

billion at the end of 1950, snd even more dramatically as a share of bank

capital, which had risen to $11.4 billion by the middle of the lstter year.41

This is likely to have reduced the weight the Fed and other bank regulators

attached to stable long-term rates.

      The question is by how much this risk had been reduced. Table 2 reports

the market value of bank Treasury security portfolios (net of bills maturing in

fewer than 12 months) as s share of two measures of bank capital, in fact and

under the counterfactusi that Treasury security yields at each date doubled




    41 Data are from Banking and Monetary Statistics, Table 13.5.

                                      3Q
relative to their historical values.42 The comparison over time confirms

that the impact of higher interest rates on the value of bond portfolios

declined quite significantly. At the end of 1945 a doubling of yields would

have led to the loss of nearly 60 per cent of total capital; by the end of 1951

the comparable figure had declined to 30 per cent. (When a narrower measure of

bank capital, total stocks, is considered, the comparable figures are 172 and

98 per cent, respectively.)   Thus, it was logical that the Fed should have

attached lower weights to this concern with the passage of time. The

calculations also suggest that fears that higher interest rates would leave the

banks insolvent were somewhat exaggerated. Many of the long-term bonds held by

the banks had been scquired in the 1930s or at the beginning of the 'forties

and were approaching maturity. A doubling of yields would nearly halve the

value of a portfolio of bonds running many years to maturity; compared to this,

the effects in Table 2 are relatively modest.

    Though by 1951 the banking system's vulnerability to capital losses had

been considerably attenuated, it is an indication of the depth of the

authorities' concern that at the time of the Accord steps were taken to

minimize the extent of such losses. Following the Accord, bond yields rose

immediately above 2.5%. The Treasury stepped into the breach; through a bond

conversion, it absorbed part of the losses that would have accrued to

bondholders.

      The Treasury offered the conversion to holders of the various issues of

long term bonds marketed in 1945. The conversion offer did not apply to all


     42 For example, if certificates were yielding 1.25 per cent while 20
year bonds were yielding 2.42 per cent, we assume that their yields rose to
2.50 and 4.84 per cent, respectively.   Bills are omitted for lack of
comparable information on coupons and yields. Given their short maturity,
capital losses on bills should be of little consequence.

                                       31
 long term bonds, though $19 billion in such bonds were eligible. Marketable

 long ten bonds could be exchanged at psr for non-marketable Treasury bonds

with 2.75% yields. This wss a 29 year bond callable in 24 years, so its

maturity approximately matched those of the bonds to be converted. Since the

bond was non-marketable, some loss in liquidity offset the capital gain

associated with the higher yield. Since the new bonda would be removed from the

markets, the maximum potential magnitude of any future intervention by the Fed

aimed at stabilizing long term yields was therefore reduced. The new bond,

however, was convertible on demand of the holder into a marketable five-year

note paying a yield of 1.5%. This would tend to protect the holder against

large rises in bond yields during the life of the bond and minimize the value

loss arising from its lack of liquidity.

        The bond conversion proceeded as of April 1, 1951, as announced in prior

Treasury Circulars. Since bond yields rose to the range of 2.75%, bondholders

did manage to avoid capital losses. The Treasury absorbed the baa rather than

the Fed. Supposing that the holders avoided the entire capital loss of 9%, the

Treasury absorbed a $1.2 billion loss to keep its creditors whole.43

        Commercial banks were permitted to engage in the conversion of only one

of the bond issues covered by the conversion only if they had acquired these

bonds on original iaaue or held them in trading accounts.44 Otherwise, banks

could not engage in this transaction, Of course, since they could market their


          For a detailed description of these bonds see Treasury. Department
Circular No. 883, March 26, 1951. If the conversion involved a transfer of
this magnitude, it is unclear why the entire eligible issue was not
converted. About $5 billion of eligible long bonds remained outstanding
after the conversion offer, but it is not clear from the evidence who held
them.

         These were bonds which matured on December 15, 1972 issued in
November 1945.

                                         3t
bonds to insurance companies, banks could capture any positive value of the

conversion offer.

     The transaction was also aimed at insurance companies. Its magnitude is

indicated in Chart 9, which shows a fall in the amount of marketable Treasury

bonds from March, 1951 to April, 1951 of $13.6 billion from $43.6 to $30

billion. Of course, this decline was offset by an increase in non-marketable

debt from March to April, 1951 of $13.5 billion of new convertible bonds.45

      Insursnce company holdings of long bonds dropped from March to June 1951

from $11.2 to $7.3 billion. Unspecified other private investors reduced their

holdings from $13.8 to $10.5 billion. U.S. government agencies and trust funds

reduced their holdings from $5.5 to $2.6 billion. Federal Reserve Banks which

had been cumulating these long term bonds reduced their holdings from $3.5 to

$1.4 billion.



VI. Conclusions

      In this paper we have analyzed U.S. monetary-financial policy in the

turbulent aftermath of World War II. We have shown that the juxtuposition of

periods of rapid inflation and deflation with stable nominal interest rates can

be understood as a corollary of the Fed's implicit policy of maintaining a

price-level target zone. Because the credible price-level target zone regime

decoupled inflation from inflationary expectations, interest rates were

stabilized.

      A deeper question is why the Fed adhered to this target-zone regime for

prices and interest rates immediately after World War II but not in other

periods. The explanation, we argue, lies in policymakers' perceptions of the


         See Banking and Monetary Statistics, vol. 3, Table 13.3.

                                      3$
threats to financial stability. In the aftermath of World War II, higher

interest rates were perceived to pose a threat to the stability of the banking

system. Only when the banks' exposure to bond market risk had been reduced in

the 1950s was policy reoriented to other targets. Our analysis of bank

portfolios suggests that fears for the stability of the banking system may have

been overdrawn. But it remains true that concern over financial stability.

which originated in memories of widespread bank failures in the 1930s, provides

the explanation for the singular policies pursued in the aftermath of World War

II.




                                      34
                                  REFERENCES

Barger,   Harold (1964), The Management of Money, New York: Rand McNally.

Bertola, Giuaeppe and Ricardo J. Caballero (1989), "Target Zones and
Realignments," memeo, December.

Board of Covernors of the Federal Reserve System (various years), Annual
Report, Washington, D.C.: GPO.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (l9**), Banking and Monetary
Statistics, Washington, D.C.: GPO.

Chandler, Lester V. (1949), "Federal Reserve Policy and the Federal Debt,"
American Economic Review 39, pp.405-429.

Eccles, Marriner 5. (1951), Beckoning Frontiers, New York: Knopf.

Fforde, J.S. (1954), The Federal Reserve System 1945-1949, Oxford: Clarendon
Press.

Flood, Robert and Peter Garber (1989), "The Linkage Between Speculative Attack
and Target Zone Models of Exchange Rates," NBER Working Paper no. 2918, April.

Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz (1963), A Monetary History of the United
States 1867-1960, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Froot, Kenneth and Maurice Obstfeld (1989), "Exchange Rate Dynamics Under
Stochastic Regime Shifts: A Unified Approach," mimeo.

Goldenweiser, E.A. (1951), American Monetary Policy, New York: McGraw-Hill.

Joint Committee on the Economic Report (1948a), Credit Policies, Hearings, 80th
Cong. 2nd Sess., Washington, D.C. : GPO.

Joint Committee on the Economic Report (1948b), Anti-Inflation Program,
Hearings, 80th Cong. 1st Seas., Washington, D.C.: GPO.

Joint Committee on the Economic Report, Subcommittee on General Credit Control
and Debt Management (1952), Monetary Policy and the Manaaement of the Public
Qg, 82nd Congress, 2nd Seas. , Part I, Washington, D.C. : GPO.

Karunatilake, H.N.S. (1963), The Variable Reserve Ratio as an Instrument of
Central Bank Policy, Ceylon: Central Bank of Ceylon.

Krugman, Paul (1987), "Trigger Strategies and Price Dynamics in Equity and
Foreign Exchange Markets," NBER Working Paper No. 2459, December.

Krugman, Paul (1988), "Target Zones and Exchange Rate Dynamics," NBER Working
Paper No. 2841, January (forthcoming, 0uarter1 Journal of Economics).

Krugman, Paul (1989), "Target Zones with Limited Reserves," mimeo, August.

                                        3j
Lewis, Wilfred (1962), Federal Fiscal Policy in Postwar Recessions, Washington,
D.C. : The Brookings Institution.

Miller, Marcus and Paul Weller (1988), "Solving Stochastic Saddlepoint Systems"
A Quslitative Treatment with Economic Application," mimeo, October.

Murphy, Henry C. (1950), National Debt in War and Transition, New York: McCraw
Hill.

Seltzer, Lawrence H. (1946), "The Changed Environment of Monetary-Banking
Policy," American Economic Review 36, pp.65-79.

Svensson, Lars (1989), "Target Zones and Interest Rate Variability: Where Does
the Variability Go, and Is a Fixed Exchange Rate Regime the Limit of a Narrow
Zone?" mimeo.

Tobin, James (1951), "Monetary Restriction and Direct Controls," Review of
Economics and Statistics 33, pp.196-198.

Senate Committee on Banking and Currency (1947), To Provide for the Regulation
of Consumer Credit for a Temporary Period, Hearings on S.J.R. 157, 80th Cong.
1st Sess. , Washington, D.C.: GPO.

Senate Subcommittee on Monetary, Credit and Fiscal Policies (Douglas Committee)
(1950), Report, S. Con. Res. 26, January 4, Waahington, D.C.: GPO.

Simmons, Edward C. (1950), "The Monetary Mechanism Since the War," Journal of
Political Economy LVIII, pp.124-141.

Sproul, Allan (1947), "Monetary Management and Credit Control," American
Economic Review 37, pp.339-350.

Subcommittee of the Joint Committee on the Economic Report (1950), Hearings on
Monetary. Credit, and Fiscal Policies, 81st Cong., 1st Seas. , Washington, D.C.
GPO.

Toma, Mark (1982), "Inflationary Bias of the Federal Reserve System: A
Bureaucratic Perspective," Journal of Monetary Economics 10, pp.163-190.

Whittlesey, Charles (1946), "Federal Reserve Policy in Transition," Quarterly
Journal of Economics 60, pp.340-350.




                             3
                                                                 Table 1

                                  MATURITIES OF UNITED STATES GOVERNMENTOBLIGATIONS HELD BY
                                              INSURED COMMERCIALBANKS, 1945-1951




                                                            Marketableissues


                                                            Direct
Dec.    Total
 31                                                                                                                  Non-
                                                                      Bonds maturing in: 2               Cuar-    mar-
                              1
                      Bills                    Notes                                                       anteed
                                  Certifi-1                                                                         ketable3
                                     cates                                                                 issues    issues
                                                        5 years       5 to 10      10 to 20     Over
                                                        or less        years        years     20 years


Amount (in millions)
1951   $60,599      $7,223        $7,536      $11,274   $19,645           $7,024    $3,055     $2,335         $21     $2,486
1950    61,047       4,122         1,937       16,774    22,594            7,737     2,987      2,554          11      2.331
1949    65,847       3,692        12,488        5,812    27,278            7,692     4,461      2,409            6     2,009
1948    61,407       2,822        10,068        3,395    19,374           15,114     6,581      2,059             8    1,986
1947    67,960       2,124         7,555        5,920    18,341           22,202     7,534      2,654            14    1616
1946    78,575       1,272        12,293       6,781     12,728           29,700     6,597      3,008            15    1,181
1945    88,933       2,456        19,075       16,047     9,030           32,230     6,092      2,787            22    1,194

Percentage
  distribution
1951     100.0%      11.9%         12.4%        18.6%         32.4%        11.6%      5.1%        3.9%     (4)          4.1%
1950     100.0        6.7           3.2         27.5          37.0         12.7       4.9        4.2       (4)          3.8
1949     100.0         5.6         19.0          8.8          41.4         11.7       6.8         3.6      (4)          3.1
1948     100.0        4.6           16.4         5.5          31.6         24.6       10.7        3.4      (4)          3.2
1947     100.0         3.1          11.1         8.7          27.0         32.7       11.1        3.9      (4)          2.4
1946     100.0         1.7          16.7         9.2          17.8         40.4       9.0        4.1       (4)          1.6
1945     100.0         2.8          21.5        18.0          10.2         36.2       6.9         3.1      (4)          1.3



     1 Treasury bills are generally issued with maturities of 91 days: certificates of indebtedness have maturities of

approximately one year; and Treasury notes are issued with maturities of from one to five years.
     2 Based upon number of years to final maturity.
     3 United States savings bonds. Treasury bonds (investment series A-1965), and depositarybonds.   Prior to December
                                      Table 2

    Value of Public Marketable Securities of at Least One Year to Maturity
                         as a Ratio of Bank Capital:
                                    1945-1951:
                        Actual and Counterfactual Values



                  Actual Market Value Counterfaccual Market Value
                 Share of   Share of      Share of    Share of
                Total Cap Total Stocks    Total Cap Total Stocks
End of

1945               10.71     31.34              10.12    29.61
1946                8.47     24.46               7.83    23.53
1947                6.99     21.66               6.46    20.04
1948                5.84     18.48               5.46    17.28
1949                6.15     19.55               5.84    18.56
1950                5.25     17.00               4.91    15.91
1951                4.53     14.74               4.22    13.73


Notes: Not including Canal bonds and other issues for which no
maturity/coupon information was available. Valuations are baaed on the
assumption that calls are exercised on the first eligible date. Total
stocks are the sum of common and preferred issues. Total capital is the
sum of total stocks, surplus, reserves for contingencies and undistributed
profits. A figure of 10.65, for example, means that the market value of
bonds was slightly more than 10 times the value of capital.

Source: Authors' calculations based on data drawn from Treasury Bulletin
(various issues) and Annual Reports of the FDIC (various issues).
            Chart   1


      Yields by Maturities (%)
3.2                              3.2
 3                                3
2.8                              2.8

2.6                              2.6

2.4                              2.4
2.2                              2.2

 2                                2
1.8                              1.8
1.6                              1.6

1.4                              1.4
1.2                              1.2



0.8                              0.8
0.6                              0.6
0.4                              0.4
0.2                              0.2
                              Chart 2
                         Consumer Price Index
          —   -
190                            —--                               190
                                                             /
180                                                              180



170   -
                                                      /          170



160-                                                             160



150-                                                             150
              End
              Puce
140 -             End                                            140
                               End T-b,II Peg
                  Pnce CnoIs   ,    Raise Peg
                                    On Cerflficates
          /              ____                    ___ ___   ___   130
                                       Chart 3
                        Federal Reserve T-Bill Holdings
                                       1/7/42-12/26/51
     16

     15
     14

     13
     12'
     11

     10


0
4,   7
     6
     5
     4

     3

     2



     0
          1/42   1/43   1/44   1/45   1/46      1/47     1/48   1/49   1/50   1/51

                                        Weekly Data
                                           Chart 4

                              Federal Reserve Bond Holdings
                                          l/7/42-12J25/51
    12

    Ii
    10


    9

    8

    7
C
0

    5

    4

    3

    2




    0
         1/42   1/43   1/44      1/45   1/46        1/47    1/48   1/49   1/50   1/51

                                         Weekly Data
                         Chart 5

          Total Federal Reserve Security Holdings
                         1/1/42- 12J28/5l

    26

    24

    22


    '20

    18

    16
C
0
    14
4
    12


    10


     8

     6

     4

     2
                      1/46

                        Weekty Data
                                               Chart 6
      Ownership of U.S. Government Marketable Securities, 1946-51

$ Billion
                        —             —-           -——--                ---—-
   200

   190      -
                         \      All Holders




   160              \
   150      -.                  "Private Investors•

   140

   130 -

   120                                                                            Accord

   110              rrrrr rrr                               r-r—r—1r-1-          r-
                                                                                1 rr
                                        p      p

                Soo,co:6nIdng   d Mony StIc.   1l1 .70, p   884. 881.
                                Chart 7
                          Ml and Monetary Base
130


                                                                —a—
120 -

                                                    —U--.---
110   -                                 —.-— —--a
          a—
          /                        Ml
100—



go


80


70




               Monetary Base


40    -
                                    -
                         1ji,                                  qqp
              Chart 8
Monetary Base and Federal Reserve Assets
               Billion $

                                           50
                                           48
                                           46
                                           44

                                           42
                                           40
                                           38

                                           36
                                           34
                                           32
                                           30
                                           28
                                           26
                                           24
                                           22
                                           20

                                           Is
                                           16
                                "'
              ,            ic1'1q111
                    Chart9
 Treasury Bills, Certificates and Notes Outstanding
                       Billion
                                                      45


                                                      40


                                                      35


                                                      30


                                                      25


                                                      20


                                                      15


                                                      10




Treasury Bonds and Non-Marketable Debt Outstanding
                    $ Billion
                                                      130




                                                      120




                                                      110




                                                      100




                                                      90



                                                      80



                                                      70
                             Figure 1
                       Price Level Zone
Price Level




              1           '2

         pu


                          /Y
                            \ //
                       /// \\             H
                                          H
                  //               :1     H
         p1
                             Figure 2

                    Nominal Interest Rates
                and Expected Inflation Rates




Maxi
           \\    Edp/dt                  i   r + Edp/dt




Mini




                                                          \




       r         q                                    0
                        Figure 3
Price Level
                  Price Level Zone



              2                      4
