                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        BANKS IN THE MARKET FOR LIQUIDITY




                                  Peter Carber

                                 Steven Wejsbrod




                             Working Paper No. 3381




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 1990




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Financial Markets and
                                                                       Monetary
Economics.  Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3381
                                        June 1990


                       BANKS IN THE MARKET FOR LIQUIDITy


                                   ABSTRACT




        Banks are unique among financial institutions because
                                                               they are the
cheapest source of liquidity in the economy. Banks choose to hold
                                                                    reserves
to facilitate settlement of end-of-day net due to positions arising from
payments operations.   Money market substitutes for bank liabilities do not
escape from the cost of reserves since their issuers lean on banks to
provide liquidity.   Since the cost of reserves falls on all issuers of less
liquid liabilities seeking access to payment services, including non-bank
intermediaries, reserves cannot represent a tax on the banking system alone.




    Peter Carber                       Steven Weisbrod
    Department of Economics            Weisbrod Group Ltd.
    Brown University                   114 E. 32 Street
    Providence, RI 02912               Suite 1306
                                       New York, NY 10016
         In   recent    literature on the role   of banks   in       financial
 markets, the ascendent perspective has focused on banks'
                                                          special
 information about borrowers relative to that of other
                                                                     financial
 institutions)-   For example, Fania (1985) presented evidence that
 commercial, paper, bankers' acceptances, and bank
                                                     certificates of
 deposit trade at the same yields. Banks must hold
                                                    reserves against
 deposits, which most researchers interpret as a tax paid by bank
 customers.2          Because commercial paper does not have     a    reserve
 requirement, Fama inferred that depositors do not pay for reserves.

He concluded that the tax incidence falls on customers who
                                                           borrow
from banks and that therefore bank loans are a unique
                                                          form of
credit.       Otherwise, borrowers would switch to an untaxed source of
credit.

     Such observations have generated assumptions that banks have
private information about customers unavailable to other, non—bank
lenders.       Little effort has been expended, however, to detail the

     1
              For a    recent review of this literature and of other
perspectives on the role of banks, see Gertler (1987).
     2
        For example, see Black (1975) for such an interpretation.
James (1987) confirms Fania's evidences on insignificant
                                                           spreads
between certificates of deposit and commercial paper, showing that
the average spread remained unchanged across changes in
requirements.                                              reserve

          James (1987) developed additional evidence that capital
markets regard banks as possessors of private information about
borrowers not available to other lenders.      He found that the
announcement of a bank line of credit causes the stock of the
recipient company to exhibit excess returns immediately after the
announcement.   In contrast, he found that the announcement of a
commitment to lend by an insurance company causes no such reaction
in the stock market.     Lummer and Mcconnell (1989) found that
James's results hold only when existing bank lines are renewed.


                                      2
sources of such superior bank information.4

     In these pages, we consider an explanation of why banks are
unique among financial intermediaries which does not lean on an
informational advantage.    Banks are unique because they are the
cheapest source of liquidity in the economy.   This advantage is not
derived from the special nature of individual banks but from the
special nature of the banking system which can mobilize good funds
more easily than competing financial institutions.5     When a cash
in advance requirement materializes for some transaction, a bank
must make the market by delivering a bank deposit.

     We develop this liquidity concept by presenting a basic image

of the commercial paper market in which issuers may be forced to
depend on bank loans to guarantee delivery of cash to investors
when their paper matures.   Issuers in such wholesale markets obtain

          Black (1975) and Goodfriend (1988) have suggested that
banks obtain their special information because of their role in the
payments system.   They argue that a bank benefits from having a
demand deposit relationship with a customer which provides it with
current information about the state of the borrower's financial
condition.   Another non—bank lender, however, could easily erode
this competitive advantage by requesting that the borrower provide
real time access to his on line bank financial statements.
     Goodfriend also argues that since banks must lend to each
other on short notice, they develop skills for quick credit
evaluation.    These skills are then transferable to customer
examination.
     There may be economies for a potential borrower to subject
itself to a bank credit examination because the borrower must visit
the bank anyway to access the payment system.     After having done
the examination, the bank knows more than other lenders ex cost;
but ex ante it has no intrinsic advantage in information gathering.


        "Good funds" can mean either cash or, more typically in the
wholesale markets we examine, deposits at the Federal Reserve or at
banks, items whose delivery always constitutes settlement of a
claim for dollars.

                                  3
assurance of access to bank loans by establishing a line of credit
with a bank.     If the line is used, the bank must issue a demand
deposit and obtain reserves.              To guarantee that   it will have
reserves, the bank holds reserves against the unused line,                tinder

this scenario, participants in the commercial paper market bear
part of the cost of the bank's reserves, the price paid for making

commercial paper liquid.          In a more realistic commercial paper
market where reserves are not held directly against an unused line,

anyone demanding liquidity for commercial paper will still pay for
the cost of reserves in the banking system.          We extend our argument
further across the balance sheets of banks by explaining how banks

can hold commercial and industrial loans in the absence of an
informational advantage.
     Analogous     to    the   relation    between   commercial   paper     and
certificates of deposit, demand deposits and Federal funds loans
are substitutes.        Holders of neither instrument bears the cost of
reserve requirements against demand deposits.          Rather, holders and
issuers of less liquid assets requiring periodic settlement in
demand deposits bear the costs.           Any wholesale borrower or lender
demanding liquidity is directly or indirectly a potential bank
customer acquiring similar services from the bank.            The standard
explanation treats borrowers and depositors at banks as different
groups making essentially different decisions.

     Finally, we study the sense in which reserves can possibly be
a tax on the banking system rather than a cost of accessing payment

services paid by less liquid securities markets,          Generally, it is

                                      4
difficult to determine the incidence of any tax because the entity
directly paying the tax typically passes the cost through to its
customers.    Bank customers dealing in the wholesale money markets
considered here channel their direct costs of bank services                      to

their ultimate clients, the issuers and buyers of securities less
liquid than bank deposits.

     Indeed, since reserves provide a service, reserve requirements
are not necessarily a tax.           Reserves cover the costs and risks
assumed by the clearing mechanism, generally a central bank.                     If

reserve requirements exceed those needed to cover the risk of the
central bank, however,       reserves do represent a tax; but the costs
will be borne by all users of liquidity.                    If there are non-
reservable perfect substitutes for each class of bank deposits,
reserve requirements cannot be excessive; banks will adjust their
reservable deposits to match their desired reserve holdings.


1. Who Pays for Reserve Requirements?

     We begin this analysis with the now conventional scenario of
who pays for reserve requirements.            In Figure 1, the vertical axis
represents the interest rate paid on bank deposits or earned on
loans by banks,     holding other           interest rates     in     the   economy
constant.     The   supply    of   deposits        to   the banking     system   is

perfectly    elastic at      interest       rate   r.    The cost     of    reserve
requirements, the foregone interest on reserve holdings at the
central bank, is represented in Figure 1 by the difference between

the dashed line and the supply curve of deposits.               The demand for

                                        5
bank loans is downward sloping.
     The    shape   of   the    supply curve     of    deposits   in   Figure    1

indicates that investors' portfolios contain perfect substitutes
for bank deposits.       Investors are unwilling to earn a lower yield
on bank deposits than on the perfect substitute, which is exempt
from reserve requirements.         As a result, depositors will not        bear
the cost of reserves.

     Non—bank loans are riot perfect substitutes for bank loans.                If

the interest rate on bank loans rises relative to rates on other
credit market instruments, bank borrowers will continue to demand
bank loans, though in reduced amounts.                Borrowers then bear the
cost of reserves in Figure 1.

Are There Perfect Substitutes for Bank Deposits?

     Commercial paper offers an alternative short—term investment
to bank certificates of deposit.           Like a bank deposit, it promises
to deliver good funds at maturity; but since commercial paper is
not a bank liability,          it does not have a reserve requirement.
Commercial paper issued by creditworthy corporations in the United
States trades at the same yield on average as bank CD.6                Bank CD,
like commercial paper,         is negotiable, so both instruments can be
sold to other parties before maturity.          Alternatively, both can be
used as collateral to obtain bank loans.

     That commercial paper and certificates of deposits trade at
the same yields indicates that they have the same liquidity and
risk characteristics.      From this evidence of substitutability and

     6
         This was shown in Fama's (1985), Table 1.

                                       6
the graphical analysis of Figure 1, we should infer that the cost
of reserves is paid by bank borrowers and not by bank depositors.
From this conclusion arises the assumption that banks are special
because they have access to special information about borrowers
that cannot be equally well gathered by a non—bank lender.



Commercial Paper Issuers Obtain Credit Lines from Banks

       This reasoning, however, ignores an important element in the
commercial paper market: corporations which issue commercial paper

maintain credit lines, representing the right to borrow good funds
from    a   bank     during   a   certain      period.7      Credit    lines      give
commercial paper issuers access to the liquidity of the banking
system.     Commercial paper issuers sometimes require bank loans to
pay off their commercial              paper;   as occasional bank borrowers
themselves,     they must also pay for reserves according to the
conventional view that bank borrowers pay for reserves.




2. Banks as Market Makers in Liquidity
       Access   to    good    funds    makes    banks     suppliers   of   cash    to
commercial paper issuers.         Since any financial institution can hold

        We have been purposeful in maintaining this oversight to
mimic the analysis of the current banking literature. Fama (1985)
discusses lines of credit but only as a device for periodically
triggering a bank's assessment of the company. In practice, banks
do not generally back up their credit assessment with a guaranteed
loan, however; the line is conditional on no material change in the
financial standing of the company. Hence, the bank making a
commitment of a line needs to know no more about its customer than
other financial intermediaries know.

                                          7
good funds in the form of a currency inventory, it is useful to
explore the organization of the banking system to understand why
banks are the lowest cost market maker in good funds.
     Banks hold a small percentage of their assets in good funds.
Individual banks can make a credible statement about delivering
good funds to their deposit customers and borrowers           on demand
because banks are part of a banking system, tied together by the
clearing and settlement mechanism of a clearinghouse.            Members
agree to lend good funds to members who experience a drain on good
funds on any particular day,    i.e.   to banks whose market making
activities in good funds cause them to have end of day net debit
positions from large volumes of payment orders.8
A Clearinghouse System

     We now examine the organization of a clearinghouse and the
effects   of   different conventions   of   clearing   and   settlement.
Though most of the following is well—known,        it emphasizes the
advantage that a clearing and settlement system gives to banks in
the market for good funds.

Payments with Continuous Settlement

     Final settlement of payments among banks occurs with the
delivery of good funds.9     In a system of continuous settlement,

     8
         Whenever a deposit is cashed or a loan is made, a bank
becomes a buyer of good funds at a posted bid price because it must
make delivery of funds to a customer or another bank.    Whenever a
loan is repaid or a deposit is made, a bank becomes a seller of
good funds at a posted offer price.

        Of course, settlement may be in any mutually acceptible
medium.  In actual banking systems, settlement is not final unless
payment is made in good funds——currency or central bank deposits.
                                  8
each payment message from one bank to another is accompanied by the

good funds specified in the message.                  As long as the sending bank
has     sufficient     reserves     on    hand,      payments    messages          will   be

processed without delay.               In continuous settlements,                 receiving

banks    bear    no    credit   risk     from participating          in   the       payment

mechanism.

        In a continuous settlement system, when the amount of payment
exceeds the good funds on hand, the payment must be blocked until
more    funds    are    received.        If       numerous banks     face     a     similar

situation, the payments system can become gridlocked.                         Banks wish
to make large payments to each other but cannot send payments
because they have not received payments.                        Thus,     a   system of
continuous settlement dispels credit risk among banks from the
day's payments by reducing the potential speed of transmitting
payments.       That is,   it reduces risk by reducing liquidity.

        The gridlock problem can be solved by breaking up payment
orders into smaller parts.             This increases the payment traffic on
the communication system and may result in incomplete delivery of
agreed values, thereby creating credit risk.                    Alternatively, the
banks can generally increase their reserve holdings.                          This would
involve selling loans to other investors in return for good funds.

Bank customers would have                to   pass through       a   higher cost          of

reserves.




Whether this arises through legal constraints or through choice is
not at issue here.

                                              9
Periodic Net Settlement

     To avoid breaking up transactions or increasing reserves,
banks can engage in net settlement at the end of the day.                          They
would pay the difference between total payments and total receipts
at the end of the day, forming a clearinghouse for the purpose of
executing the net settlement.        All good funds held by banks would
be transferred to the clearinghouse to collateralize bank payment
orders.

     Banks can execute delivery of good funds without increasing
their reserves because the individual members of the clearinghouse
and their customers believe that net due to positions cumulating
during the day will be covered by delivery of good                          funds at
settlement.     Members      are   justified        in    their    belief    if     the

clearinghouse guarantees due to's and holds reserves exceeding the

sum of the net due to exposures to the clearinghouse that crop up
between settlement periods.

     In a private clearinghouse system reserves are not a tax;
rather, they are the cost of providing assurance that good funds
will be delivered to banks for their net due to positions.                          The

clearinghouse   does   not     insure        that   all    the    deposits    in     an

individual bank will be treated as cash settlement by the market
place, but it does guarantee that good funds will be delivered for

payment orders among banks)0         To the extent that the guarantee

     10  In settling net positions, the clearinghouse makes a claim
that in the event that one member is in bankruptcy,     it has the
right to offset payments due from that member with payments due to
that member.   The clearinghouse makes prior claim over all other
creditors to the bankrupt member's liabilities to the clearinghouse

                                        10
is credible,      a depositor can treat bank payment orders to                  its

account during the day as good funds.


The Role of the Federal Reserve
     The Federal Reserve         is   a clearinghouse with the power to
create good funds by purchasing government or private securities.
The Fed's power freely to create reserves does not obviate reserves

as a source of liquidity.       Nor does this power make reserves a tax,

as in the conventional interpretation. The Fed bears the same risk
of settlement failure as the private clearinghouse: reserves serve

as a guarantee to the Fed of the delivery of good funds against
end-of-day net due to positions.
          In Fedwire payments,        banks with net positions due their
reserve account at settlement borrow Fed funds from other members.

The Federal Reserve guarantees unconditionally that a bank payment
message    sent   over Fedwire will          be   honored   as   good   funds   at

settlement.       If   a   bank fails to deliver good funds,            the Fed
supplies them without assessing other banks for the deficit in
reserves resulting from the failure.              During the day, the Fed then
insures the market in wholesale payments.               Hence, the revenue on
reserves deposited with the Fed serves as a compensation for the




to the extent that they are offset by that member's loans to the
clearinghouse. Much of the security the clearinghouse adds to the
payments mechanism is derived from liability rules.        Reserve
requirements protect the payments mechanism in a similar fashion.
They are assets of the several member banks, but the clearinghouse
has prior claim to them in the event of bankruptcy.

                                        11
risk it bears.3-1

     The inter—connection among banks and their connection to the
central bank permits the quick movement of good funds from banks
with a surplus of good funds to deficit banks.   Of course, non-bank
institutions could establish similar networks and supply similar
assets and liabilities, but this would effectively make them banks,

though lacking in payment insurance.     That banks can turn to the
central bank for funds, however, makes it certain that their net
due to's issued between settlement periods will be settled in good
funds, while the net due to's of other financial institutions lack
such guarantees.

     Aside from operational expense, the cost to the banks of the
liquidity provided to borrowers and depositors through access to
the banking system is the forgone interest on the reserves banks
hold with the central bank to guarantee liquidity.   Other financial
institutions are not required by regulators to bear this cost, and
they typically do not form independent organizations which impose

reserve requirements on members.12     If banks alone are forced to

         The Fed may or may not earn a profit from the user charge
represented by reserves, depending on its magnitude.     Moreover,
there may be more efficient means of charging for this risk
bearing.     Since the Treasury taxes the Fed's revenues,        it
ultimately bears the risk of operating the payment system.
     12
         In the U. S., any depository institution which offers
transaction accounts, that is, deposits which permit third party
payments services, must hold reserves with the Federal Reserve.
The role of non—banks in wholesale payments is very small, however.
Clearinghouses in organized financial markets provide liquidity
services for members and do regulate member liquidity, but
ultimately they rely on the banking system for the delivery of good
funds to cover net positions.


                                12
hold reserves and membership in a central banking system has no
offsetting value,   banks would go     out    of   business because   no

investor or borrower would be willing to pay for the reserves. The
banking system gives banks the advantage of providing to potential
borrowers a credible guarantee of delivery of good funds without
holding reserves on their balance sheets to cover all lines.


3. Pricing a Line of Credit: A Basic View
     Commercial paper issuers attach      a   line because they must
assure lenders that they can deliver good funds           at maturity.
Normally, issuers can obtain funds by reissuing or rolling over
commercial paper;   during times of liquidity stress in the money
markets, however, it is difficult for even high quality borrows to
issue short—term paper.    Even in normal times, a CP issuer may face
technical problems in rolling over its paper.       A cash delivery can
be assured only by buying a line from a bank which in turn has
access to the banking system and to the liquidity services of the
central bank.

     We will see that commercial paper holders must bear some of
the issuer's cost of accessing bank liquidity and that the cost of
using a line is related to the cost of reserve requirements.          To

analyze these claims, we examine the banking transactions involved
with maturing CD and CP.

A Certificate of Deposit Matures

     In Table 1 we illustrate the impact of a maturing deposit on
the balance sheet of a banking system consisting of two banks.

                                  13
Consider banks A and B in Table la.       As assets, bank A has $900 of
loans on    the asset side and $100 of reserves.        It funds these
assets with a $100 certificate of deposit and $900 of demand
deposits.     Suppose that banks by convention hold         10    percent
reserves against demand deposits but can choose any level              of
reserves    against CD, so bank A holds "excess reserves" of $10
which, as we will see, guarantees      the liquidity of the CD.    Bank B
has loans of $540, reserves of $60 and $600 of demand deposits.

      Now let us assume that the CD on Bank A's balance sheet
matures.    The holder of that deposit uses the funds to pay a debt
to a customer of bank B, who, in turn, buys a demand deposit (DD)
from bank B with the funds.   The customers of the banking system as
a whole then do not roll over the CD but require settlement in
demand deposits.    If they are always willing to roll over the CD,
the existence of CD would place no liquidity demands on the system.

Occasional demands to settle CD in demand deposits make CD somewhat
illiquid.

      If the system settles at end—of—day, in the first instant the

payment order appears on B's books as a due from A of $100 and an
addition to demand deposits of $100.      On the other hand, if this is
a   private continuous settlement system,       A would send $100      in

reserves.

      Bank A still has $900 of loans which it funds with $900 in
demand deposits. It settles its payment with the delivery of $100
in reserves to bank B, so its reserves were sufficient to cover its

end-of-day net due to position.    Bank A may feel that its position

                                  14
is not balanced because it may not have sufficient reserves to
process further payments next day.      Suppose that A considers $90 in
reserves sufficient to operate its payment services. In the inter-
bank market, bank A borrows $90 from B so that B now has a due from

A on the asset side of its balance sheet, and A has a due to B on
the liability side of its balance sheet.        The final positions of
banks A and B are illustrated in Table lb.          The CD was liquid
because bank A could guarantee the delivery of good funds through
its reserve holdings and its ready access to interbank loans.
Reserves on hand also guaranteed liquidity by effecting a transfer

among banks of the credit risk arising from the day's payments
traffic



Commercial Paper Matures

        Suppose now that the investor who held a CD in bank A in the
previous example holds commercial paper instead.     The holder of the
CP is a customer of bank B.     Since commercial paper is the direct
liability of a borrower, both loans and CD are initially $100 less
than in the previous example.     The issuer of CP, however, arranges
a line of credit from bank A to assure payment at maturity.

        The initial positions of banks A and B are presented in Table
2a.     Bank A has a credit line for $100 to the commercial paper
issuer.    Appearing as a memo item, this line represents a potential

liability because bank A must raise a liability if the line is
used.

        Suppose that the CP issuer cannot roll over the paper when the


                                   15
CP matures.          The issuer of the CP, calling on his line,                takes a
loan from bank A to pay the customer of bank B.                        The customer of
bank B again buys a DD from his bank with the funds.                       The balance
sheets of the two banks up to this point are illustrated in Table
2b.   Bank A's assets consist of its original $800 in loans plus its
new $100 loan to the CP issuer.                     Bank B's DD liabilities have
increased by $100.             The accounts of the two banks are balanced
through the use of due to's and due from's if settlement is at end
of day.        If settlement is continuous, balancing occurs through                   a

delivery of reserves.           With a clearinghouse or with a central bank
bearing payment system risk,             bank A will have to restore                 its

reserve position to cover the risk to the payment system on the
next day's transactions.              Bank A borrows $90          in the interbank
market to leave the end—of—day position of the banking system as in
2c.       As    an    effect    of   these        transactions,   bank     assets    and

liabilities have been substituted                    for the maturing commercial
paper.

Holding Reserves Against a Line

      Again, raising the DD in bank B generates a use of reserves
for   settlement        directly     connected        to   providing     liquidity    to

commercial paper.        Bank B cannot expand its demand deposits carried

overnight without increasing its reserves by $10 because it must
cover its greater potential next day net due to position.                       Bank A

can satisfy its commitment to the CP issuer by holding sufficient
good funds as reserves on its balance sheet to cover the increased

reserve holdings on the DD generated when the issue matures.                        Bank


                                             16
A knows that the delivery of $10 in good funds plus $90 of due to's

will satisfy its credit commitment to the CP issuer, while still
allowing it to serve the potential next day payment needs of its
remaining DD customers.13     More generally, bank A need not hold
the additional reserves directly, as long as they are available
somewhere in the banking system.
The Price of the Line of Credit and the Cost of Holding Reserves
     In this example, the reserves held against the CP and CD are
equivalent.     If bank A holds $10 in additional reserves to cover
its liquidity commitment on its customer's line, the opportunity
cost will be covered in the price of the line on the commercial
paper.     The CP issuer will offer a commensurably lower yield to
cover this cost of providing liquidity, so the CP holder bears the
cost of reserves needed      in   the payments mechanism to provide
liquidity.      Both short-term and liquid,   CP and CD are perfect
substitutes; and they should therefore pay the same yields,       as

confirmed by Fama.     Both depend on the holding of good funds as
reserves against demand deposits to assure liquidity, however, so
both pay for the cost of such reserves.

     This stark example is not a realistic view of the CP market,
however.      As members of a banking system,   individual banks can
provide lines without actually holding reserves. They can provide
liquidity to non—bank securities at a much lower cost than our


     13
          If settlement in bank claims alone were sufficient to
operate the payment system, there would be no need for reserves.
Reserve holdings even in a private clearing system provide the most
liquid collateral for participants.

                                   17
example would imply.     We will show below that the effect of       a

banking system's ability to economize on reserve holdings does not
change the incidence of the cost of reserves.


4. The Cost of Liquidity: A More Realistic Commercial Paper Market
     In our simple commercial paper example, we concluded that both

CP and CD holders pay for reserves.     We consider again a commercial

paper market     in which issuers hold bank lines to assure        the

delivery of good funds to investors at maturity.       If the line is
used, a loan is created to deliver funds to the CP holder's bank.
The issuance of the loan creates a due to position to the CP
holder's bank which must be funded with a deposit.          Since the
Federal Reserve guarantees that the due to will be converted to
good funds at settlement, reserves need not be held against the
line to guarantee that a deposit can be created to fund the loan.
If the deposit is issued, reserves must be found by the end of the

day, however.    We will discuss in detail how the costs of reserves

are split. First, we determine the costs borne by the CP buyer.
Then we consider costs borne by the CP issuer.




The CP Buyer's Cost of Bank Liquidity
     Suppose that the commercial paper issuer faces a probability
of .1 of borrowing from a bank at the maturity of the CP in five
business days.     The CP issuer expects to use a bank loan only
overnight at maturity, if at all.      As an alternative to issuing CP


                                  18
with a line, he can issue a liability of the same maturity without
a liquidity guarantee.   He would issue the less liquid liability if
he could sell it at an interest expense greater than the explicit
interest expense on the CP by no more than the expected additional
cost of the bank loan plus the up—front cost of the line.

     Assume that the interest rate in the inter—bank Fed funds
market is 10 percent and the reserve ratio against demand deposits

is 10 percent.   Since the bank can sell reserves in the Fed funds
market,   its opportunity cost of reserves is an annualized one
percent of the deposits that it must raise to fund its loans.

     The CP issuer's expected annualized cost of reserves is 1/5 x
1/10 x 1 percent or 2 basis points.   The issuer faces a ten percent
probability of using a bank loan once every five days.       He will
issue commercial paper backed by a credit line rather than a less
liquid liability if he can obtain at least       a   two basis point
reduction in his annual interest rate for doing so.     The CP buyer
in this case will accept a two basis point reduction from the yield

on less liquid paper, such as the same paper without a bank line.



The CD Buyer's Cost of Bank Liquidity

     To determine the cost of reserves to the CD holder, we must
consider whether CD can substitute for CP in an illiquid market in
which CP generally cannot be rolled over.   Actually having the same
liquidity characteristics indicates that the two instruments are
affected similarly when the market demands delivery of cash.      If

the delivery of a CD is accepted as settlement when the delivery of


                                 19
CP generally is not accepted, CD must be more liquid than CP and
therefore must trade at a lower yield.

       Accepting the evidence indicating that CD and CP are equally
liquid, we presume in completing this example the extreme case that

investors reluctant to hold CP also shun CD.14      In this case,   a

demand for cash payment requires settlement with a demand deposit,
which always maintains its value in good funds.   If holders of both
CP and CD require delivery of a demand deposit in a liquidity
crunch, they must both pay for the reserve holdings against demand

deposits when either the bank issuing CD or the corporation issuing

CP cannot roll over these liabilities.     In this case, holders of
both   instruments pay   for the   expectation that investors will
require a demand deposit at settlement, and their yields are less

than the yield of a less liquid instrument by the expected cost of

holding reserves on demand deposits.



The CP Issuer's Cost of Bank Liquidity: The Role of the Dealer

       The analysis of the incidence of reserve costs is not yet
complete because the holder of CP or CD may wish to sell the
security before maturity.     Assume that the investor sells to a
dealer who in circumstances of illiquidity in CP and CD markets
cannot sell the security under a repurchase agreement to finance
inventory.   The dealer must then finance with a bank loan which, iii

turn, must be financed by the issue of a demand deposit, given that

       14
         More generally, the CP of an individual firm may not roll
over even though there is no general OP crisis.  The bank loan may
then be funded with CD.

                                   20
the CP and CD markets are not then liquid.

    Since the CP or CD has not matured,          it must be sold at     a

discount today.     The discount must be greater than normal by the
cost of the reserves, which represents an additional funding cost
for the dealer.15       We assume again that interest rate on Fed
funds is 10 percent and that the reserve ratio against DD is 10
percent, so the cost of reserves will be an annualized 1 percent of

demand deposit funding.
        As before, we assume that with a probability of .1, the CP or

CD cannot be sold before maturity without bank funding to the
dealer and that five days remain until maturity.          On issue, the
investor must be compensated       for   the   expected extra   cost   of

illiquidity    in   the CP and CD markets,     i.e.   the extra haircut
administered by the dealer to cover the reserve cost of his bank
loan.    We assume an equal probability that the paper cannot be sold

on any of the four days before maturity.       On an annualized basis,

the expected cost of liquidity of a sale before maturity is 4/5 x
1/10 x 1 percent, or 8 basis points.      The investor is then paid 8
basis points above the rate of return on Fed funds.16

        15
        This analysis presumes that there is an ample number of
dealers with well—prepared bank lines.  If not, there is an even
greater illiquidity due to the limited capacity of individual
dealers to bear risk.    See Grossman and Miller (1989) on this
issue.
        16
        It is not necessary for all investors to sell their CP and
CD for demand deposits in a liquidity crunch. As in all markets,
the demands of the marginal investor determine the price.      The
eight basis points is the incremental return required to make the
marginal investor willing to bear the risk of a decline in the
value of his security relative to good funds in a crunch, whether
he sells his security or not.

                                   21
     The liquidity crunch requiring the raising of a demand deposit

occurs with probability .1 spread evenly over the time to maturity
of the paper.    The total expected cost of reserves generated by
loans providing liquidity to CP is then ten basis points (1/10 x 1
percent).   If the CP buyer were to pay this expected cost entirely,

the issuer would have to compensate him by offering a yield 10
basis points above Fed funds.    The issuer, however, achieves a    2


basis point lower yield because the market is virtually certain
that he can deliver cash in five days at the maturity of the paper.

He expects to pay for this two basis point reduction in the form of
the cost of reserves.      Prior to maturity,   the buyer must be
compensated for the possibility that he might have to sell to a
dealer who must finance inventory with a bank loan.   For this, the
buyer must receive an 8 basis point higher interest rate, compared
to Fed funds. The issuer pays 4/5 of the cost (the higher interest

rate paid to the buyer), and the buyer pays 1/5 of the cost of
constantly providing liquidity to the CP.

     The expected cost of reserves can take the form of an up front

fee for a line or a premium over the overnight inter-bank rate.    If

the cost is paid as a fee, both issuers and purchasers of CP pay
the expected price for bank line use.   If it is paid as a premium,

the full cost is borne by the actual users of lines, i.e. either by

the issuer or by the buyer of the paper in costs passed through the
dealer.




                                 22
5. Who Pays the Cost of Reserves on CD's?                   The Market for less
Liquid Securities
     In section 4 we described a liquidity problem in which the
marginal investor wanted to convert his CP or CD into a demand
deposit.     We now consider less severe liquidity problems that may
affect less liquid financial instruments than CD's and CP's.                   We

will refer to the more severe crisis in which only demand deposits

are acceptable as a DD crisis and to the less severe liquidity
problem     as    a   CD/CP crisis.       During    such    liquidity problems,
investors        attempt   to   convert     their    less     liquid    financial

instruments into CD's or CP's.            In this milder form      of   liquidity
problem, CP and CD holders do not demand to convert their holdings

into demand deposits.

     We assume, as before, that the Fed funds rate is 10 percent
and that banks hold a 10 percent reserve ratio against demand
deposits.        In addition, we assume that the reserve ratio on bank
CD'S is 3 percent and that the less liquid security has the same
five day maturity as the CP in our previous example)7                        The

probability of a CD/CP liquidity crisis on any day is 0.2.                   The

probability of a DD liquidity crisis on any day is 0.1, as before.
The occurrence of the two types of crisis is mutually exclusive.
    How does the cost of liquidity affect the market for the less
liquid instrument?         At maturity, the issuer of the less liquid
instrument faces a         probability of 3/10 that he cannot roll over


     17
           This ratio would reflect the CD'S effect on the bank's
potential net due to's from a day's transactions.
                                      23
his security and must fund with a bank loan.            When this happens,
the bank can fund the loan with a CD with probability 2/3; with a
probability of 1/3, it must issue a demand deposit.
          By taking out a bank line to guarantee delivery of whichever

bank deposit is demanded in settlement, the issuer faces part of
the expected cost for reserves generated by the security.             This
expected cost consists of two components: 1/5 x 30 basis points is
the expected cost of a mild liquidity problem and 1/10 x 100 basis
points is the expected cost of a major liquidity crisis.         The total
expected cost of bank liquidity is then 1/5 x 30 + 1/10 x 100 or 16
basis points.     Since he refunds his security once every five days,
the issuer's expected cost in terms of an annualized liquidity
premium is 1/5 x 16 or 3.2 basis points.         He is willing to issue a
security backed by a line if he can achieve a 3.2 basis point
reduction in interest expense for doing so.

        The holder of the security faces an expected cost of reserves
in selling to a dealer in a crisis.        In a mild crisis, the dealer
funds with a bank loan issued against a CD.          The cost is 1/5 x 30.
In a severe crisis, the bank loan is funded with a demand deposit.
The cost is     1/10 x 100.    The total expected cost        is absorbed
between issuance and maturity -—        that   is,   for four out of five
days.     Thus, the expected cost of reserves borne by the holder is
4/5 x 16 basis points or 12.8 basis points.            The holder must be
paid 12.8 basis points over the Fed funds rate to be content to
hold the less liquid security.

        The cost of reserves on CD's will be split between the issuer


                                   24
of a security less liquid than a CD and the holder of the security.

The expected cost of reserves on a CD is 1/5             x    30 or      6   basis
points.     The holder pays an expected 1.2 basis points in terms of
accepting a lower yield than on the same security without a bank
line.     The issuer pays an expected 4.8 basis points in terms of a
higher yield to compensate the investor for the cost of selling in
a mild crisis.



6. The Commercial and Industrial Loan Market

        Consider a potential issuer whose security is so illiquid that
if it were sold on a security market, a dealer would always have to

fund his purchase with a bank loan.            The security is also so
illiquid that it certainly cannot be rolled over at maturity --                  a

bank loan is surely required to deliver cash at maturity.             We shall
show that the potential holder and issuer of this security face an

expected cost of reserves equal to the actual cost of reserves
against such a security held directly by a bank.         No incentive then
arises to hold this security off a bank balance sheet.

        Suppose that the Fed funds rate is 10 percent, the reserve
ratio on a demand deposit is 10 percent, and the reserve ratio on
a CD is 3 percent.     For now we assume that the security is held by

a non-bank lender, that it matures in five days, and that it is
affected by a DD crisis in the same way as all other securities.
With    probability   .1,   investors   will   attempt       to   sell       these
securities for demand deposits before maturity or the issuer will
have to deliver demand deposits at maturity.                 The C&I         loan,


                                   25
however, is in a constant state of mild liquidity crisis.                  If an
investor were to sell the security,            it would always have to be
bought by a dealer funded by CD, except in a DD crisis.          Similarly,
issuers must always borrow from a bank at maturity             funded by CD
except in a DD crisis.

        When he takes out a bank line, the issuer knows he must borrow
at maturity.      His expected cost of reserves is 1/10 x 100 basis
points to cover the expected cost of delivery of demand deposits.
It is 9/10 x 30 basis points to cover the expected cost of delivery
of a CD.     Since the security matures every five days, his expected
cost of reserves is 1/5 x 1/10 x 100 basis points plus 1/5 x 9/10
x 30 basis points         7.4 basis points.    He will take out a bank line
if he can issue his security for 7.4 basis points less than he
would have had he not obtained a bank line.
        The holder   of    the   security must    be   compensated   for    the

expected dealer financing costs.           These costs are 1/10 x 100 basis
points for the expected cost of the delivery of a demand deposit,
and 9/10 x 30 basis points for the expected cost of the delivery of
the CD.    The holder faces these costs over 4 days.        Thus, his total

expected cost is 4/5 x 1/10 x 100 basis points plus 4/5 x 9/10 x 30

basis points = 29.6 basis points.              The holder will hold this
security only if he can earn 29.6 basis points above the Fed funds
rate.

        The total expected cost of reserves is 37 basis points.        Given

the market's expectation of liquidity crises, a bank can expect to

fund itself with 90 percent CD's and 10 percent demand deposits.

                                      26
The expected cost of the reserve burden facing the bank is thus .9

x 30 basis points plus .1 x 100 basis points = 37 basis points.
The expected cost of reserves in the C&I market exactly equals the

cost of reserves facing the bank.18



7.     The Fed Funds Market and the Burden of Reserves
       We have used the Fed funds rate as our benchmark liquid
interest rate.     Fed funds obligations are effectively guaranteed
settlement in good funds since the Fed provides intra-day and
limited overnight lines to Fed fund borrowers.      The properties of

bank demand deposits held overnight are identical to those of Fed
funds: both represent instant next—morning access to good funds.
As in Famas examples of the close substitutes CD and CP, the yield

on Fed funds should then approximate the implicit yield on demand
deposits.      Yet, a bank funding itself with demand deposits bears a
reserve requirement while a bank funding itself with Fed funds does

not.    Since a bank borrowing Fed funds typically must acquire them

from a bank which funds itself with demand deposits or with CD
which require reserves,      it   is conventionally presumed that Fed
funds yields bear a markup over implicit demand deposit yields and
CD yields by the cost of reserves.       We will now show that, on the

contrary, the Fed funds and effective yields on demand deposit


        18   We note that lender and borrower share the burden of
reserves in the ratio of 4 to 1, which is determined by the
maturity characteristics of the note.   In a more complete model,
the maturity characteristics would be endogenously determined. If
borrowers bore the burden of more frequent cash verification,
lenders would pay a higher percentage of the reserve burden.
                                    27
rates should be equal and, that both rates should be lower than
yields on CD and CP.

A Conventional View of the Relation Between Fed Funds and CD Rates

     This conclusion is contrary to the following standard argument
that the Fed funds rate should equal the CD rate plus the interest
cost of reserves.-9       At settlement,    a bank with a net due to
position cumulated during the day has two means of acquiring funds
through raising liabilities.     It can either purchase Fed funds or
sell a deposit.    We presume that CD rates are the marginal cost of
bank funds.2°     If it sells a CD,     it creates a due from the bank
of the party purchasing the CD, which will decrease the selling
bank's own end—of—day net due to position.            If it purchases Fed
funds,    it settles a due to position directly through interbank
transactions alone.     Either transaction will increase the bank's
reserve account balance.

         Reserves must be held against CD, however, while no reserves

are required against Fed funds. Since banks would apparently gain
by avoiding the cost of reserves, banks should have an incentive to

bid the Fed funds rate above the CD rate by the cost of reserve
requirements.     The effective CD rate, the CD rate divided by .97,
would equal the Fed funds rate.

     That this does not happen is illustrated in Table            3.   We

compare the average daily Fed funds rate with the average daily one

     19    For example, see Moore et al.    (1988).
     20 The argument would apply to implicit DD rates if DD is the
marginal source of funds. The Fed funds rate would then exceed the
DD rate by the cost of reserves.
                                   28
month domestic CD rate over the period 1980 through 1988.      Over the

entire period, the Fed funds rate was an average of 13 basis points

above the CD rate.    Correcting for reserve requirements by dividing

the CD rate by .97, the effective CD rate was 18 basis points above

the Fed funds rate.
     CD's are of a longer maturity than overnight Fed funds,           so

their yields are not strictly comparable.         Since the positive
spread of Fed funds over CD's could have reflected an anticipation
of the dramatic decline in Fed funds rates over the period, we
investigated the spread for two sub—periods as well.           Over the
three year period from the beginning of 1984 to year-end 1986, Fed
funds rates trended downward, but the decline was slow.          During

that period, the Fed funds rate exceeded the CD rate (unadjusted
for reserve requirements) by 12 basi points.     Adjusted for reserve

requirements, the CD rate exceeded the Fed funds rate by 14         basis
points.    Over the two year period from the beginning of 1987 to
year-end   1988,   the   Fed   funds rate was rising.    The   CD    rate

(unadjusted for reserves) exceeded the Fed funds rate by 7 basis

points, on average.      In no case was the differential significantly

different from zero.

Why Demand Deposits and Fed Funds are Substitutes
     In Table 4a we present the balance sheet of a bank at the end
of the business day.     There are 1000 in demand deposits, 2000 in CD

and 50 in capital funding 950 of overnight Fed funds loans and 1940
of securities.     Reserves are 160, 10% against DD and 3% against CD.

Since the business day is over, the customer with demand deposits

                                    29
has certain access to the funds at the start of business the next
day but has loaned the funds to the bank overnight.           The bank then
has good funds overnight which          it   can   lend at   the Fed   funds
rate. 21

     If it uses the deposit to lend Fed funds,         good funds will be
returned by the borrowing bank at the start of business next day.
Hence, the properties of the Fed funds loan are identical to those
of the booked demand deposit.     Table 4 depicts the balance sheet at
the start of business next day.    Reserves have increased to 1110 as
the Fed funds are repaid inunediately.

     The bank would not pay a higher implicit yield on demand
deposits than on Fed    funds.    The demand deposits on its books
indicate that customers and the bank both are willing to forego the
interest on the 10% required reserves held against the deposits.

Why do banks not bid the Fed funds rate above the DD rate by the
cost of holding reserves?

     The DD holder has indirect access to the Fed funds market
through the use of overnight repurchase agreements with banks.
Toward the end of a business day,        a customer faced with holding
positive end—of—day demand deposits can elect either to leave them

in the bank or to enter a repurchase agreement with the bank.            In

a repurchase agreement, the customer will purchase a government
security from the bank at the end of the day, and the bank will buy
it back the next morning for a predetermined price.          The bank's end


     21
         Alternatively, having the demand deposit allows the bank
to avoid borrowing overnight Fed funds.

                                   30
of   day balance sheet will   have    fewer demand deposits by the
purchase price of the security, and this will release reserves to
lend on the Fed funds market overnight.    The next morning, the bank
simultaneously receives repayment on the Fed funds and repurchases

the security, making the funds available to the customer at the
start of business.

      Table 5a depicts the end—of—day bank balance sheet if demand
deposits are   all expended on   a    repurchase agreement.     Demand
deposits are now zero, so reserves are only 60.    The bank makes an
additional 100 in overnight Fed funds loans.       A 1000 repurchase
liability replaces the demand deposit.    Table 5b depicts the start
of day bank balance sheet after the Fed funds overnight loans have
been repaid on Fedwire and after the bank exchanges           a demand
deposit credit for its securities to its repo customer.        For the
bank and for the customer, the start of day position is identical
to that of holding a demand deposit overnight.

      The repurchase agreement permits the customer to convert its
demand deposit into a collateralized Fed funds loan with liquidity

properties identical to Fed funds.22       Both demand deposits and
repurchases entail delivery of good funds at the end of the day to
the bank for resale on the Fed funds market.        Both require the
receipt of funds available for expenditure the next morning.      From


      22
         Since the repurchase agreement is collateralized while Fed
funds are not explicitly guaranteed, repurchase agreement rates are
typically somewhat lower than the Fed funds rate. To ease clerical
problems and transactions costs, however, banks typically ask that
the security be deposited with the bank itself. The extent of the
guarantee of repayment therefore is questionable.

                                 31
the viewpoint of the customer, these are identical claims.          If the
implicit yield on DD is less than the Fed funds rate, the customer
will substitute entirely into repurchase agreements, leaving no
demand deposits in the bank.

     This discussion leads to a result analogous to the incidence
of the cost of reserves on CD and CP.            Banks cannot charge the
reserve cost of demand deposits to the Fed funds borrowers or to
the holders of demand deposits.      Demand deposits and Fed funds pay
the same liquidity premium because they have the same liquidity
characteristics.

CD Rates and Fed Funds Rates

     Since CD is less liquid than demand deposits, it should pay a
premium    to its holders over the implicit rate on demand deposits,
reflecting the costs of reserves held on demand deposits.            Since
Fed funds are substitutes for demand deposits, CD rates bear             a

markup over Fed funds rates.

8. Reserves Are the Most Liquid Asset
     The    availability   of   substitutes    for   reservable   deposits

permits banks to reduce reserves to any desired level while still
supplying liquid liabilities to the market.23          Since banks issue
demand deposits, they must not view reserves as a cost from which
they derive no benefit.    They hold the level of reserves necessary
to supply liquidity to the market.            We now consider why banks
choose both the amount of reserves that they will hold and their


     23
            Reserves pushed out of the banks would show up              as
increased currency holdings.

                                    32
structure of reservable liabilities.
     Clearinghouses allow banks to conserve on the holding of
reserves,     thereby lowering the cost of delivering good                      funds.

Settlement,     however,      is   designed       to   transfer     risk     from   the

clearinghouse         back    to   the       individual    members,         severally.

Settlement occurs because of             a    risk of material change in the
creditworthiness of banks.             If a member's position deteriorates
such that it cannot deliver reserves for settlement of the day's
payment     orders,     the   entire     clearinghouse      loses     the     reserves

necessary to cover that bank's net due to position, which could
weaken otherwise strong members of the clearinghouse.

     To assure that bank deposits are liquid instruments, periodic

settlements must occur.            Risk transfer cannot be accomplished
completely unless reserves are held in the system.                    Reserves are
the most liquid instrument,              whose presence makes credible the
guarantee of liquidity to other securities.24
     The Federal Reserve absolutely guarantees delivery of reserves

associated with daylight payments, which lays the risk of non—

     24
          This basic interpretation of reserves was held in the
early days of the Federal Reserve system.    For example, Willis,
Chapman, and Robey (1933, p. 257) state: "Thus, the reserve
requirement under the Federal Reserve Act is really that there be
maintained a net balance between claims upon the banks and those
held by it against other banks equal to a given percentage of the
claims (deposits) it has agreed to pay, and this balance is the
outcome of the clearing which has been described.    It represents
the net live credit of the banks which make up the Federal Reserve
System--the credit which has not become subject to draft as the
result of checking by depositors.  Reserves in the Federal Reserve
sense are thus the proportion of unquestionably liquid claims to
total outstanding claims against the members. The Federal Reserve
System is thus, in its reserve aspect, a means of testing and
assigning credit to those entitled to it."

                                             33
settlement on the Fed.        If, in addition, they can borrow overnight
from the Fed to cover net due to positions, member banks themselves
have    no     apparent   incentive   to    hold   reserves       to    effect    risk
transfer.      To provide an incentive and to compensate itself for the
risk it bears, the Fed must limit the use of its overnight loans.

       The Fed's limit creates a shadow price for borrowing reserves

from the Fed, which leads to a contract market in Fed funds lines.
To     avoid    incurring   the   shadow     price    at    the        Fed,   a   bank
participating in the market will pay for Fed funds lines.25
       On any day, a spot seller of Fed funds can apparently provide
funds on a line without holding reserves overnight because the Fed
guarantees that       a   liquidity problem on the next day will                  not
prevent the delivery of good funds sent the following morning.
This appearance is an illusion, however.             To assure the ability of
satisfying unusual borrowing demands on lines, the seller must hold
some overnight reserves.

       As an example, assume that a spot seller of overnight Fed
funds arranges several Fed funds lines.               Suppose that today it
sells all its reserve holdings on the spot market through its

committed lines by eliminating all its required reserves through
repos with its demand deposit customers.                   This    is    its normal
practice, so that it never holds reserves on its overnight balance

       25
         If end—of-day net due to's are the random variable N, the
level of bank Fed funds lines, L, plus borrowings from the Fed, B,
must be such that N=L+B.  If the lines pay the Fed funds rate
and the Fed's shadow overnight rate is r5(B), the banks establis
lines such that the difference between the expected Fed funds rate
and the shadow overnight rate equals the covariance between the
marginal shadow rate and the level of discount window borrowing.

                                       34
sheet.     It appears that the cost of making credible the promise to

deliver good funds on the line commitments is zero exactly because
the Fed guarantees to deliver good funds for all payment orders
sent next day.     Next morning, its Fed funds customers will deliver

the good funds due the seller, which will surely be available
because of the Fed's guarantee of Fedwire payments              If, next day,

its Fed funds line customers wish to increase their borrowing
demands under the. line to a level higher than normal, the selling

bank has no way to fulfill its obligations.            To provide a credible
guarantee that yet additional Fed funds will be delivered on a
line, the seller must hold reserves overnight on its balance sheet;

and it will demand compensation for holding them.


9.   A Crisis under a Fractional Reserve Banking System
      In   our   stylized    version   of    the   commercial   paper market
presented in section 3, banks held reserves against lines.            We have

argued that, in practice, they need not hold 100% reserves against

all lines because they are part of a banking system which can
mobilize good     funds     rapidly.    Thus,      the banking system   is   a

fractional reserve system as measured against the potential demand
for reserves to back up lines.

     Occasionally, however, there is an increase in the amount of
end—of—day net due to's in the banking system, with an associated
increase in demand for reserves.            How does the system create the
increased delivery that is demanded?

     The amount of reserves that the banking system chooses to hold


                                       35
is determined by the shadow price of borrowing from the Fed.                     With
a sudden increase in demand for reserves, sellers conunitted to Fed

funds lines can respond by substituting for demand deposits non—
reservable     liabilities       with   equal      liquidity.       They   can   also
generate excess reserves by substituting non—reservable paper for
CD's, though this is not as instantaneous a procedure.

     If these actions cannot satisfy the demand, the Fed funds rate
will rise.     This will cause the liquidity premium on less liquid
securities to rise and            increase the discount that sellers               of

securities must suffer to effect settlement in demand deposits.
Some potential sellers will decide to hold their securities rather
than to sell them for bank deposits.                   In addition, the Fed funds
rate may rise sufficiently to make it profitable to pay the shadow
price of borrowing from the Fed, which will increase the amount of
reserves in the system.

     Finally, the Fed may provide liquidity to the market through
open market operations.           If the Fed makes it known that it will
substantially increase reserves               in   a    crisis,   bank holding of
reserves will decline in normal times.



10. When are Reserve Requirements a Tax?
     Reserve    requirements associated with the                  occasional     bank

funding of securities are paid by both issuers and investors.                      If

reserves really are         a   tax,    the burden        is   then borne by      all

participants     in   the       securities      markets,       including   non-bank
intermediaries.       In this section,             we analyze the question of

                                         36
whether reserves are indeed a tax on the provision of liquidity.

       Reserve requirements cannot be a tax if banks would hold the
same   level    of    reserves without     the   requirement.   If   perfect
substitutes are available for reservable deposits, banks can reduce

the level      of reserves to the desired level regardless of the
reserve requirement.

       If the clearinghouse or Federal Reserve decides to increase
reserve requirements on        DD,   the cost of settlement      in demand
deposits increases, which raises liquidity premiums on CP and CD.
Fewer transactions will be settled in bank deposits and more open
market paper will be issued relative to bank loans.             The rise in
liquidity premiums will be constrained somewhat by the decline in
the probability of a demand for settlement in demand deposits
because of the increased cost of such settlement.

       The reserve requirement is a crucial determinant of the size
of the banking system as measured by the end—of—day balance sheet
and of the liquidity premium.             If the requirement is high, the
liquidity premium and the opportunity cost of holding liquid assets
will be high.        But in what sense is the reserve requirement high?
To determine this, we return to our discussion of the private
clearinghouse.



The Optimal Level of Reserves at the Private Clearinghouse

       Reserves must at least equal the sum of the end—of—day net due
to positions for the private clearinghouse to guarantee absolutely
the delivery of good         funds   at    settlement.    The cost   of   the


                                      37
guarantee is the foregone interest on the reserves; and to receive
the assurance that good funds can be delivered on the day's payment

orders, clearing members pay this cost of providing the guarantee.
Reserves are not a tax in this situation.26

     Reserves become a tax when a clearinghouse forces its members
to hold reserves in excess of those reasonably needed to cover the
day's "net due to's".       If excessive reserves are required,    the
price of delivery of funds will rise,      forcing up the liquidity
premium on yields on market securities.      More investors will be
willing to forego selling their securities to dealers      for bank
deposits, because the price of dealer bank finance will rise.
Are Reserves a Tax in the Federal Reserve System?

     What is the appropriate level of reserve requirements in the
Federal Reserve System?       The Fed's guarantee of    delivery   of

reserves at settlement is absolute.     Ideally, the Fed should set
the reserve requirement such that the income on its portfolio of
securities financed by reserves plus income from other charges on
member banks for using the payments system covers expected losses
from the payments system.

     The Fed can mimic the private clearinghouse in this regard.
It can set reserves equal to expected end-of—day net due to's and
charge a fee for expected losses in reserves.   Required reserves in


     26
            Members of the clearinghouse must bear an additional
charge in the event that one of their members fails, so the
interest foregone on the reserves does not represent the total cost
of the guarantee.   Members must assess depositors an additional
charge to cover the expectation that they will have to replace
reserves.

                                  38
the United States are currently about $59 billion, of which about
$37 billion represents bank deposits held at the Fed. An additional

$22 billion is vault cash held directly at banks for use in the
banks' currency business.       Net due to positions on Fedwire, CHIPS,

and U.S. government securities trading suxn to about $100 billion
a day at some time of the day.        Total reserves are then less than
the potential due to position during the day, though not at the end
of the day.      This is below the level that a private clearinghouse
would set to provide an absolute payment guarantee.27

         Reserve requirements are not necessarily too low, however.
Unlike    the    private   clearinghouse,   the   Fed   earns    interest   on
reserves.       Since it can create good funds at will, it can invest
the proceeds without worrying about its ability to convert them to
good funds to satisfy net due to positions.             This income can be
viewed as compensation for having to supply additional reserves in

the event that an individual bank or group of banks cannot deliver
good funds at settlement.       The private clearinghouse would have to
assess individual members in the event of a failure.            The Fed would
absorb the loss on daylight overdrafts since it would have to line
up as an unsecured creditor.

     In summary, reserve requirements cannot be a tax on banks
because with perfect substitutes for reservable deposits banks can
avoid holding unwanted reserves.      In the U.S., bank reserves amount

     27
        The net due to position in the government securities market
is $40 billion.   If a bank fails to make payment on a government
security it has received for its customer, and the Fed delivers
reserves as payment to the seller's bank, it is not clear who has
claim to the security -— the purchaser or the Fed.

                                     39
to about     2   percent of bank liabilities while deposits at the
Federal Reserve amount to about 1 percent of liabilities.             This is
comparable to reserves held against liabilities in other banking
systems with much lower reserve requirements.           Counting off—balance
sheet items,      it    is comparable to the reserves held by the UK
banking system, which lacks explicit reserve requirements.
11. Conclusion

      In the conventional view, reserve requirements are a tax on
the banking system not borne by other intermediaries.             The recent
literature has focused on bank borrowers as the bearers of the cost
of   reserves.         This   has   resulted   partly   from   evidence   that
commercial paper and certificates of deposit trade at the same
yields.     Commercial paper is not subject to a reserve requirement,
while certificates of deposit are.             Since they trade at the same
yield,    certificate of deposit holders cannot bear the cost of
reserves.     Therefore, bank borrowers must.

     We have presented an alternative for how the cost of reserves
is borne in financial markets.          Commercial paper issuers purchase
lines which commit a bank to provide a loan if the issuer cannot
roll over the paper at maturity.               The bank guarantees that a
commercial paper issuer can deliver good funds to the investor at
maturity, so the bank supplies liquidity to the commercial paper
market.

     We have shown that commercial paper issuers pay for reserve
requirements to the extent that they expect to borrow against their

lines because the use of the line has payment implications for the


                                       40
banking system, which expands its desire to hold reserves.                           Using

a similar line of argument, we have shown that the cost of reserves

must be reflected in the prices of all securities.
        Securities with a bank line trade at lower interest rates than

securities with otherwise identical characteristics which lack a
line.      The difference in yields exactly reflects the expected cost
of reserves and represents a liquidity premium.

        If a security without a bank line has a low probability of
requiring settlement by the delivery of good funds, the expected
cost of a bank line and the liquidity premium will be very low.                          We

can then define a liquid security as a security which infrequently
settles with the delivery of reservable deposits.                        Consequently,

holders and issuers of these securities pay little of the cost of
reserves.

        Reserve requirements are not a tax if close subs it jtutes exist

for reservable liabilities.           Even without such substitutes, if they

are set at the level necessary to guarantee that a banking system
can provide settlement          in    good      funds   at   the   end    of    a    day's

transactions, they also need not represent a tax.                   If they are set
above this limit,          they are    a   tax;    the incidence of             the tax,
however,     falls generally on liquidity in all financial markets
rather than on current depositors or borrowers from the banking
system.      The cost of reserves cannot be a tax on liquidity as long
as   the    market   can    create    instruments       which      have    no       reserve

requirements while maintaining the same liquidity as reservable
deposits.


                                           41
                                References
Black,    Fischer,   "Bank Fund Management in an Efficient Market",
Journal of Financial Economics, 1975,    2,   323—339.

Fama, Eugene, "What's Different About Banks?" Journal of Monetary
Economics 15 (January, 1985), 29—40.
Gertler,   Mark,  "Financial   Structure and Aggregate     Economic
Activity: An Overview," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol.
20, no. 3, August, 1988, Part 2.

Goodfriend, Marvin, "Money, Credit, Banking, and Payments System
Policy," in David B. Humphrey, ed., The U.S. Payments System:
Efficiency, Risk, and the Role of the Federal Reserve, Kluwer
Academic Publishers.

Grossman, S. and N. Miller, "Liquidity and Market Structure," The
Journal of Finance, Vol. 43, No. 3, July, 1988, 617—634.
James,  Christopher, "Some Evidence on the Uniqueness of       Bank
Loans,", Journal of Financial Economics, 19(1987), 217—36.
Lumxner, Scott and John McConnell, "Further Evidence on the Bank
Lending Process and the Capital Market Response to Bank Loan
Agreements", Working Paper, June, 1989.

Moore, George R., Richard D. Porter and David H. Small, "Modeling
the Disaggregated Demands for M2 and Ml in the 1980's: The U.S.
Experience", Board of Governors of Federal Reserve, May 12, 1988,
working paper.
Willis, H. Parker, Chapman, John, and Ralph Robey, Contemporary
Banking, New York: Harper, 1933.




                                  42
                                            Figure 1
                Conventional Analysis of the Cost of Reserves



Interest Rate




                            Clemand for Bank Loans




          H
                                                                S




                                                                Volume of Loans of Depoat3


                • - P,v *n () o.nng ,,
                 — SloaN eq Jnd. V OsnePeg sYsm
                 flf SleajAing foe eta of SlNH
</ref_section>
                                    Table 1

                                        (a)

                 BankA
                                                             BankB
        Assets         Uabilities                   Assets       Uabilities
Reserves 100           900 00                  Reserves 60           600 00
 Loans     900         100 CD                   Loan* 540




                                        (b)




               BankA                                        BAnk B


        Assets         Uabilities                   Assets       Uabilities
Reserves 90             90 Due to   B         Reserves 70        700 00

Loans    900           900 00                  Loans 540

                                              Duefron,A90
                                     Table 2

                                          (a)

                 BankA                                        BankS
        Assets        Uabiflttes                     Assets        UabiIities

Reserves 100           900 DO                   Reserves 60           600 DO

 Loans    800                                    Loans 540




                  M.ino: icc C,Sdt Line




                                          (b)




            Bank A                                            BAnk B


        Assets        Uabilities                     Assets        Uabilities

 LoanS 900               900 00                 Reserves 160          700 00

                                                  Loans 540




                                          (c)




            BarikA                                            BAnkS


        Assets        Uabilities                     Assets        Uabilities

Reserves 90           900 D                     Reserves 70           700 DO

Loans     900         90 DuatoB                   Loans 540

                                                DuetromA 90
                                Table 3

                  One Month CD Rate Less Federal Funds Rate
                           Reserve Adlusted         Unadjusted
198 0—88
Average Difference              0.18%                 —0.13%
Stand. Dev.                     0.70%                  0.70%
1984—1986
Average Difference              0.14%                 -0.12%
Stand. Dev.                     0.51%                  0.49%
1987—1988
Average Difference              0.29%                  0.07%
Stand.     Dev.                 0.34%                  0.33%

Data Source: DRI.




                                        43
                                       Table 4

                   (a)                                             (b)
                                                        Next Morning
     End of Day—Hold DD                               Fed Funds Pays Off
       Assets            Uabihtles                     Assets            Uabilitles
 Reseives 160            1000 00                 Res.ree 1110            1000 00

 Fed Funds 950           2000 CD                 Securitiee 1940         2000 CD

 Securities 1940          50 Capital                                      50 Capital




                                       Table 5
                   (a)                                             (b)
     End of Day—Use AP                                 Next Morning
                                                     Fed Funds Pays Off
       Assets            Uabilltles                    Assets            Uabilities
 Reserves 60             1Q00 Repo               Reserves 1110           1000 00

Fed Funds 1050           2000 CD                 Securities 1940         2000 CD

Securities 1940           50 Capital                                      50 Capital
