                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           IMPLICATIONS OF A CAPITAL GAINS TAX CUT
       REVENUE AND WELFARE
                                            PAYOUTS ARE ENDOGENOUS
       WHEN GAINS REALIZATIONS AND DIVIDEND




                           Patric H. HendershOtt

                                 Eric Toder

                                 Yunhi Won




                           Working Paper No. 3386




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  June 1990




                                                 of the National Chamber
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support
                                                 This paper is part of NBER'S
Foundation and the comments for Harvey Galper.
                                             expressed are those of the authors
research program in Taxation. Any opinions
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #3386
                                       June 1990

          REVENUE AND WELFARE IMPLICATIONS OF A CAPITAL GAINS TAX CUT
          WHEN GAINS REALIZATIONS AND DIVIDEND PAYOUTS ARE ENDOGENOUS

                                   ABSTRACT

       This paper uses a general equilibrium model to simulate both the
  effects of a preferential capital-gains tax rate on total income tax
  revenues and the effects of a revenue-neutral substitution between a capital
  gains preference and marginal income tax rates on economic efficiency and
  the distribution of income. In the simulations, a capital gains preference
  increases efficiency by reducing tax distortions between untaxed assets
  (household and state and local capital) and taxable business sector assets
  and between realized and unrealized capital gains (the "lock-in" effect),
  but reduces efficiency by increasing tax distortions between corporate
  dividends and retained earnings and between financial assets that produce
  capital gain income and those that produce ordinary income. Because the
  model treats aggregate factor supplies as fixed, however, the simulations do
  not capture the efficiency gain from reducing the tax distortion between
  current and future consumption or the loss from increasing the tax
  distortion between current consumption and leisure (or untaxed labor).

       The net estimated welfare effects depend on two parameters: the
  elasticity of capital gains realizations with respect to a change in the
  capital gains tax rate and the elasticity of the dividend-payout ratio with
  respect to a change in the tax cost of dividends relative to retentions.
  With no payout response, the net welfare effect from a 15% maximum rate on
  capital gains is positive for a wide range of realizations elasticities.
  With a high payout elasticity, the net welfare effect is slightly positive
  for high estimates of the realizations elasticity and slightly negative for
  low estimates of the realizations elasticity. The welfare changes, both
  positive and negative, mainly affect taxpayers with income of $50,000 and
  over.




Patric H. Hendershott        Eric Toder            Yunhi Won
Ohio State University        The Treasury          Ohio State University
Dept. of Finance             P.O. Box 3724         Dept. of Public Policy
Hagerty Hall                 1 The Terrace         Hagerty Hall
1775 College Road            Wellington,           1775 College Road
Columbus, OH 43210           New Zealand           Columbus, OH 43210
        Under the U.S. income tax, as in most OECD countries, capital income

that people accrue in the form of increases in asset values (capital gains)

is taxed only when the gain is realized by sale or exchange. The taxation

of capital gains upon realization instead of accrual produces two sources of

efficiency loss. First, because tax liability is triggered by realizations,

the capital gains tax in its current form encourages taxpayers to hold onto

assets with accrued gains, instead of disposing of them by sale or exchange,

in order to compound income tax-free until realization. Further, under U.S.

law, the step-up in basis at death allows gains transferred by bequest to

escape income tax entirely. The result is a "lock-in" effect in which many

households hold suboptimal portfolios (in terms of higher risk or lower

productivity of assets to the household than to other households) to reduce

tax liability.1 One can usefully interpret the utility loss from lock-in to

a suboptimal portfolio as art implicit tax -   -a   tax paid by the household but

not received by the tax collector.

        Second, the ability of households to defer tax until realization

results in a lower effective tax rate on assets that produce capital gain

than on assets that produce ordinary income. This distorts the choice among

assets, leading to overinvestment in gains-producing assets, and induces

investors to incur transactions costs to convert ordinary income to capital

gain.
                                            2




         One   important   source of conversion of income to capital gain is the

substitution of corporate retained earnings for dividend payouts.

Households may prefer dividends to retained earnings because such payouts

convey useful information and increase shareholder control of the firm.2

The higher effective tax rate on dividends than on retained earnings,

however, reduces the desired payout rate. The optimal payout rate is one at

which the information (and other) benefits of an extra dollar of dividends

to shareholders exactly equals the marginal net tax costs of payouts to the

weighted average shareholder.3 Again, tax avoidance, through reduced

corporate payouts, has its cost in the form of an implicit tax.

     A reduction in the tax rate on realized capital gains would lessen one

excess burden on households, by unlocking them from suboptimal portfolios,

but would increase another excess burden, by discouraging corporate payouts

(and, more generally, by encouraging taxpayers to incur costs to substitute

capital gains for ordinary income). The impact of a capital-gains tax rate

cut on these excess burdens, as well as on the Federal budget, the

efficiency of allocation of real capital, the level and allocation of risk

in the economy and the distribution of income, should be taken into account

when considering the wisdom of a capital-gains tax rate cut. Moreover,

measurement of all these impacts should allow for household portfolio

responses, capital stock reallocations, changes in the corporate debt-equity

ratio, and changes in the interest rate on Federal debt (Cook and O'Hare,

1987).

     In this paper we calculate the impact of capital-gains tax rate cuts on

both the Federal budget and economic welfare by income class. The vehicle

for this calculation is an enhanced version of the Hendershott and Won

extension (1989b) of the Galper-Lucke-Toder general equilibrium model

(1988). The enhancement entails introducing utility-maximizing realization

and payout responses.4 The enhanced model incorporates all of the above
                                     3




noted behavioral responses and is parameterized to reflect alternative

recent empirical estimates of these responses to capital gains tax rates.5

     Although the model incorporates many behavioral responses heretofore

not considered explicitly in analyses of the effects of capital gains taxes,

some important responses are not incorporated. In particular, the model we

use assumes fixed factor supplies. This means that changes in aggregate

saving, economic growth, and labor supply that may result from substitution

of labor income for capital income taxes are not considered. Nor do we

consider efficiency gains from less distortion of intertemporal consumption

or efficiency losses from more distortion of the choice between taxable and

untaxed work effort (home production and market production compensated via

tax-free fringe benefits). Thus, it is important to stress that the model

cannot assess the net welfare effect of changing the overall tax mix between

income and consumption taxes or between capital income taxes and wage taxes.

     The model is appropriate for analyzing the combination of capital gains

tax cuts and general income tax rate increases (or decreases if the capital

gains cuts gain revenue) if one assumes either that aggregate factor supply

responses are negligible or that the welfare changes they cause cancel each

other out. If aggregate factor supply responses matter, then the more

appropriate use of the model is to assess the relative welfare effects of

alternative ways of lowering capital income taxes. For example, the model

can be used to assess the relative welfare effects of reducing the capital

gains tax or increasing allowable contributions to tax-free individual

retirement accounts.

     The paper is divided into four sections. The first briefly describes

the underlying general equilibrium model. Section II discusses the

incorporation of capital-gains-realization and corporate-payout responses

into the model. The model simulations are reported in Section III, and the
                                         4



paper is summarized in Section IV. Appendices are included on estimation of

 the payout equation and parameterization of the model.


                    I. The Modified Extended CEMDAT Model

     GEMDAT (General Equilibrium Model of Differential Asset Taxation)

captures the interaction between differential tax treatments among assets

and differences in marginal tax rates among taxpayers. The particular

assets each household holds in its portfolio will reflect the pretax yields

on and tax treatment accorded alternative assets, the riskiness of these

assets, and the household's own   tax   status and aversion to risk. At the same

time, household portfolio choices will influence market yields that in turn

determine the costs of capital to sectors issuing assets. These costs

determine tangible capital allocations and assets supplied to households.

Thus, the structure of GEMDAT emphasizes the simultaneous interaction among

household portfolio choices, business financing and real investment in

tangible capital.

     The capital using sectors in the model are the corporate and

noncorporate business sectors (both of which produce marketable goods and

services), state and local governments, and 147 separate household "sectors"

that produce in-kind services from owner-occupied homes and from consumer

durables. Each of these sectors finances the capital it employs in

production by issuing financial assets that are absorbed in household

portfolios. The financial assets that households can acquire are: taxable

bonds (1), corporate equities (2), shares of noncorporate business divided

between rental housing (3) and other noncorporate (4), and tax-exempt bonds

(5). Capital is also used directly by households to produce services from

Owner-occupied houses and consumer durables.

     The supply of financial assets issued to households depends on both the

demand for capital services in each sector and the way in which the capital

stock of that sector is financed. The sectoral demands for capital
                                        5




services, including those used directly in the household sector, are unit

elastic functions of the real costs of capital. The particular financial

assets issued to households vary by capital-using sector. Corporations

issue corporate equity, taxable bonds, and to a limited degree, tax-exempt

bonds. The corporate debt-equity ratio is determined by an optimizing

equation in which corporations balance the net tax benefits of debt finance

against leverage costs that vary directly with the share of capital that is

debt-financed; the corporate payout ratio comes from the balancing of the

information or other benefits from payouts against the extra taxes on

payouts versus retained earnings.      Noncorporate enterprises issue shares in

unincorporated business, and state and local governments issue tax-exempt

bonds. In addition, the Federal government issues a fixed amount of taxable

bonds to finance cumulated deficits.

     These financial assets are held by the 147 sample households, weighted

to represent the entire taxpaying population and disaggregated by labor

income (7 classes), capital income (7 classes), and tax filing status

(single, married or other). Households, solving a problem of portfolio

choice under uncertainty, decide whether to own or rent their housing and

allocate their fixed wealth among financial assets and household sector

capital (including owner-occupied houses and consumer durables).6 Demands

for risky assets vary directly with their after-tax expected return and

inversely with their after-tax variance, and demands for consumer durables

vary inversely with their opportunity cost (in most cases, the after-tax

interest rate).

     The model contains a fairly detailed representation of the tax law.

Each sample household confronts the actual rate schedule for joint, single

or other returns, as applicable; tax liabilities are computed directly based

on gross income flows, exclusions, excess itemized deductions (if positive),

and personal exemptions. Taxable income includes all the income from wages
                                       6




and taxable bonds, but excludes a portion of income from corporate equity

and noncorporate capital and all the income from tax-exempt bonds, owner-

occupied houses, and consumer durables. The fractions of corporate equity

income and noncorporate capital income included in the personal income tax

base depend on tax law and household realization behavior (introduced

below). The separate corporate level tax is also represented in the model

and affects the relationship between the rate of return on corporate capital

before all taxes and rates of return to individuals who hold debt and equity

of corporations. The corporate income tax is described by two parameters- -

the   statutory corporate tax rate and the percentage of corporate economic

income included in the corporate tax base.

      The net amount of each asset demanded by households is equal to the

amount supplied by capital-using sectors and the federal government. The

model solves simultaneously for the value of physical capital in each

productive sector, the share of corporate capital that is debt-financed

(debt-capital ratio), the corporate payout ratio, the fraction of each

household cell that owns instead of rents housing, the composition of each

household's portfolio of financial and physical assets, rates of return on

all assets, and after-tax income and taxes paid by each household (including

each household's allocated share of any corporate income taxes).

      When the parameters that represent the tax law are changed, the model

solves for a new configuration of total capital stocks, household portfolio

holdings, and interest rates. (Aggregate supplies of capital/wealth and

labor are assumed to be fixed.) In the new equilibrium, financial asset

holdings and rates of return are again consistent with a single set of real

capital stocks and costs of capital in each capital-using sector. The

solution to a simulation also implies, for each household in the model, new

values of pretax income, taxes paid, after-tax income, and income adjusted

for the riskiness of the household's portfolio.
                                      7




        II. Modelling Capital Gain Realizations and Corporate Payouts

      This section discusses incorporation of capital-gains-realization and

corporate-payout responses into GEMDAT. Adding this behavior to the model

involves two steps: 1) specifying equations relating realizations and the

corporate payout rate to tax rates and 2) recovering from the realizations

and payout equations both the explicit tax rates and total tax burdens on

various assets. The latter includes explicit taxes and implicit taxes in

the form of welfare losses from tax-induced reductions in both gains

realizations and dividend payouts. The total tax burden is used in

equations explaining the portfolio demands for assets, while only the

explicit tax rates are used in calculating government revenue from taxation

of capital income. The realization equation relates the ratio of

realizations to accruals to the marginal tax rate on capital gains; the

corporate payout equation relates the fraction of earnings paid out to the

difference between the effective marginal tax rates

on dividends and retained earnings.


Realizations Equation

      The realizations equation relates the ratio of realizations to accruals

(rr) to the marginal tax rate on realized capital gains (g). The

specific functional form assumed is


(1)       ln(rr) —
                     k0 + k1g    (k1<O),


where k0 and k1 are constants. The semi-log form has been used in

econometric work on capital gains realizations by Lindsey (1987), the

Congressional Budget Office (1988), Darby, Gillingham and Greenlees (1988),

and Auerbach (1989). This form has several appealing properties.7 First,

the (absolute value of the) elasticity of rr with respect to g increases

with increases in g, which conforms to prior beliefs about behavior.
                                            8




 Second, as a result of the increasing elasticity, it is possible to

 calculate a tax rate that maximizes revenue from realized capital gains.

 This tax rate (g times rr) is g' —                Je use g' as our index of the
                                          -1/k1.
 responsiveness of realizations to capital gains tax rates; smaller values of

 g' imply a larger realization response. Third, in contrast to a linear

 form, the equation does not imply that rr goes to zero at moderately high

 marginal tax rates; rr is always positive. For high absolute values of
                                                                               k1,

 however, rr can become very small. Fourth, in contrast to a log-log form,

 the equation is defined at g — 0.

        The one disadvantage of the semi-log form is that it can imply values

 of rr greater than 1, which would happen if there is a sufficiently high

calibrated base case value of rr at a given g and if the absolute value of

k1 is large. The parameter values have been chosen to make sure that this

does not happen; i.e., values are chosen such that k0 is negative and thus

rr is less than 1.0 when g — 0 (see Appendix R).

       Substituting -hg' for k1 and taking logs,


(1')        rr —
                   exp(k0
                            -
                                g/g')   (k0<O).


The negative relation between rr and g is shown in Figure 1. In general, g'

will be assumed to be equal for all assets and all households; k0 will vary

across assets but not households. Of course, rr for a given asset will vary

across households because g varies.


Effective Tax Rates

       To the extent that the investor is induced to lower realizations in

response to high values of g, the tax burden imposed on him is greater than

the actual tax paid. The total tax burden per dollar of accrued gains
                                               9




equals the taxes paid, grr, plus the excess burden resulting from a sub-

optimal level of realizations. This total tax burden will affect the demand

for capital-gains producing assets.

       We denote the total tax burden per dollar of accrued gains as grr* and

calculate it as the area under the rr demand curve between 0 and g, or:

                       g

(2)         grr*

                       0

The solution of the integral evaluated between g and 0 is


(2')        grr* —
                       g'exp(k0)[l
                                     -
                                         exp(-g/g')]

                   —   grr[exp(g/g')     -l](g'/g).


The total tax burden per dollar of accrued assets is shown in Figure 1 as

the sum of explicit taxes, area OrrBg (I), and implicit taxes or excess

burden, rrAB (II).

       Given values of g' and k0, rr and rr* can be calculated from equations

(1') and (2') for any household given its value of g; g can vary across

different assets for a given household, and g for the same asset varies

across households that face different individual marginal tax rates on

ordinary income. When the tax law changes, new values of rr and rr* are

calculated based on the new g values. Because grr* affects demands for

capital-gains producing assets, changes in rr* can move households along

their marginal tax rate schedule to different values of g. That is, g and

rr* are simultaneously determined. We now turn to the relationship between

demands for capital gains producing assets and grr*.

Resyecification of Asset Demand Eauations

       In the extended GENDAT model, three risky taxed assets exist:

corporate stocks, rental housing and equity in noncorporate nonhousing
                                        10




 businesses. With zero covariances between returns, the utility-maximizing

 share of a specific household's wealth in the kth risky asset can be derived

 as the ratio of the difference between the expected after-tax rates of

 return on that asset and the risk-free asset to the product of a risk

 aversion parameter and the variance of the after-tax return on the risky

 asset. The share in risky asset k is thus



 (3)      Sk
               (lakt)ik -
                       2
                            (l_t)it
                              2



where k is the expected pretax return, ak is the share of the return

subject to tax (see below), t is the household's marginal tax rate,         the


yield on taxable risk-free bonds, or the expected pretax variance,    a the
share of variance included in the tax base, and R is the product of the

household's degree of risk aversion, its utility per dollar of expected

income and its wealth.8

        In GEMDAT, the taxes paid on a marginal dollar of income from the kth
asset are measured as

(4)         a.Kt —   Pkt + (l-p)grr

where      is the fraction of economic income on the kth asset that accrues

as annual taxable income to households and        is the fraction that is

taxed only when realized by sale, exchange or other taxable disposition.

In the original version of GEMDAT, the akt term was used in the portfolio

demand equation (3), and rrk was a constant.

       For equity in noncorporate business, all recorded noninflationary

earnings are paid out by definition. However, inflationary gains are
deferred and not all noninflationary earnings are necessarily recorded

concurrently, but rather are deferred owing either to the generally
                                            11




favorable taxation of business activity (e.g., investment tax credits,

accelerated tax depreciation) or simply to the fundamental delayed nature of

their cash flows before someday showing up as capital gains. To illustrate,

p for rental housing, where the only tax advantage is accelerated

depreciation, is


(5)          'rh —    rh   -
                               - (dhdrh)]/rh

where i      is the nominal total return on rental housing, i         -   is the
        rh                                                   rh

noninflationary return, and dh -             is the excess of the geometric-
                                      drh
equivalent tax depreciation rate (at replacement cost) over the economic

depreciation rate. That is, both inflation gains and earnings shielded by

excess tax depreciation are not recorded and thus not paid out.

      For corporate stock, p is not the reported payout ratio because

reported earnings in the denominator of this calculation do not include

inflationary gains (earnings have been Corrected for the inventory and

capital consumption adjustments, IVA and CCA). The relevant payout measure

is the reported payout ratio multiplied by the ratio of real to nominal

returns to shareholders. The PC variable can thus be expressed as


(6)             —
                     p[i(lf)   -




where p* is the reported dividend payout ratio, i is the return to

shareholders (before personal taxes --           the k in equation 3), and f is the

debt-to-assets ratio for corporations. This relationship is simpler than

equation (5) because the corporate tax advantages (such as accelerated

depreciation) are already incorporated in

      In this revision of the model, realizations are endogenous, and the akt

terms that affect portfolio demands include all factors that reduce the
                                        12



 individual's perceived benefit from holding the asset, i.e., both explicit

 taxes and the excess burden from reduced realizations to avoid the taxation

 of realized capital gains. This excess burden is an implicit tax on returns

 and reduces the value of the return to the investor even though it does not

 generate revenue for the government. To incorporate implicit taxes, we

 rewrite (4) as


 (4a)        at Pkt +    (lP)grr,
where a is labelled the income inclusion rate for asset demands and is used

in equation (3) in place of a.K.



The Payout Equation

        A single payout equation is specified for the corporate sector, just as

a single corporate debt-equity equation was specified in GEMDAT.9 This is

necessary, even though corporations clearly have different payout ratios,

because different types of shares with different dividend rates have not

been imputed to the various households in GENDAT. A disadvantage of this

approach is that most investors are out of equilibrium in the sense that,

given their tax rates, they would prefer to hold shares with higher or lower

payout rates than those available to them.

        The single equation approach enables us to apply Poterba's (1987)

single dividend payout equation. Poterba estimates a long-run elasticity of

dividends with respect to the ratio of after-tax income per dollar of

dividends to after-tax income per dollar of retained earnings, where the tax

rate on retained earnings is grr. Empirically, the ratios are weighted

averages for all equity investors (individuals and pensions in our model) in

the economy.

        We have reestimated Poterba's equation with two changes (see Appendix

A). First, we have expanded the tax rate on retained earnings to include
                                                  13




 the excess burden or implicit taxes from delayed realizations, i.e.• we

 define the tax rate on retained earnings as grr*. Second, we have replaced

 Poterba's ratio of after-tax incomes per dollars of dividends and retained

 earnings with the difference between the marginal tax rate on dividends and

 our marginal tax rate on retained earnings. This difference is a direct

 measure of the cost of dividends and facilitates the computation of the

 utility loss from investors receiving fewer dividends than are desired.

       The dividend payout ratio is expressed as


 (6)         ln p* —        +
                       c0       c1DIVCOST        (c1<O),


where DIVCOST —    E - grr*,       E   being   the average tax rate on dividends and


grr* the average tax rate on retained earnings, and c1 comes from the

estimation of the payout function and depends on the tax rate that maximizes

revenue from realized capital gains. Given a base line DIVCOST —
                                                                              DIVCOST0
and p* —
           p,   c0 can be paranieterized. A value of c0 < 0 insures that the

payout ratio would never exceed unity.


Utility Losses from Suboptjmal Payouts and the Demand for Corporate             Euit
       Investors experience a loss in utility to the extent that the dividend

payout ratio is less than the ratio that would result if DIVCOST were equal

to zero. We assume that all investors have the same demand schedule for

dividends, although desired dividends will be greater for those with lower

marginal tax rates. There is only one dividend payout ratio for the

corporate sector, however. Therefore, for any single investor, the dividend

payout ratio will not necessarily be the optimum ratio at which the marginal

reduction in utility loss from an additional dollar of dividends equals

DIVCOST, the marginal tax cost of an additional dollar of dividends.

       The utility loss from reduced dividends is illustrated in Figure 2

as the area pAZ (I) between the payout demand schedule and the actual payout
                                          14



 ratio. This is the total amount of utility gain taxpayers would receive

 from incremental dividends if DIVCOST were lowered to zero. Therefore, it

 also approximately equals the total utility loss from the reduction in

 dividends from the payout ratio associated with the excess tax on dividends

 vis-a-vis retained earnings.

        The utility loss can be expressed as the area under the payout curve
 between 0 and DIVCOST. Thus,

            DIVCOST

 (7) UL —                                       -
                                                        DIVCOSTp*.
                exp(c0)exp(c1DIVCOST)dDIVCQST
            0

 Evaluating this integral, we obtain:


 (8) UL —                                           -
            -(exp(c0)/c1)[l-exp(c1DIVCOST))             DIVCOSTp*.


       These losses raise the effective tax rate on corporate equities and

thus lower the demand for corporate stocks. The inclusion rate for

corporate stocks, a, is changed from equation (4a) to


(4b)        at — Pct +    (l-P)grr +    UL.


For pensions and other zero-bracket investors, a't is simply UL.



                              III. Simulation Results

       The extended GENDAT model is paraineterized based upon 1985 asset

holdings, capital stocks and tax law. Thus the first step in the analysis

is to simulate the impact of the 1986 Tax Act. These results are then taken

as the base from which the capital gains tax-rate reduction is presumed to

affect the economy. These results also provide the basis upon which our 294

sample households (147 owners and renters) are combined in the tables to

present the portfolio responses in a meaningful fashion.
                                       15




      Households have been divided into seven classes based on their
                                                                        marginal
 tax bracket after adjustment to the 1986 Tax Act. Under the 1986 Act, the

 marginal tax rate rises as taxable income increases to 0.15, 0.28, 0.33, and

 then falls to 0.28. Taxpayers with marginal tax rates of zero, 0.33 and the

 highest 0.28 form three classes, while the 0.15 and lower 0.28 classes are

 divided roughly in half to form the other four classes:   0.15L, 0.15H, 0.28L
 and 0.28H. The 0.l5L bracket includes taxpayers with a marginal tax rate of

 0.15 and income under $19,000 (single) or $38,000 (joint); the 0.28L bracket

 includes taxpayers with a tax rate of 0.28 and income under $38,000
                                                                        (single)
 or $76,000 (joint).   Income is the GLT concept: before-tax nominal economic

 income, including before-tax profits of corporations allocated by share

 ownership of households, but excluding imputed rent on homes and consumer
durables.

     Table 1 contains background information on the presumed starting point

for the capital gains tax cut simulation in the moderate realization

response (g—0.29) case (without a payout response). That is, it shows how
wealth and its components are distributed across our seven tax bracket

classes after all adjustments to the 1986 Tax Act are completed (the eighth

line is the total for the economy). Part A gives the raw data; Part B shows

the percentage distribution of wealth for each tax-bracket class across the

seven assets and within pensions; Part C shows the percentage distribution

of each asset among taxpayers in the seven tax classes; Part D, which

converts the tax bracket classes to income classes, shows in which income

range the tax bracket classes fall (those with single, including ocher, and

joint tax returns are considered separately). Part E gives the percentage

distributions of wealth for joint and single filers by income class.

     The simulations of capital gain rate cuts are performed for two

alternative corporate payout responses and three household capital gains

realization responses. The two payout responses are zero and the
                                          16




 reestimated Poterba response (see Appendix A). The three realization

 responses, reflecting different realization elasticity assumptions, are;


      high (g' —   0.18):    based on Lindsey (1987),

      medium (g'— 0.29): based on the Congressional Budget Office's (1988)
                    result that this rate is between 26 and 32 percent, and
      low (g' —   0.41):    based on Auerbach's (1989) recent study.

Thus six sets of results are reported below.

     Two alternative assumptions are made regarding the financing of the

gains rate cut. The first presumes that the gains rate cut is matched by a

cut in federal government spending (or an increase if the gains cut

 increases government revenues). In this analysis the static and dynamic

impacts on the federal budget (changes in tax revenues and the interest on a

constant federal debt) are reported. The second assumption presumes that

the entire personal and corporate tax rate schedules are raised (or lowered)

slightly so as to maintain the federal budget at a constant level. The

extent of this change and the change in household welfare (risk-adjusted

after-all-tax income, including implicit taxes on realizations and payouts)
are reported.

     The precise tax cut analyzed is a cut in the maximum tax rate on

realized gains to 15 percent. That is, a capital gains exclusion (x) is

reintroduced where the exclusion rate for the jth household is x — 1    -




.15/ti.   There are two advantages to analyzing the reduction to a maximum

rate rather than analyzing a flat exclusion. First, the stimulus to

portfolio responses are clear. Households in the 0.28 and 0.33 tax brackets

get the cuts while households in the 0.0 and 0.15 brackets don't. Second,

the cut dlrecth raises the welfare of only higher income households.

    The realizations, payout, portfolio, revenue and welfare impacts all

refer to the new long-run steady state. That is, they reflect a long-run
                                         17




 steady-state increase in the ratio of realizations to accruals, not a

 short-run unlocking effect.


                       A. Revenue Implications of a Gains Cut

      Table 2-1 describes the tax law parameters for the gains cut (gains

 rate lowered to 15 percent) in the moderate realization response case with

a fixed payout rate. For both 1986 tax law and "New law" (1986 law

 including the gains rate cut), parameters given for corporate equity, rental

housing and other noncorporate capital includes the following for households

in the zero, 0.15, 0.28 and 0.33 percent tax brackets: the values of g, rr,

rr*, ak for revenue (equation 4), a for demand (equation 4a), and a, the

inclusion rate on the variance of capital income (equation 3).

     Table 2-2 shows the impact of the gains cut on pretax yields, capital

stocks, and the corporate debt-capital ratio assuming the moderate

realizations response and no payout response. The corporate equity rate

falls by 18 basis points, the noncorporate rates decline by seven basis

points, and the taxable and tax-exempt debt rates rise by six and two basis

points, respectively. As a result, there is a noticeable shift from

household capital ($48.7 billion) to business capital (mostly, $39.2

billion, corporate), but the shift is only one percent of the respective

                  10
capital stocks.

     Table 2-3 contains the long-run impacts of the gains cut on the Federal

budget by tax bracket class. Column 1 shows a $5.75 billion static tax

revenue loss; column 2 indicates that this loss is cut to $1.88 billion when

a gains realization response is incorporated, but no interest rate, capital

stock, or portfolio responses are allowed. The remaining columns indicate

the results when all model responses are incorporated. Columns 5 and 6 show

a $0.86 billion rise in corporate tax receipts due to the reduction in the

corporate debt-capital ratio and the increase in the corporate capital

stock, but a $2.39 billion decline in personal tax receipts for a net
                                      18




 decline of $1.53 billion. The next two columns indicate a $5.15 billion

 drop in implicit taxes on realizations and no change (by assumption) in

 implicit taxes on payouts. The last column shows that the higher taxable

 bond rate increases federal interest payments by $786 million. Thus the

 combination of higher Federal interest payments and lower tax revenues would

 cause a budget shortfall (change in explicit taxes and interest payments) of

 $2.32 billion.

      Table 2-4 reports the portfolio shifts of the tax-bracket class

 investors, both in dollars and in percentage points of wealth. High income

 (tax bracket) investors increase their holdings of corporate equities by one

to two percentage points and of noncorporate equities by about a quarter

point, the shifts coming largely from taxable bonds. Lower income (tax

bracket) households engage in a reverse 0.8 to 1.6 percentage point shift

into taxable bonds, the shift coming roughly 50/50 from household capital

and equities. The gains tax cut explains --   triggers   --   the shifts of the
high tax bracket households, and the resulting changes in pretax interest

rates explain the shifts of the low tax bracket households. This portfolio

shift, with higher bracket households more specialized in tax-preferred

assets, explains the induced decline in individual income tax revenues.

     Tables 3-1 to 3-4 give the same results for the moderate realization

response case with endogenous payouts (p*). Table 3-2 indicates a slightly

smaller 14 basis point decline in the yield on corporate equity, and thus

$7 billion smaller rise in corporate capital, and a sharp decline in the

payout rate from 0.75 to 0.69. The modified static revenue loss (including

only realization and payout responses) shown in Table 3-3 is a billion

dollars greater than the result with no payout response, and the dynamic

budget shortfall (decline in tax receipts plus increase in interest

payments) is increased by $1.5 billion to $3.89 billion.

    The impacts on federal revenues, the taxable bond rate and the

distribution of the real capital stock with high and low realization
                                                 19




responses (with and without endogenous corporate payouts) are summarized in

Table 4. The greater is the realization response (the lower is g'), the

smaller is the revenue loss and the greater is the increase in corporate

capital. Two       portfolio      responses tend to offset each other, causing the

dynamic revenue loss to be approximately equal to the static loss. First,

the increase in taxed business capital at the expense of zero-taxed

household capital tends to raise tax revenues. Second, the portfolio shifts

among households cause a net revenue loss because the shift of high income

households out of fully taxable bonds and into both corporate and

noncorporate equities tends to lower tax revenue by more than the reverse

shift by low income households raises revenue)° With no payout response,

it would appear that the tax cut would gain revenues only if the tax rate

that maximizes revenue from realized capital gains were under 0.2.

With an endogenous payout response, the revenue losses are larger.


                                   B. Welfare Implications

        In CENDAT, each household is assumed to maximize a utility function of

the form


                            •mV
                              1
(9)          U —
                   m0(l-e      ,    m0, m1 >
                                             0



where V is a Cobb-Douglas function of outputs consumed, m0 is a constant,

and m1 is a parameter that represents the household's degree of risk

aversion. It can be shown that maximizing this function is equivalent to

maximizing


(10)        Y - TAXEX   -    TAXIM   -
                                         m1m2a/2,

where Y is pretax income, TAXEX is explicit taxes, TAXIM is implicit taxes,

      is an index of utility per dollar of expected consumption (and varies
                                       20




 with changes in relative prices) and cy2 is the variance of the after-tax

 income of the household.

      Note that government spending does not appear in this function. Thus

 welfare calculations cannot be performed in the model when government

 spending changes. In order to provide such calculations, we finance the

 gains tax rate cut (when the cut loses revenue) by increasing the .34

 corporate and .28 and .33 personal tax rates proportionately (because

households in the .15 tax bracket do not get a capital gains rate cut, we do

not increase this rate). We do not mean to imply that this is the preferred

way to finance revenue shortfalls, but choose this method because it is the

standard differential incidence analysis of changes in the tax structure and

 is what the model was designed to analyze.

     Tables 5-1 to 5-5 are again for the moderate realization response case

with fixed corporate payouts, where federal budget neutrality is maintained

via a 0.95 percent increase in both personal and corporate income tax

schedules. The differences in interest rate and capital stock changes

relative to the case of no offsetting change in regular income tax rates

(Tables 2-1 to 2-4) are minor.

     Table 5-5 indicates changes in welfare by both tax bracket and income

class. Referring to equation (10), the change in welfare can be attributed

to changes in pretax income ('1), in explicit corporate and personal taxes

(TAXEX), in implicit taxes on realizations and payouts (TAXIM), in relative

prices (m2) and in utility loss from risk (m1c2). The utility loss from

risk tends to increase in the simulations because risky business capital

increases relative to less risky household capital and because risk-bearing
is allocated less efficiently among households (high bracket investors are

induced by tax preferences to hold too large a share of risky assets and

thus bear too great a share of the risk from the uncertain returns to the

capital stock).
                                         21




         The impacts for the other realization and corporate payout response

 cases are summarized in Table 6. A number of points stand out. First, when

 payouts are exogenous, a cut in the capital gains tax rate to a 15 percent

 maximum increases welfare by 2.4 to 4.5 billion dollars. While these gains

 are not large, neither were the revenue losses (before compensating tax

 rate changes) that were needed to generate them. For example, with g' —

 0.29,   the dynamic revenue loss (Table 4) was $2.3 billion, compared to a net

welfare gain of $2.8 billion (after accounting for the disutility associated

with higher marginal tax rates). Second, the source of the welfare increase

 is the reduction in implicit taxes on realizations. The welfare increase

 from this source more than offsets losses from increased misallocation of

risk-bearing and changes in relative prices.

        When payouts are variable, the impact on welfare is effectively zero

 (ranges from $1.4 billion to -$1.2 billion). The increase in the implicit

taxes on payouts owing to the decline in the payout ratio offsets 35 to 75

percent of the decrease in the implicit taxes on realizations. This, along

with the increase in explicit taxes and risk (there is more risky business

capital and less tax-free household capital) is sufficient to lead to a

decline in total welfare when the tax rate that maximizes revenue from

realized capital gains is above about 25 percent. However, even at g' —

0.41,    the annual welfare loss is only $1.16.

        Table 7 examines the changes in total welfare by tax bracket and income

class. With no payout response, the gains go predominately to higher income

households (94 percent to those with incomes over $50,000) if the gains

realization response is high. But if the realizations response is low, the

gains are distributed evenly across income classes (those with incomes over

$50,000 receive only 39 percent of the gains). In spite of paying higher

(slightly) corporate taxes (via their stock holdings), households in the 15

percent tax bracket experience increases in welfare owing to increases in

the taxable bond rate and reduced risk taking (these households shift from
                                      22



 equities to risk-free fully taxable bonds). With our payment response,

 higher income households receive the welfare gains, if there are any, or

 suffer the welfare losses.


                                 IV. Summary

      The simulations reported in this paper use a revised version of the

 GENDAT model to assess the revenue and welfare effects of reducing the

 taxation of capital gains. We modify the GEMDAT model by introducing capital

 gains realizations and corporate payout responses. Households select the

 ratio of realized gains to accrued gains to equalize the marginal benefit of

 increased portfolio flexibility with the marginal cost of higher taxes on

 realized capital gains. Corporations select a single payout ratio that

equalizes the weighted-average shareholder's marginal benefit of payouts and

marginal cost of additional dividend taxes (the explicit tax on dividends

less implicit and explicit taxes on accrued capital gains). The equations

for capital gains realizations and the dividend-payout ratio that are

consistent with such optimizing behavior are specified in accordance with

recent empirical estimates reported in the literature.

     We simulate the effects of reducing capital gains taxes using six

combinations of realizations and payout responses. For realizations, we use

three recent estimates from econometric studies of capital gains realizations

that imply that revenue from realized gains is maximized at marginal tax

rates (g') ranging from 18 percent to 41 percent. For payouts, we use a

reestimated equation from a recent study by James Poterba in some simulations
and assume no dividend-payout response in other simulations.

     In "modified static" simulations with no payout response and no capital

allocation or portfolio responses, the implied long-run budgetary effects
from a cut in the maximum capital gains tax rate to 15 percent range from a

$1.2 billion annual reduction in the deficit, when g' — 18 percent, to a

$3.8 billion annual increase in the deficit, when g' — 41 percent. The
                                      23


 estimated effect on the deficit from a full simulation of GEMDAT (that

 includes portfolio responses and capital allocation effects) is slightly less

 favorable than in the "modified static" case. The difference between the

 full model simulation and "modified static" estimates results from two

 offsetting responses. First, the gains cut reallocates tangible capital from

 household to business use, which increases tax revenue. Second, higher tax

bracket households shift their portfolios from fully-taxed bonds to

partially-taxed equities, while lower bracket households and pension funds do

 the reverse. On balance, these portfolio shifts lower tax revenue.

     A capital gains tax cut may decrease the corporate dividend-payout ratio

by raising the tax penalty associated with substitution of a dollar of

dividends for a dollar of retained earnings. In simulations with the payout

response estimate based on Poterba (1987), lowering the capital gains tax

rate to 15 percent increases the budget deficit for all realizations response

and reduces annual revenue in the full model simulations by about $1.5

billion.

     The revenue estimates are not strictly comparable to official revenue

estimates of either the Treasury or the Joint Tax Committee. This is because

the baseline data we use is for tax year 1985, modified by a simulation of

the Tax Reform Act of 1986, and does not incorporate all features of

government data bases. Our estimates also do not take account of the effects

of different effective dates and the timing of response in the first few

years after the tax change. What is relevant from our estimates is the

comparisons among the static, "modified static", and full model simulation

results. These results show the extent to which different behavioral

responses either offset, or magnify, the long-run annual static revenue loss

from lowering the tax rate on capital gains.

     The results reported in this paper are also dependent on the specific

form of the capital gains cut we simulate. A reduction in the marginal tax

rate on realized gains to 20 percent would have a more favorable effect on
                                      24


the deficit than a cut to 15 percent. On the other hand, an across-the-board

exclusion rate on capital gains for all households (including those in the 15

percent bracket) would increase the deficit more than a reduction to a

maximum flat rate.

     We simulate the effects of reducing the capital gains tax on economic

efficiency in a budget-neutral context. Budget neutrality is maintained in

the simulations by adjusting statutory marginal tax rate on ordinary income

in the 28 percent and 33 percent brackets by a constant proportion.

     The effects on net economic welfare of reducing the capital gains tax

are more likely to be positive than are the effects on revenue because the

reduction of the economic distortion due to lock-in is significant even in

cases where tax cuts reduce the revenue from capital gains taxes. The net

welfare effect we estimate is sensitive to the specification of the corporate

payout response. In cases where we assume no payout response, lowering the

capital gains tax results in an annual welfare gain for all three realization

response assumptions. The gain ranges from $2.4 billion (for g' — 41

percent) to $4.5 billion (for g' — 18 percent). In contrast, in simulations

with a payout response, the results are mixed. The net welfare effect ranges

from a gain of $1.4 billion (for g' — 18 percent) to a loss of $1.2 billion

(for g' — 41 percent).

     The estimates of economic efficiency effects are incomplete because they

do not account for all possible behavioral responses that may result from

changes in the structure of the income tax. We must emphasize in particular

that GE14DAT assumes fixed aggregate factor supplies (although factors are

highly mobile between sectors). This means that the model cannot be used to

assess the net efficiency consequences of shifting the tax burden from

capital income to labor income. Aside from intertemporal consumption and

labor supply effects, however, the results of the simulations provide useful

insights on the intersectoral efficiency gains and losses from reducing

capital income taxes in the form of a capital gains differential.
                                          25


                       Appendix: Parameterization of the Model


The Constant Terms (k0) in the Realization Equations;

       The return on an asset consists of two parts --    an   immediately
taxable return (dividends, in the case of corporate shares; taxable income

in the case of noncorporate business) and a tax-deferred return (retained

earnings in the case of corporate shares). The entire pretax return is

either retained or reinvested in the asset every year; the basis is

increased every year by the sum of reinvested earnings (dividends plus

realized capital gains). Each portfolio of assets is divided into two
parts - -   assets   with a positive annual realizations rate (traded

portfolios) and assets with a realizations rate of zero that are simply

held to death (not traded portfolios). The stock of accrued gains on the

traded portfolio is the difference between the total value of the portfolio

and the cost basis. Every year the taxpayer sells a constant percentage of

his traded portfolio and realizes a constant percentage of accrued gains.

At the end of 40 years, the basis is stepped up to the market value, but

the difference between the market value and the cost basis at the end of

the year is not taxed (except for the normal realized gain).

      We calculate the ratio of the present value of the sum of realized

gains to the present value of the suni of accrued gains over 40 years for

the traded portfolio. (For the nontraded portfolio, this ratio is zero.)

The ratio for traded assets multiplied by the share of assets that are

traded is the inclusion rate (a,) in equation (3). Note that the step-up

in basis at death lowers the inclusion rate both directly and indirectly.

The direct effect is that the inclusion rate on assets held until death is

zero. The indirect effect occurs because, at the end of 40 years, the

basis on traded assets rises to the market value and the stock of accrued

gains falls to zero. This means that the ratio of annual realized gains to

annual accrued income at the beginning of the 40-year period is lower than
                                      26


its long-run steady state value, thereby resulting in a lower present value

of the ratio of the sum of realizations to the sum of accruals for traded

assets over the entire period.

      For traded corporate equities, we assume a seven-year holding period

(1/7 of the traded portfolio is sold each year). We also assume that 75

percent of assets are in the traded portfolio, and we use a discount rate

of 0.1128. The resulting long-run ratio of the present value of

realizations to accruals (rr0) is 0.4156, which we round off to 0.4. For

rental housing, we raise the percentage of assets in the traded portfolio

to 80 percent and the discount rate to 0.1443, and we calculate an rr0 of

0.4163, which we also round off to 0.4. We consider nonhousing

noncorporate assets to consist of two equal parts: commercial real estate

and expersed assets, both with discount rates of 0.1780. The holding

period and fraction of assets traded for commercial is the same as rental;

for expensed capital, we assume a ten-year holding period and 60 percent of

assets in the traded portfolio. The resulting rr0 is 0.3848 for commercial

real estate and 0.2318 for expensed assets, giving an average for

nonhousing noncorporate capital of 0.3083, which we round off to 0.3.

      To calculate the k0's we need tax rates to go with these rr0 values.

For the regular marginal income tax rate, we use the weighted average tax

rates under 1985 tax law for GEMDAT investors in corporate equities, rental

housing and nonhousing noncorporate. These are 0.395 for corporate

equities, 0.387 for rental housing and 0.307 for nonhousing noncorporate.

The relationships between the capital gains tax rates and the regular tax

rates are described below. With these relationships, the k0's for g' —

0.18 are -0.0374 for corporate equities, -0.0287 for rental housing and
-0.5414 for other noncorporate. For g' —   0.29,   the respective k0's are
                                                  27


 -0.3708, -0.3654, and -0.7927; for g' —                0.41,   the k0's are -0.5309,

 -0.5267, and -0.9131.


Noncororate Payout Ratios and Capital Gains Tax Rates:

      As noted in the text, the payout ratio for noncorporate investments


is given by p —        - (d*-d)         -
                                            'k'       where d* —
                                                                   (ik1r+d)
                                                                               N
                                                                               E TAXD /(1+ik)i,
                                                                              i—i    j


TAXD is tax depreciation per dollar of assets and N is the tax life of the

assets. For rental housing, d* - d — 0.0305 under 1985 law and 0.0073

under 1989 law. For commercial real estate, d* - d — 0.0232 and 0.0034.

With expensed assets, ETAXDi/(l+ik)i — 1, which implies that p —                     0. Using

these values and the assumed ik'S, p for rental housing rose from 0.5462

under 1985 tax law to 0.7067 under the 1986 law. For nonhousing

noncorporate (an average for the commercial and expensed assets), the

increase was from 0.3364 to 0.3921.

      For corporate equities and expensed capital, the capital gains tax

rate, g, is simply (1-x)t, where x is the exclusion rate. Further, under a

tax law lowering the gains rate to a maximum level, such as that analyzed

in this paper, x — 1     -   tmax/t,        where t
                                                      max
                                                            is the maximum level.

      Depreciable real estate is different for two reasons. First, trading

before the end of the tax life can generate recapture of accelerated

depreciation as ordinary income. Second, trading allows establishment of a

higher basis upon which depreciation can again be taken. The former

increases the effective tax rate and the latter lowers it. For depreciable

real estate, we compute the gains tax rate as


     g —   [l-x(1-Recap)     -
                                 zjt,
where recap is the ratio of the recapture of accelerated depreciation upon

sale assuming a seven-year holding period to the taxable gain upon sale and
                                              28




z is the ratio of the present value of the net additional tax depreciation

created by the sale to the taxable gain. The 1985 values for rental

housing are recap — 0.2370 and z — 0.1290.             For 1986 law, recap —     0.0   and z
— 0.0129.     Under both laws, recap is zero for coimnercial real estate. For

1985 law, z —    0.0233; for 1986 law, z — 0.0052.           The z values for

northousing noncorporate are half of those for conunercial real estate.


The Corporate Payout Ratio:

        Pocerba (1987) estimates an equation of the form:



(Al) ln (D/Di) — d0 +                           +                     +
                                d1ln(Y/Y1)          d2ln(et/9             d3ln(D1)
                     +                +               +
                          d4ln(Yi)        d5ln(8i)        d6DIVCON,


where D —    dividends,   Y —   corporate   accounting earnings adjusted for CCA and IVA,
9 —    the ratio of after-tax income per dollar of dividends to after-tax income

per dollar of retained earnings, DIVCON is a dummy variable that is 1 in years

when there were dividend payment controls (1972-74) and 0 in other years, d0

d6 are constants, and the subscripts t         and t-l refer to current period and

one-year lagged values, respectively.

       The 9 variable is a weighted average of &           for   all individuals j,
which   are computed as


(A2)                — (1-MTRDIv)/(1-MT1wNsi)


where MTRDIV — the marginal tax rate on dividends and MTRACNS — the

marginal tax rate on accrued capital gains. It is assumed implicitly that

a dollar of retained earnings results in an additional dollar of expected

accrued capital gains. Poterba defines MTRAGNS as grr, with rr —                     0.25.
                                           29




 We use girr*i (equ. 2' in the text), with rr endogenous (equ. 1' in the

 text).

        The long-run elasticity of D with respect to e derived from the

 estimated coefficients of equation (Al) does not tell us directly how much

 a given change in the "cost" of dividends affects the dividend payout ratio

 because the cost of dividends is directly measured by the difference

 between the marginal tax rate on dividends and the marginal tax rate on

 retained earnings (DIVCOST), not by the ratio of after-tax returns on

dividends and retained earnings (8). While DIVCOST and 8 are correlated

with each other over time, there is not a one-to-one correspondence between

them. The same value of 8 can be associated with different values of

DIVCOST if it results from different combinations of the taxpayer's

marginal tax rate on ordinary income and percentage of accrued capital

gains excluded from taxable income.


       DIVCOST is a weighted average of DIVCOST among all taxpayers where


(A3)              DIVCOST — MTRDIV   -   MTRACNS3.


We recalculated DIVCOST for individual investors using a weighted average

of the marginal tax rates on dividends and accrued gains for individual

taxpayers. DIVCOST for all investors is then equal to DIVCOST for

individual investors multiplied by the share of corporate equity held by

individuals because DIVCOST — 0 for pension funds (in contrast, 8 —   I   for

pension funds).

       When we estimate equation (Al) with DIVCOST substituted for 8, the

long-run estimate of the percentage change in the dividend payout ratio per

unit change in the price of dividends (DIVCOST) is equal to -4.77 for the

high realizations response case, -4.66 for the medium response, -4.60 with

a low response and -4.53 in the case of no realizations response.
                                           30



     These responses are the c1's in equation (6). To paraineterize c0 we

need to set base case values for p* and DIVCOST. We set p* equal to 0.56,

the average value of the payout ratio for 1984-86, and use the weighted

average marginal tax rate and marginal gains tax rate under 1985 tax law

for GEMDAT investors (including pensions) in corporate equities to compute

DIVCOST. The marginal tax rates depend on the assumed realizations rate

for capital gains. In the medium response case, the average tax rates are

0.294 and 0.066, respectively, giving DIVCOST —       0.230.   Substituting these

numbers in equation (6), c0 —    0.49,   which implies a payout ratio of 1.6

when DIVCOST —   0.
     To avoid a payout ratio in excess of unity, we set c0 — 0 and solve

equation (6) for c1, when DIVCOST —      0.230.   The result is c1 —   -2.52,   or

only about half the estimated value. With the high realization response

case, DIVCOST — 0.214 and c1 —    -2.71;   with the low realization response

case, DIVCOST — 0.237 and c1 —    -2.45.    Using these values of c1 implies

payout responses to the capital gains tax cut that are more in line with

the estimated relationship of the payout rate to e than to DIVCOST.
                                       31




                                   Footnotes



 1Auerbach (1989) notes that optimal tax planning might lead households to

 time realizations of losses and gains to avoid gains taxes costlessly. He

also reports evidence that households do not do this in a major way and thus

 that the efficiency losses owing to "lock-ins' are important.   Also, see
Poterba (1987b).

2See Poterba (l987a, p. 471) and references cited therein. While none of the

explanations of dividend behavior are fully satisfactory from a theoretical

point of view, we follow Poterba in assuming that there is something about

dividends that makes shareholders want them in spite of their taxation.

3The marginal net tax cost of payouts is the difference between the marginal

tax rate on dividends and the marginal tax rate on retained earnings, where

the latter includes both the explicit tax on realized gains and the implicit
tax from lock-in.

4See Hendershott and Won (l989a) for a first attempt at estimating the

revenue implications of capital gains tax rate cuts using the original GLT
model.


5Lindsey (1987), the Congressional Budget Office (1988), Auerbach (1989) and

others successfully relate capital gains realizations to capital gains tax

rates, although the estimated responses vary widely (see the discussion in

the text). Poterba (l987a) estimates a significant link between corporate

payouts and the ratio of after-tax income per dollar of dividends to after-

tax income per dollar of retained earnings.


    order to simplify the calculations, tenure choice is held constant in the

simulations reported below. Given the nature of the tax change analyzed, the

impact on tenure would be miniscule.
                                      32




   minor technical disadvantage of the logarithmic form is that the time

series estimates of the aggregate response do not translate into exactly the

same response for individual taxpayers because logarithmic changes are not

additive. That is, the total realizations response calculated by adding up

individual responses to changes in marginal tax rates will not add up exactly

to the predicted total response from applying the same coefficient estimate

to the average change in marginal tax rates among taxpayers. This bias in

applying aggregate time series estimates to a microsimulation has been noted

in Darby, Gillingham, and Greenlees (1988). CBO (1989) simulated both the

Tax Reform Act of 1986 and the 15 percent capital gains tax rate proposal and

found that the quantitative magnitude of this bias is insignificant. CBO

computed aggregation error from applying the coefficient estimate for the

entire sample to compute the response for each taxpayer reporting capital

gains in a sample of 80,000 individual income returns. The predicted capital

gains realizations from summing among individuals was within 1 percent of

realizations predicted by the aggregate equation for both simulations.

8Thjs is a simplified version of the share equations. The most important

omission is a term that captures the impact of the variance in government tax

revenues owing to the variance in revenues from the asset (see Hendershott

and Won, 1989b, for the precise form of the asset share   equations).

9Corporate share repurchases are not included in the model.

10While household capital declines here, in a growth context the one percent

decline would translate into a less than one-tenth of a percentage point

slower annual growth in household capital over several decades.

11Only the reallocation effect occurred in simulations with the original

Galper-Lucke..Toder model with three risky assets, and thus the dynamic

revenue losses were significantly less than the static losses (Hendershott
and Won, l989a).
                                        33




                                    References

 Auerbach, Alan J., "Capital Gains Taxation and Tax Reform," Ntjona1
                                                                        T
      Journal, Vol. XLII, No. 3, September 1989.

 Congressional Budget Office, How Capital Gains Tax Rates Affect Revenues:

      the Historical Evidence, March 1988.

              "Simulating the Revenue Effects of Changes in the Taxation of

     Capital Gains," Staff Working Paper, March 1989.

Cook, Eric W. and John F. O'Hare, "Issues Relating to the Taxation of

     Capital Gains," National Tax Journal, Vol XL, No. 3, September 1987.

Darby, Michael R., Robert Gillingham, and John S. Greenlees, "The Direct

     Revenue Effects of Capital Gains Taxation: A Reconsideration of the

     Time Series Evidence," Treasury Bulletin, June 1988.

Galper, Harvey, Robert Lucke and Eric Toder, "A General Equilibrium

     Analysis of Tax Reform," in Aaron, Galper and Pechnian (eds.), Uneasy

     Compromise, The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C., 1988.

Hendershott, Patric H. and Yunhi Won, "The Long-Run Impact on Federal Tax

     Revenues and Capital Allocation of a Cut in the Capital Gains Tax,"

     NBER Working Paper 2962, May 1989a.

             "Introducing Risky Housing and Endogenous Tenure Choice into

     Portfolio-Based General Equilibrium Models," NEER Working Paper 3114,

     September 1989b.

Lindsey, Lawrence B., "Capital Gains Rates, Realizations, and Revenues," in

     Martin Feldstein, ed., The Effects of Taxation on Capital Accuinmulation.

     Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1987.

Poterba, James M., "Tax Policy and Corporate Saving," Brookings Papers on

     Economic Activity, 2, l987a.

__________   "How Burdensome Are Capital Gains Taxes?," Journal of Public

    Economics, July 1987b.
TABLE 1: POST1986 TAX ACT DISTRIBUTION OF WEALTH AND ITS COMPONENTS
               FIXEO PAYOUT AND MODERATE REALIZATIONS)
A. DCLLAR DISTRIBUTION OF WEALTH AND ITS CDMPONENTS(BILLION $)
   TAX      WEALTH    TAXABLE   PENSION      CORP.        RENTAL              OTHER
  RATE                   BOND                STOCK       HOUSING NONCOR?.                EXEMPTS        HOUSING DURABLES
 0.0         803...    -433.4     162.5       13.9             35.6            135.7         0.1          770.6    118.4
 0.1SL      1711.5     -144.5     383.6       84.3             1:3.3           257.3         6.7          705.1    305.6
 3.15H      1747.7      286.7     257.3      251.à             ..2.0           195.9        17.9          432.0    194.4
 0.281.     1236.0     -293.5     347.9       50.2             lOj.7            93.6        41.1          576.6    316.3
 0.2814     2225.8      506.8     299.0      413.5             166.9           167.6        37.3          318.4    216.3
 0.33       2149.3     427.0      355.1      575.8         270.2               205.0       133.5          546.5    236.2
 0.28       1412.5     283.8       70.4      399.5         245.8               190.3       121.5           74.1     36.9
 TOTAL     11886.2     632.9     1875.8     1788.9        1047.6              1235.4       353.2         3523.3   1324.0
B. PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION OF TOTAL WEALTH AND ITS COMPONENTS ACROSS ASSET TYPES
   TAX      WEALTH TAXABLE      PENS ION     CORP.        RENTAL    OTHER                    TAX          OWNER CONS JMZR
  RATE                   BOND                STOCK       HOUSING NONCJRP.                EXEMPTS HOUSING DURABLES
 0.0        100.00     —53.95     20.23       1.73              4.43           lb.89        0.02          95.91    14.73
 0.1SL      100.00      —8.44     22.41       4.93              6.62           15.03        0.39          31.20    17.86
 0.1M       100.00      16.41     14.72       14.39             6.41           11.21        1.03          23.72    11.12
 0.28L      130.00     -23.75     28.15       4.06              8.39           7.57         3.33          46.65    25.59
 0.28H      100.00      22.77     13.43      18.58              7.50            7.53        1.68          19.80     9.72
 0.33       130.00      15.53     12.92      20.94              9.83            7.46        4.85          19.88     9.59
 0.28       100.00      20.09      4.99      28.29             17.40           12.77        8.60           5.24     2.62
 TOTAL      100.00       5.32     15.78       .5.OS             8.81           10.39        3.01          29.64    11.98
C. PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION OF TOTAL WEALTH AND ITS COMPONENTS ACROSS HOUSEHOLD CLASSES
   TAX      WEALTH    TAXABLE   PENSION      CORP.   RENTAL   OTHER                          TAX          OWNER CONSUMER
  RATE                   BOND                STOCK HOUSING NONCOR?.                      EXEMPTS        HOUSING OURABLES
 0.0          6.76     -68.49      8.66           0.78          3.40           10.99        0.04          21.87     9.31
 0.ISL       14.40     —22.83     20.45           4.71         10.82           20.83        1.87          20.01    21.46
 0.1514      14.70      45.31      13.72      14.06            10.69           15.86        5.01          12.26    13.65
 0.281.      13.40     -46.38     ia.55        2.81             9.90            7.8        11.48          16.37    22.21
 0.28H       19.73      80.08      13.94      23.12         15.93              13.56       10.42          11.88    15.19
 0.33        23.13      67.47      18.93     32.19          25.79              16.60       37.25          15.51    16.59
 0.28        11.88      44.85       3.76     22.33          23.47              14.60       33.92           2.10     2.59
 TOTAL      100.00     100.00    100.00     100.00         100.00             100.00      100.00         .O3.3O   130.00
D. DISTR:BOTI0N OF HOUSEHOLDS BY INCOME AND TAX BRACKET
INCOME*  0%   S       0% J 15% S        15% .2      28% S        28%     .2     33% S      33%     .2       28%   TOTAL
   < 10 12581.0         0.0      0.0        0.0          0.3           0.0         0.3           0.0        0.0 12581.0
10 — 20       0.0 6927.0 14912.4           0.0           0.0        0.0            0.0           0.0        0.0 21839.5
20 — 30
30 — 50
              2.6 3227.5 8302.3         8133.5      1158.4          0.0            0.0           0.0        0.0 20824.3
              0.3       0.0     966.1   8060.2 8280.1            2772.1            0.0           0.0        3.0 20078.7
50 —100       0.0       0.0      16.2   1235.0 1870.3            5574.2        3520.9            0.0        0.0 13216.6
100—200       0.)       0.0      0.0        0.0          0.9      263.1        1847.5            0.0        0.0 2111.6
  > 200       0.0       0.0      0.0        0.0          0.1           0.0      103.1       131.7         473.9   713.8
 TOTAL     12583.8 10154.5 24197.0 17428.7 11309.8               8609.4        6471.4       131.7         478.9 91365.2
*pRTAX NOMINAL INCOME EXCLUDING IMPUTED INCOME FROM OWNER-OCCUPIED
  HOUSING AND CONSUMER DURABLES
E. PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION OF TOTAL WEALTH AND ITS COMPONENTS ACROSS ASSET TYPES
(JOINT FILER)
 INCOME   WEALTH      TAXABLE   PENSION       CORP.   RENTAL   OTHER                         TAX          OWNER CONSUMER
BRACKET                  BOND                 STOCK HOUSING NONCORP.                     EXEMPTS        HOUSING DUR.ABLES
   < .0     0.00         0.00       0.00       0.00             0.00           0.00         0.00           0.00     3.00
10 — 20   100.00       -48.94      33.61       1.76             2.90           16.65        0.00          71.24    22.78
20 - 30 100.00         -18.09      21.49       5.00             8.82           26.23        0.46          41.12    14.97
30 - 50 100.00         -17.26      25.74       5.61             7.00            8.97        1.50          46.57    21.88
50 —100     100.00      17.04      16.88      13.87             8.18            9.08        1.95          22.31    10.70
100—200     100.00      21.75       8.89      24.57             9.23            9.84        7.17          12.73     5.81
  > 200     100.00      21.31       5.65      28.57            14,20           11.75        9.55           6.13     2.84
 TOTAL      100.00       4.54      16.64      14.65             9.19           12.62        3.65          26.98    11.73
(SINGLE AND OTHER FILERS)
 INCOME WEALTH TAXABLE PENSION                CORP.        RENTAL             OTHER          TAX          OWNER CONS'JMER
BRACKET                  BOND                 STOCK HOUSING NONCORP. EXEMPTS H:)USING DURABLES
   < 10      100.00    -96.31      15.09          0.89          1.26            2.39        0.05         .59.65     16.98
10 - 20     130.30      12.15      15.64          5.19          3.97            9.04        0.09          41.20     12.72
20 -. 30    100.30      —2.77      19.85      10.93             6.46           11.53        1.95          32.94     19.11
30 — 50     100.00       6.80      17.31      13.25             6.38            6.75        1.43
50 —100     100.00                                                                                        31.08     16.98
                        12.55
130—200
  > 200
             1/0
             1C.')0
                    22.47
                      17.46
                                   16.87
                                   1(;.18
                                    5.16
                                              16.82
                                              24.20
                                              26.59
                                                                7.75
                                                               10.62
                                                               21.47
                                                                                6.42
                                                                                8.14
                                                                               12.54
                                                                                            1.20
                                                                                            4.67
                                                                                            7.70
                                                                                                          25.59
                                                                                                          15.54
                                                                                                           6.22
                                                                                                                    12.78
                                                                                                                    4.18
                                                                                                                    2.86
 TOTAL       133.00      b.16      14.88      15.47             8.41            8.04        2.34          32.46     12.24
                                                                       '-3                                                                                                           P3
                                                                                                                                                    *      :P3l-3
228                                                                    t't'i    ,.1*
                                                                                dv          ott    ••*                                   :c
                                                                                                                                         out       o''             on                n
                                              DIP3I<
                                                            i-s         I
                                                                                 0V          0
                                                                                             •
                                                                                                   d ott M*
                                                                                                        O
                                                                                                         o            0
                                                                                                                      •      D                0
                                                                                                                                              •
                                                                                                                                                   I 0V             0                14
                              P3        P3
      ci                      .ll4t'3                       Z
                                                            P3
                                                                                                                                                      i
                                                t'I
                              CatOfl                  t't   U)
                              'l4 vt .t't
                                        P3P3
                                          t.
                        '.3
                                                                                                                                                                                     !;
                        UI    ,sl-4                               (1
                                 '.t'                                                                                                                                                P3
                        -.         0  J                     ..3                000000                                     000000                   00000                t'in         c.
                        W
                        P-i
                                                                  l-
                                                            tIl i-IuZ
                                                            11)        1-3     14 a' UI 014       (.1      0. P3P3        0. -J 0' UI 0. H         .40101 CIa' D                     UI
                                                                  '-3 tIl      -J (9 P4 H P419    H at
                                                                                                     Ui 0.0.0'UI          0. I- (9(9 I-l Vt        00001010             i-i
                                                                               H'OHPJHO           0-4-413 P40             '0 a' UI UI i- 0         10101010100           -30
                                                                                    -oo,-o        14 UI UI 0. .40         1.401.401(90             10-4.410100
                        o
                        Z                                         CflP.3
                                                            0     P3
H                       411                                 UI
j9 49 P-' H i- P3             0. P3 UI P- I.' 1                                000000                                     000000                                            '.
UI UI 494914010               (9 a' a' (9-40. a' 0 -J       1-3        '.3          •                                                                                           10
UI UIUI 0. UI
  0             H                                  •                   UI      -J UI-JO. P4(9     -4 UI -JO 1414          UI UI UI U' H
                                                                                                                                     0             101010a' a' 0        0   t
                                                                                                                                                                        C Z UI       1.3
                              UI490-JOI0.IR19HZ                   W            .JP4.4H1414        UI (9 UI 0. at—I        P301 P30 HO.             00010100             U)P3O'       -i
          •                            0P4UI0UIPJH                UI           P3-JP4dIUIU1       0. Ci 0 -4-4 a'         -40-4190101              —3-4-3(9(90                       0
OUIIO.4P3a'0I
OIO10UIH0.OI                           010  P40.UI0               ca                              I- P4i- P300.           P4014 P3491-j            Ut UI VIa' a'   0                 z
                                                                  ZP3
                                                            4     CflQ
                                                                               000000             000000                  000000                  000000
                                                                                                                                                                                E.   £1'
                                                                  UI
                                                                  ti           ......                                                                                                UI
                                                                                                  0. UI 0. P3I-l P4       Ut 01 Vi (9 P3 H        0' a' 010.00
I-                                                                —            UI UI UI .4  14    '0011010.4.4            Ui UI UI-JO
                                                                                                                             0                    CIa'  0' Ui Ui
H  49t-' H H P3               0.13 UIH    II I                                 0 a' 00 Ut '0      01 UI 0101.450          UI Cl 5)1 UI 010        0' a' Cl '.3 P400     0
UIUI0.19140UI                 Ut-Ja'19..J0.C%0-J                                                  UI P4 UI 0. -419
UI HI3 01490.4
a'UI01'UIUI-JO                         0UI.JOUIU'0OI-4
                                                      •     0,-3 0
                                                                 II
                                                                       '       P4HP30.OI—                                 01(901,9001             19(9(9(9(90           .
                              0.P4OCt0.OtUlOOtrO
                              HUI0UIUIl0P3(90Ch
                                                                  0• 0                                                                                                               I-I
OUI.40.UIH0.0                                                     P3UI
                                                                  'ow
                                                                  —.4                                                                                                                C
                                                                                                                                                                                     (I)
                                                                               000000                                     000000                        00)0
                                                                     .4                           4.3
                                                                                                    Ui (11 UI OH          0.40'    VI 0.          -J 0101 a' 010
                                                                               (919019HUI         -40' P3(9 H Ut          0. t- (.1(9 HUI         00001010              C            z
                              ii III  I                              0         IOOIHUIHO          0(9   HUI I- 0          '0 a' UI UI H 0         10101010100
   • I                        P300000000                                       (9UI 001(90        1)119 UI a' 190         1)01 -J 01190           '0-4-410100
                                        •
  HUll44 UI a' (9
0-JO           100
               • P-I
                              0100 H 000 I- 00
                              Q190t9a'0IP3.4UI4-4
0.11 UI -4-40. P4 lIt         -414010 UI -4(9 UI UI lIt
                                                                               000000             000000                  000000
                                                                               .4-4-4 UI01—       .4.4.4 UI 0.            UI UI UI Ut 0. H        10*0100'010
                                                                               a' —I a' 0. HO.    -410-40.   HH0.         44 a' 1.30.H 0.         00010100
                                                                               H     HUt50 UI     0000.0101               -40-4(901UI
                                                                               H -4
                                                                                  (91- P401-4     10 P310 a' .4           1.4014P4(9 H            Vi Vt UI a'010                     II
                                                                                                                                                                                     0

                                                                               0.0.0(9 P3 —       0. Ut0. UI 1.4 I-       Ut Cl Ut (91.)          a' CIa' 0.0.0
                                                                               a' UI 0' Vt-JO     .40.4   UI40.           (1105)1 UI40.           CIa' Cl UI UI 0
                                                                               0110 a' (9050      IDa' '019010            (1101 UI (9010          CIa' a' P.4140
                                                                               0.140.a' OH        —4-4-45)1(919           UI (9 UI (9001          19(9(9(9(90           0
                                                         36

TABLE    2-3:   IMPACT ON INCOME AND TAXES, DIFFERENCES FROM 1986 IN MILLION $
                (G' 0.29, PAYOUT= 0.56)
          STATIC POST TAX Y                                          DYNAMIC
   TAX
  RATE      PURE MODIFIED           POST TAX   PRETAX     CORP        INDIV       RR     PAY     FEDERAL
                                       I—524      Y
                                                -1037
                                                         TAXES
                                                          -367
                                                                      TAXES
                                                                          -146
                                                                                 TAXES   TAXES INTEREST
 0.0             0      0                                                            3       0
 0. 15L          3      3              -1017    -2225     —960            -248     -20       0
 0. 15H          0      0               —620    —1297     —585             —92     —12       0
 O.28L       470      165                616      866         349         -100    -403       0
 0.28H      1425      501                974      987      506            -493   —1170       0
 0.33       2296      662               2146     3076     1588            —658   —2259       0
 0.28       1561      549                765      444      326            -647   —1287       0
 TOTAL      5752     1877               2340      814*        858      -2385     -5151       0       786*
*IN THE ABSENSE OF ROUNDING ERRORS, THE IMPACTS ON PRETAX I AND FEDERAL
 INTEREST WOULD BE EQUAL.




TABLE 2-4: PORTFOLIO SHIFTS IN RESPONSE TO GAINS TAX CUT, BILLIONS OF
           DOLLARS AND PERCENTAGE POINTS(G' 0.29, PAYOUT= 0.56)
DOLLAR PORTFOLIO SHIFTS (BILLION S)
   TAX   TAXABLE    CORP.    TOTAL    TAX HOUSEHOLD
  RATE      BOND   STOCK NONCORP. EXEMPTS   CAP I TAL
 0.0        12.8     -4.2     -3.0    0.0       -5.6
 0.15L      27.7    —11.4     —6.8    0.1       —9.5
 0. 15H          13.9       -3.3        —3.4      —0.4          -6.8
 0. 28L          —9.2       16.5         3.3      -0.6          —9.9
 0.28H          -19.8       24.1         4.3      -0.7          —8.0
 0.33           -51.7       51.8        11.7      -2.7          -9.2
 0.28           —20.5       14.5         6.2      —0.4              0.3
 TOTAL          -46.9       87.9        12.4      -4.7         -48.7
PERCENTAGE POINT PORTFOLIO SHIFTS ACROSS ASSET TYPES
   TAX   TAXABLE    CORP.    TOTAL      TAX HOUSEHOLD
  RATE      BOND   STOCK NONCORP.   EXEMPTS   CAPITAL
 0.0        1.60    -0.53    —0.37     0.00    —0.70
 0.ISL      1.62    -0.67    —0.40     0.01    —0.55
 0.1SH      0.80    -0.19    -0.19    -0.02    -0.39
 0.28L     -0.75     1.33     0.27    —0.05    —0.80
 0.28H     -0.89     1.08     0.19    -0.03    -0.36
 0.33      -1.88     1.89     0.43    -0.10    -0.34
 0.28      —1.45     1.02     0.44    —0.03     0.02
 TOTAL     -0.39     0.74     0.10    -0.04    —0.41
PERCENTAGE POINT PORTFOLIO SHIFTS ACROSS HOUSEHOLD CLASSES
   TAX   TAXABLE    CORP.    TOTAL      TAX HOUSEHOLD
  RATE      BOND   STOCK NONCORP.   EXEMPTS   CAPITAL
  0.0           -3.29       -0.27      —0.17      0.01         0.06
  0.1SL          2.84       —0.83      -0.39      0.05         0.01
  0.1SH          5.96       —0.83      —0.22     -0.03        -0.01
  0.28L         -5.20        0.74       0.10     -0.02        -0.02
  0.28H          2.91        0.21       0.11     -0.06        -0.03
  0.33          -3.31        1.26       0.40     -0.27        -0.03
  0.28           0.10       -0.27       0.17      0.33         0.03
  TOTAL          0.00        0.00       0.00      0.00         0.00
                                                                             .3                                                                                                                              .3

      i,Fa                                                                   ('I
     &,io                                               N13I4
                                                                             1.1
                                                                                    O7I              lI M*
                                                                                                     OilO  0O                   Oil                      Oh                                                  t'i
                                                                   H                    D                O 0
                                                                                                           •D                    0                            0                       0
                                                                   z                                    OM                                                    -
                                                                                                                                                                    dO "n
                                                                                                                                                                    D    tJ                                      I
                 N                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                  ('I
                                44 .3 N
                                                         N
                                                        I3L
                                          00                      ('I        v                              D                                                       a
                                                                  (ft                                                                                               b
                          P1                                      .3.3
                          (ftH N
                          .3__.
                          —
                          w  0                                                      000000•                     000000                  000000
                          H                                       (0    H           I3 0' (ft                   1.1.3 UI    I-) II)      (00' UI H                 .3(0(001010
                                                                        .4 N        .310 I-                     H   H 0'    01(0       UI H UI (4 H (ft            H H I-' 10.00           cH               -
                          t..                                                       010PJH0                     P.)     (41.31.10      H OH (0H                    H 0101000
                          H                                       '1                H000HO                      101001 UI    .30           0101-4   ll   U,        H UI Ui 000             .10
                          O                                                  (0
                           Z                                            (0.3                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                 p3
H                         ift                                                                                                                                                                    (3
I-' (.11-' H              '-    1.1 1.1   OIl-' H H      I-'      (0                000000
W. 1.11.1P4010                  WUI 101.1.3             010.3     p4    p3               •                      000000                 000000                      00000                              I—
(0.401 UI(.1 UI.4                                           •            N          .3(0.3        P41.1                                                                                    ON '0
01(0.301W H H                   000UI         -.1       010 H                (0     -41.)                                              (0(00' UI ft. H             10101001010             C ZW             .3
                .                                                                         .3 H P4               (0(40' 0lJ             140114 ft. I-' ft.          0001000                 (01-301          H
                                                                        N—                                             —1.30'              ft. .3(4010'            -I—I-4141.10
00I1.1P40b'                                 tJHO                        (0         oo—jos-j                     . ..
                                                                                                                  P4 H P.)
                                                                                                                H 01                   P•) 0 I.) 1.)1.1 H          UI UI UI 01010          H)Il
                                                                        lO.                                                                                                                ('r              z0
                                                                   0    O
                                                                        0L3        000000                                                                          000000
                                                                                                                  (11 P.) I-' P4       UI 01 UI 1.1 P4 H           01010' ft. ft. 0
H                                                                            U     (0(11(0.4         p4         10011010.3.3           UI 0  UI UI --I
H 1.1H H I-' 14                  I1 —11-' HI-' H                                                                                                                   010101(11 UI 0
                                                                                   00100    UI ID               01(0010I.) ID          UI 01 UI 1.1010             01010' '9 P.) 0
0' 1.11.11.1010                 HUI UI 1.1.3 010-4  .                   -.3        t.J H P4    I-'
                                                                                                 .              (014(0 -1(4            (01.1(01.1001               (.1(4(4(41.10           o
(010(0(111.1    (.1                              •                14    II N
01(010101.)    - (00                                           H OH
                                lJ40UI(0Q(0HtO
                                UIH.M0'.30UI0 (ft 0
                                                  • 0                                                                                                                                                      H

                                                                        —.3                                                                                                                                lIC
                                                                                   0100                        000000                 000000                                   (30                         H
                                                                                   P.)UI.lJlft.p-'                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                   000000 00
                                                                                                               II) 0' UI (ft n. i—        (001 UI H                .3(0(001010
                                                                                   (4WW(4HU1                   QI P.)
                                                                                                                   0 (4H       (11    ft. UI P41.1 H (11           00010100               P-I
                                                                                                                                                                                          c                z
     I
                                111111
                                14001000000                                 0       -JW-J(0HO                  (0(00' WHO                 H lOW HO                 '0    000 P3O'0                         "1
  HPJI         (lb
                                                                                   I-' 10(0-4(40               ft. 0(0-4(40           01-4 H -41.10                H .3.3000
010 II) P40101 P40              l0(0(0 H 000 HOD
               •    I-I         .4W.4H-.J0'P4ft.U1I-4                                                                                                                                           1-3        1-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                (3         0
                                                                                              D)O              O)c))oo                                            ODO                                      (0
                                                                                             UI ft. i-'        .4.3.3 UI ft. H        (0(0(0Wft. I-'              10101001010
                                                                                   01-401        ft.           -J 10-4 H              P.) 01 P4 ft. H                                     Cz
                                                                                   H          10 UI
                                                                                       4 H UI H                       ft. (00'                                    00010100                (11P3
                                                                                   H (4 H P.101.3              000.                   .4 1(401(0                             (40          Hl               0-
                                                                                                               '01.11001.3ft.         1-401-91-9(4 H              (ft (11(1101010
                                                                                                                                                                                          'E
                                                                                       ft. ft. 1.1 P.) H          UI
                                                                                                                   ft. 1.11.) H       UI 0' (111.1 P.) H           010101 ft.
                                                                                   01(00' UI -.1 ft.           -JO--I  (11.3 ft.      (110 UI UI .4ft.                         0
                                                                                                                                                                   010101 UI (110
                                                                                   0110011.1010                100110(4010            UI 0' UI (4010              010101 P.) 140
                                                                                   ft. P.) 01 H                -.J--I-.JUI (41.1      0' ( (01.100'               (41.11.11.1(40
                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                               38

TABLE 3-3: IMPACT ON INCOME AND TAXES, DIFFERENCES FROM 1986 IN MILLION $
             (G= 0.29, PAYOUT= END)
         STATIC POST TAX Y                                              DYNAMIC
   TAX
  RATE     PURE     MODIFIED           POST TAX      PRETAX     CORP        INDIV    RR         PAY   FEDERAL
                                           Y            Y      TAXES        TAXES   TAXES      TAXES INTEREST
 0.0          0            1               -543       —1154     -464         -146          0       5
 0.ISL        0           23              -1172       —2827    —1382         -273         -6      58
 0.15H        0           77               -632       —1651     -837         —182         25     220
 0.28L      536          229                   731     1092      507         -147    -406        1:9
 0.28H     1434          760               1228         777      479         -930    -861        441
 0.33      2296      1096                  3011        3724     2054        —1342   —1673        671
 0.28      1535       782                  1198         678      457         -978    -971        395
 TOTAL     5800      2968                  3822         639*     814        —3997   -3892       1909      707*
*IN THE ABSENSE OF ROUNDING ERRORS, THE IMPACTS ON PRETAX Y AND FEDERAL
 INTEREST WOULD BE EQUAL.




TABLE 3-4: PORTFOLIO SHIFTS IN RESPONSE TO GAINS TAX CUT, BILLIONS OF
           DOLLARS AND PERCENTAGE POINTS(G'= 0.29, PAYOUT= END)
DOLLAR PORTFOLIO SHIFTS (BILLION S)
   TAX TAXABLE      CORP.      TOTAL TAX HOUSEHOLD
  RATE      BOND STOCK NONCORP. EXEMPTS    CAPITAL
 0.0          13.3             -5.4        —2.9          0.0         —5.0
 0.1SL        33.5             —18.7       -6.6          0.2         —8.4
 0.1SH        17.5              —7.9       —3.3         —0.3         -5.9
 0.28L       -17.6             23.1         3.7         —0.5         -8.7
 0.28H       —19,4             25.4         2.7         —2.1         -6.6
 0.33        -66.5             64.9        12.1         -2.4         -8.1
 0.28        -25.6              17.4        7.0          0.3           1.0
 TOTAL       -64.8              98.7       12.6         -4.7        —41.8
PERCENTAGE POINT PORTFOLIO SHIFTS ACROSS ASSET TYPES
   TAX TAXABLE      CORP.    TOTAL      TAX HOUSEHOLD
  RATE      BOND   STOCK NONCORP. EXEMPTS     CAPITAL
 0.0        1.66    —0.68    -0.36     0.00    —0.62
 0.1SL      1.96    —1.09    —0.39     0.01    —0.49
 0.15H      1.03    —0.47    —0.20    —0.01    -0.35
 0.28L     -1.37     1.80     0.29    -0.04    —0.68
 0.28H     -0.87     1.14     0.12    -0.09    —0.30
 0.33      -2.42     2.36     0.44    -0.09    —0.29
 0.28      -1.81     1.23     0.50     0.02     0.07
 TOTAL     —0.55     0.83     0.11    —0.04    -0.35
PERCENTAGE POINT PORTFOLIO SHIFTS ACROSS HOUSEHOLD CLASSES
   TAX   TAXABLE
  RATE      BOND   STOCK NONCOR?.   EXEMPTS   CAPITAL
 0.0       -8.23    —0.31    —0.17     0.01     0.05
 0.15L        2.93             —1.19      —0.38         0.07        0.00
 0.15H        10.11            -1.06      —0.22        -0.01     —0.01
 0.28L       -10.94             0.93       0.11         0.01     —0.02
 0.28H         8.13             0.14       0.04        -0.45        —0.03
 0.33         —3.67             1.65       0.41        -0.19        —0.03
 0.28          1.66            -0.17       0.20         0.55         0.04
 TOTAL            0.00
                                       39




                                 Table 4:
             Impact of Capital Gains Cut on Federal Deficit,
                 the Taxable Bond Rate and Capital Stocks
                       (bil. of $ and basis points)



                          No Payout ResDonse          Payout Response
                       g'—0.18 g'—O.29g'—0.41     g'—O.18 g'—0.29 g'—0.41
Federal Deficit
     Pure Static         4.2     5.8        6.8      4.2        5.8   6.8
     Modified Static    -1.2     1.9        3.8     -0.2        3.0   5.0
     Dynamic            -0.3     2.3        3.9      1.2        3.8   5.5
Taxable Bond Rate         7       6          5        7          5     4

Capital
     Corporate           46      39      34          36         32    28
     Noncorporate        12      12      12          12         13    12
     Household          -55     -49     -43         -45        -42    37
     State and Local     -3      -3      -4          -3         -3    -3
                                                                                                                                                                                             '.3
                                                                             .-n
      co(rfl                                                                 r'                  0z                                               fl        I,1
                                                                                                                                                  On
                                                                                                                                                                           0On
                                                  t'                         t.i                 On          O            On        0Z                      O
                                               N.34                          vi                        0     C                  0        Q              0     0             0                Ui
                                                                              I
      tq.         . 014143                                    H
                                                              z              .     C   0               .1                                                                   a
                  N                                                          .•                        (.1
                  14HN                         14             N
        r                                           N                        '0                                                                                                              :
                     -on                                      P1                   C
                             (.1                              (0
        g
                             i-                                                    r
                       CO ,..H         N                14                                                                                                                                   14
                             0
                       -P31414                          N     '-3
                                                              '     0H             000000                    000000                 000000                  000000               P30         N
                       (0                                     N     -.Z                                           •                                              •
                       1.4                                    (0    H14            1.40' Ui S. P4(4          (40' Ui S. P41.3       S. -.J0' UI S. H        -.3(00'
                                                                                                                                                                0' 0' 0                      (0
                                                                    I-IN           0'(4H0H44                 OUiS.19U'0'            S.H(4I90Ui              000(0(00             H'O
                       (-I                                    "                    -3JI00'-4Ui               OiO'V1'0(0S.           0'Ui0'0'4'4                01010100          I30
                       I-I                                             P1          S.P4 S. '00 S.            (400Ui 0' 0'           00' 0' 0' (0.0.         l0-.i 4 0 '00        .4
                                                              '4       (0                                                                                                              '.3
                                                                    (01-3
                       oz
H                                                                                                                                                                                            H
H (4I H 1 P4           4.0   5.        HHH H                  N
(0Ui19(4P40'0
                                   3 ViO'0'0J
                                                        •                                0000.               000000.                000000.                 000000.
0'OiOO'5.Ui0                                                 ZPI             14
                                                                             N     -J0'-.l5.P4I. ..0'-.jS.P4P4                      0'0'0'Ui5.H             l0'0l00'0'0                0'    14
      .                      S.Ui040'5.U'P4H.
                             0I00-J0'0UiO'(9                        00'            ..3P4-4HP4(4 0'190'S.0'0'                        P301P45.HUi             000io.00             (01-30'     H
0P405.UiP4'0
4I-'H5.5.                    0'VI000U"00'0'                         tiI•           00'0(4HH                                         0'(90'H1.30                  -4(4(40         I-''
                                                                                                                                                            UiUiUiO'010
                                                                                                                                                                                             0Z
                                                                    (0                           '0(4(0(4(410
                                                                                   0'S.0'0'UiH P4UIP4S.(40                          P45.P4H0'Ui                                  --
                                                                    v0                                                                                                                       (0
                                                                    Z'4                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                             14
                                                              '4    (00                                      000000                 000000                  000000                           N
H                                                                   (13
                                                                                   000000
                                                              'N
H(4H        1-1-.lP4         5.P4(flHHH                                            5.UiS.PJH(4               S.UiS.P4H1.4           UiO'Ui(4P4H             a'0'0'5.S.0                      -
0' Ui 5. (4 P40W             Ui.40' (4-45.0'H
                                            0-4                     -              -JUi -4015.14             1001lOW -4(0           Ui0 (Ii (Il 0' Vi       010' 0' Vi Ui 0
WPJP40'W5.0'                                    •                   0'             W5.(0WP45.                Ui-JUiWO(4             5.Ui5.PJ41.J            0'0'OlP4b.30         0(0         .
0'145.03Ui-JWO               UiS.0'0Ui5.00..                        -I-I           OI0'0'S.-JVi              P4QP4UiO0'             5.UiS.0-40              1414(9(9(40          (0
                             Vi 0100Ui -35. -.i 0' r' '4              H II                                                                                                       .
                             (05.00O5.-40P4.,I-(                    00                                                                                                                       '-4   .
                                                                    P4t'1
                                                                    lOW                                                                                                                      t'C 0
                                                                    —I-I                                                                                                                     (0
                                   I   I I I        I                              000000                    000000                 000000                  000000               (Ii ()      H
    I I                      P400000000                                                 •                         '                      .                                       00          0
    H 141                                                                    1.3   '3 Ui 5.0' 5.1.-'         IJUi      S. H         5. -40' Ui S. H         -J (00' 010'
                                                                                                                                                                    0            C           Z
                             I-' 0' OH
                                   000 I'30 C                                      (41410(90     Ui          010' Vi
                                                                                                                  H Vi
                                                                                                                     (90  Vi        5. H 14(90 1)1          0000' (00            H
                             UiOOP4OIOIHOU1H                                       -JVIIOUiVi14              -11310U'V119           OSUiOiO'-JP4            '010(010100          13          "3
00' H HO' 010' H                                                             0
QHH5.04H"J                   1.-0'0'0'010t35.OlhIl                                 00'5.(40"0                (0(9.3(4(0(0           0010101(05.             '0-4-4(0(00
                                                                                                                                                                                       I-I   1-3
                                                                                                                                                                                 '4N         0
                                                                                                                                                                                             (0
                                                                                   000000                    000000                 000000                  000000                           (13

                                                                                   .4.4.4Ui5.H               .4-4-4Ui5.1.-'         0'0'0'Ui5.H             (0lO(00'0'O                Z
                                                                                   0'-J0'5.I-'5.             -JW.-JS.HUi            P40I'35.HU1             00010.00             (0.-I       0
                                                                                   O00l-'5.lO                0'0OH14O               0'14OIH1.40             -J-1-.J(9140         1.4
                                                                                   S.iOS.IOP4Vi              I—'-.4H5.P4P4          P45.PJHWVI              ViVIV1OIOIO                      II
                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                             1.3
                                                                                   000000                    000000                 000000                  000000                           '0
                                                                                   5.5.5. (91.3 H            5. Vi 5.19'3 1         Ui 01 Ui (9 '31-'       01010' 5.5.0
                                                                                   0'W0'ViOSUi               -J0-JUi0'Ui            UiOVIUiO'Ui             O'0'OIUiUiO
                                                                                   ViWUIHO%I4                W0'WH0114              5.Ui5.P4-.1I-J          (001(01.31.40        0(0
                                                                                   5.45.5(00                 t#l0UiS.-JP4           5.UiS.O-J0              14(4(4(9(40          (0
                                                          4i
TABLE 5-3: IMPACT ON INCOME AND TAXES, DIFFERENCES FROM 1986 IN MILLIcN $
             (G'= 0.29, PAYOUT 0.56)
         STATIC POST TAX Y                                       DYNAMIC
   TAX
  RATE    PURE MODIFIED            POST TAX PRETAX      CORP         INDIV       RR        PAY
                                       I       Y                                                 FEDERAL
                                                        TAXES        TAXES       TAXES    TAXES INTEREST
 0.0       —25       —25              -607     -1135     -394         -135            0        0
 0.15L     —73       -73              -922     -2090     —999         -169         —24         0
 0.1SH     -108     -108              -763     -1386     -517         -105         -13         0
 0.28L      220      —90               248       641      384           10       —405
 0.28H                                                                                         0
            887      —60               485       927      572         -129       -1183         0
 0.33     1208      —470              1166      3216     1975           75       -2281        0
 0.28     1075        37               430       653      543         —321       —1299        0
 TOTAL    3185      -789                37*      828*    1564         -773       -5205       0      803*
*IN THE ABSENSE OF ROUNDING ERRORS, THE IMPACTS ON PRETAX   AND FEDERAL
 INTEREST WOULD BE EQUAL AND THE CHANGE IN POST TAX Y WOULD BE ZERO.
                                                                             I


TABLE 5-4: PORTFOLIO SHIFTS IN RESPONSE TO GAINS TAX CUT, BILLIONS OF
            DOLLARS AND PERCENTAGE POINTS(G'= 0.29, PAYOUT 0.56)

   TAX    TAXABLE      COP.?.  TOTAL              TAX HOUSEHOLD
  RATE       BOND     STOCK NONCORP.          EXEMPTS
 0.0         14.2           —5.1      —3.4        0.0      -5.7
 0.1SL       39.6          -13.2      —7.7       —0.2
 0.15H       13.5           —3.9      —3.7       —0.5      -5.4
 0.28L      —13.4           16.0       3.2       —0.4
 0.28H      -15.0           21.7       3.7       —0.8      —9.7
 0.33       -62.1           54.4      13.1       —1.8      -3.6
 0.28       —24.9           15.8       7.6        0.3          1.2
 TOTAL      —48.1          85.6       12.9
PERCENTAGE POINT PORTFOLIO SHIFTS ACROSS ASSET TYPES
   TAX    TAXABLE      CORP.         TOTAL       TAX HOUSEHOLD
  RATE       BOND     STOCK NONCORP. EXEMPTS CAPITAL
 0.0         1.76          -0.64     -0.42      0.00     -0.71
 0.15L       2.32          —0.77     -0.45     —0.01     -1.08
 0.15H       0.77          —0.23     —0.21     —0.03     -0.31
 0.28L      —1.08          1.29       0.26     -0.03     -0.43
 0.28H      -0.67          0.98       0.17     —0.03     -0.44
 0.33       —2.26          1.98       0.48     —0.07     —0.13
 0.28       —1.76          1.12       0.54      0.02      0.08
 TOTAL      -0.40          0.72       0.11     —0.03     —0.40
PERCENTAGE POINT PORTFOLIO SHIFTS ACROSS HOUSEHOLD CLASSES
   TAX   TAXABLE    CORP.    TOTAL       TAX HOUSEHOLD
  RATE      BOND   STOCK NONCORP. EXEMPTS      CAPITAL
 0.0       —3.21    -0.31    —0.19      0.00     0.06
 0.15L      4.90    —0.92    —0.43     —0.03    —0.18
 0.15H      6.04    —0.85    —0.24     —0.09     0.01
 0.28L     -6.11     0.72     0.09     —0.01     0.06
 0.28H      4.02     0.10     0.08     —0.11    —0.08
 0.33      —5.07     1.43     0.46     —0.17     0.08
 0.28      —0.57    —0.18     0.23      0.41     0.05
 TOTAL      0.00     0.00     0.00      0.00     0.00
                                                           42

TABLE 5-5: WELFARZ CHANGES BY TAX AND INCOME CLASSES
                 (G= 0.29, PAIOUT= 0.56, TAXADJ= 1.0095)

TAX CLASSES
      TAX    PRETAX       INDIV     CORP IMP L IC IT         RISK     PRICE      TOTAL % CHANGE
  RATE          I      TAXES -) TAXES(-) TAXES(-)               (—)     (-)    WELFARE IN TOTAL
 0.0         —1135.4      135.4         393.7      0.0     633.2        -5.8      21.7     0.01
 0.   15L    -2089.7      169.1         999.2     23.5     1317.4     -30.7      390.8     0.07
 O.15H       —1385.5      104.9         516.9     13.4     733.5      —40.0      -54.7    -3.02
 0. 28L       641.2        -9.9        —383.6    404.6     -520.3     —43.6       88.0     0.02
 0. 28H        927.4      128.8        —571.5    1183.4    -777.0     —29.9      859.8     3.25
 0.33         3215.9      —75.0        —1975.0   2281.1   —2505.5     —82.3      856.4     3.20
 0.28         652.9       320.5         —543.4   1299.3   —1010.7     —54.6      661.2     0.68
 TOTAL        828.0       773.4        -1563.7   5205.2   -2129.5     —286.9    2823.2     3.11
INCOME CLASSES: JOINT FILER
      INC.    PRETAX      INDIV           CORP IMPLICIT      RISK     PRICE      TOTAL % CHANGE
BRACKET          I     TAXES (   -)   TAXES(-) TAXES(-)         (—)     (-)    WELFARE IN TOTAL
   < 10          0.0         0.0           0.0      0.0       0.0        0.0       0.0     3.00
10 — 20       —305.1       23.7          131.5      0.0     166.3       -4.3      12.3     3.01
20 — 30      —1299.5       65.7          520.9      9.7     877 .8     —15.0     160.7     3.06
30 — 50       -914.4      112.5          365.6     97.5     501.6      —29.6     133.7     0.03
50 —100        191.5      120.3         -263.8    673.1    -338.6      —50.8     331.1     0.10
100—200        676.1      103.8         -445.8    658.2    —587.7      —19.8     383.8     3.57
  > 200        836.3      271.6         —591.6   1091.7    —981.2      —44.7     579.4     3.74
 TOTAL        —815.0      697.6         —283.2   2530.2    —361.9     —164.3    1601.2     3.13

INCOME CLASSES: SINGLE ANt) OTHER FILERS
      INC.    PRETAX      INDIV           CORP IMPLICIT      RISK      PRICE     TOTAL % CHANGE
BRACKET
   < 10
                 I
              -241.1
                       TAXES(-) TAXES(-) TAXES(-)
                           47.9           72.7      0.0
                                                                (-)
                                                            165.4
                                                                        (-)
                                                                        —0.5
                                                                               WELFARE IN TOTAL
                                                                                  44.4     3.03
10 — 20       -730.9      118.1          382.7      8.3     361.2       -4.7     135.1     3.08
20 — 30       -490.2       33.1          181.2     12.7     242.7      —21.7     —41.4    —0.02
30 — 50        412.7      —52.8         —281.4    351.1    —381.3      —29.6      18.5     0.01
50 —100       1493.0     -167.8         —803.5    928.0    -986.7      —20.9     440.8     0.14
100—200       1016.8       11.8         -644.6    821.7    —825.9      -25.8     352.7     3,34
  > 200        183.2       86.1    —187.7         553.3    —343.0      —19.4     271.9     0.61.
 TOTAL        1643.0        76.4 -1280.7         2675.0   —1767.6     —122.6    1222.0     3.10
                                         43




                                 Table 6:
Impact of Capital Gains Tax Cut on the Taxable Bond Rate, Business
                                                                   Capital
            and Welfare (Risk-adjusted After-all-taxes Income)
                       (basis points and bil. of $)



                               No Payout Rnrn,                             Payout Rnrn
                             g'—O.lS g'—0.29 g'—0.41 g'—O.18g'—0.29g'—Q.4].
Percentage Increase             -0.32         0.95         2.46          0.60      1.91     2.73
in Tax Rates to Main-
tain Tax Revenues

Taxable Bond Rate              6          6            7             8             7         7

Corporate Capital                                                                           14
Noncorporate Capital          13         13           10            12            13        12
Household Capital            -59        -47          -37           -44           -36       -26
State & Local Capital                                                                       -l

Change in Welfare
Owing to Changes in:

   Pretax Income             0.76    0.83            0.93          1.07         0.98       0.93
   Explicit Taxes           -0.81   -0.79                         -1.07         -1.05     -1.02
   Implicit Taxes on Realiz. 7.17    5.21                          5.18          3.88      3.00
   Implicit Taxes on Payouts 0        0            0              -1.85                   -2.32
   Risk                     -2.29                -1.46            -1.72     -1.87         -1.61
   Relative Prices          -0.35   -0.29        -0.21            -0.22     -0.20         -0.13
   Tota].*



*Components do not swu to total because of interaction terms and rounding.
                                      44




                                  Table 7:
              Welfare Changes by Tax Bracket and Income Class
                              (billions of $)


               Households     No Payout Rsnons             Pavniir R
               (millions)   g'—0.18g'-0.29 g—0.41       g'—0.18 g'—0.29 g—0.4l
Tax Bracket
   0.0           22.7          0.04    0.02     0.13       0.15    0. 06    0.1.0
   0.15          41.6         -0.15    0. 34    1.24      -0.32    0.14     0.34
   0.28          19.9          1.43    0.95     1. 10      0.52   -0.11    -0.27
   0.33           6.6          2.14    0.86    -0.29       0.62   -0.56    -1.16
   0.28           0.5          1.01    0.66     0.18       0.43    0.04    -0.18

  Total          91.4          4.46    2.82    2.36        1.39   -0.43    -1.16

Income
    <10          12.6          0.01    0.04    0.09       0.03     0.06     0.08
  10-20          21.8          0.09    0.15    0.30       0.20     0.21     0.26
  20-30          20.8         -0.13    0.12    0.38       -0.26   -0.14    -0.06
  30-50          20.1          0.30    0.15    0.65       -0.13   -0.22    -0.27
  50-100         13.2          1.46    0.77    0.32        0.42   -0.40    -0.88
 100-200          2.1          1.28    0.74    0.34        0.49   -0.01    -0.11
  >200            0.7          1.46    0.85    0.27        0.64    0.08    -0.18

 Total           91.4         4.46     2.82    2.36       1.39    -0.43    -1.16
                                            43




 Figure 1: Capital Gains Realization Function and Efficiency Loss



Realization
 Rate


        A




                                B
        rr




        0                       9                                   Gains
                                                                    Tax Rate
                                                 46




               Figure 2: Corporate Payout Function and Efficiency Loss




Payout
Rate


           A




           *                      B
       p




           0                  DIVCOST
                                                                         Dividend
                                                                         Cost
