                          NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     HOT HANDS IN MUTUAL FUNDS: THE PERSISTENCE OF PERFORMANCE, 1974-87




                              Darryll Hendricks

                                Jayendu Patel

                             Richard Zeckhauser




                           Working Paper No. 3389




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   June 1990




The research was supported by grants from the Bradley Foundation and the
Decision, Risk, and Management Science Program of the National Science
Foundation. We thank Robert Zeckhauser, whose informal studies of the hot
hands phenomenon stimulated this investigation, and Sheridan Titman for
providing data on the P8 indices. Helpful comments from Richard Ruback, Larry
Summers and seminar participants at the Harvard Business School, the Kennedy
School of Government, and Cornell University are gratefully acknowledged. This
paper is part of NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                         NBER Working Paper #3389
                                                         June 1990


       HOT HANDS IN MUTUAL FUNDS: THE PERSISTENCE OF PERFORMANCE, 1974-87


                                                  ABSTRACT


   The net   returns  of no-load mutual gro'Mh funds exhibit a hot-hands phenomenon during 1974-87. When
performance is measured by Jensen's alpha, mutual funds that perform well in a one year evaluation period
continue to generate superior performance in the following year. Underperformers also display short-run per-
sistence. Hot hands persists in 1988 and 1989.
     The success of the hot hands strategy does not derive from selecting superior funds over the sample period.
The timing component — knowing when to pick which fund — is sigeificant. These results are robust to alterna-
tive equity portfolio benchmarks, such as those that account for firm-size effects and mean reversion in returns.
Capiti'ing on the hot hands phenomenon, an investor could have generated a significant, risk-adjusted excess
return of 10% per year.




                                                         Darryll Hendricks
                                                         Jayendu     Patel
                                                         Richard Zeckhauser
                                                         John F. Kennedy School of Government
                                                         Harvard University
                                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     I. Introduction and Overview
      Mutual fund performance has been extensively studied on behalf of investors seeking practical advice,

and by academics testing the efficient markets hypothesis (EMB). Studies since the 1960s — ace the classic

papers by Treynor (1965), Sharpe (1966), and Jensen (1968), and rcccnt updates with refinements by Shawky

(1982), Ippolito (1989), Grinblatt and Titman (1989), and references therein —have forged an academic con-

sensus that mutual funds do not offer ex-ante net returns to prospective investors that are superior to ben-

chmark portfolios (like the 'market' portfolio), though gross returns of funds outperform passive strategies suf-

ficiently to cover their fees and loads.

      The practitioner literature sees matters differently. For instance, Rugg (1986) advocates, with some

caveats, investing in aggressive-growth equity funds that arc top-ranking performers in the most recent phase

(one to six months) of a bull market. Similarly, ConsumerGuide (1988) reports, "Loads., fees, and expenses can

be considerable, but most financial professionals suggest that the performance of the hind, not the costs, should
be the primary consideration when choosing a fund."1 Mutual fund performance rankings are compiled on a

regular and timely basis and are widely followed. Mutual funds that do relatively well tout their performance

prominently in their advertising. Those that don't, search for the measure that puts them in the best possible

light. Directly or indirectly, investors are willing to act on such ongoing relative performance information. In

Paid, Zcckhauser, and Hendricks (1990), we document that investors steer their money to funds that have per-

formed well recently. Are such investor behaviors justified?2


        tln contrast, academics, as in Brealey's (1983) chapter on "Can Professional Investors Beat the Market?",
 advisc that most of the differences between cx post performances of individual funds are due to chance.

       2Nerous biases in individual decision-making have bccn identified. Tversky and Kahneman (1971)
 have shown that people expect the properties of large samples, such as convergence of relative frequency to
 population parameters, to hold in small samples too. From such evidence, it is easy to see why investors,who
 may have a proclivity to generalize too readily from small samples, may incorrectly infer autocorrelation in per-
 formance from observed runs in mutual fund returns that arise from random stock selection and random
 market timing.
Hot Ha,ids, 5/31/90                                                                                                  2



      We reexamine the quarterly performance data of open-cod, no-load equity funds. We evaluate statistkal

evidence of the persistence of superior performance by identifiable mutual funds, measured both in relation to

market indices and to their fellow funds. Such persistence proves to be significant, though it is predominantly a

short-run phenomenon. Adopting the argot of the sports world, we label funds that deliver sustained short-run

supenor performance as ha'.ing 'hot hands.'3 Applying conventional Jensen and Sharpe measures, we measure

performance of ex-ante investment strategies that exploit the identification of funds with hot hands. We find

statistically significant potential for superior performance, with economically large risk-adjusted excess returns

up to 10% per annum. We can also identify es-ante underperformers with substantial negative excess returns.4

      These results are striking since our methodological framework is simple and widely used in the litera-

ture, as in Grinblatt and Titman (1989). The results are not sensitive to the use of more-sophisticated ben-

chmarks of performance proposed in the literature. Moreover, they hold up in the post-sample years of 1988

and 1989.

      We evaluate the time horizon over which past performance is relevant. If the evaluation period is too

short, the signal of superior performance due to skill is lost in the noise from chance factors. If the evaluation

period is too long, the salience of hot hands diminishes. The strongest results appear when the evaluation peri-

od is one year, which is consistent with the lag-length beyond which the partial autocorrclations in excess

returns are no longer significantly different from zero.

      The paper is organized as follows. Section II outlines the hypotheses and presents the statistical test

results that identify short-run persistence of performance, both superior and inferior. Section m demonstrates


      3Camerer (1989) finds that point spreads for betting on basketball games are consistent with bettors
believing in a 'hot hand' among professional basketball teams. His analysis of point spreads suggest that bettors
respond too strongly to winning and losing streaks. However, bookmaker's commissions preclude profiting
from Camerer's findings.

•
       4Grinblatt and Titman (1987) also report performance persistence of the worst performers in their
sample. However, the magnitudes of inferior performance for their constructions are much smaller than we
find. Persistent inferior performance, of course, does not generate any exploitable investment strategy since
opcn.end funds cannot be sold short, nor does it immediately reject the efficient markets hypothesis, since poor
performers may be churning or otherwise building up expenses.
Ho Hand.r, 5/31/90                                                                                              3


that hot hands in mutual funds can be exploited to achieve superior investment strategies. Section IV estab-

lishcs the robustness of the findings. Section V concludes.




                            H. Properties of Mutual Fund Performance
        A finding that recent performance can predict which funds are likely to pcrform well in the future would
be inconsistent with the usual null hypothesis of effiaent markets and martingale equity prices.5 We analyze

time-series characteristics of mutual-fund excess returns in this regard..



11.1 Hypotheses
        We assess fund performance using the familiar market model applied to excess returns:

(1)              (R — R1)     a, + Bj(Rmt - R11)   + c   , i= 1,.N, t=   1,...,T.

Here we have data over I time periods for N funds and where

            the return by fund i over quarter t, net of all fees and assuming dividend reinvestment;

            the risk-free return over quarter ((which we proxy by the yield on 90-day U.S. treasury bills);

      a = Jensen's alpha: measure of superiority of fund i in period t relative to the benchmark portfolio m in a
            mean-variance framework;

         = 'beta' of fund, which we assume to be time-invariant for convenience: measures systematic risk of fund

            I within the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM);

           —   the return to the market (benchmark) portfolio over quarter I; and

          = ex-post idiosyncratic component (error) of the return, which would be unpredictable under a joint

            hypothesis of the CAPM and the EMH.


       5Tbough recent papers by Fama and French (1988) and Poterba and Summers (1988) suggest mean re-
version in equity indices, the presumption of unpredictable excess returns on equity portfolios remains a useM
starting point. Moreover, Richardson (1989) suggests that the recent evidence for mean reversion is flawed be-
cause the correlation among the serial correlation estimates and the jointness of returns across holding periods
has been ignored.
 HOt Hands, 5/31/90                                                                                                    4


        We are interested in the dynamic properties, if any, of thea-paranieter for mutual funds. The traditional

 null hypothesis is thai a , is es-ante unpredictable by investors:

        Hi:    a,,111 — 0, for all i.

 Here the notation It-l' indicates the expectation of the variable conditional on infonnation available through

 time t-i. An alternate hypothesis would be that some funds have a constant nonzero el-ante excessper-
 form ance:

        112:
                        p1, i.1'OforsomeL
 Typically, the alternate hypothesis of interest is superior performance by some funds, ie., p > 0. Our evidence

 on 112 versus Hi is an update, with some refinements, of earlier tests.

       We move beyond the earlier literature by conjecturing that the conditional mean is nonzero and time-

 varying:

       H3:     a,,111 = p, + f(a,; j>0), f(. )' 0 for some i and some t.

 Note that even if the unconditional mean,p1, is zero, we reject Hi as long as the conditional prediction, f1(.), is

nonzero for some t. H3 admits funds that have hot hands, that is, funds that arc expected to be superiorper-

formers in the near term. For convenience in discussion, consider the special case of 113 whena follows a

mean-zero univariate moving-average process of order J (MAIJfl:

       H3A: a,,111
Here the v 's arc moving-average weights, and u1, are the innovations drivinga,. While direct tests with a

specilk parametric model of hot hands like H3A can be powerful in discriminating agnct Hi or 112, the tests

may be grossly misleading if the specialization of t(.) is inaccurate.



11.2 Data Sources and Sample Selection

      Our benchmark ('market') portfolios are the equally-weighted portfolio of mutual funds in our sample

(EWMF) and the portfolio indexed to the Standard & Poor's 500 (SP500). Treasuiy bill yields (ourproxy for

the risk-free/zero-beta return) and dividend-adjusted returns for SP500 are obtained from Ibbotson and Sin-

qeufield (1989). In our description of the results, we focus on the well-known SP500 benchmark though the
Ho Hands, 5/31/90                                                                                                  5


results with EWMF are essentially the same.

      We restrict our attention to no-load equity funds that have a growth objective (Ic., funds that identified

themselves as seeking growth, aggressive growth, or growth and income). Our focus on equity funds makes rea-

sonable our reliance on equity portfolio benchmarks. We concentrate on no-load funds because the transac-

tions costs assoaated with investing in (and switching between) such funds are trivially different from zero,

which is convenient for the switching strategies we consider. (We ignore tax consequences.)

      Our returns data are net of management fees and assume that all dividends arc reinvested. For the peri-

od 1974:4 to 1984:2, the returns were obtained from CDA Investment Technologies, 1nc of Silver Spring.

Maryland. This data source is also used by Grinblatt and Titman (1989). Returns for the period after 1984:3

were taken from quarterly reports published in Bwron 's of data collected by Upper Analytical Services, Inc. of

New York City. We cross-checked the data for the 1982:2-84:2 period when the two sources overlap: the over-

lapping data agree with each other.

       The sample of 96 funds is a subset of the 157 funds that met our growth strategy criterion in the Barron's

listing in 1982. We dropped 61 funds: 10 funds adopted a load before to 1988, 21 were not in the CDA database

at all, another 24 started in the CDA database only from 1984, and 6 were merged into other funds. The

Wiesenbeigerlnvestme'U Suiwy suggests that our sample contains approximately 75% of the universe of no-load

growth mutual funds during the 1970s; the proportion falls to about 50% by 1988.

       in the post-1982 period, no fund disappears from the Upper reports except because of merger; survivor-

ship bias, if any, affects only the pre.1982 sample since the CDA database only includes funds that remain by

1984. Note, however, that the funds most likely to not have survived the entire sample period and therefore to

be excluded from our sample arc those that exhibited persistently poor performance. Such a sampling bias may

lead to false rejections of Hi relative to H2 with the use of a benchmark like the SP500 (thougb ii is less likely

to do so with the EWMF which relies on the funds' sample itself). However, the same sampling bias will un-

derestimate performance persistence and therefore tests unadjusted for selection bias will be biased in favor of

H2 relative to H3. Since H3 is of main concern to us, our adjudications below in favor of H3, if affected at all,

 arc probably understated.
 Hot Hands, 5/31/90                                                                                                    6




 11.3   Permanent Performance Persistence: HI vs H2
         In the appendix we provide summary statistics and basic results that are directly comparable with the

 earlier literature on mutual funds. Briefly, the mutual fund betas are distributed around unity, and the majority

 of the estimated ndMdual a's (excess returns) are not significantly different from zero. Jouit tests for zero a

 are complicated by the fact that the number of funds 96, exceeds the number of observations per fund, 54. We

 provide one battery of tests using a common factor model that relaxes the widely used but unconvincing as-

 sumption of oss-scctionafly uncorrelated market-model errors (see Ippolito (1989, p.7 and table 1) or Grin-

 hiatt and Tjt.man (1989)). In all the tests, the joint hypothesis of zcroa's is easily rejected for our sample.

        However, feasible investment strategies — not reported — that exploit the rejection of Hi in favor of 1-12

do nol generate signiflcant excess returns (either statistical or economic), a finding similar to Grinbiart and Tit-

man (1987, table 9)6 In sum, while we can statistically reject Hi in favor of HZ this appears to have little prac-

tical consequence.



11,4 Short-Run Performance Persistence (Hot Hands): H2 vs. H3
        Let us turn to the statistical evidence on 1-12 versus H3, that is, between a constant a versus a time-

varying a for individual funds. (Note that since Hi is a special case of HZ t.he rejection of H2 in favor of H3

also rejects Hi). In ow- jargon, we assess the evidence for funds with hot hands. Of course, finding statistical

evidence for hot hands need not imply that economically worthwhile investment strategies exist, but without the

possibility for practical exploitation the phenomenon is far less interesting and less threatening to the EM}I.

We defer to section m the assessment of economic gains from identifying funds whose hands are hot.



II.4jAjUoco,relp4on in mw*nw&j,jthw. Consider the res3duajs, e, from estimating the market-model

equation (1). Under HZ e is white noise. Under H), the residuals will be autocorrelated. Under H3A for in-


       6Even allowing short sales of mutual funds, which is not possible in practice, does not lead to excess
returns for strategies based on exploiting 1-12.      -
Hof Hands, 5/31/90                                                                                                 7



stance, e   is the sum of an MA(J) process (our model fora) and white nosc,which is also an MA(J) process.7

       For any fund with I observations, an omnibus test of 112 can be based on the modified 0-statistic — see

Harvey (1981, p.211):

(2)             0 T(T +      2) [/(T.j)],
where , is the estimated residual autocorrelation at lag j. The 0-statistic tests the hypothesis that all of the

autocorrelations of a series up to lag L arc zero; its asymptotic distribution is x- in our application, the Q-

test may have low power because the autocorrelations will be close to zero, even if the v 'a under H3A are non-

zero,ifthevarianceof ismuchbiggerthanthatofu.
       We set L 1.2, allowing for correlations up to three years. The 0-statistics for each fund appear in the

last column of table 1. Of the 96 funds, 30 have 0-statistics significant at the 10% leveL8 A joint test of zero

first-order autocorrelation in the residuals,     , of   all funds is:

(3)              01 =
Under H2, Q has an asymptotic -dist.ribution. We use this technique to construct 0K statistics that include

higher-order autocorrelations. Table I reports the results up to K 8. The p-values of the 0Kstatistics are

dose to zero: we can easily reject the null hypothesis of H2 in favor of H3.

        For a practical exploitation of short-term persistence in performance, the approximate autoregressive or-

der of Jensen'sa under H3 is of interest. The order indicates the relevant time period for predicting future per-

formance. Preliminary inferences can be based on examining the sums of squared pa.'tialcorrelations:

 (4)             q
where           is the estimate of the ktb partial autocorrelation in the residuals of fund L Under the null

 hypothesis that an autoregression of order (k-i) or less fits the residuals,   is asymptotically distributcd.


        7The specific time-series process of et is sensitive to the exact specification appropriate under 113. Thus,
 for an autoregressive process of order 3 bra instead of the MA(J) in H3A, e, will follow an autoregressive
 moving-average process of order (1,3).

        8Tbe 10% significance level was chosen because this test has low power we are trading off some type I
 risk for type II risk.
  Ho Hands, 5/31/90                                                                                                 8

  The pattern of q's in the lower panel of table I (which have low p-values up tu k —4 and high p-values for

  through q8) indicate that an AR(4) process adequately approximates the time-dependence in the market model

  residuals. Practically, performance information from the most reccnt four quarters appcars suffldcnt for effi-

 cient prediction about future performance, which is consistent with the findings of ex-ante strategies detailed in

 section III. For now, we consider further statistical tests for hot hands.



 11.4.2 Methods for Direct Assessment of Shod-Run Persistence in a's. A direct assessment ofperformance predic-

 tabWty from period A to period B examines the relation between the two sets of 's. This approach bypasses

 the problem due to a large variance of c (which affects the previous tests based on residualautocorrelation)

 since it looks at deviations from the cross-sectional-mean i (which may vary considerably over tiruc). How-

 ever, a direct cross-sectional regression between sets of& 's would have disturbances that are correlated across

 funds.9 Thus, we employ the time-series regression approach discussed in Grinblatt and Titman (1989) as well

 as contingency table analysis.

       The time-series approach recognizes that the slope-coefficient relating&'s inperiod B to those of peri-

od A is a weighted average of the &a'S with weights that are proportional to the deviations of the as from

their period-A mean. Thus, the slope-coefficient is equivalent to the Jensen measure of a self-financing port-

folio of funds formed by choosing weights proportional to the deviations of the tz 's from the mean of period A.

We compute the excess returns to this portfolio during period B, say RPB. Let RmB denote the corresponding

vector of excess ret-urns on the market portfolio during B. The t-statistic of the intercept from the time-series

regression of Rp8 on RmB tests the hypothcsis that a-performance in period A is correlated witha-performance
in period B.

       For a specified length of subperiod, T1, our sample provides M — T/(T5 + 1) nonoverlapping pairs for

study. A specific alternate hypothesis, say H3B, is thata-persistence is positive (hot hands) and thepersistence

relation is stable across subpcriods. For this case, we perform thefollowing regression:


      9Anotber complication is that we do not know the truea, but only have a noisy estimates instead,
which leads to errors-in-variables problems.
HOt Hands, 5/31/90                                                                                                    9


(5)                       a +4ib6iR + w, t.1,2,..T,
wherc

       R return in time t of the weighted-average portfoliowhose weights depend on the subperiod to which

            the observation belongs,

       a      intercept that mcasures-persistence,
       M number of subperiods under consideration,

       b1
              regression coefficient that is not of direct intercst,

       S       dummy that is unity lit belongs to ubpcriod I and is zero otherwise, and

            = regression error that is assumed homoscedastic for all I.

In the case of H2 versus H3B, the t-statistic of the intercept, a, provides the test.

            For contingency table analysis, consider&-quartilcs for periods A and B. A 4x4 table is constructed

such that the cell (j,k) contains the number of funds that fall into the th quartile of period A and the kt quartile

of period B. This method has several appealing features:

            • Like the regression approaches, it focuses on the deviations of the performance measures from the

               cross-sectional mean at any point in time.

            • It allows us to compare effects across performance levels. That is, we can look directly at whether per-

               sistence seems to be more evident among poorly performing funds than among funds that perform

               well, or vice versa.

            • Nonlinearitics in the relation may be uncovered. Also we avoid the risk of incorrect inference in the

                traditional framework because of possibly leptokurtic (fat-tailed relative to Ganian distribution)

                returns. (This risk may be substantial; see Afileck-Graves and McDonald (1989).)

 Of course, the contingency table analysis will have low power relative to a co'rectly specified parametric method.

            We use the -y -statistic proposcd by Goodman and Kruskal (1954) as a measure of ordinal association in

 the contingency table:

 (6)

 Here P is the number of concordant pairs of observations (that is, the number of paired observations where one

 member falls into a higher quartile in both periods); 0 is the number of discordant pairs (i.e., one memberfalls
 Hot Hands, 5/31/90                                                                                                    10


 into a higher quartile in period A and the other member is higher in period B). Observation pairs tied in ODC Or

 both periods are ignored. Asymptotic tests use the asymptotic variancc of -' given by Goodman and Kruskal

 (1972).

        We analyze a -persistence for different subperiod lengths. The relation between the magnitude of the

 persistence and the length of the subsample will depend on the validity of Hi versus H3. If H2 is true, then the

 longer the period used to estimate a • the smaller the sampling variance of the estimate and thus the stronger the

 relation between the & 's from different periods. On the other hand, under H3, if the unconditionalmean of a

 is zero but its conditional mean is time varying, then the relations will vary in a complicated manner but decay

exponentially after some maximum subpcriod length. We estimate a's over one-, two-, three-, and four-year pe-

riods, and over tht half-sample (seven-year) periods. Since our subperiods do not overlap, there are twice as

many subperiods for the one-year computations as for the two-year, and so on.



114.3 Results on Direct Assessment of Short-Run Persistence in a 's. The regression results and -statistics that

employ the methods of section 11.4.2 are presented in table 2. The results of-persistencc are shown for com-

parison. The tests show that & 'sand the 's display similar significant persistence for the one-year periods:

the1 -statistic for& 's is 0.32 and that fork's is 0.40. The -persistence is expected. That of the cz 's is surpris-

ing, given that the EMH suggests zero persistence. However the magnitude of& -persistence, when assessed by

7-or t-statistics, diminishes to zero by about three- year estimation periods. In contrast, the persistence in is

long-lived, as expected.

       In table 2, the t-statistics and the -"s reject H2 in favor of H3, which is consistent with the earlier analysis

of residual autocorrelations. The decay of& -persistence with increasing estimation-interval length suggests

that thc unconditional mean of a' is zero, since otherwise some persistence, possibly attenuated, would be ob-

served for long periods.

       We can also examine the relation between & 's computed over one-year periods with different intervals

between the one-year estimates. Such an examination provides inferences about the efficient evaluation-period

length for forecasting performance. (The earlier tests based on partial autocorrelations in table 1 are
                                                                                                                     11
Hot Hands, 5/31/90


analogous.) Under H2, the relation between thc&'s should not        be affeed by the interval between the years of

the estimates; under H3, the relation should be sensitive to the interval. The procedures used for table 2 were

applied to study annual a -persistence between: year t versus t +2, year t versus t + 3, year t versus t + 4, and year

versus t + 5. The results appear in table 3. (Year t versus t +1 is repeated from table 2 for convenient compari-

sion.)
         The results in table 3 support H3 (short-run persistence) relative to H2 (long-run persistence) since the

-pcrsistencc, both as measured by the regression intercept and by-)' based on the contingency t.ables,

diminishes substantially when we allow a nonzero interval between the estimation years.

         In summary, the evidence in tables 1, 2, and 3 indicates statistically significant persistence between per-

forinance from one period to the next. The persistence is greatest for an assessment period of one year, from

which we seem to obtain sufficient information on performance to overcome noise yet retain enough recency to

be relevant. The persistence fades away in the long run, which is consistent with a hot-hands phenomenon.



                     ifi. Performance of Strategies Based on Hot Hands
         To learn whether hot hands are economically important, we generate comingled portfolios from open-

end mutual funds using historical information on superior short-term performance. Our evaluation is based on

Jensen's a (see equation (1)) and on the difference in Sharpe's measure (eacess return per unit of standard

deviation risk) between the hot hands and benchmark portfolios. The significance of the difference in Sharpe's

 measure is assessed by norm2li,'in it by its asymptotic standard deviation (computed following Jobson and

 Korkie (1981)); the ratio, denoted as z-sxatistic, is asymptotically distributed standard normal.

         As is well known, Jensen's a or differential Sharpe's measure will provide ambiguous results if our ben-

 chmark portfolio does not lie on the efficient frontier — see Roll (1977, 1978). Simple equity-market indices,

 which were common benchmarks in the 1970s, do not seem to lie on the mean-variance efficient frontier —see

 Grinblatt and Titman (1987), Dc Bondt and Thaler (1989), and references therein. Substantial diversification

 gains can accrue from including real estate in portfolios —see Virstenber& Ross, and Zisler (1988) for recent

 evidence. Likewise, a case can be made for including foreign securities. Clearly, our benchmarks are unlikely
  Hot Hands, 5/31/90                                                                                                 12


  to be globally effident. Reassuringly, our results withstand the sautiny in section IV of simulations and aiterna-

 tive benchmarks. Finally, since we reuse the sample of section II rather than test on a new sample, our results

 on hot-hand strategy gains should be interpreted cautiously. (Though, again, we are reassured by some out-of-

 sample evidcncc presented in section IV.)

          Practically, following Dybvig and Ross (1985), we assess whether a hot-hands strategy improvesper-

 forinance unambiguously relative to the benchmark in a mean-variance framework (given the choice of the risk-

 free asset). While the success of the hot-bands strategies need not imply a rejection of the EMH,economically

 large and significant gains should raise questions about the prior mutual-fund studies' apparent support for the
 ENifi.

       Consider a strategy that invests in a equally-weighted mix of mutual funds that is updated at the end of

 each holding period. To exploit hot hands, the mix of mutual funds for a holding period is based on thetop per-

 formers in the most recent evaluation period. The notation mEnH for a strategy indicates arn-quarter evalua-

 tion period and a n-quarter holding period: for example, 4E8H will indicate a procedure based on the most-

recent 4-quarter performance, with selections updated every S quarters. The simple net return (a naive per-

formance measure justified by a prior of unit beta for each fund) from the evaluation period is the criterion for

fund inclusion. In results not reported, we find that selection based on an estimate of Jensen'sa from the

evaluation period performs similarly or slightly better; selection based on Sharpe's measure, however, generates

performance that is insignificantly different from the benchmarks.

       lu the tables that follow, we report the net quarterly return, the Sharpe's measure (asterisks indicating

values that are statistically different from those with the EWMF portfolio), and Jensen's alpha with its t-statistic

to assess the magnitude of excess returns.

       In table 4, top panel, we focus on a best-fund strategy in which the evaluation period and the holding pe-

ricd are equal, mEmH, ranging from one quarter to 12 quarters. An annual honzon, 4E4H,appears best,

which is consonant with the earlier s   jsljcal results in tables 1 and 3. Thea -estimate for 4E4H is statistically

significant and indicates an excess annualized return greater than 10%. The Sharpe's measure for 4E4H is also

statistically significantly different from that of the benchmarks. The middle panel in table 4reports on the best-
Ho€ Hands, 5/31/90                                                                                               13


fund strategy performance with varying holding periods and a 4-quarter evaluation period. The bottom panel in

table 4 reports on the performance variation obtained when the number of top-performing funds that are

selected varies. Including more funds lowers the extent of superior performance, by both the Jensen's and

Sbarpe's measures. (However, the statistical significance ofa remains invariant when assessed with the EWMF

benchmark, perhaps because idiosyncratic variation decreases.) Any diversification gains from increasing the

number of included funds appear to be offset by reduced selectivity, at least with naive equal weighting.

      Overall, the best-fund 4E4H strategy bascd on hot hands leads to a statistically significant Jensen's a,

with annualized values of 10%, a remarkable record of excess performance. A best-a fund strategy finds similar

excess returns of 5-12% per year. In figure 1, we show the average relation between percentile ranks of one

year with the next. (Since the average relation i shown, the percentiles for period t +1 do not span 0 to 100.) A

best-fitting regression line is shown in the figure for reference. We observe that performance persistence is not

restricted to the extreme ranks but is uniformly distributed Thus, a fund in the second-best decile is more like-

ly to outperform, in the next year, a fund in the third-best decile, and so on.

      01 course, a hot-hands selection strategy does not guarantee superior performance every year. Figure 2

shows the distribution of the year-by-year decile ranks of the best-fund 4E4H strategy. While the top decile is

the mode (with 5 outcomes in 12 years), we do observe a number of below-median rankings.

      We can examine the selectivity of the hot hands approach in distinguishing prospective winners from

losers by comparing the best fund strategy with a worst fund strategy. Table S reports the results for the

strategy that selects the worst performer annually using a annual evaluation period (4E4H). (The results for the

best fund strategy differ slightly from table 4 because of different sample periods.) The worst-performer fund

consistently generates sigificantly negative excess returns that are below -9%per annum. The counterpart to

hot hands, what we might call icy hands, appears to be an equally strong effect. A hypothetical short position in

the worst-performer fund combined with a long position in the best-performer fund generates large Jensen's a's

and differential Sharpe's measures, which are statistically significant for other mEn}i combinations too (not

reported). For the 4E4H combination, we observe risk-adjusted annualized excess returns of +21% for this

long-and-short strategy. Since the market-model residual variances for the hot-hands strategy vary across bold-
 Hot Hands, 5/31/90                                                                                                14



 ing periods, selected heteroscedasticity-corrected estimates arc also showa. The overall results and inferences

 stay unaffected by corrections for hetcrosccdasticity.

       Table 5 also shows selected results for the subperiods 1976-81 and 1982-87. The Jensen's a is much

 higher for the best-performer fund during 1976-81 than for 1982-87. In contrast, the worst-performer fund does

 much worse during 1982-87. Thus, the selectisity of the hot-hands strategy is high in each subperiod:for in-

 stance, Jcnsen's (based on the SP500) for the best-worst strategy has a p-value of less than 5% in each peri-

od.



                             IV. Robustness of Hot-Hands Finding
       We consider three explorations on the robustness of the findings.'0 First, using simulations, we shed

light on whether the excess returns that we find are attributable to (a) simply selecting good funds rather than

selecting the right fund at the right time, or (b) a spurious interaction between our selection strategy and the

structure of equity returns in the 1974-87 sample period. Second, we consider a multiple portfolio benchmark

that accounts for documented anomalies when using the traditional indices. Third, we update the best-fund


       1Ii results not reported, we find that our findings are similar between bull and bear markets.
       Also, we evaluated a specific implementation of H3 where Jensen's a follows an autoregressive model:
()            a     a + a111 + fl,1.
Equation (1), the market model, was estimated by applying the Kalman lilter. We specified a autoregressive
representation forfl as well:
(••)     8,, b + efl,,,, + v1.
For convenience, we focused on autogressive models of order one. (Second-order specifications gave similar
results). We imposed a tight prior on centered at unity, and a loose prior on a centered at zero. The variance
of E, the error term in equation (1), was set at 80% of the estimated residuai variance from ordinary least
squares.
       For a sample of 10 funds out of 96, we explored a grid of choices for the autoregressive parameters (i.e.,
for and9 in equations () and () respectively) and for the variances of n and v. Typically, o >            while
   >9k. Asthfactoryspedficationwasthenusedforall%funds. For each fund, at eacbquarter from 1976-
87, we computed the one-step prediction ofa,a1111. The strategy was to select the funds ith the highest
a11111 for each period t. Our time-varying parameterization did not lead to superior performance. Within the
time-varying coefficients model, we also analyzed a selection strategy that allowed for estimation risk without
success.
Ho Hands, 6/1/90                                                                                                    15



wategs results itb post-sample data from 1988-89.


LVI Simulations: Selectivity vs. Timing and Sample Artifacts
      Our tests of permanent performance persistence (H2) versus short-run persistence (H3) favored the lat-

ter. This distinction between pure selectivity and tlangsclcthty is a central issue in this paper. We report on

simulations that provide further evidence on this issue.

      Consider the two-fund 4E4H strategy, which scleds, each year, the two funds that performed the best in

the most recent year (based on Jensen'sa). In our sample, 4E4H picks 19 different funds during 1976-87. (The

maximum possible number of funds that could be picked is 24.) We simulate 5000 times the performance of a

portfolio that includes, each year, two funds randomly chosen from among the 19. The probability of including

a particular fund in any year is set equal to the relative frequency observed in our actual sample." The per-

centiles from the simulations of Jensen's a, Sharpe's measure, and average excess return are shown in table 6.

The original observed value is indicated in each of the panels. Less than 5% of the simulations have values

larger than the observed values from our 4E4H strategy. In fact, the central 80% of the distribution for each

measure always includes the corresponding values of the benchmark portfolios. Thus, it appears unlikely that

pure selectivity of funds is the source of the potential for risk-adjusted superior performance. We conclude that

the hot-hands strategy displays timing ability (i.e., the ability to pick funds at a good time), quite apart from

picking good funds.

       Next, we evaluate the likelihood that the hot-hands findings were generated spuriously, because of a

chance interaction of our selection procedure and of the time-series properties of equity returns during 1974-87.

We generate 100 artificial portfolios, each of which is an equally weighted portfolio of 100 equities drawn ran-

domly from the NYSE/AMEX (New York Stock Exchange and American Exchange) stocks on the dely used

monthly returns tapes constructed by the Center for Research in Security Prices, University of Chicago. We

apply the best-fund 4E4H strategy to this set of unmanaged portfolios/funds over the sample period identical to


       11This approach amounts to sampling with replacement from the admissible funds. Simulations based
on sampling without replacement give virtually identical results and are not reported.
 J*x Hands, 6/1/9i)                                                                                                   16


 that used in our analysis in section 111. One hundred such simulations are carried out. With the unmanaged

 portfolios, we find that the 4E4H best-fund strategy does not generate excess returns; in fact., its average excess

 return (measured by Jensen's a) is slightly negative with thc benchmarks of the PS portfolios or the EWMF.

With the SF500 benchmark, the 4E41-l strategy's a is positive and significant but this is inconsequential because

the average unmanaged portfolio also obtains a similara — essentially, the SPSOO is an inappropriate benchmark

since the unmanaged portfolios are, on average, composed of equities from much smaller firms than those in

the SP500 and thus the well-known size bias surfaces. We coodudc that the hot-hand finding is eremely Un-

likely to be an artifact of the sample period returns.



IV.2 Alternate Benchmarks
       In recent years, anomalies in the risk-return relations with common indices have been linked to firm size,

dividend yield, and returns reversions. That is, the returns of small firm portfolios, portfolios of firms that pay

high-dividends, or portfolios of firms that have performed very poorly recently, exhibit significant positive

Jensen a's when common indices are used as benchmarks. Conceivably, therefore, our hot-hands results with

the SP500 or the EWMF merely mimic such well-known phenomena.

       We consider an eight-portfolio benchmark (denoted P8) that accounts for size, dividend, and mean-

reversion anomalies, as described in Grinblatt and Tiiman (1987, 1989). Grinblatt and Titman argue con-

vincingly that the PS benchmark is preferable to other candidates, such as the equally weighted CRSP portfolio,

the value-weighted CRSP index, or the factor portfolios discussed by Lehmann and Modest (1988). The per-

formance of the 4E4H strategy relative to PS is presented in table 7. Since the PS returns were only available

for the 1975-84 subperiod, we show comparable performance results for the subpenod with SP500. Results with

the PS benchmark leave the conclusions based on P50t) unchanged: we continue to obtain a significantly posi-

tive Jensen's alpha.U The substantial selectivity potential identified in the previous section does not appear to


      % results not reported, we found that the superior performance of the 4E4H strategy becomes in-
significant when we use the benchmark of the ten-factor portfolios, FlO, of Lehmann and Modest (1988). How-
ever, this deviant finding is readily explained by the observation of Grinblatt and Titman (1989, p. 396) that "In
particular, funds that invest in large firms (which includes most funds) tend to exhibit negative performance
with the EW and PlO benchmarks." The Grinblatt and Titman condusion is based on finding that the PlO port-
folios display size, dividend-yield, and beta-related pricing errors.
Hot Hands, 6/1/90                                                                                                 27



reflect the choice of an inappropriate benchmark.



IV.3 Best-Fund 4E4H Strategy In 1988-89
      The results in sections 11 and 111 are based on the same dataset; hence their marginal reinforcement br

the hot hands finding is less than additive. In future research, we plan to eatend the examination to different

mutual fund classes as well as to the unit trusts of U.K. The out-of-sample average quarterly returns for the

best-fund 4E4H strategy, EWMF (average mutual fund), and SP500 are as follows:

      • For 1988, 3.1%, L6%, and 2.4% respectively.

      • For 1989, 5.9%, 4.0%, and 5.1% respectively.

      • For 1988-89, 4.48%, 2.79%, and 3.77% respectively.

In the post-sample period, the 4E4H strategy continues to outperform the EWMF as well as the SP500. The

hot-bands persistence holds up in recent years.



                                      V. Concluding Discussion
       We found a hot-hands phenomenon in net returns of no-load mutual growth funds during 1974-87. Spe-

ciuically, mutual funds that perform well in the most recent year continue to be superior net performers in the

near term (one to eight quarters). A best-fund strategy with an annual holding-period and an annua]

evaluation-period that exploits hot hands generates significant risk-adjusted excess returns of 10% per year. Icy

hands, the negative counterpart to hot hands, also show up in our sample: funds that perform poorly in the most

recent year continue to be inferior performers in the near term. This phenomenon is possibly even more sig-

nificant in the statistical sense, though not exploitable. Since our hoc-hands strategies are based only on knowl-

edge of historical returns, the findings cast doubt on the weak-form efficient markets hypothesis and differ

sharply from the established literature on mutual funds, which reports no exploitable opportunity to achieve

risk-adjusted superior performance.
 Hot Hands, 6/1/90                                                                                                  18


        For the 1974-87 sample period, the siifIcant performance of the hot (icy) hands strategy can no be ex-

 plained either as a resull of simply selecting superior (inferior) funds or as an artifact of the equity returns

structure. There is a significant timing component. The superior performance of hot-hand strategies persists in

1988-89 and with alternative benchmarks, including an eight-portfolio benchmark that accounts for finn-size ef-

fects, di'idend yields, and reversion in returns.

       We leave unexplained the causes that underlie the observed time-decay in the capacity of superior per-

forming funds. Plausible conjectures include:

       • bidding away of supe nor analysts once they build a track record,

       • excessive new funds flow to successful performers, leading to a bloated organization and fewer good

          investment ideas per managed dollar,

       • loss of urgency and drive once reputation is established,

       • market feel that is limited to specific circumstances, and

       • rise in fees and salaries to capitalize on demands arising from recent successes.

More generally, there may be a life cycle for effective organi7tions: witness the decline of General Motors or
Great Britain.

       Like baseball teams and pop singers, stellar mutual funds typically fade away after a few years. Substan-

tial gains are available from investing in the mutual fund equivalents of last year's pennant winners.
Hof Hands, 5/31/90                                                                                                  19



                                                   Appendix
                Testing for Permanent Superior Performance: Hi vs. H2
        Table Al, panel A, reports simple summary statistics for 90-day Treasury bills. The equally-weighted

portfolio of mutual funds in our sample (EWMF) and the SP500 pcrform about equally.

        For a test of 111 versus H2 (Ic., of some hinds performing persistently differently from the benchmark),

we estimate equation (1) (the market model in excess returns) 'th ordinary least squares using the entire

sample pcriod. Table Al, panel B, reports the estimates and the t-statiszics for each of the 96 funds in our

sample. The estimated slope.coeflicients,ft's, are scattered about unity; the market model R-squared values

(not reported) are around 0.8. The majority of the estimated intercepts, & 's, arc not significantly different

from zero.

        The ft for EWMF is 1.069, which is statistically not different from unity. The & for EWMF is 0.123

with a p-value of 0.7:14 hence Hi (i.e., the hypothesis of a zeroa) is not rejected. This, however, is not the same

as a test of all the a 1's being jointly equal to zero. A joint test can be constructed using the 'seemingly unrelated




                                          1,a2, fl2,

each market model regression. It can be shown that
                                                        N'   '
regression' framework, SUR. The null hypothesis of Hi asserts that R,r — 0, where R is a restr-icxion matrix

that selects thea's and where r                                  is the vector of stacked regression coefficients from




(Al) g = (Ri)'(RCR')1(Rir)

       I3 assumption of a constant fund beta during the sample period is unreasonable if the fund changes its
strategy. Also, if the fund's strategy is to time the market, then Jensen's a is not a consistent estimator of su-
perior performance — see Henriksson (1984), although he uncovers little evidence of superior timing ability in
his sample of 115 mutual funds.

       14A p-value gives the probability of obsen.ing the estimated value under the null bypothesis. The p-value
stays above 0.1 even if we correct for the substantial autocorrelation in the residuals indicated by the large 0-
statistic.
 Ho( Hands, 5/31/90                                                                                                20


 is asymptotically distributed since we have 96 funds and one a-restriction per fund.'3 Here
 C - 0 (X'X), t is an estimated variance-covariance matrix of market-model errors across funds, and X is
 the regressor matrix (a constant and the excess benchmark returns) which is identicaJ across cross-sections.

 Unfortunately the g-statistic cannot be directly computed since we can't obtaint when the number of funds, N

 (=96), exceeds the number of time periods, T (=54). This problem is frequently encountered in the literature

 evaluating mutual funds. We consider three different methods, with increasing reasonableness in our judge-

 meet.

         SUR Approach 1. Typically,   — see   Grinblatt and Titman (1989) and Ippolito (1989, p.7) — zero

 covariances between market-model errors are assumed, which is a heroic assumption at best since the average

sample cross-correlation between errors is 0.23. Under this assumption of cross-sectionally uncorrelated

market-model errors, we reject the null hypothesis of a zero a sincc, among 96 funds in table Al, we observe 19

non-zcro&'s at a p-value below 5%. Under Hi, this outcome has a probability of less than 1%. This finding is

similar to Ippolito (1989, table 1). More directly, the g-statistic with a diagonalt is 219, which has a p-value

below 0.1% under Hi and thus favors H2.

         SUR Approach 2. Another typical approach considers subsets of funds so that N <T. Under this ap-

proach, we randomly selected 40 funds and computed the g-statistic. Table A2, top panel, reports on the results

from 100 repetitions. In each case, the null joint hypothesis of a zeroa for every included fund can be rejected
—   similar rejection of Hi is obtained by Grinblatt and Titman (1989) in their subsample results for growth

funds.

         SUR Approach 3. Our preferred approach estimates at matrix under less resthctivc assumptions than

Approach 1. As a first cut, we modifledt to reflect the sample cross-correlation average of 0.23 between

funds. The g-statistic, reported in table AZ lower panel. is computed to be 281, which has a near-zero p-


       '3For our situation, where we have identical constraints and identical regressor matrices for each fund,
Laitinen's (1978) results indicate that reliance on the asymptoticx2 distribution, at any nominal significance
level. may tend to reject a correct null hypothesis more frequently than it should. In our study this concern is
mitigated because our test-Statistic values are very large and imply nominal p-value levels below 0.1%.
Ha Hands, 5/31/90                                                                                                  21


value.16 A more general method is to assume that the market-model-error correlations can be modeled as aris-

ing from an underlying common-factor model. The equation for the common factor model that is applied to

market model errors is:

(Al)             _1h + v11,
where

           the market-model error for fund I during time t.,

           the loading on factor k for predicting error I,

           the value of factor k during Lime t,

    v=    the unique factor for fund i (i.e., is uncorrelated with the unique factors corresponding to the other

        funds), and

    K = the number of common factors.

In matrix terms, we can write:

               E=     H'   + V.

H is the matrix of factor scores, and " is the factor pattern. The factors are normalized to have unit variance

and rotated to be uncorrelated with each other.

        We estiinate and V assuming five factors (K=5) by iterated unweighted least squares.'7 Under the as-

sumptions of factor anaiysis,Z =   ''   + V2. Hence we obtain the desired. The g-statistic with thist is

computed to be 496, which has a negligible asymptotic p-value under Hi.18


      1The g-statistics for assumed cross-correlations of + 0.5, -0.25, and -0.5 appear also in table AZ lower
panel. The results indicate that only substantial negative correlations between hinds could fail to reject Hi in
our sample; such a correlation pattern is contra-indicated both by the sample evidence and by common intui-
tion.

        t7Ma,omuin likelihood would require N<T.

      t8For widespread use of this approach, future research will have to establish small sample properties.
Such assessment is probably best conducted by bootstrap simulations since sensitivity to significant leptokurtosis
(which is widely recognized in equity returns) or skeiess (which may arise from dynamic portfolio manage-
ment with option-like position-taking) are of concern.
Not Hands, 5/31/90                                                                                                22



      However, positive investment strategies — not reported — that exploit the rejection of 1-li in favor of H2

do nat generate    nificant excess returns (either statistical or economic), a finding similar to Grinblatt and Tit-

man (1987, table 9)19 The result —failure to find signilicant ex-ante performance strategies despite statistically

significant rejection of Hi — is consistent with survivorship bias in the sample. In sum, while we can statistically

reject Hi in favor of HZ that finding appears to have little practical consequence.




      19Even allowing short sales of mutual hands, which is not possible in practice, does not lead to excess
returns for strategies based on exploiting H2.
Hat Handr, 5/31/90                                                                                            23


                                                References
Affleck-Graves., J, and B. McDonald, 1989, Nonnormalities and Tests of Asset Pricing Thcorics," Jowna! of Fi-

     nance, XLIV, a. 4,889-908.

Brcalcy, R. A., 1983, "Can Professional Investors Beat the Market," chapter 3 in AnI, odcuon to Risk and

     Return for Common Stocks, 2nd edition, MIT. Press (Cambridge, Massachusetts).

Camerer, Cohn, 1989," Does the Basketbafl Market Believe in the 'Hot Hand'?" ,American EconomicReview,

     79, a. 5, 1257-61.

Consumer Guide, 1988, Top PerfomungMutual Funds, 483.

Dc Bondt, W. F., and R. H. Thaler, 1989, "Anomalies: A Mean-Reverting Walk Down Wail Street," Journal of

     Economic Perspecnves, 3 (1), 189-202.

Dybvig, P. H., and S. A. Ross, 1985, "The Analyucs of Performance Measurement Using a Security Market

     Line," Journal of Finance, 40,401-416.

Fama, E. F., and K. French, 1988," Permanent and Temporary Component.s of Stock Prices," Journal of Political

     Economy, 96, 246-273.

Firstenbcrg, P., S. Ross, and R. Zisler, 1988," Real Estate: The whole story," The Journal of Portfolio Manage.

     men!, Spring, 22-34.

Goodman, L.A., and W.H. Kruskal, 1954, "Measures of Association for Cross.Classificacions," Journal of the

     Ame,ican Statistical Associaflon, 49,732-764.

Goodman, LA., and W.H. Kruskal, 1972, " Measures of Association for Cross-Classifications, IV: Simplification

     of Asymptotic Variances," Journalof the American Stat j.stical Association, 67, 415-421.

Grinbiart, M., and S. Titinan, 1987, "A Comparison of Measures of Abnormal Performance on a Sample of

     Mutual Fund Returns," UCLA Working Paper #13-86.

Grinblati, M., and S. Titman, 1989, " Mutual Fund Performance: An Analysis of Quarterly Portfolio Holdings,"

     Journal of Business 62, 393-416.

Harvey, A.C., 1981, The Econometric Anaiysis of Time Series (Philip Allan Publishers, Oxford).

Henrikson, R., 1984, "Market Timing and Mutual Fund Performance: An Empirical Investigation," Journal of

     Business, 57,73-96.
Hot Handj, 5/31/90                                                                                             24


Ippolito, R. A., 1989, Efficiency with Costly Information: A Study of Mutual Fund Performance, 1965-84,"

     Quanerly Journal of Economics, 104, 1-23.

Jensen, M.C 1968, The Performance of MUtual Funds in the Period 1945-1964," Journal of Finance, 23, 389-
     416.

Jobson, J.D. and B. M. Korkie, 1981, Performance Hypothesis Testing with the Sharpc and Treynor Measures,"

     Journal of Finance, 36, 889-908.

Henriksson, R., 1988," Market Timing and Mutual Fund Performance: An Empirical Investigation," Journal of

     Business, 57, 73-96.

Laitinen, K., 1978," Why Is Demand Heterogeneity So Often Rejected," Economic Lettery, 1, 187-191.

Lehmann, B. N., and D. M. Modest, 1988, "The Empirical Foundations of the Arbitrage Pricing Theory," Jour-

      nal of Financial Economics, 21, 213-54.

Patel, 1., R. Zeckhauser, and D. Hendricks, 1990, " Investment Flows and Performance: Evidence from Mutual

      Funds, Cross-Border Investments, and New Issues," forthcoming in a volume of the Center of Japan-U.S.

      Business and Economic Studies, New York University.

Poterba, 1., and L. Summers, 1988, "Mean Reversions in Stock Prices: Evidence and Implications," Journal of

      Financial Economics, 22, 27-59.

Richardson, M., 1989, " Temporary Components of Stock Prices: A Skeptic's Vicw," manuscript, Wharton

      School of Business, University of Pennsylvania.

Roll, R., 1977, "A Critique of the Asset Pricing Theory's Tests - Part!: On Past and Potential Testability of the

      Theory," Journal of Financial Economics, 4, 129-176.

R0U, R., 1978, "Ambiguity When Performance Is Measured by the Security Market Line," Journal of Finance,

      33, 1051-1069.

Rugg, D., 1986, Dow Jones-Irwtn Guide to Mzw.tal Funds (3rd edition).

Sharpe, W., 1966, " Mutual Fund Performance," Journal of Business, 39, 119-138.

Shawky, H. A., 1982, "An Update on Mutual Funds: Better Grades," Journal of Ponfolio Management, Winter,

      29-34.
Ho Hands, 5/31/90                                                                                        25


Treyoor, I., 1965, How to Rate Management of Investment Funds," Har.'ard Business Review, 44, 131-136.

Tversky, Amos, and Danid Kahneman, 1971, BCliCf in the Law of Small Numbers," Pystholoica1 Bulletin, 76,

     August, 105-110.

Wiesenberger, A., 1974-1987, Investment Company Survey (A. Wiesenbergcr & Co., New York).
</ref_section>
                                                      Table 1
                              Persistence in Market Model Residuals
                                      Quarterly Returns: 1974Q4- 198801




Joint test of zero autocorrelations
(Assessing persistence    based    on equation (5))

                                            Autocorrelations Uo To Lao 1K
                             K=1 K=2 K=3 K=4 K=5 K=6 K=7 IK=8
                              119         229         396       538    606      703       793        881
0kstatist,ca
p-value                       5%          3%          0%        0%     0%       0%        0%           0%



Joint test of zero partial autocorrelations
(Inference on approximate order of autoregression based on equation (6))

                                            Partial Autocorreiptign at Laa k
                             Ic=1        k=2 k=3 k=4 k5 k6 k=7 k8
                              119         90          153       120     74       71        77          66
qstatisticb
p-value                       5%          65%         0%        2%     95%      97%      91%         99%




        aThe Ok-statistic is                       where (i)k is the autocorrelation at lag k
in the market model residuals of fund i. It is asymptotically distributed X96K it the true autocorrela-
tions are zero.


          bThe q-statistic is fT        O)kk)• where (i)kk is the partial autocorrelation at lag k
in the market model residuals of fund i. It is asymptotically distributed      it the autoregressive
order is less than k.

Note: In the lower panel, the small values beyond lag 4 suggest that the market model residuals,
        and hence Jensen's a, may be approximated by a fourth-order autoregression.
                                           Table 2
                       Persistence Measures Between Estimated Alphas
                         and Betas for Different Sub-Period Lengths

Persistence in Alpha


Length of Estimation                      Regression Measure       Gamma Measure
Sub-Periods                               (1-statistic)            (probability]


One Year                                  0.30 (394)**              0.32 (0.001
Two Years                                 0.25 (3.29)"              0.24 10.00]
ThreeYears                                0.22 (2.11)*              0.17 (0.061
Four Years                               -0.00 (-0.01)              0.10 (0.23]
Sample Halves                            -013 (-1.16)              -0.03 (0.57]


Persistence in Beta


Length of Estimation                     Regression Measure        Gamma Measure
Sub-Periods                              (1-statistic)             (probability]


One Year                                  0.40 (5.89)"             0.40 [0.00]
Two Years                                 0.54 (5.66)"             0.45 [0.00]
Three Years                               0.56 (6.64)"             0.54 10.00]
Four Years                                0.52 (5.46)**            0.50 (0.00]
Sample Halves                             0.39 (4.86)"             0.45 [0,001


        * = p-value is below 0.05.      = p-value is below 0.01.


Notes: Time-series regression 1-statistics are in parentheses.
       The p-values for the gamma measures are in parantheses.
       The regression coefficients and their associated 1-statistics are estimated using the time-series
       technique described in section 11.4.2; the gamma statistic is also discussed in the same
       section.
                                                  Table 3
                          Persistence Measures for Atphas and Betas for
                          Varying Intervals, One-Year Estimation Periods


Persistence in Alpha


                                           Regression Measure         Gamma Measure
Interval                                   (t-statistiC)              [probability]


Zero Years                                 0.30 (394)**               0.32 [0.00]
Oneyear                                    0.18 (3.17)**              0.11 [0.03]
TwoYears                                   006 (0.82)                 0.11 [0.03]
Three Years                                -0.04 (-0.49)              -0.02 [0.64]
Four Years                                 -0.07 (-1.23)              -0.13 (0.97)



Persistence in Beta


                                           Regression Measure         Gamma Measure
Interval                                   (t-statistic)              [probability]


Zero Years                                 0.40 (5.89)"                0.40 [0.001
OneYear                                    0.28 (4.19)**               0.28 [0.00]
Two Years                                  0.16 (2.48)*                0.35 (0.001
Three Years                                0.23 (4.80)"                0.32 [0.00)
Four Years                                 0.26 (5.66)**               0.28 [0.00]


           * = p-value is below 0.05.   ** = p-value is below 0.01.


Notes: Time-series regression t-statistics are in parentheses.
       The p-values for the gamma measures are in brackets.
       The regression coefficients and their associated t-statistics are estimated using the time-series
       technique described in section 11.4.2; the gamma statistic is also discussed in the same
       section.
                                                     Table 4

       Performance Results of Portfolios Formed on the Basis of Past Performance
                                  Quarterly Sample PerIod: 197801 - 1987Q4


                                                                             Jensen's Alpha (%)
                                                                                Benchmarks
                                                                   S&P 500                         EWMF'
                          Mean        Sharpe's
      Strategyb           Return      Measurec             Value       t-statlstic          Value      t-statistic

  Benchmarks
  S&P 500                  1.76          0.20               —
                                                            —
                                                              —                              —
                                                                                             ——
  EWMF                     1.73          0.18

  Variable Holding and Evaluation Periods, Top Fund Included
  1E IH                 2.93          0.19             0.55              0.35               0.70          0.49
  2E 2H                 2.28          0.16             0.09              0.06               0.28          0.21
  4E 4H                    4.38          0.37*              2.60         2.16               2.64          2.63
  8E 8K                    2.83          0.19               0.45         0.34               0.54          0.53
  12E 12H                  3,75         0.26                1.34         1.09               1.44           1.54


  Variable Holding Period, Annual Evaluation Period, Top Fund Included
  4E IH                  2.89        0.25               0.75        1.01                    0.89          2.00
  4E 2K                  1.64        0.13              -0.17       -0.12                   -0.05         -0.04
  4E 3K                  2.96        0.22               0.82        0.66                    0.91          0.89
  4E 4H                  4.38        0.37*              2.60        2.16                    2.64          2.63*

 Annual Holding Period, Annual Evaluation Period. Number of Funds Included Varies
 4E 4H 1 Fund           4.38        0.37*            2.60        2.16*            2.64                    2.63
 4E 4K 2 Funds          3.87        0.33*            1.98        1.87             2.05                    2,45
 4E 4K 5 Funds          3.55        0.30*            1.52        1.68             1.61                    2.5
 4E 4K 10 Funds         3.24        0.29**           1.20        1.62             1.32                    2.86**


        * p-value is below 5%;           ** p-value is below 1%.

        'EWMF Is the equally-weighted portfolio of all mutual funds In our sample.

       blhe notation mE nH indicates an rn-quarter evaluation period and an n-quarter holding period. For
example, 4E 2K IndIcates a portfolio for which the fund selections are based on an evaluation Interval of the
most recent 4 quarters and the selections are updated every 2 quarters.

        CSharpes measure is the mean of the quarterly returns divided by the standard deviation of the quarterly
returns. For each of the Sharpe's measures, a 2-statistic was calculated to test the significance of the difference
in Sharpes measure between the strategy and the EWMF. Significance of the z-statlstlc Is Indicated by
asterisks.
                                                     Table 5
        Performance of Portfolios of Worst Fund Versus Portoflios of Best Fund
                 Annual Holding Period, Annual Evaluation Period. Best or. Worst Fund


                                                                            Jensen's Alpha (%)
                                                                               Benchmarks
                                                               S.&P   500                          EWMF'
                          Mean       Sharpe's
  4E 4H Strategyb        Returnc Measured                 Value       t-statlstic         Value       f-statistic


 Sample Period: 197601 - 198704
 Worst Fund              -0.55         .0.05**            -2.26         2.15*             -2.51         -2.76"
 Worst (corrected)'      -0.55         •0.05**            -0.76         -1.12             -1.76         .2.19*
 Best Fund                4.78          0.40               3.10          2.67*             2.77            2.88**
 Best (corrected)'        4.78          0.40*              2.56          2.56              2.63            2.99"
 Best - Worst             5.33          0.52     .         5.36          355**             5.28            349**

 Sample Period: 1976Q1 - 198104
 Worst Fund           1.49      0.21                       0.99          1.19              -0.12        -0.15
 Best Fund           6.38       0.44*                      5.35          3.40               2.82         2.38
 Best - Worst        4.88       0.47                       4.35          2.62*              2.94           1.91


 Sample Period: 198201 - 198704
 Worst Fund               -2.60        0.17**             -5.83         .3.48*             .443         -316
 Best Fund                 3.18         0.33               1.16          1.05              2.09            1.96
 Best - Worst              5.78         0.53               6.99          3.42**            6.51            337**

        * p-value is below 5%;              p-value is below 1%.

        'EWMF is the equally-weighted portfolio of all mutual funds in our sample.

       bThe notatIon mE nH Indicates an rn-quarter evaluation period and an n-quarter holding period. For
example, 4E 2H indicates a portfolio for which the fund selections are based on an evaluation interval of the
most recent 4 quarters and the selections are updated every 2 quarters.

        °The mean returns over the whole sample for the S,&P 500 and the EWMF were 1.58 and 1.88,
respectively. For the first half, these mean returns were 0.59 and 2.30, respectIvely; and for the second half.
2.56 and 1.46.

         dSharpes measure Is the mean of the quarterly returns divided by the standard deviation of the quarterly
returns. The Sharpe's measures over the whole sample period for the S&P 500 and the EWMF were 0.19 and
0.20, respectively (First half: 0.09 and 0.27, Second half: 0.26 and 0.14). For each of the Sharpe's measures,
a z-statistic was calculated to test the significance of the difference in Sharpes measure between the strategy
and the EWMF. Significance of the z-statlstlc Is indicated by asterisks.

        •The corrected estimates take Into account fundspeclf Ic heteroscedasticit'y. Since the best and worst
fund portfolios are constructed from one fund each year, the residual variance of the portfolios for that year will
be proportional to the residual variances of the funds which make up the portfolios in that year. The residual
variances for the IndMdual funds were calculated from the regressions of the fund returns on the benchmark
series over the entire series. The corrected estimates are then calculated via weighted least squares where the
weights for each year are proportional to the residual variances of the funds Included in the portfolios for that
year.
                                                 Table 6
                       Timing Versus Selectivity of Hot Hands Strategy




                                                                i
                                  Quarterly Returns: 1976Q1 - 1987Q4



                                                         Selected Perce ntiles ftpm 5000 Draws8
                                  4E4H result                            50%        Q.%     .




Meanexcessreturn(%)                    4.33            1.60      1.82      2.67     3.54        3.77

Sharpe's measure                       0.35            0.14      0.17      0.24     0.32        035

Jensen'salpha(%)                       2.45           -0.12      0.11      0.93      1.78       2.02



      aEach draw generates a portfolio that includes, each year, two funds randomly chosen from among
the 19 that appear in a 4E4H strategy that selected the best two funds based on Jensen's a. The prob-
ability of including a particular fund in any year is set equal to the funds relative frequency observed in
the 4E4H strategy.
                                               Table 7
        Performance of 4E4H Strategy Relative to Benchmark of PB Portfolios
                                 Quarterly Returns: 1976Q1 - 1984Q4




       Reference Benchmark                        Jensen's a                      sauareda
                                                                  (Null: a = 0)
Best Fund Selected
       8500b                                          3.37             2.35            0.56
       P8C(eightpoq.tfoIios)                          3.21             1.94            0.77


Best Two Funds Selected                                                       *
       SP500                                           2.38            2.12            0.72
       P8 (eight portfolios)                           2.97            2.27*           0.85


sp5ood (1975Q1 - 1984Q4)
      P8 (eight portfolios)                            0.06            0.21            0.98




    *pvaIue is below 5% **pvaIue is below 10%

     alhe 2 value is from the regression, which estimates Jensens a, of the strategy's returns on the
returns of the benchmark portfolio(s).

     bThe SP500 benchmark mimics the Standard & Poor's 500 index, with dividend reinvestment. The
results with SP500 in this table differ from table 5 because the selection criterion is Jensen's a rather
than net return. The conclusions are the same with either selection criterion.

     CThe P8 benchmark comprises eight portfolios chosen to account for anomalies related to firm size,
dividend yield, and past returns — see Grinblatt and Titman (1987).

    dThe results of SP500 versus P8 are only included to show that the SP500 benchmark is not
mispriced relative to P8.
                                                       Table Al
                                                 Basic Statistics
                                       Quarterly Returns from 1974:4 - 1988:1

Panel A: Summary Statistics on Benchmark Portfolios

Benchmark                                     Mean (%)                          Std. Dev. (%)

3-month Treasury Bills                        1.99                              0.70

Standard & Poors 500 (SP500)
    total returns                             418                               8.67
    excess return                             2.19                              8.80

Portfolio of all mutual funds (EWMF)
     total returns                            4.45                              9.60
     excess returns                           2.46                              9.74



Panel B: Market Model Estimates
     Regression: Rit - Rtt = + i(Rmt - R) + it benchmark portfolio, m, is SP500.


Ei.tn                                                                            1i!                     value)
                                                       (Null:=O)              (Null. = 1)
EWMF (Portfolio of all mutual funds)           0.12       0.34         1.07        1.74         42.60   (0 00)
ACORNFUND                                       1.48      2.16         1.08        1.07         18.76   (0.09)
AFLJTUREFUND                                   -0.42     -0.55         1.03        0.39         61.94   (0.00)
AMERICANINVESTORSFtJND                         -1.56     -1.40         1.34        2.73         22.10   (0.04)
BABSON GROWTH FUND                             -0.73     -2.48         1.03        0.79           9.97 (0.62)
BEACON HILL MUTUAL FUND                        -0.75     -1.81         0.86       -3.09         .35.84 (0.00)
BOSTONCO.CAP.APPREC.                           -0.17     -0.40         0.95       -1.13         20.01   (0.07)
BULL&BEARCAPGRQWTH                            -0.05      -0.08         1.24        3.16         22.19 (0.04)
BULL&BEAREQUITYINC.                            0.07       0.18        0.74       -5.61           7.09 (0.85)
CENTURYSHARESTRUST                             0.47       0.51        0.90       -0.98          13,64 (0.32)
CHARTERFUND                                    1.02       1.59        0.92       -1.11          32.36 (0.00)
COLUMBIAGROWTHFUND                              0.69      1.29         1.14       2.27          13.23 (0.35)
COMPANIONFUND                                  -0.17     -0.63         1.06        1.81         14.16 (0.29)
COMPOSITE FUND                                  0.08      0.14        0.82       -2.80          14.97 (0.24)
CONCORDFUND                                     0.08      0.11        0.86       -1.65           5.60 (0.94)
CONSTELLATION GROWTH                            0.44      0.44        1.57        5.15          13.64 (0.32)
000GE&COXSTOcK                                  0.48      2.43        0.96       -1.82           9.44 (0.67)
DREYFUSTHIRDCENTIJRY                           0.79       1.03        0.97       -0.34          15.06 (0.19)
ELFUNTRUSTS                                    0.46       1.65        0.99       -0.19          15.63 (0.21)
ENERGYFUND                                     0.41       0.70        0.83       -2.58          16.74 (0.16)
                      .
EVERGREENFUND                                  2.30       2.71         1.24       2.55          26.63 (0.01)
                           TABLE Al ... continued

Panel (continued)

                                                                        Q.stpta(o.vpue)
                                     (Null: a0)            (Null: =1)
EXPLORERFUND                -1.14       -0.80       1.26      1.62       30.03 (0.00)
FIDELITYCONTRAFIJND         -0.07       -0.14       112        1.98       8.42 (0.75)
FIDELITY DESTINY             1.74        2.77       1.19      2.70        9.09 (0.69)
FIDELITY FUND                0.20        0.75       0.98      -0.79       8.34 (0.76)
FIDELITYTREND               -0.42       -0.97       1.14      2.83       11.02 (0.53)
FINANCIALDYNAMICSFUND        0.05        0.07       1.15       185       16.17 (0.18)
FINANCIAL INDUSTRY FUND      0.18        0.40       0.96      -0.69      38.05 (0.00)
FORTY-FOUR WALLSTFUND       -2.62       -1.20       1.97       4.00      53.54 (0.00)
FOUNDERSGROWTHFUND          -0.06       -0.12       1.03       0.46      22.41 (0.03)
FOUNDERSMUTUALFUND          -0.86       -2.58       1.04       1.00      11.50 (0.49)

FOUNDERS SPECIAL            -0.20       -0.22       1.03      0.25       12.26 (0.42)
GENERALSECURITIES            0.46        0.65       0.92      -1.04       3.73 (0.99)
GROWTHINDUSTRYSHARES         0.11        0.20       1.08       1,23      13.23 (0.35)
GUARDIANMUTUALFUND           0.81        2.14       0.94      -1.43      10.44 (0.58)
HARTWELLGROWTHFUND           0.89        0.96       1.29       2.83      12.69 (0.39)
HARTWELLLEVERAGEFUND         0.48        0.38       1.65       4.61      11.81   (0.46)
HORACE MANN GROWTH FUND     -0.55       -1.37       1.04       0.98      11.76 (0.47)
INDUSTRYFUNDOFAMERICA       -1.13       -0.93       1.19       1.39      29.72 (0.00)
IVYGROWTHFUND                0.45        1.10       0.86      -3.04      22.01   (0.04)
JANUS FUND                   0.68        0.86       0.90      -1.18      14.30 (0.28)

KEYSTONE INTL FUND            0.34       0.51       0.90      -1.40       6.71   (0.88)
KEYSTONEK-2                  -0.56      -1.43       1.03       0.73      31.38 (0.00)
KEYSTONE S-I                 -1.03      -2.95       1.03       0.67      13.14 (0.36)
KEYSTONE S-3                 -0.17      -0.29       1.23       3.64      31.21   (0.00)
KEYSTONE S-4                 -0.45      -0.53       1.50       5.36      25.23 (0.01)
LEHMAN INVESTORS FD INC       0.02       0.07       0.96      -1.15      14.26 (0.28)
LEXINGTON GROWTH FUND        0.07        0.09       1.25       3.00      27.09 (0.01)
LEXINGTON RESEARCH FUND      0.00        0.01       0.95      -1.02      19.57 (0.08)
LOOMIS-SAYLESCAP. DEV.        1.15       1.41       1.21       2.35      13.66 (0.32)
MANI-IATTANFUND              -0.07      -0.18       1.10       2.33      17.90 (0.12)

MATHERSFUND                   1.35       1.73       1.00      -0.03      11.71   (0.47)
MEESCI-IAERTCAP.ACCUM.       -0.52      -1.12       0.69      -6.06       4.55 (0.97)
MORGAN(W.L.)GROWTH            0.26       0.55       1.13       2.48      14,14 (0.29)
MUTUAL SHARES CORP.           2.12       3.47       0.73      -3.90       9.93 (0.62)
NATIONAL INDUSTRIES FUND     -0.67      -1.41       0.93      -1.32      49.74 (0.00)
NEUWIRTH FUND                -0.63      -0.84       1.24       2.88      10.12 (0.61)
NEWTONGAOWTHFUND             -0.41      -0.59       1.12       1.55      11.63 (0.47)
NICHOL.ASFUND                 1.67       2.51       0.99      -0.15      14.33 (0.28)
OMEGAFUND                    -0.17      -0.18       1.08       0.82      13.82 (0.31)
ONE HUNDRED FUND             -0.52       -0.54      0.95      -0.46       9.86 (0.63)
                                                TABLE Al ... contInued

Panel B (continued)


                                                                                                 psta.value)
                                                          (NulI:a=0)              (Null: $ 1)
ONE HUNDRED ONE FUND                              -0.29      -048          0.86      -2.07        14.39 (0.28)
PARTNERSFUND                                       1.27       2.98         0.71      -6.21         9.40 (0.67)
PENNSQUAREMUTUAL                                   0.16       0.45         0.98      -0.54        17.23 (0.14)
PENNSYLVANIAMUTUALFUND                             2.11       1.67         1.33       2.33         6.17 (0.91)
PINE STREET FUND                                  -0.21      -0.77         0.92      -2.52         8.08 (0.78)
PRICE(ROWE)GROWTHSTK.                             -0.87      -2.39         1.05       1.22        13.44 (0.34)
PRICE(ROWE)NEWERA                                  0.16       0.27         1.05       0.73        36.51    (0.00)
PRICE(ROWE)NEWHORIZ.                              -0.25      -0.34         1.29       3.53        28.61    (0.01)
RAINBOWFUND                                       -0.54      -0.62         0.89      -1,15         7.52 (0.82)
SAFECOEQL)ITYFUND                                  0.27       0.58         1.07       1.41        18.74 (0.10)
SAFECOGROWTHFUND                                   0.83       1.17         1.13       1.62        24.07 (0.02)
SCUDDERCOMMONSTOCK                                0.02        0.05         0.93      -1.84        16.13 (0.19)
SCUDDERDEVELOPMENTFUND                            0.70        0.66         1.30       2.56        14.13 (0.29)
SCUDDER INTERNATIONAL ED                           0.63       0.79         0.82      -2.01        11.02 (0.53)
SELECTEDSPECIALSHARES                             -0.72      -1.27         1.03       0.46         7.72 (0.81)
SEQUOIAFUND                                        2.40       2.66         0.77      -2.27        11.87 (0.46)
SHERMAN.DEANFUND                                  -0.70      -0.33         1.09       0.41        16.67 (0.16)
SMITH, BARNEY EQUITY                               0.14       0.31         0.92      -1.59        10,36 (0.58)
STATE FARM GROWTH FUND                             0.75       1.51         0.99      -0.22'       6012 (0.00)
STATE STREET INV. CORP.                           -0.01      -0.01         1.02       0.39        21.96 (0.04)
STEADMAN AMERICAN INDUS.                          -3.24      -4,21         0.98      -0.27        19.96 (0.07)
STEADMAN INVESTMENT                               -2.08      -3.21         0.85      -2.06         5.39 (0.94)
STEADMAN OCEANOGRAPHIC                            -3.24      -2.93         1.02       0.17        17.10 (0,15)
STEINR&FCAPITALOPPORTUNITY                        0.21        0.24         1.32      3.20         25.03 (0.01)
STEINR&FSTOCK                                    -0.59       -1.14         1.20      3.38         14.22 (029)
STRATTONGROWTHFUND                               -0.10       -0.16         1.10       1.44         6.10 (0.91)
TUDORFUND                                         0.81        1.07         1.17       2.00        10.31    (0.59)
TWENTIETHCENTURYGROWTH                            2.17        1.89         1.45       3.49        34.48 (0.00)
TWENTIETHCENTURYSELECT                            2.21        2.68         1.21       2.29        24.21    (0.02)
UNIFIED MUTUAL SNARES                            -0.18       -0.49         0.88      .2.95        10.96 (0.53)
USMMUTUALFDGROWTH                                 -1.01      -2.14         1.12       2.29         6.24 '(0.90)
VALUELINEFUND                                     0.55        0.63         1.13       1.37        16.78 (0.16)
VALUELINELEVER.GROWTH                              1.68       1.56         1.19       1.58        14.05 (0.30)
VALUELINESPECIALSITUATION                         0.02       0.02          1.40       3.23        30.28 (0.00)
WEINGARTENEQUITYFUND                               1.54       1.95         1.28       3.24        20.40 (0.06)
WINDSOR FUND                                       1.56       2.96         0.93      -1.28         7.33 (0.83)

     8The 0-statistic is based on the first twelve autocorrelations of the residuals from the market model regressio
see eqjation (4). Under the null hypothesis that the autocorrelations are zero, the Q.statistic is distributed asympt
cally x2 The p-value, i.e., the probability of the observed 0-statistic under the null hypothesis. is shown in
parantheses.
                                               Table A2
                              Joint Tests of Zero Jensen's Alpha
                                    Quarterly Returns: 1974Q4- 1988Q1



SUR Approach 2: Randomly select a subset of 40 funds horn 96 available funds and estimate full cross-
sectional residual covariance matrix. Repeat selection 100 times. Under the joint null hypothesis of zero
Jensen's alpha for each included fund, the 9-statistic has a 1% nominal significance level of 64.


                                             nn                          9
                                                        Percentiles from 100 Draws


                g-statistic                  231      274      580       1255     1874


 SUR Approach 3: Estimate a full covariance matrix for residuals of 96 funds. Under the joint null
hypothesis of zero ,Jensen's alpha for each included fund, the 9-statistic has a 1% nominal signtficance
level of 130.
      A Assume an average cross-correlation. (The average cross-correlation for the sample is 0.23.)

                                                        Assumed Cross-Correlation
                                                     + 0.23    Q.QQ     zQZ Q
                9-statiStic                  432      281       219       173      144

        Assume that the residual correlations are adequately represented by a five-factor model.

                g-statistic = 496



          Note: For StiR Approach 2, we also studied a modification to the 9-statistic that makes it
analogous to a F-statistic, which is usedto test restrictions on an equation-by-equation basis. We ad-
justed the degrees of freedom to account for the estimation of the covariance matrix. The F-type statistic
could have superior finite sample properties and a test based on it is more conservative than the one
based on the 9-statistic. Fortunately, in our case, the inferences stay unchanged: the values that we ob-
tain for the F-type statistic — not reported — have p-values below 0.1%.
                           Figure 1
      Mean Annual Returns Percentiles: Year t vs. Year t+1
   0
   0
 + 0
   0
 I-
 0 0
 a)
          0
 C
          0
 a>
1C 0
 a)
 0
 L 0
 a>
a-        0
 a)
 0 0
 a)
 > 0

       0
              0       10       20 30 40         50       60       70       80   90    100
                                     Percentile in Year t



                             Figure 2
          Decile Rank in Year t+1 for Best Fund in Year t




>'
U
C
a>

C-
a>
U-




      0
                  1        2     3     4    5        6        7        5    9    10
                                     Decile in Year t+1
