NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE SIMPLEST TEST OF
TARGET ZONE CREDIBILITY

Lars E.O. Svensson

Working Paper No. 339/i

NATIONAL B1JREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge MA 02138
June 1990

I have benefitted from a discussion with Gunnvald Gronvik, Norgea Bank who
gave me the idea to compute rate-of-return bands, I am also grateful from
comments from Bernard Dumas, John Hassler, Peter Scum, Ingrid Werner and,
in particular Mats Persson who gave me the idea to also plot expected future
exchange rates.
I thank John Hassler for expert research assistance, Molly
Akerlund for editorial and secretarial aaaistance and Svertges Riksbank and
the Finance Department of the Stockholm School of Economics for providing
data. Remaining errors and obscurities are my own. This paper is part of
NBER'a research program in lnternational Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NEER Working Paper #3394
June 1990

TilE SIMPLEST TEST OF TARGET ZONE CREDIBILITY

ARSYRACT

A credible target zone exchange rate regime with a given exchange rate band implies

bounds on the amount of depreciation and appreciation of the domestic currency. This
implies, for given foreign interest rates, bounds on the domestic-currency rate of return on

foreign investment: a rate-of-return band for each time to maturity. Whether domestic

interest rates are outside these rate-of-return bands can be used as a simple test of

exchange rate credibility, under the assumption of sufficient international capital
mobility. This test is applied to the Swedish target zone during February 1986—February
1990.

Under the additional assumption of uncovered interest rate parity, an equivalent test

is whether expected future exchange rates are outside the exchange rate band.

In

addition, the expected future exchange rates are used to give an estimate of the
probability of future devaluations.

Lars E.O. Svensson

Institute

for International
Economic Studies
3-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden
46-8-163070

1

1. Introduction

An exchange rate target zone with an explicit band for the exchange rate implies
bounds on the amount of depreciation and appreciation of the exchange rate, since the
exchange rate cannot move further than to the edges of the band. Given foreign interest

rates, these bounds on the amount of depreciation and appreciation imply bounds on
domestic currency rates of return to foreign investment. These rate-of-ret urn bounds
define a rate-of-return band around the foreign interest rates. The rate-of-return bands

are narrower for longer terms (times to maturity)) since the maximum amount of
appreciation and depreciation per unit term is decreasing in the term.

Suppose there is sufficiently free international capital mobility.

If the domestic

interest rate for some terms is outside the rate-of-return band for that term, and if capital
inflows are not large, the exchange rate regime cannot be completely credible within the

horizon given by the term. That is, investors must perceive a risk of a change in the
regime, for instance a devaluation, before maturity. For if the target zone was considered

completely credible there would be completely safe arbitrage, and huge capital flows
would arise.

Therefore, whether or not the domestic interest rates are within the rate-of-return
bands can be used as a very simple and most straightforward test of the credibility of a
target zone. If the interest rates are within the rate-of-return bands it does not necessarily

follow that the target zone is credible, but if the interest rates fall outside the band it
definitely follows that the target zone is not credible (if there is sufficient international
capital mobility and capital flows are not large).

Grenvik (1986) discussed rate-of-return bands (called "interest rate corridors") in a
study of the Norwegian forward foreign exchange market. He argued that they should be

interpreted as constraina on domestic monetary policy and domestic interest ratS. He

computed a 3-month rate-of-return band for Norway during the period 1983-85 and

2

showed that the Norwegian 3-month interest rate was above the rate-of-return band
during the end of 1984 and 1985. This fact was used to explain the large growth of the

Norwegian forward exchange market and increasing attempts to circumvent the
Norwegian capital controls.

Here we shall assume that there is sufficient capita! mobility between Sweden and the
rest of the world, and we shall consequently apply the rate-of-return bands as a simple test

of the credibility of the Swedish target zone. Separately, we also examine the volume of
capital flows.'

Under the additional assumption of uncovered interest rate parity expected future

exchange rates can be computed from current spot exchange rates and domestic and
foreign interest rates for different maturities. Whether or not the domestic interest rate

for the corresponding maturity is inside its rate-of-return band is then equivalent to
whether or not the expected future exchange rate at maturity is inside the exchange rate

band. Then target zone credibility can tested by examining whether the expected future
exchange rate is inside or outside the exchange rate band.2

Also under the assumption of uncovered interest rate parity, the lack of credibility of

the target zone can be quantified, in that the expected rate of depredation for different
terms, adjusted for the rate of depreciation consistent with a credible exchange rate band,

can be used as a measure of the expected rate of devalualion. Under additional
assumptions about the stochastic process of devaluations and the size of devaluations, the
perceived probability of devaluations per unit of time can be estimated.

Section 2 and 3 define rate-of-return bands, expected rates of depredation and
expected rates of devaluation. Section 4 examines data from the Swedish target zone
Swedish capital controls the last few years have enerally been considered very
ineffective, with many ways of circumventing them. The capital controls have been
gradually dismantled, in particular since January 1989, and since June 1989 they are for
I

all practical purposes abolished.
2

Mats Persson has in lecture notes independently examined the credibility of the

Swedish target zone by computing expected future exchange rates.

3

during the period February 1987 - April 1990 (the period is determined hy the availability
of interest rate data). Section 5 concludes. An appendix presents some technical details.

2. fle Rate-of-Return Hand

Let S, i, and f denote, respectively, the spot exchange rate in period t (in units of
domestic currency per unit of foreign currency), the domestic-currency interest rate in
period t for term-r loans in domestic currency, and the foreign-currency interest rate in
period t for term- r loans in foreign currency. (The "foreign currency" may he a particular

foreign currency, or a basket of several foreign currencies.) Let us measure the term r in

months, and let the interest rates be annualized effective interest rates. The annualized

effective domestic-currency ex post rate of return on a foreign currency investment in
period t of duration r, R, is then given by

= (1 + j*T)(5

(1)

7J5)12/T

- 1.

This expression can be understood as follows. Investing one unit of domestic currency

means investing 1/Se units of foreign currency. This invested in a r-month foreign
currency bond results in (1 + a7)n/12/St units of foreign currency after r months (recall

that

is the annualized effective interest rate). This is (1 + 1*T)T'l25

domestic currency, which equals (1 + R)Th12, where

/5 units of

is the annualized effective

domestic-currency rate of return. The result can be written as in (1).

Suppose the exchange rate is restricted to a band with lower and upper bounds S

(2)
The exchange rate band implies bounds on the amount of depredation and appreciation of

the domestic currency. This implies that the rates of return

band,

R R

will also be restricted to a

4

which we will call the rate-of-return band. The lower and upper bounds on the rates of
return are given by
(4a)

(1 + s1)(S/S1)l2IT -

1

(4b)

= (1 + *7)(3/S)12/T -

1.

and

The bounds are decreasing in the current exchange rate: A higher exchange rate means a
weaker domestic currency, which increases the scope for domestic currency appreciation.

This lowers the domestic currency rate of return on foreign investments and shifts down

the rate-of-return band. The width of the rate-of-return band is decreasing in the term:
A given relative change in the exchange rate during a longer time period implies a smaller

relative change per unit of time. Therefore the upper bound of the rate of return is
decreasing in the term, and the lower band is increasing.

Under a completely credible exchange rate regime, and with free capital mobility, the

domestic interest rate

must lie inside the rate-of-return band (3). For if the domestic

interest rate is outside the rate-of—return band there is completely safe arbitrage: If the

domestic interest rate is above (below) the rate-of-return band, an agent can borrow
(lend) abroad and lend (borrow) at home and make a safe profit. Such safe arbitrage
would not be compatible with an equilibrium in the world capital market.
Therefore, if indeed the domestic interest rate in some period and for some maturity is

outside the rate-of-return band (2), and if capital is sufficiently internationally mobile, the
exchange rate regime cannot be completely credible. That is, investors perceive a risk of a

change in the exchange rate regime, for instance a devaluation (a shift in the band).
Therefore, the simplest test of whether the exchange rate band is completely credible is to

check whether domestic interest rates are inside the rate-of-return band, in different
periods and for different maturities. This we shall do below, for the Swedish target zone.

5

3. Expected Exchange Rates and Expected Rates of Depredation

Let us now make the additional assumption of uncovered interest rate parity: that

the expected home currency depredation compensates for the interest rate differential
between home and foreign interest rates such that the expected rate of return on a homecurrency investment equals the expected rate of return on a foreign-currency investment.3

i

We can write uncovered interest rate parity on the form
(5)

r/12

+

where

8+ denotes the expected value in month t of the exchange rate to rule in

month t+r. Hence, from a particular month's exchange rate and domestic and foreign

interest rates for bonds with r months to maturity, we can compute the month's
expectation of the exchange rate T months later.

Whether the domestic interest rate in mouth is inside or outside the rate-of-return

band for a particular term of r months is then equivalent to whether the month's
expectation of the exchange rate in month t+r is inside or outside the exchange rate band.

Therefore, an alternative way to illustrate the credibility of a target zone is tocompute

the expected future exchange rates according to (5), and then examine whether the
expected future exchange rates are inside or outside the exchange rate band. This we
shall also do below, for the Swedish target zone.

Given expected future exchange rates computed by (5), we can compute expected
annualized rates of depreciation d from month t to month t-4-r according to
(6)

d;= Q51+7/st)l2/'T_ 1.
Replacing the expected exchange rate in (6) by the lower and upper bounds for the

exchange rate, S and 5 we get the minimum and maximum rates of depreciation
3

Svensson

(1990a) demonstrates that any foreign exchange risk premium in a relatively

narrow target zone should be small, also when there is devaluation risk. Therefore
uncovered interest rate parity should be a good approximation for narrow target zones.

6

compatible with a credible exchange rate band, 4

and

E.

By (5) the annualized

expected rates of depredation in (6) are of course just annualized interest rate differentials
and fulfill

+

dT=

-

1.

We shall also compute and discuss these expected rates of depredation. We shall see that
they need to be interpreted with some care:

More specifically, we make the additional assumption that devaluations are expected

to occur regularly over time with a probability A per unit of time. This implies that
devaluations are assumed to follow a so called Poisson stochastic process.4 Furthermore,
we assume that devaluations, if and when they occur, are expected to be of a given size g

(measured in percent). Then the expected rate of devaluation per unit time, d (measured

in percent per unit of time), is simply the product of the probability per unit time of a
devaluation and the size of a devaluation,

dAg.

(8)

Excess of the expected rate of depreciation over the maximum rate of depreciation
compatible with the target zone indicates a positive expected rate of devaluation. From

this expected rate of devaluation, assuming a given size of a devaluation, the
corresponding probability per unit of time of a devaluation can be computed.

4. Swedish Data

Sweden has a unilateral exchange rate target zone. An exchange rate index is defined

as the exchange rate between the Krona. and a currency basket consisting of the
trade-weighted currencies of Sweden's fifteen largest trade partners (with double weight

4

See

Svensson (1990a,b) for further details on a model of a target zone with

devaluations being a Poisson process.

7

for the dollar). The basket exchange rate is restricted to a band around a benchmark rate.
The benchmark rate has been fixed at 132 since the latest devaluation in September 1982.

The bandwidth was first kept secret at *2.25 percent around the benchmark. Tn June
1985 the bandwidth was reduced to *1.5 percent (between 130 and 134) and made publics

The data consists of monthly observations (last trading day of the month) for the
period February 1987 to April 1990 of the basket exchange rate, Krona interest rates for

Swedish Treasury Bills and government bonds of terms 1, 3, 6, 12 and 60 months,
corresponding Euro interest rates and, for 60 months to maturity, national bond interest
rates, for most of the currencies in the basket. Long term interest rates for some basket
currencies are not easily available for the period before February 1987.

4.1 Rate-of-Return Bands

Using the weights of the currency basket, foreign basket interest rates have been

computed. Then the lower and upper bounds of the Krona rates of return on foreign
basket investment have been computed according to (4), for each month and for the
different maturities.

The resulting rate-of-return bands' dependence on the exchange rate is illustrated in
Figure .1.

The bottom solid curve shows the basket exchange rates percentage

deviation, e, from the benchmark rate [e = 100(S - 132)/132 percent] during the period
February 1987-April 1990.6 That is, in Figure 1 the benchmark rate is at 0 percent, and
the exchange rate band is between plus and minus 1.5 percent, shown as dashed horizontal

lines. (Positive values indicate a weak Krona.) The months are numbered consecutively
so that the first observation, February 1987, is month number 2. The two dashed curves
in the upper part of the Figure show the upper and lower bounds on the rate of return on
For details, see RingstrOm (1987).

Since (because of a labor market conflict in the banking industry) Swedish interest
rates are missing for month 37 (January 1990), all observations for that month are for
convenience set equal to an average between the observation for month 36 and 38. The
actual exchange rate for the last trading day of mOnth 37 was 132.2, 0.15 percent above
the benchmark value. The actual exchange rate in month 37 is plotted in Figure 7 below.

8

a 12 month foreign currency basket investment. The top solid curve shows the 12-month

basket interest rate. We see that when the exchange rate is near its benchmark rate, for
instance in month 12 (December 1987), the rate-of--return is about *1,5 percent around

the basket interest rate, since then the exchange rate can either appreciate or depreciate

1.5 percent. We also see that when the exchange rate is at the lower edge of its band
(when the Krona is strong), for instance in month 16 (April 1988), the rate-of-return band

shifts up and is between 0 and +3 percent relative to the basket interest rate, since then

the home currency can only depreciate. For a 60 month term, the width of the rate-ofreturn band will decrease to about a fifth, and for a 6 month term it will increase to about

double the width for a 12 month term ("about" rather than "exactly" because compound
rates of return are used).

Figure 2 shows the rate-of-return band (the top and bottom dashed curves) and the
basket interest rate (the bottom solid curve). Also shown is the 3-month Krona Treasury

Bill interest rate (the top solid curve). We see that the Krona interest rate is above the
basket interest rate, but that the Krona interest rate is well into the rate-of-return band.
From the 3-month interest rate we cannot here find any evidence of a devaluation risk.

This is also the case for the 1-month interest rate where the band is about three times
wider (not shown here)

Figure 3 shows the same variables for a 6 month term. Also here the Krona interest

rate is inside the rate-of-return band, except during months 36-38 (December 1989February 1990) when it reaches the upper edge of the band. Figure 4

shows

the same

variables for a 12 month term. Here we see that the Krona interest rate has been above
the band on several occasions, in months 10-13 (October 1987-January 1988), and since
month 35 (November 1989). Hence we find evidence that on these occasions there was a
perceived risk of a devaluation within 12 months.

Figure 5 shows the same variables for 5 year bonds. Here we find evidence of a

perceived devaluation risk throughout the period. The Krona interest rate was least

9

above the rate-of-return band in month 25 (January 1989). We note the dramatic rise
away from the band since month 33 (September 1989)."

4.2 Capital Flows
The reasoning above is under the assu.mption of free international capital mobility, if
the domestic interest rate happens to move outside the rate-of-return band for some term,

large capital flows would immediately push the domestic interest rate inside the rate-of-

return band, if the target zone is credible. if no big capital flows arise, in spite of the
domestic interest rate being outside the rate-of-return band, this is evidence of a lack of
credibility of the target zone.

Let us therefore check whether any large capital flows have been observed during
periods when Krona interest rates have been outside their rate-of-return bands, Let us
more specifically examine the amount of foreign exchange intervention done by Sveriges

Riksbank. Figure 6 shows monthly foreign exchange interventions (in billion Kronor)

during the period February 1987-April 1990. Positive values denote foreign exchange
inflows (purchases of foreign exchange). The Riksban.k reports weekly and monthly net
changes in foreign exchange reserves. These net changes in foreign exchange reserves , less

government net foreign borrowing, we call reported foreign exchange interventions. They

are plotted for each month in Figure 6 as small triangles. These reported interventions do
not, however, include changes in the Riksbank's positions in the forward foreign exchange

market. (These positions are not included in the official definition of foreign exchange

reserves, although they should of course be included in an economically meaningful
definition of foreign exchange reserves.)

Changes in the forward foreign exchange

positions are reported separately, in Sver'iges Riksbank Quarterly Review, with a three
month lag. When these changes are added to the reported interventions, we get the total
The rate-of-return band (4a) and (4b) for the 60 month term presumes, if interest
payments are yearly, that the exchange rate depredates/appreciates gradually to the edge
of the band in 5 years. Alternatively, we can assume that the exchange rate moves to the
edge of the exchange rate band already in one year. This assumption causes a slightly
wider rate-of-return band than the one given by (4a) and (4b). See appendix for details.
7

10

foreign exchange interventions, plotted as small circles with a connecting line.

Let us compare the total interventions in Figure 6 to the 12-month interest rate in

Figure 4. The 12-month interest rate is outside its rate-of-return band from the end of
month 10 (October 1987) to the end of month 13 (January 1988). During these months
we do not see any large foreign exchange inflows in Figure 6; on the contrary we see some

outflows, Hence we may conclude that this was indeed a period with a lack of credibility

of the target zone on a 12 month horizon. We also see no large inflows in month 20
(August 1988) and month 22 (October 1988), when the interest rate is at the edge of its

rate-of-return band. The 12-month interest rate again moves outside its rate-of-return
band from the end of month 35 (November 1989) in which month we see a large foreign
exchange outflow, indicating a definite lack of credibility of the target zone. Total capital

flows are small in months 36-38 (December 1989-February 1990), although previously
reported foreign exchange flows are positive. This does not contradict a continuing lack of

credibility of the target zone. (At the time of writing this, in June 1990, changes in the
R.iksbanks forward foreign exchange positions have not been released for later months.)

4.3 Expected Exchange Rates

The expected exchange rate index is computed according to (5) and plotted as a
function of the calendar month t and the horizon month r in Figure 7. (The exchange rate

index is measured in absolute units, rather than in percentage deviation from the
benchmark value as in Figure 1.) The spot exchange rate is plotted for a zero horizon and

can be read off the front edge of the box (the bottom of the box corresponds to an
exchange rate index of 130, the lower edge of the exchange rate band).5 For each calendar

month, the expected future exchange rate is plotted parallel to the left edge of the box,
towards the back edge of the box which corresponds to a 60 month horizon ahead of the
calendar month.

5

The actual exchange Tate in month 37 (January 1990) is plotted (cL footnote 6

above.)

-

11

We see in Figure 7 that the expected exchange rate 60 months ahead was the lowest

(the expected future value of the Krona the highest) in month 25 (January 1989). The
highest expected future exchange rate (lowest expected future value of the Krona) was in
month 38 (February 1990). This is also illustrated in Figure 8, which shows the spot and

expected future exchange rate plotted against the horizon, for both January 1989 (circles)
and February 1990 (squares). (The horizontal line for the currency index at 134 shows the
upper edge of the exchange rate hand.)

In January 1989, the expected exchange rate 12 months ahead was well inside the
band. The expected exchange rate 60 months ahead was outside the hand, at 141.5, which
corresponds to an expected depreciation of about 7 percent.

The situation in February 1990 was different. The expected exchange rate only 6
months ahead was at the edge of the band, the expected exchange rate 12 months ahead
was well outside the band, and the expected exchange rate 60 months ahead was at 159.5,
which corresponds to an expected depreciation of about 21 percent.

4.4 Expected Rates of Depredation

in Figure 9 we have plotted the expected annualized rate of depreciation 4°,

using

each month's expectation of the exchange rate 60 months later. We have also plotted the

minimum and maximum rates of depreciation consistent with a credible exchange rate

band, d60 and 40. (These variables are of course by (7) nothing but the annualized
interest rate differential between the 60-month Krona interest rate and the 60-month
basket interest rate, and the maximum and minimum 60-month rates of return less the
60-month basket interest rate, ci Figure 5.)

We see that the expected rate of depreciation reached a minimum, 1.6 percent, in
month 25 (January 1989). From month 33 (September 1989) it rose to the highest level
during the whole period, 4 percent, in months 38 and 39 (February and March 1990).

The excess of the expected rate of depredation over the expected rate of depreciation

within the band can be interpreted as the expected rate of devaluation. What is the

12

expected rate of depredation within the band? We know that the expected rate of
depredation within the band is bounded by the minimum and maximum rates of
depreciation. if the unconditional probability distribution of future exchange rates is
symmetric, the expected depredation within the band is for sufficiently long horizons

given by depreciation to the middle of the band. This would correspond to the rate of
depreciation given by the middle of the band between d° and a6° in Figure 9. Since the

band is narrow anyhow, let us simplify by setting the expected depredation within the
band equal to zero, and hence identify the expected rate of depreciation in Figure 9 with
the expected rate of devaluation.9

If we then assume that devaluations are expected to occur regularly over time
according to a Poisson process, we know from (8) that the expected rate of devaluation is

equal to the product of the probability per unit of time of a devaluation and the size of a

devaluation. Suppose for simplicity that a devaluation, if it occurs, is expected to equal

10 percent. Then we can interpret an expected rate of depreciation of 1.6 percent in
Figure 9 in January 1989 as indicating expectations with a probability of devaluations of
16 percent per year (A = 40/p = 1.6/10), that is, an expected length of time to the next
devaluation of almost 6 years.'0 Similarly, when tbe expected rate of depreciation rose to 4

percent in February 1990, we can interpret this as indicating expectations with a
probability of devaluations of 40 percent per year, that is, an expected length of time to
the next devaluation of 2.5 years.

If we instead assume that a devaluation, if it occurs, is expected to be 20 percent
rather than 10 percent, the probabilities above are halved and the expected length of time
to the next devaluation is doubled.

°
Se Svensson (1990b) for a rigorous derivation of the expected depreciation within the
band for arbitrary horizons.
'° For a Poisson process with a probability A per unit of time, the expected length of
time to the next event is 1/A.

13

5. Condusion

In conclusion, we have applied very simple tests of credibility to the Swedish target
zone during February 1989 - April 1990, in a step-by-step fashion. First, under the

assumption of sufficient international capital mobility and with the help of a simple
arbitrage argument, we have tested target zone credibility by examining whether Krona
interest rates fall outside rate-of-return bands for different terms. As an additional check,
we have also examined the foreign exchange interventions at times when Xrona interest
rates have been outside their rate-of-return bands.

This simple test reveals that the Swedish target zone never had credibility within a
5 year horizon, and that it occasionally has lacked credibility within a 12 month horizon.

The loss in credibility in the Winter of 1989-90 is particularly evident. In that period
there is an indication of a perceived devaluation risk even within 6 months, since the
6-month Krona interest rate then reaches the edge of the 6-month rate-of-return band.
That the interest rates for shorter maturities than 6—months fall inside the bands does

not, of course, imply that the target zone is necessarily credible for short horizons. The
rate-of-return bands become very wide for short maturities. The probability of exchange

rate movements to the edges of the band may be rather small, so the expected
depreciation or appreciation in a short period for a credible band is much smaller.

Therefore, short term interest rates may be well inside the rate-of-return bands as
calculated here and stifi indicate devaluation risks. This is the case for the target zone
models originated by Kngman (1988), where structural assumptions allow an explicit

computation of the errcted depredation within a credible exchange rate band. in
Svensson (199Gb) such computations are used to specify interest rate bands for different

maturities that are much narrower than the simple rate-of-retu.rn bands calculated here.

The empirical results on the Swedish target zone in that paper for the period February
1986-October 1989 (hence, excluding the Winter 1989-90!) indicate statistically significant

14

(but small) devaluation risks for horizons down to 1 month. The first simple test used in

the present paper has, however, the attractive featu.re of relying on a minimum of
structural assumptions.

Second, under the additional assumption of uncovered interest rate parity, expected

future exchange rates have been computed. Then target zone credibility have been
ifiustrated in greater detail by plotting these expected future exchange rate in relation to

the exchange rate band. The assumption also allows the lack of credibility of the target
zone to be quanlified: Expected Krona depreciation for different terms in excess of the
maximum Krona depreciation compatible with the exchange rate band indicates expected

positive devaluation for those terms. The expected devaluation within a 60 month
horizon varies between 7 and 21 percent (the peak is observed in February 1990).

Third, by assuming that devaluations follow a Poisson process, the expected rate of
devaluation of the Krona can be interpreted as the product of the probability per unit of

time of a devaluation and the size of the devaluation. The expected rate of depredation
within a 60 month horizon has usually fluctuated between 1.6 and 3 percent. The peak is

4 percent in February 1990.

For a 10 percent devaluation, that corresponds to a

probability of devaluation of 40 percent per year, or an expected length of time to the
next devaluation of 2.5 years.

These very simple tests of target zone credibility seem able to convey a fair amount of

interesting information.

It should be worthwile to collect and compare similar

information for longer time periods and for other target zones, both multilateral target
zones like those in the Exchange Rate Mechanism within the European Monetary System
and unilateral ones like those in the Nordic countries other than Denmark.

Interest rates for times to maturity between 1 and 5 years would provide more

detailed information about expected future devaluations, for instance possible
non-linearity. Of special interest is the issue of how efficient and liquid the world capital
market is for debt instruments in different currencies for longer terms. For simplicity, we

15

have in this paper assumed that international investment for terms 1, 3, 6, 12 and 60
months is available in the important currencies in the Swedish currency basket. This
assumption is surely all right for terms up to 12 months, probably all right for 60 months,
but possibly doubtful for other terms above 12 months.

Appendix

For the 60-month interest rates, '60, let us assume that interest is paid yearly, in
months 1+12, 1+24, 1+36, 1+48 and 1+60. We then define the ex post rate of

eturn, RI°, as fulfilling the equation

=

(Al)

605 t+l2n1S1 +
L1 (1+R°)'
(l+R°j

Let us assume that the home currency appreciates (depreciates) gradually at an even

rate u.ntil the exchange rate reaches the edge in month 1+60. That is,
S(s/s)7il5, it = 1, 2, ..,5 (Sg+120

=

st(s/st)n/s it = 1, 2, .. 5). This still gives rise to

lower and upper bounds according to (4a) and (4b).

Suppose we define the lower (upper) bound on the rate of return under the alternative

assumption that the exchange rate appreciates (depreciates) to the lower (upper) edges of

the exchange rate band already in one year and then stays there. That is, 51+l2n =
it

1, 2,

5t+12n = 5, it =

1,

2, .., 5). Under this assumption the lower and upper

bounds for the rate of return fulfill

6O
(A2a)

(A2b)

-

1=

(l+Rr)'
1=

*60

+ (1+Rr)5] /S and

(1+R60)51

These expressions can be rewritten according to

+ ('+R?)] ss.

16

(ASa)

R
-

60 (+t)sI — 1 =
(l-i-R) -1
(i+R60)5S/ I

*60

—

(1-i-fl) -

—

and

*

1

These equations are easy to solve numerically.

The rate-of-return band arising from (A3a) and (A3b) is wider than the one resulting
from (4a) and (4b), although the difference is small and hardly visible in Figure 5.

References

Grenvik, Gunnvald (1986), "The Forward Foreign Exchange Market: Is the Growth of
Bank Lending a Result of a Large Demand for Kronor on the Forward Market — or the
Reverse?" (in Norwegian), Working Paper No. 1986/3, Norges Bank.

Krugman, Paul (1988), "Target Zones and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Working Paper
No. 2481, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Svensson, Lars B. 0., (1990a), "The Foreign Exchange Risk Premium in a Target Zone

with Devaluation Risk, Working Paper, Institute for International Economic Studies.
Svensson, tars B. 0., (1990b), "The Term Structure of Interest Rate Differentials in a
Target Zone: Theory and Swedish Data," Seminar Paper No. 466, Institute for
International Economic Studies.

Figure 1

-

//

—

\

N

3 6 9 12 5 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42

0

12 months1 Feb 87

Apr 90

month

Figure 2

N ''''
ci-

N:

_____________
/

o(N
I

.3 3 •*3 P3
—

1

I

1

'..

/

I

,'. / / \_.

.

I'.I

I

/

/

I

/
1

I

a

I
I

I,

/

I

/

/

g

-

'—"

I

/

I,

I

to

I

/__//
/
'i
_J

I

/

/

/

. I..i.iJj_A
I,,
0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42

3 months, Feb 87 — Apr 90

month

p12

Figure 3

6 R6 i6 P6
LU

/

t

/

I—
J%

0

i.6

—I

I/

03 6 9 2 15 8 21 24 27 30 33 36 3 42
6 months1 Feb 87 — Apr 9.0

month

Figure 4

12 R12 *12 p12
LU

i12

l2
.12

0

0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42
12 months1 Feb 87 — Apr 90
month
LU

Figure 6

Poregn exchange interventons
Co
(-I-)

03 69 1215182124273033363942
o Total

Reported

Feb 87 — Mar 90

month

Figure 7

icte

Expected

Feb 987

Apr 90

Figure 8

Expected exchcnge rate
cc

x
C
-'4-

> LU

C
L- LU

C

'4.
re)

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Horizon, months

Figure 9

d60, a60, d60

Li)

o -!_!_1.j,,1

I o 3 6 9 2 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42

60 months, Feb 87 — Apr 90

month

