                          HERR WORKING PAPERS SERIES




                                  SANCTIONS




                                Jonathan Eaton
                                 Maxim Engers




                            Working Paper No. 3399




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge MA 02138
                                   July 1990




We thank seminar participants at Tokyo, Robe, Nagoya. Hiroshima, Dnshisho,
Osaka, Kyoto, Keio, Tohoku, and Osaka Municipal Universities for useful
comments. This paper is part of NEER's research program in International
Studies, Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                           NBER Working Paper #3399
                                           July 1990



                                     SANCTIONS



                                     ABSTRACT




     Sanctions   are measures that one party (the     sender)   takes to influence the

actions of another (the target). Sanctions, or the threat of sanctions, have

been used, for example, by creditors to get a foreign sovereign to repay debt

or by one government to   influence the   human   rights, trade,   or foreign policies

of another government. Sanctions can harm the sender as well as the target.

The credibility of such sanctions is thus at issue. We examine, in a

game-theoretic framework, whether sanctions that harm both parties enable the

sender to extract concesaiona. We find that they can, and that their thrust

alone can suffice when they are contingent on the target's subsequent

behavior. Even when sanctions are not used in equilibrium, however, how much

compliance they can extract typically depend-s upon the coats that they would

impose on each party,




Jonathan Eaton                              Maxim Engers
Department of Economics                     Department of Economics
Rouss Wall                                  Rouss Hall
University of Virginia                      University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22901                   Charlottesville, VA 22901
I. Introduction



     Within    national   boundaries, laws and contracts allow parties to influence

each other's actions. A third party, the legal system, can punish those vho

break laws or breach contracts. In contrast, the interactions of sovereign

governments, or of parties under the jurisdictions of different sovereign

governments, typically lack third parties to enforce contracts and agreements.

Hence, parties to such contrscts or agreements must      themselves   be willing to

enforce them if they are to have any effect. Enforcement may then require

measures that affect the other party directly, without involving anyone else.

Economic sanctions, steps by a government that inflict harm on another

country, possibly at a cost to itself, are such measures.

     National governments have often used economic sanctions to affect

policies of other countries.' The United States government, for example, has

banned trade with Cuba and South Africa in response to policier of their

governments. U.S. trade law calls for trade restrictions against countries

found to engage in practices that damage U.S. industry or infringe upon U.S.

intellectual property. Finally, collecting repayment from debtor governments

may require that creditor countries threaten to curtail financial relations or

trade with debtor countries. In each of these circumstances, one national

government tries to affect the actions of another by threatening, or by

actually   tsking seesures that are likely     to han both countries.

     We    examine the potential for sanctions to elicit desired behavior from

     Oaoudi and Dajani (1983) and Hufbeuer at al. (1985) provide detailed case
studies of several historical situations  in which national governments have
used economic sanctions, successfully and otherwise, to pursue foreign policy
obj ectivea,
another party. We consider the interaction over time of two parties, called

the sender and the the target.2 The sender would like to affect the target's

actions. It has the power to harm the target, but at a cost to taef,

     We consider two types of actions that the sender aight wish to affect.

One is the target's ongoing choice of some action, such as the target's

debtservice payments, trade policies, pollution, or degree of protection of

intellectual property. Another is the target's once—and—for—all choice of an

irreversihle action, such as ceding territory, releaeing s hostage,

extraditing an accused criminal, or relinquishing power to a new government.

     We examine whether sanctions that are costly both to the sender and to

the target enable the sender to alter the behavior of the target.4 When they

can, we also consider whether the threat alone of such sanctions is enough, or

whether they must actually be used.

     The answers depend critically on the dynamics of the interaction between

the sender and target. One issue is whether sanctions are contingent on what

the target then does, or are purely spiteful in the sense of imposing a cost

independent of the target's subsequent actions. Sanctions, for example, si5'nt

be imposed or renewed only occasionally (as by a legislature), but enforced

continuously (as by an executive or judiciary). Legislation could then

instruct the executive or judiciary to lift sanctions as soon as the target




         are using the terminology of Hufbeuar et sl. (1985).
     3The relationship between sender and target resembles that between
principal and agent in contract theory. See, for example. toss (1973). Our
concern here is not with the nonobservability of the target's (egent's)
action, which has been the focus of this litarature, but with the sender's
(principal's) ebility to enforce a contract with the target (agent).
     4For example, the failure of the grain embargo imposed by the United
States against the Soviet Union sfter its invasion of Afghanistan is tommonly
attributed to the toss of export revenue it implied for U.S. farmers. See
Oauodi and Dajani (1983) or }Iufbauer et sI. (1985) for a discussion.
                                            -3-

perform.d   as   specified.   The Jackson Amendment linking moat favored nation
status   to free emigration is an example (See Oaoudi and Dajani, 1983).

     Another issue is whether, when setting its own policy, each party knows

the ocher's current policy. A repeated-gsme specification implies the

ccntrary. In the context in which economic sanctions are used, however,

parties seem to set policies       for   a period, owing   current policies   elsewhere,

but also knowing chat these policies may change later. interaction of this

sort can be captured by' assuming that parties alternate in setting policies.

     As a benchmark, we first suppose that the parties do set their policies

at the same time. The standard theory of repeated games then applies. As the

Folk Theorem implies, if the parties' relationship continues indefinitely then

many outcomes can be supported as subgasie perfect equilibria. But if stricter

equilibrium criteria are applied, the sender has no control over the target:

One criterion yielding this result is that the equilibrium be the limit of

finite horizon equilibria, what we tall a limit ecuilibrius.         Another    is that

it be Markov oerfect. This criterion specifies that each party's strategy

depend only on variables that directly affect the parties' current and future

payoffs, and not what might affect current and future payoffs only through the

response of the other party.5

     Our paper focuses primarily on limit and on Matkov perfett equilibria.

These provide a mucb     sharper   characterization of outcomes than subgame

perfection alone, and     we find them    to be of intrinsic interest: Many

situations may    in   fact involve only finite interaction, while Markov




     5See Maskin and Tirole (l988b) and Farrell and Maskin (1987). Any
equilibrium in which responses are payoff relevant is one equilibrium in a
specification in which payoff relevance is not imposed g        orion.
                                                                  if one party
does not respond to payoff irrelevant information then there is no gain to the
other of responding to such information.          -
perfection requires parties to use the subgaise perfect equilibrium strategies

that   are   informational!7 most parsimonious.

     In an alternating mov, framework, if sanctions are noncontingent then          it

raisins a (limit or Markov perfect) equilibrium for the sender to have no
power over the target. This is the only limit equilibrium. There are,

however, Markov perfect equilibria in which the sander can obtain concessions,

but it must ectually impose sanctions to do so.

       In contrast, oontingent sanctions can ensure the sender a degree of

control over the target's actions in a limit or Markov perfect equilibrium,

and the threat alone of sanctions suffices. If the sender seeks to influence

an ongoing policy of the target then, under general conditions, there is a

Markov perfect equilibrium in which the level of compliance depends upon the

costs of sanctions to both the sender and the rarget, and on each psrty's

patience. This can also be a limit equilibrium. In the only other possible

steady-state Markov perfect equilibrium, which is not a limit equilibrium, the

only outcome is for the target to concede to the maximum, i.e., to the point

at which conceding iscre would be worse for it than enduring sanctions and

conceding nothing. This can happen if and only if sanctions are not too

harmful to the target.

       We also find that contingent sanctions tan enable the sender to exact a

once-and-for-all concession from the target. The sender might or might not

actually     have to use   sanctions,

       In suary, the       costliness of sanctions to the sender need. not render
them ineffective, and sanctions can be effective even if, in equilibrium, they
are not actually used.


     This finding contrasts with Bulow and Rogoff's (1989, p. 168) result,
from a Rubinatein bargaining framework, that, if imposing sanctions on a
II, The Basic Framework



       More formally. we consider the interaction of two parties, the sender and

target, each of which controls the level, of a particular variable. The target

chooses the level a e A, A c R, of some activity that affects its own and the

senders utility in opposite directions, while the eender chooses a level

a E 0, S C   , of sanctions that affect both itself and the target adversely.
The per period utility of the sender is u5(a,s), which increases in a,

decteases in a, and is continuous in both variables while the target's

utility per period is uT(a,s), whi'ch decreases in a and a, and is continuous

in both.7 Hence the sender rsost prefers the target to choose the caximum

level of a while the target most prefers the minimum level. The per period

discount factor is       for the sender and S,, for the target, where 0      6, C 1

i —   S,T.
       with ongoing actions we usually let the target's choice set A be a

continuum, and set A —    toIl,   We treat irreversible actions as dichotonuus,

however and set A —    (0,1k
       Soae sanctions, such as the level of a punitive tariff, can be

continuously varied over some set S.     If so, we set S —   0,11.   Other

sanctions are more discrete, such as an embargo, boycott or a military attack.

Hence we also consider sanctions that are just on or off, and set S —        (0,1)
       The sender's highest possible per period utility level (bliss) is

therefore u5(I,0), achieved when the sender chooses the maximum value of a



debtor country is costly to credirora, then the "threat to seize shipments is
not credible and they will not be paid a peso in a perfect equilibrium."
       7'Increaaing" and "decreasing" are used in the strict sense throughout.
 (one) and no sanctions are in place. Bliss for he target is

attained when a is at its minimum value (zero) and no sanctions are in place.

l's normalize bliss for each party at one;          i.e. ,   we set:



                                   S
                                  u (10) — uT (0,0) — 1.



The sender's minimum individually rational utility level, the highest per

period utility it can achieve given the least advantageous, for the sender,

behavior of the target (i.e., setting a —         0),   is attained by setting sanctions

at zero, yielding u(0,O) .        The target's minimum individually rational utility

laval uT(Cl) ocrurs when sanctions are at their maximum level (one) and is

antained at a —   0.    We normalize each party's minimum individually rational

utility levels at zero; i.e., we set:



                                   S           T
                                  u (0,0) —   to (0,1) — 0.


     The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: In Sections III, IV, and

V the sender seeks to affect the target's ongoing performance, while in

Senriono VI and VII     it   tries to   make the target take an irreversible action.

In Sectiun ElI   the   sender and target siaulraneously choose o and a each

period. In the remaining sections they alternate in choosing. In Sections

III and IV sanctions are noncontingent, while elsewhere they are tontingent on

the target's eubeequenc performance.



III. Exacting Ongoing Performance: Simultaneous Moves



    Consider a situation in which the target thonses some level of action
each period, while the sender simultaneously decides what level of sanctions

to impose. Say that sanctions are nonconcingent.

       Any one-shot play of this game has, as a unique Nash equilibrium in

dominant strategies, the sender setting s — U and the target setting a — 0.

That is, the option cf imposing sanctions fails to give the sender any ability

to   affect   the target's choice.

       This   outcome remains the only Nash equilibrium outcome if the game is
finitely repeated. However, if       it is   repeated an   indefinite   number of
periods, then the relationship between the sender and target is an

infinitely-repeated game, for which there are many other subgane perfect

equilibrium outcomes.

       Figures Ia and lb depict the oct of possible per period utility levels of

the sender (on the horizontal axis) and target (on the vertical axis). Points

on   the   northeast frontier of this set represent Pareto-efficient outcomes.

       Figure Ia is drawn under the assumption that uTo..o) > 0, i.e., that

setting a —     I and suffering no penalty yields a per period utility above the
ainimum individually rational utility level (normalized at         zero): Sanctions
inflict    so such harm on the target that the target prefers to perform at any

feasible level and avoid sanctions rather than to suffer the penalty. Here

sanctions have overkill capacity.

      Figure lb is drawn under the opposite assumption: The target prefers to

suffer sanctions at their worst rather than to perform at the maximum feasible

level. Here sanctions have limited capacity. In this case we define a as the

action level at which the target's per period utility, with aanctiona at zero,

is at the minimum individually rational level, Le., uT(.o) —             0.
      The Folk Theorem (Fudenberg and .'laakin, 1986) assures that, for             —

sufficiently    close to 1, there exist aubgame perfect equilibria sustaining any
feasible outcome that strictly Pareto dominates the minimum individually

rational payoff pair. In the diagrams these outcoaes correspond to all

feasible points in the northeast quadrant.

     The outcome s — a — 0 (no performance and no penalization) is of course

still sustainable, but there are many ocher possibilities as well. For the

case illustrated in Figure ia, any Pareto-efficient outcome is sustainable,

including the outcome s — 0 and a — 1 (bliss for the sender), but inefficient

outcoaes in which some penalization occurs are also sustainable.

     In Figure lb the target's individual rationality constraint admits am

steady states only outcomes in which the level of complisnce is less than a.

In this case the cost of the penalty to the target limits the extent of

conpliance that the sender can exact in steady state.

     Note that, in the limit as 5 approachea one, the cost to the sender of

imposing sanctions does not affect the set of efficient euatainable outcomes.

The sender finds it worth incurring any finite cost for a finite number of

periods in order cc extract a higher level of compliance in perpetuity.'

     The case in which sanctions are contingent or actions or sanctions (or




      1For discount factors    —     sufficiently close to one and for N
                                  5T
sufficiently large, the following triggers strategies provide one way of
supporting compliance at an action level a* as a subgeme perfect outcome:
Consider first the following rule R for the sender: Set s —     I if the target
has set a c a* in any of the previous N periods. The strategy for the sender
is to set s — I   if a C a* in any of the previous N periods and if the sender
has always adhered to R previou.sly, and to set s — 0 otherwise, The strategy
for the target is to set a — a* if the sender has always adhered to R
previously and a     0 otherwise. For the overkill case (illustrated in
Figure Ia) a* can lie anywhere in [0,1]. For the case in which sanctions have
limited capacity (illustrated in Figure lb), e* cannot exceed       .
                                          -9,.


both) are dichotomous can be handled similarly.9

       In conclusion a wide range of possible (efficient and inefficient)

outcomes can be supported as subgame perfect equilibria in a repeated geme

with costly sanctions. However, the only limit or Karkov perfect equilibrium

repeats the outcome of a one-shot game,       with   actions and sanctions at zero,

Hence) the sender can extract a performance level above zero only if the

parties expect to interact indefinitely end condition their decisions on past

decisions     that no longer affect current or future payoffs.11


IV.    Exacting Ongoing Performance: Alternating 4oves with Ncncontingent

Sanctions



       So far   we have examined the efficacy of sanctions in a repeated game in
which the    parties choose simultaneously each pertod, without having observed

the other's current choice, Perhaps a more realistic assumption is that Party

1   sets   its choice   for a period of time (which may be very short), having
observed Party l's previous choice, which remains in affect for the moment,
Having     observed Us choice, which itself remains in effect for the moment, 2
cay subsequently respond by making       a different choice, After 2 responds, 1



     51f sanction-s are contingent, utilities at outcomes (0,0), (0,1) and (1,0)
are unaffected, as is the efficient frontier (along which s — 0). Hence the
act of efficient sustainable outcomes is unaffected.
     1f both are dichotomous then only the four extreme points in Figure ta or
lb are attainable in the one-shot game. Average or expected utility peira in
the convex hull of these points are attained by generating the four outcomes
with various possible frequencies: either as the realization of a random
process with a given distribution (I.e. by "correlated atrategies) or as a
periodic (but deterministic) function of time. In an average or expected
utility sense, then, the Folk Theorem epplias as above.
     "Farrell and Maskin'a (1987) requirement that equilibria be "weakly
renegotiation-proof" reduces the set of possible subgame petfect outcomes to
the shaded regions in Figurea la and lb. See Appendix A for an explanation.
                                       - 10   -




can make another choice, knowing how 2 responded to its previous choice, and

so on. Each time it chooses, each party takes the     entire   sequence of future

choices into account in deciding its best current choice.



An   Ajternsrthz   dove Framework

      This   type of interaction can be studied by assuming that the partiea

choose only in alternste periods, with only one party choosing in each period.

The outcome in any period is detenined hy one party's current choice and the

other patty's choice the previous period.u

      Applying this framework to our situation means that the sender chooses a

level of sanctions having observed the target's current performsnce level, but

knoving that the target can change this level before the sender can reset the

level of sanctions. Similarly, the target decides its action having observed

the current severity of sanctions, but realizing that the sender can reset the

level of sanctions before the target can respond.

      With the additional requirement that strategies be payoff relevant, each

party's strategy can be specified as a reaction function of its rival's

current choice. Hence, we specify the sender's strategy in setting the leve]I

of sanctions s as a function R5(e) cf the target's current action level a and

the target's strategy in setting a as a function at(s) of s, If mixed

strategies are used then R5(s) and aT(s) are rendom variables. Where there is

no ambiguity we use R5(a) and aT(s) to denote the support of these variables'

distrihutions.

      Markov perfection implies that the maximum discounted present value of



     mcyert and de Groot (1970), Maskin and Tirole (1987,l988a,1988b) Gertner
(1986), Davies (1987) and Eaton and Engers (1989,1990) have analyzed
duopoliscic onmpetition in a similar alternating-move framework. The
Rubinstein (1992) bargsining model also posits an alternating-move ftsmework.
                                                    - 11   -




current and future payoffs to the sender at the time it sets the sanction
level.    a depends only on the targets current action. Given J,                   this   value,

denoted V'5(a), can be obtained recursively by dynamic                   programming:


                V3(a) — sup           E(u2(a,s) +
                                                    s5uu[aT(s),sJ
                                                                     +




where E is the expectations operator. Equivalently, for the target, the

maximum     discounted present             value of current and future payoffs at       the   time it

sets     the action level a depends only on the                sander's current sanction level.

Given K2, this value, denoted VT(S), is similarly obtained:




                VT(s)     —    sup EuT(a,s) +       STuLa.R(afl + 4VT(aS(a)j.


         A Markov oerfecc enuilibrium is a             pair    of reaction functions K2 and RT

such     that, given aT, for each a in A, R5(a) attains V2(a) and, given B?,                    for
                  T                 T
each s in 5,     K. (a)    attatns V (a).



         Henceforth, we use the unqualified term                equilibrium"   to mean "Harkov

perfect equilibriums and refer to limit equilibria explicitly.




The    Imoossibilitv of        Ex,tctins Perfornence Efficient,Zr

         it is still true          that,    when sanctions are noncontingent. the pair of

strategies R2(a —          0       for all a and KT(a) — 0 for all a is an      equilibrium,     with

the    outcome a — a      —    0   every period:     If the sender will under no circumstances

impose sanctions in the future then the target has no reason to set a > 0 even

if sanctions     were for some reason currently in place. Similarly, if the
                                              12 -



 target   will under no circumstances set a >        0   in the future then sanctions

 impose only costs and no benefits to the sender.

       Furthermore, while this is the only limit equilibrium, there can be other

equilibria. But any outcome that these support will             not be   efficient: Ii the
target (at least occasionally) sets a >        0, then the sander must (at Least
occasionally)    set s >   0.   Hence the only equilibrium outcome in which

sanctions are never actually imposed is one in which the            target   never

performs. This result follows from:



Proposition 1:     If R5[RT(O)J —0 then RT(a) —0 for all a.



      The proof of this result, and ail our remaining ones, are in            Appendix B.


A Sanctions Cycle
      There   are, however, equilibria in which the target does sometimee make

concessions and in which the sender does sometimes actually impose sanctions,

Say, fcc example, that sanctions and actions are dichotomous (S —              CII   and
A —   (Cl))   and consider the following reactions:



                                 R3(C) — 1;    R3(l) —     C




                                      — 0;    RJ(l) .—    ii

These generate a cycle of length four periods over which all combinations of

actions and sanctions occur: High performance elicits the removal of

sanctions that in turn engenders low performance followed by the reimposition

of sanctions, etc.
                                          - 13   -




      These reactions are an equilibrium if, for instance,      4 a 1/2 and
4a    1/2 and if preferences are as in (1) below:



Exsrnole   1:


                               u5(a,s) — (l+a)(1-a/2)
                                                                             (1)

                              uT(a,s) -    (2-aXl-s/2).


     These utility functions have the property that, as a increases, the cost

of sanctions decreases to the    sender    and increases to the target. 13   If a is a
transfer of income, for exanple, since sanctions halve the utilities of both

parties, th.    more the target transfers, the acre costly are sanctions to the

sender, and the less costly are they to the target.                                -




V.   Exacting Ongoing Performance: Alternating Moves with Contingent Sanctions



     So far we have analyzed a repeated game and an alternating move game in

which sanctions ate not contingent on the target's level of performance. Two

results have emerged: First, in order to raise the target's action level

above zero in equilibrium, the sender must (at lease on occasion) endure the

cost of imposing senctions, Second, no perfonance and no sanctions in all

periods is always an equilibrium outcome, and it ia the only limit equilibrium




      '°For simplicity these utility functions (and their generalizations in
xanple 2 below) are not normalized. To normalize them, subtract 1 from each.
More generally to normalize any utility function subtract the minimum
individually rational utility, and then divide by the difference between
utility at bliss and the minimum individually rational utility.
                                        - 14   -




outcome.     We shall show, however, that these      results   do not hold when the

sender can impose sancttons that are contingent upon the target's performance.

      Suppose that sanctions are dichotomous (S —        (0,11)   while the action is

ccntinucus (A —    {0,lfl    In each period in     which the sender moves it specifisa
a threshold c. Sanctions will be experienced in the current period if and

only if the current action level is less than t. Similarly, they will be

experienced the subsequent period if and only if the target subsequently

chooses an action level below t.

     The possible decisions of the sender and target can each be classified

into two    categories:   When choosing its action level a, given the sender's

current threshold performance level t, the target may either arsileste by

setting a at or above t (thus averting sanctions in the current period), or

else .gjJ by choosing a below t (automatically triggering sanctions).

Similarly, observing the target's current action level a, the sender may

either condone this level by setting t at or below a (thus averting sanctions

in the current period) or else           it by setting t above a (thus inflicting

sanctions in the current period) ,    Matching by the sender is condoning by
cecting t — a, while matching by the target is acquiescing by setting a —

     in    this framework, a payoff—relevant strategy for the sender is a

reaction function A5 mapping each possible action level to a threshold while a

payoff relevant strategy for the target is a reaction function T mapping each

possible threshold to an action level.     To denote that sanctions are in effect

if and only if a is below t, let u(t,a) —      1 if a 'C t and s'(t.a) — U   if a     t,

As before, dynamic programming gives the value functions V3 and Vt of each

party if the reaction function of the other party is specified. Some

additional notation will prove useful. The expected discounted utility of the

sender, having set a threshold t the previous period, in a period in which the
                                             - 15


target choosas, is:



                       —   E(uS[at(t)q(taT(tfl]               +
                                                                  &3vS[Rt(t)fl.

Similarly, the expected discounted utility of the target having set an action

level a the previous period, in a period in which                  the    sender chooses, is:



                   wTca) —       E(uT[a,a(RS(a),a)] + 8V            [R (a)]l.



     The expeccad discounted value to the sender of currently choosing an

arbitrary threshold t, given the target's action level, a, is:



                       Z5(a,t) —      u5[a,r(t,e)]        +



and the expected discounted value to the target of currently choosing an

arbitrary action level a, given the          sender's     threshold t, is:




                       ZT(c,a) —      uT[a,r(t,s)I +


     Let   C(a) denote argmex      Z5(a,t)   end let CT(t) denote argieax ZT(a,t).
                             t                                        a
Then lt and 'r constitute an equilibrium if and               only       if:




            Va e (0,1], RS(a) c cSca and            Vt   G (0,l, Rt(t) C Ct(t).



If so:
                                                       - 16        -




                                — max    Z5(a,t)          and VT(c) — max       ZT(a.t).


 Z6(a.t) is increasing in a; hence                         is. Similarly, ZT(t,a) is nonincreasing
 in   t; hence
        We say that     a is   a steady state of              the equilibrium     if i   — aT     — P.5(a).

Proposition        2 states that if sanctions have limited capacity then there exists

an equilibrium that supports ,                  the   target's highest individually rational

action level, as its unique steady state.



Proposition 2: If 3 d 1 such that uT(a,o) —                            uT(Ol)   then, fot

sufficiently close to          one,    the following is an equilibrium:



                               R5(a) — a




                               at(t)    —
                                            t for     t   B            L' ()
                                            0 for     t   e   (a,a) u (a,l],



where a sattsttas u (al) +                      (al)      —   0.


        These reaction functions are              depicted in Figure 2.            The sendet always

sets     as a threshold, thus spurning all action levels below .
                                                                                             (&   must be

large enough to ensure that condoning at levels below a is no better.) A: or

below      the target is indifferent between acquiescing to ; and spurning to

zero, both of which dominate just meeting the threshold above a. Between a

and a this indifference is resolved by balking to zero but a                             itself is
matched.      At   thresholds   above           balking to zero is beat.

       Thus   the   action level at which the target is at its minimal individually
                                                 - 17   -




      rational    utility level if it is feasible, can be sustained s.s a steady state.

      We now show that under fairly general conditions there is just one           other
      equilibrium that supports a steady state, We characterize this equilibrium

      and show that it    supports   a band of steady states lying below a, whose width

      rends to zero as either patty's discount factor tends to one.

           We now impose the restrictions (i) that the cost of sanctions to the

      sender increase and (ii) that the cost of sanctions to the target               increase
      in the target's action level. That is, u3(a,O) -        u5(a,l)   everywhere increases
                  T         T
      in a while u (a,0) - u (al) nowhere increases in a.

           Under these restrictions we     use   five lemmata to prove two     theorems   that

      ensure the existence of, and completely characterize, equilibrium steady—state

      outcomes.

           Lemma 1 says that there is an action level g such that the sender
:1.




      condones all action levels above g and spurns all those below :



      Lemma 1: 3 such that Va < a, CS(a) > a and Va > a, C3(a) S          s.


           Laoima 2 says that the sender will never spurn to a threshold that it

      would spurn if the target performed at that level:



      Lemma 2: If b e C5(a) and b > a then C5(b) Sb.



           Lemma 3 states that, if there is a point n at which the target does not

      balk (Le. is "nice"), then the sender, when facing an action level of at

      least n, never sets a threshold that the target strictly prefers to o:
                                             -      -



Lemma 3: If RT(n)           n, a. an, and I E C(a) then vT(t)



        Lemma A    characterizes   arty point n at which neither balking nor spurning

occurs. Raising its action level above n leaves the target worse off as of

the following period (i) while lowering the threshold below n makes the

sender no betcar off as of the following period (iii). The larget will always

match at n (ii), and it is optimal for the sender to match at n (iv).

Finally, V1(n) and        W'(n) have the same values that they would if n were a
steady state (v and vi).



Lemma 4: Suppose that R9(n) S n and R'(n)               n.

(i)     If a> n, then W1() c T(n).

(ii) If t S n, then cT(t) s n. mus RT(n) — n-

(iii) If t < n, then W3(t) a W(n).
               S
(iv) nec (n).
(v)     V5(n) —    (n) —
(vi)    VT() — VT(n) —
                            J(n,O)/(l-51).

       Let     denote minla,l), the largest feasible action level that gives the

target at least its minimal individually rational payoff. Let B —                Etc   0,1]:

cTc.t) n (Dl) $        $, i.e.,   3 is the set of all thresholds t at which it is

optimal for the target to balk. If B is not empty let              —   inf   B while if B is

empty   let     — 1.



Lemma 5:      B is an interval and 01(t)     is   a constant for all t e B.



       If 3 is nonempty we define V —      VT(t) for all t e 3. We now state:
                                              - i_p   -




Theorem 1:      (i) If    g and there is a steady state then it            is at —    a.

(ii) If a 'C    t    then each a      (j,t)   is   a steady state and the following paira

of    inequalities   Sold with complementary slackness (i.e. at moat one in each

pair is strict)



                             utK,O)     (l&r)uTL ,l) + 61u(a,,                     2(a)
                                                                                   2(b)



                             u3L,O) a (l_63)uS(a,l) +      SsuS(t,O),              3(a)

                                                                                   3(b)


Theorem 2:      (i) There exists a solution to inequalities (2) and (3), which we

denote a* and t,       and   there exists an equilibriuz whoae set of steady states

is [a*, t*).     (ii) If, in addition, uS and uT are concave in a           then a* and t*

are   unique and the only possible bfarkov perfect steady—state outcomes are

[a*,t*J and, if sanctions have limited capacity,              .




       Figure   3 depicts equilibrium reaction functions that support steady

states [a*,t*].



Examole   2:
       To illustrate th. theorems, we generalize           Example 1 to allow for
differences     between the cost of sanctions to the sender and to the target and

a more general interaction between sanctions and             the   action level:
                                                    - 20      -




                                u5a,s)      —       a        S(F + C5a)
                                                                                                 (4)

                                uT(a,s)     —       -a - s(F          -
                                                                           C?),

where a e (01] arid a a 0,l}. Cur restrictions onu5 and T require that:



                     1 > Cs >         1 > C.             0. F3 > 0,         and FT > C,.         (3)




        In this example, a —
                                FT
                                      if
                                           FT
                                                s       1.    (If          > 1    we are in the overkill
                                                                      FT
case arid I —

       Conditions (2)     and (3)    take she following form (where, for convenience,

we    replate    by w —   :-&, the   width of the band of steady states)



                     +          S FT            (complementary with + s




                C3 + (l8) 23                    (compLerenta with a a 0)




       To find the range of steady states we solve:



                                                +                 —
                                                                      FT

and


                                                +                 —
                                                                      F3
                                                    (1-35)



for w and a     ro obtain the solution:
                                              - 2].


                                  57* —
                                          (&T)(CTFSSFT)
                                                      +


                                          aF -   F
                                     —
                                          aCT + CS




                                   a —



is   a measure of the sender's patience relative to the target's." If both

parties share a common discount factor S then a —         8. Restrictions (5) imply
that 7* > 0 and, if either 85 or 8T converges to 1, then w*iO, so that the set

of steady states converges to a point.

         Steady states may lie strictly between zero and one (Case I), a — 0

(bliss for the target) may be a steady state (Case II), and a —        I. (bliss for

the sender) may be a steady state (Case III).



         Case I:     If 0 < a* C a* + w* < , then the range of steady states other

than a when sanctions have limited capacity) is (a*,a*+w*J ,       where:


                                                 aF - F
                                          s*_         +




         '4As the time between choices tends to zero, a converges to T5' the
ratio of the target's continuous discount rate to the sender's. Since
     —   ei',      where a is the interval between choices, the result follows from

LEopital's Rule.
                                           - 22      -




which increases in FT snd a, and decreases in F3, T' and C3.25 Thus lowering
the cost of sanctions to the sender or increasing the sender's patience

relative to the targets raises the iow.r hound on steady—state performance

levels. Furthermore, as the lowest cost to the target of incurring sanctions,

   - G,•    or CT rises so does this bound. In this way the sender benefits from

being more patient than the target, and           from having   sanctions that are

relatively acre painful for the target.

        If the parties share a common discount factor that converges to tne then

the steady states converge to:



                                      Fr    - F3
                                            +
                                      Cr        Gg



If in addition, as in Zxsmple I. 33 —             — C and F5 —        - C (so that the
                                                                 FT
costs of sanctions are symmetric) then the steady states converge to 1/2.

Thus,    by the continuity of the expression for a*, if the two parties have
nearly    equal ccsts and patience, the outcome is nearly symmetric.



        Case II:   Zero can be supported as a steady state if and only if a* C
or, equivalantly, aF d F5. Thus if the target is sufficiently patient

relative to the sender, a steady—state performance level of sero can emerge:

Molding 6 constant belosi one, as          approaches one, a approaches C so that

the inequelity is eatisfied.

        If the parties have the same discount factor converging to one then the

condition is that Fr S          the highest possible cost of sanctions to the
                          F3:


     25The result for a    is
                           most readily seen by observing that functions of the
form (ax-e-b)/(cx+d) are monotonic in x (by the quotient rule), so we need only
compare the expressions when x is zero and when x is infinite.
                                                      2]



target is no greater than the lowest possible cost of sanctions to the sender.



       Case Ill: An action level of one can be supported as a steady state if

and only if F1 —      I,   so that        —   I.   or if T a 1 and a* + w-*     1. If the

sender is sufficiently patient relative to the target and sanctions have

overkill capacity, then the sender can exact a performance level of one:

Holding & constant below one, as 6 approaches one, a* approaches F1/01 > 1.

       If the parties have the same discount factor converging to one then

a* +   v*   t I reduces to FT -
                                     CT        F5 + C5:    The lowest possible cost of

sanctions to the target is no less than their highest possible cost to the

sender.                                   -




       In Example   1, C,1, — C5   — .5,       Ft —   1, and F5 — .5,    so that a — 1, and a

steady state at one can be supported, by Proposition 2. But if Ft is raised

slightly then the highest steady state that can be supported is less then one

(in fact, it is around one half if discount factors are similar). Thus

sanctions with overkill capacity can be Less effective than limited sancticns.

       To see why, consider behavior just below any maximum sustainable steady

scata a. If          is the unique steady state, sanctions cannot be too powerful

to deter balking at thresholds just below                  .   In   fact, the target must balk at

such thresholds if the sender is to spurn all action levels below .                      However,

in any equilibrium that supports a steady state less than a, sanctions sre so

powerful that, below am, acquiescing strictly dominates balking. The target's

compliance removes the sender's incentive to spurn action levels just below

a5     and such points become steady states as well, There is thus an

equilibrium determined by conditions (2) and (3) that supports a band of

steady-state action levels below .
                                     - 2A


      Example 2 illustrates that, if the sender can cormait itself, even for an

arbitrarily short while, to sanctions that are contingent on the subsequent

behavior of the target, then a considerable degree of rosipliance can be

enforced as parc of a Markov perfect equi].ibrium without sanctions actually

being suffered. If utility functions are as in Example 1, for S near one, the

sender will extract performance that is at least almost half the maximum

feasible level.

     We have found the general characterization of limit equilibria of an

alternating nave game with contingent sanctions to be intractable. With

utility functions as in Example 2, we have verified that an equilibrium

oharatter.zed by Theorem 2(i) tan be a limit equilibrium.15 We have also found

that the equilibrium of Proposition 2 is not a limit equilibrium.



VI. Exacting a Single Action: Continuous Sanctions



     5upose now chat the sender wanta the target to perform an irreversible

action, but continue to assume that sanctions are contingent, and that the

sender and target alternate in their decisions. Actions are dithotomsus,

(i.e., A —   (CU).   Once the target complies, setting a —   1, interaction
ceases. As long as the target balks, setting a —   0, however, the sender can
impose sanctions.




      '5More exactly we have laboriously verified that in Case I, if the target
is the last mover then reaction functions have a similar form to thoee in the
proof of Theorem 2(i). As the horizon lengthens, these converge pointwise to
the Markov perfect equilibrium reaction functions. As time moves backward the
intervals of zarthing contract coward the band of steady states supported by
the Markov perfect equilibrium. We conjecture that similar results hold for
Cases II and III.
                                                   - 25   -




         When the target complies, its present discounted utility from that point

H   on is normalized at -l and the senders is normalized at 1. If the target

    balks then the next period the sender may impose aanttions a: some level a,

    implying a current utility u5Cs) for itself and UT(S) for                   the   target, both of

    which decrease in s. We normalize ut(O) —                 ut)O) — 0.   Ftere we allow for a

    tontinuum of sanctions, so that S —            [0.1].
         The expected discounted utility of the sender in any period before the

    target has complied is then;



                      —              +
                                         ,r(s)85
                                                   + [l-ir(s)J(&5u5(s) +
                          m:xS(5)

    where c(s) is the probability of compliance next period given s.                     The expected

    discounted utility of the target in any period before it complies is;



                     Vt(s) — aaM 1,0T(5) +
                                           STEu (s ) +


    where s is the current sanctions level and s' the (possibly randoe) level

    chosen in the subsequent period if the target balks in the current period.

         We define three key sanction levels. The first, 5m, is such that the

    target is Just indifferent between complying and suffering 5m forever. It is

    defined by the condition uT(s5)/(l6T) —               -I.   To be einiaaltv effective,

    sanctions must   be at   least

        The second, 5h, is such that the target is Just indifferent between

    complying and suffering 5b currently and never again. I: is defined by the

    condition uT(ab) —    -I.   Obviously, if both exist,            h >   5m    To be brutally

    ffgJ,yg, sanctions must exceed
                                             - 26


       The third, s, is such that the sender is just indifferent between

imposing s currently if it ensures the target's compliance the next period,

and never inposing sanctions, ensuring permanent balking. It is defined by

the condition a3(5) +
                         53
                              —    0.   Sanctions above s are incredibly costly,

       There are tvo kinds of equilibria. If          < 5b          if s cs not

brutally effective, then it is an equilibrium for the sender never to iapose

sanctions and for the target to comply if and only if sanctions are brutal.

The outcone is permanent balking with no sanctions, If s C 5m, i.e., if

is not even minimally effective, then this is the only equilibrium outcome,

       If, hovever,               i.e., if     is minimally effective, then another

equilibrium is for the target to comply if and only if sanctions are at least

   and for the sender to impose sanctions at 3m, If the target moves first

and sanctions are initially not minimally effective then the outcome is

balking in the initial period, followed by the imposition (and suffering) of

sanctions at 5m in the next period, with compliance the period after that. If

   >      then this is the only equilibrium outcome. If 5m          5i b i.e., if
   is minimally, but not brutally effective, then both outcomes ate possible.

       All the above are also limit equilibria eccept that there is no

multiplicity in this last case: Only permanent balking can be the outcome ci

a limit equilibrium here.



VII. Exacting a Single Action: A Single Sanction



       If sanctions are dichotomous, eo that S —      (0,11,   then outcomes may be

much more coeplicated, and nastier for all: Sanctions may be experienced for

more than one period, and the target may delay complying for a while, but not
                                                 27



    necessarily forever. '

           In   accord with our earlier notation let u9(l) —
                                                                  -F5
                                                                        and uT(l) —



•   .Falkmnr Forever: rneffecrive or I.oc:ed.ifly        cpscin.fam     012.5


           If sanctions are not brutally effective (i.e. FT s 1)                then one
    equilibrium      is for the target always to balk and for the sender never to

    impose sanctions. If       sanctions   are not minimally effective (i.e. .         FT
                                                                                            C

    then it is the only equilibrium. It is also the only equilibrium if sanctions

    are incredibly costly (i.e., F5 >

           However, if sanctions are brutally effective but not incredibly costly

    then balking forever with no sanctiona csnnot be sn equilibrium outcome. The

    sender     can eventually get the target to comply, but how it         does so depends on

    whether or not sanctions can deter balking.



    Painful Corooli.snre: Nondeta.rrenr      isnctions
           A fourth key characteristic of sanctions is their          deterrence effect. If

    &TFT
           >   1-4   then senctions are detertint:    If the target is sure that balkic

    will   lead to such sanctions the next period, forcing it to coaply the period
    after that, then it prefers to comply now,        even if sanctions are not currently

    in   place. If     sanctiona are not deterrent or incredibly costly, but ore

    minimally     effective then, as with continuous sanctions, sn equilibrium is for
    the target to balk in the absence of sanctions and to comply in their
    presence, and for the sender always to impoae sanctions. The outcome is

         'TMatsuysma's (1990) analysis of a trade liberalization gsme between a
    government and a local firm, where the government wants the fin to become
    more efficient and the firm wants protection, and Fernandez and Glszer's
    (1990) analysis of strikes, are similar to the gsmes considered here. In
    either case, waiting and randomization can occur, and outcomes can be
    inefficient, even though information is perfect.
                                      -    -


initial   balking, followed by sanctions, followed by compliance. If, also,

sanctions are brutally effective then this is the only equilibrium outcome.



Mixed   Strstav   £pujflbria

     However, if sanctions are deterrent then the sender will not always

impose them: If it did, then the threat of sanctions two periods hence would

suffice to enforce compliance the next period, so there is no reason to impose

sanctions currently. If sanctiona are deterrent then the only possible

equilibria in which the target complies involve mixed strategies.

     If sanctions ere deterrent and not incredibly costly then an equilibrium

is for the sender to mposa sanctions randomly, and for the target to comply

if sanctions are in place, and to randomize between complying and balking in

their absence (i.e.. mixing at condoning). If, in addition, sanctions are

brutally effective, this is the only equilibrium.

     The outcome supported by this equilibrium is on. in which some delay is

expected before the target complies. It may comply without sanctions, or

sanctions may ce imposed in the period before compliance. Sanctions will not

last for acre than one period, however.

     In another equilibrium in which the sender randomizes, the target mixes

between balking and compliance when sanctions are in effect, and always balks

in their absence (i.e., mixing at sanctions). This can occur when sanctions

are minimally, but not brutally, effective and are not incredibly costly.



     Figure 4 illustrates the various possible outcomes as a function of the

cost of sanctions to the target Fr and the target's discount factor

assuming that sanctiona are not incredibly costly. Three ourves divide the

region of possible values into five parts. Above the hotizontal line FT — 1
                                                29 -



sanctions    are brutal while below the diagonal line FT —
                                                                    15T they    are nor even

minimally effective. Above the curve               —
                                                       16T
                                                             -   sanctions   are deterrent.

The diagram indicates the possible outcomes in each region.

     The Limit equilibria in the various cases are as follows: Below the

brutality boundary only balking forever can occur, while psiniul comoliance

remainsthe equilibrium outcome above the brutality boundary and below the

deterrence boundary. Above these two boundaries, the finite-horizon

equilibrium is for the sender to impose sanctions every 2i periods from the

period of the sender's last possible move, where i satisfies the conditions

thet F5 +
                            F3
                                 +
                                     4i"l,   and for the target to comply if sanctions

are in effect and otherwise to balk, except just before sanctions are
             -

scheduled.       The outcome is balking until the period before the first scheduled

sanctions, at which time ths target complies.

     Taking the appropriate limit gives i limit equilibria, indexed by the

time of the first scheduled sanctions. These equilibria are not Markov

perfect, however: Choices depend upon elapsed time, which is payoff

irrelevant. They are also not renegotiation proof: Whenever sanctions ars

mandated both sender and target prefer to delay them.



VtII. Conclusion



     We have considered the ability of sanctions to exact concessions in a

variety of circumstances. A conclusion ia that sanctions that are costly for

the sender to impose can be credible. A necessary condition to ensure their

success in exacting concessions, however, is that the harts caused by the

sanctions depend on the target's degree of compliance. Otherwise, sero

compliance is always a possible outcome. Sanctions that are purely spiteful
                                         - 30   -




(in -the   sense that   the harm that they do does   not   depend on the taget's
subsequent behavior) do not ensure compliance.

     We have limited ourselves to the interaction of only two parties. We

thus ignore the public-goods issues raised by having multiple senders (which

have undermined recent attempts to iaspose sanctions agsinsc the Feople's

Republic of China). We also ignore the issues that arise when distinct groups

within one country have diverse interests. ILS. farmers, for example, bore

the brunt of the U.S. grain embargo against the Soviet Union, while the

actions sought by the United States in Japan in recent negotiations under

"Super 301' were apparently welcosed by most Japanese consumers,

     We have also allowed sanctions to go only one way, If both parties can

take actions with external benefits and impose punishments then many more

possibilities emerge. Characterizations as tight as those in Theorem 2 are

thus unlikely.

     Our analysis has focused solely on situations of symmetric information.

Even in these, complisnce may be delayed, and outcomes can be inefficient in

that sanctions nay actually have to be used. Informaritnal asymmetries are

likely to increase the pursntial for delay and inefficisncy.

     Finally, the differences between the sisultaneous and alternating nove

equilibria denonatrste the critical importance of timing. A better

understanding of timing would emerge from a model with information lags as

wall as response lags: Each party learns the othet's choice only with delay,

and makes its own decision only with further delay, The alternating case

describes a situation with long response lags relative to information lags,

while the simultaneous case is more descriptive of the opposite. Modern

communications technology and political institutions suggest that the first

situation better describes the environment in which governments set policy.
                                                - 31   -




                                           REFERENCES




    Bulow, J, and K.     Rogoff (1989). "A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign

    Debt."   Journal, of    Political. Economy, 97: 155-178.




    Cyert,   R. and M. de Croot (1970), "Multiperiod Decision Models with

    Alternating Choice as a Solution to the Ouopoly Problem," Ouarterlv Journal

    of E,conomicz, 84: 410-429.



    Daoudi, MS. and MS. Dajani (1983), Economic Sanctions: Idoals and

    Exoerience. Routledge & Kegan.



    Davies. S. 31. (1987), "Dynamic     Price   Competition and the Theory of Contestable

    Markets," unpublished.



    Eaton, J.   and   31. Engers (1969), "Alternating Choice Duopoly," unpublished.



    Eaton, J, and N. Engers (l99D), "Interteeporal Price Competition."

    Econometrica, 58: 6)7-660.



    Farrell, 3. and     L   Maskin (1987), "Renegotiation in Repeated Games,'

    unpublished.



    Fernandez, K. and 3. Glazer (1980), "Striking for a Bargain between Two

a   Completely Informed Agents." Forthcoming, American Econoimic Review.
                                                - 32   -




Fudenberg 0, and S. Maskin (1986), "The Folk Theorem in Repeated Castes              with
Discounting and with Incomplete Information." Econometrica, 54: 533-554.



Cettuer, K. (1936), "Dynamic          Ducpoly   .iith Price Inertia," unpublished.



Hufbauer, C. C. J. 3. Schort and K. A Elliott (1985), Economic Sanctions

R&co.osidar.as5.   Washington D.C.: Institut, for International Economics.


Masicin E. and -I. Tirole (1987), "A Theory of Dynamic Oligopoly LII: Cournot

Competition." Eurooesn Economic Review, 31: 947-968.



Maskin E. and 3. Tirole (188e), "A Theory of Dynamic Oligopoly I: Overview

and Quantity Competition with Large Fixed Costs." Econometrica, 56: 549-569.


Maskin I. and 3. Tirole (1988b), "A Theory of Dynamic            Oligopoly II: Price
Coapetirion, Kinked Demand Curves, and Edgewcrth Cycles." Economettica, 56:

571-599.



Matsuyama, K. (1989), "Perfect Equilibria in a Trade Liberalization Came,"

American Economic ..Psyisw, 80: 480-492.



Ross, S. (1973), "The Economic Theory of Agency: The Principal's Problem."

American .Economic Raipia,      63:    134.139.




Rubinatein, A.     (1982),   "Perfect Equilibrium in a Rargsining Model."

EconometriCs, 50: 97-109.
                                            - 33   -




      APPENDIX A: DERIVATION OF RENEGOTIATION-PROOF PAYOFFS IN THE REPEATED

                                SIMULTANEOUS HOVE GAME




       Farrell and Msakin'a (1987) criterion that a subgaoe perfsct equilibrium
be    renegotiation-proof requires that the equilibrium have no subgames that

Pareto-dominate others. The justification is that, otherwise, when shout to

embark on a dominated subgame all players would benefit by agreeing to switch

strategies to the Pareto-preferred one, and what's to stop them from doing so?

       To determine what restrirtions this requirement imposes on a pure

strategy equilibrium, tonsider the beginning of the subgame of the game that

is worst   from the target's perspective. Let v5 and VT denote rhe average per
period payoffs from that period on to the sender and target respectively.

       Following Farrell and Haskin (1987) we          decompose the pair (vg.vr)          as:

                                               11       +
                                                                  cc
                          (v5,v1) —    (li)(vS.vT)          S(vSvT)


where vt is i's first-petiod expected payoff and                  is the average per-period

payoff for the remainder of the subgsme, which is itself another subgame,

Since VT is the lowest payoff of any subgame to the target, VT                     v,     and

since VT is a convex     combination   of     and 4.        4     vT
                                                                       N   v.   Since v
the   requirement that no subgame Pareto dominate any ocher implies that v
v5. Since v5 is a convex combination of v5 and v, 4                        v5
       However,   nothing can be worse for the target than ohooaing its dominant
strategy and finding itself again at the beginning of its worst subgame, i.e.,

                               VT 5 (1 flu (Os)         +   &VT
                                               T(0)


       The condition that        a     ipiies that




       These constraints on V3 and v restrict the set of possible payoffs to

lie within the shaded regions in Figures Ia and lb. (The parallel exercise

perforued fron the perspective of       the   sender iaposea no restrictions on     the
set   of   sustainable   subgame perfect payoffs.)

       The upper bound aon the steady-state performance level iraplied by the

condition that the epuiiibrium be renegotiation-proof is        thus   determined by

the two    conditicns:

                                      S —
                                     u (is) — u
                                                  5—
                                                  (a,O)

                                                                             (Al)
                                      I—
                                     u (at)
                                                 I—
                                              — u (Os).



      The following is a renegotiation proof equilibrium that in the         limit    as

Hi, can sustain a:



      Define the following modes:
                                            - 35    -




                          Regularmode;                  a—;, a—O
                          Punishment mode; a — 1, s — s

                          Zero mode:                    a —   0,   a —   0.


The equilibrium strategies call upon the parties to:                      (i) adhere to punishment

mode if, in any of the last N periods the target haa aet a C a if the game

was in regular mode or a C 1 if the game waa in punishment mode: (ii) adhere

to zero mode if the aender haa ever set a C s in punishment mode; (UI)
                                                    -
adhere to regular mode otherwiae.

     For   S sufficiently close to 1 and N sufficiently large, the equilibrium

is renegotiation-proof aa long as



                                    5
                                u       (l,a) > u       (a,0)



                                T
                               u (a,0) I' u (0,5),
                                                   T




which permit steady-state action levels a arbitrarily close to a.

     An increase in the cost of sanctions to the target raises a, while an

increase in their cost to the sender lowers a. Using Zxaniple 2 ci the text




                                    F/(F5 + Cs + FT).
                                         - 3d   -




                                  APPENDIX B; PROOFS




Proot oL Procosition I: Assume that R5(a) —           3 for all a '5    T(0)    R70) oust

consist of a single point. (If it included points a1 < a2, since both elicit

zero sanctions, and since         decreases in a, a1 would be a better response to

0 for the target than a2, so a2        RT(O).) So let a denote RT(0). For any

a < a, R5(a) must exceed C with positive probability. (Otherwise a would be a

better response to 0 than afor the target.)

      For all s,RT(s) '5 a with probability one. (For any choice a> aby the

target its current utility is lower, and the sanctions outcome no more

favora'ole than at a.)

      For the sender, then, setting s — 0 is better than setting s > 0 at any

action level a. (Setting s — 0 elicits the highest possible performance level

by the target at the least possible cost to the sender.) Hence R5(a) — 3 for

all a.

          But if the sender doss not impose sanctions under gy circuostanoes then

the target's only best response can be Ri(s) — 0 For alt s. 0



Proof of Propositton..2: By continuity a exists and, because uT is decreasing

in a, it is unique and lies between 0 sod ;.           Thus si   is   well defined.

      Verifying that a pair of reaction functiona K5 and                constitute an

equilibrium requires demonstrating that!            (I) if the sender adheres to        then

Ri   is   optimal for the target; and (ii) if the target adheres to R then K5 is

optimal for the sender, With dynamic progrsrweing, optimality csn be

denonstrated by verifying that: (i) if the sender adheres to K5, and the

target will adhere to Ri     in   the future, then RT(t) is oprirsal for the target
                                                     - 37    -




currently       at   any    feasible threshold t; and (ii) if the target adheres to BY,

and the sender will adhere to                      in the future, then a5(a) is optimal for the

sender currently at any feasible action level a.

        In principle one must consider all possihle actions as alternatives to

RT(t)       and all possible thresholds as alternatives to R5(a)                        However, since a5
        T
and R are piecewise nondecreasing, each term in the expression:



             Z5(s,t) —      E(u5a,c(t,a)J      +
                                                   S50 [RT(t)     ,C(t.RT(tfl] +   svS[RT(t,J

is   nondecreasing          in t   except,   possibly, at points of discontinuity in one of

the three terms, while each term in the expression:



              ZT(t,a) —      E(uT(au(t,a)J +                [a,o(R(a),a)1 +
                                                                                 4vT:aS(a)]}

is   decreasing in a except, possibly, at points of discontinuity in one of the

thtee terms. Hence it suffices to check that these points as well as 0 and

are not superior to the prescribed actions. Perfonoing this operation is

routine, and verifies the result. D



Proof of Lemma 1: We show that if spurning is optimal at some point a then

below a only spurning is optimal. If it is optimal for the sender to spurn a

then It > a,         such   that:




                 V5(a) —      u5(a,l) + 55W5(t)          u5(a,O) +
                                                                       S5WS(x)     Vx    a.



Consider the sender's response to any b C                    a.   The above inequality and he

condition that u5(a,0) -             u3(a,l)   strictly increases in a imply that:
                                                     - 38   -




                     — u5(bl)          +              >   u3(b,O) +
                                                                            65W(x)       x b. D




Proof   of Leiimip 1: Suppose noe. Then 3c > b such char c a CS(b)                              Hence:



               V5(a) —   u5(a,l)       +
                                           55W3(b)        Z5(a,c)       —   u(a,l)   +



and:


               V5(b) —   u5(b,l)   +
                                           55d(c)                   -       US(b,c) + £3W3(b)



The second ineualicy implies W3(c) > W5(b). which contradicts the                               first

Proof of Lemma 3:        For t   n         this   foLlows by monotonicicy. For c C n,               since


        u3(a3) + FgJS(t) —       Z3(at) — V5(a)             a Z3(a,n)             u5(aC) +


S          S
W (r) a V (n) and so



        EuS[RT(t),O] +
                            &5V3[RT(r)J)              W(t) a W3(n)            a u5(n,O) +


which   is only possible if 3b E RT(t) such that b a                         n.   Thus



                                   —   zT(t,b) — ZT(b)              a   vT(fl).
                                                    - 39    -




 En€f of Late         4;

 (1) T() a UT(fl,Q)                           > T(0) + 6rE(VTIRS(a)fl a jT() by Lemma 3,


 (ii)    T.Ye show that if a> n then a                  Cr(). That RT(n) —           ii then   foLLows

 imnediatoLy.     If       a   > n then, by (1) JT(a) <                  ,- and so



             ZT(ta) — uT(a,D) +                         c UCn,O +         — ZT(t,n)
                                           5tTa                   srwT(n)


(iii) By (ii), W5(t) a u3(n,O) +
                                                sEcvs[aT(t)] a un,ô +                     55V5(T1)
                                                                                                     C


(iv)     Since R5(n) an, 3t              05(n) fl [O,nj. But, by (iii),



              z5(n,n) — U5(U,O)           +              a u5(n,o) +                  —   V5(n)
                                              85W5(n)                    SsI5(t)


(v) By (ii) and (iv),



          75(n)   —
                      Z5(n,n)        — u5(n,O) +
                                                   55W5(n)
                                                                —
                                                                    u3(n,O)(1+55)
                                                                                      t



(vi)    By (ii)



        T() — ZT(n,n)           —   uT(no) + STW(n) — uT(n,O)(1+5T) +


                                                           — uT(n.O)(1s'fT) +


sinte   E(VT(RS(n)J — vTcn). by Lemma              3.   and because R5(n) dn. 0
                                                            - £Lo   -




Proof       of Leiejea   5:     If t1      C t2 then,       by nonotonicity, Vt(s1) a v"Rt2                       If

t1
      C B, Ba C t1 such             that




                   vT(t1)
                               —
                                   uT(a,1) +         iT(a)    —     zrta         a           a V1(t1).


Thus t2       eB    and VT(t2) —
                                           VT(i1),      o


Prool of Theorem 1.:                (i)     We first show that               —   I   is impossible if L a a-

Suppose that (a convergas to . — 1 from below. Thus the target never balks

at an. By condoning an fcrever the sender obtains u (a ,O)/(lg) which

converges cc l/(l-i). which excaeds the value of spurning to one,

               ÷ 6/(l-S) <                u5(l,l) +     5/(l-&)         C
                                                                            l/(l-6).       This contradicts

     — 1.     Thus ; C        1, and      so B is not empty.

        We can thus find a sequence of thresholds t l.a such that t
                                                                                                      n   a   B and the

sender does not spurn t .
                       n                       (If   a — 1, for each n choose t
                                                     —                          n
                                                                                             —
                                                                                                 a;
                                                                                                 —        if not,

choose tn > a.) Since tn is not spurned, the value to the target of

acquiescing to tn is at least UT(t,O)/(l.51). But                                    since   tn V B, che tar;et

is willing to balk. Hence V —                                  a uT(rn,c)/usT, and the limit gives
                                                      Vt(t)

                                                 v uTL,o)/.6T),


If there is a steady state at a, then, vT(a) —                                                        By Lemma 1,
                                                                            uT(a,o)/(l.ST).
ad j, so        that V a                   —
                                               uTCo)/(l.gT)             u(j,O)/(l-&) a V by the above

inequality.

        Hence a is the unique steady state and VTCB) —                               11,   By Lemma 2, balking to

a C   a provokes         spurning to t          aa.            Since s a B, balking yields

uT(a,j(l+5) + &V, which is maximized at a — C.                                       Hence the optimal balk is
                                                        - 41   -




to 0, implying that V — 0,                    and hence uT(B,O) —      0,   so that g —



(ii)        Each point n in the interval (at) satisfies the assumptions of Lena                                4.
Thus RT(n) —          n,    by (ii), and since VS is increasing on this interval, by (v)

            —   n, so that each point ri is a steady state, The inequalities 2(a) and
2(b) follow from the requirement that, at thresholds ttt, matching is at

leaat as good as balking to levels 4a (2(a)) and to zero forever (2(b)).

The inequality 3(a) follows from the requirement that, at levels aia,

spurning to thresholds                         is no better than marching.

        Turning to the complementary slackness conditions, we first show that, if

0      •,   v   —   VT(t)    —
                                  uTL,3)/(l5T).         Taking     a sequence of thresholds tntZ shows

that VS VTLt) S uTt,o)/(lsT), by monotonicity. st                                    ta     r >   a,   so



                              V —      V(t)      zT(t,t) a UT(t,0a+6T +           4v,

and,    taking the limit as tL, and combining the previous two inequalities



                                         V a uTL,D)/(l&r) a VT(t) a V



so that VT(t) —                                  — V.    Hence, at , the        target    is indifferent
                            uTL,o),(lsT
between balking and matching. We now show that the target never chooses an

action level above .

        The value of condoning any a at is Z5(e,t) —                        u(a.0)   + SW5(t).           But by

Lemma 4(v), 1J(t)                is    increasing on (gQ.          Hence C5(a) a so that choosing an

action level above ; yields the                    target   at most u'(t,O)(l+ST) 4               C V.      Thus
                                                                                           4V
            S   t for   all t.

        In particular,                CtL) s t, which implies that
                                                        - 42    -




                             — u5,O)      +                a u(;D)(l+s)            +



By Lemisa i(v), for all n 4 (at) ,.                                         — V5(n) a   V5()
                                                    u1(n,O)/(l-65)                               by
conttonicty. Taking the limit as ott                                 a u5L     C)/(l-S) which, combined

with the above inequality implies that v5L) — W5(r)                             —


        Va now establish the complementary slackness of 2(a) and 2(b) showing

that if ,      <   t   then 2(a) is an equality. It is not optimal for the target to

balk to a level above a because JT(a) is decreasing on (at), by Lemma 4(vi).

Balking to below a yields at most 5V (since the sender then spurns to a

threshold t        >    , because     V5(t)    is   increasing on (at), by Lemma 4(v)). If
t   < t then   V >     0,   so that           4 V. Hence the optimal balk must be to

itself.

        Since a < ,         aT)       a and, ainc by Leisa 4(vi) WT is decreasing on
                                                                              T.
(a.t)
           T
          4 () —       . By Lamms 3,           S
                                                           ,    (because V ts decreast.ng on (at)),
and so



          vTL — ZTL,a)            -   uTLO)         +
                                                        B1VTL       a UTL    0)U-6T) +    4vTc.
Henoe VT(S) a uTL,o)/(lsT). By Lemma 4(fl), for all n e                                 (a,t),
uT(n,o)/(l.6r) — VT(n) a VT(S) by monoconicity. Taking the limit as n(S,

vT(a a    uT(S,O)/(l6T)         which, combined with the above inequality, implies that

vTc — WTL) —
        Since, then, at , both matching and balking to a are optimal:



uTc,o)/(l.;T) — V —           ZTLS)      —    uTL,l)      +
                                                                &Ta)    —    uTL,l) +
                                            -43-

so that 2(a) holds with equality.

      To establish the coepleisentary slackness of the second pair of

inequalities we show that if > 0 then 3(a) holds with equality. If the

sander faces a < , matching yields at least u5(s,O)/(l-&3). By Lerorsa 1-,

belcw a it is optimal to spurn. By Lemma 4(v)                is increasing on (at), so

the best spurn is to ; or above. But, since only balking occurs above ,                the
best spurn is to         itself. Such a spurn yields



                   u5(a,l) +            —   u5(a,l)    +



Thus 3(a) holds with equality, 0



Proof of ThaoxesL..2:     (I) Let




         fT(s) — max (t E ro,:         uT(t,o)   B (l81)uT(a,1) +



and



         f5(a) —   tax    {t C [0,t]: u5(a,0)         (l-55)u3(a,l) + 55u3(t,0fl.



Thus, for each a, ft(a) (respectively f5(a)) gives the t which makes 2(a)

(respectively 3(a)) Just binding, or E,          if no such t exists. Because u5 and
ut are continuous, so are           and if5. Because ut and u5 are monotonic, ft and
fb are nondecreasing end Va          [O,tJ, f5(s) B a and ft(a) B a.

      If fT(0) a f5(0) then a* —0, t*            fT(0) is a solution to (2) and (3).

fl f'(0) > f5(0) then either 3a E (0,EJ such that fT(5) < f5(a), so that there

is an interior solution to 2(a) and 3(e) by the intermediate value theorem, or
                                                       44 -



else fl E (GE),      LT(a) >       f8(a)       so that a* —     mm   Ia: f5(a) —   r)   and t* —   t 15
a    solution to (2) and (3).

        Given these values of a* and t*,               the    following is an equilibrium that

supports (a*, Ca]    as staady states:



                                           a       a C   [a*,t*]
                              2. (a) —
                                           Ce      a < a* or a a t



                                           C       tC    ]O,a) u [a*,c*]
                              2. (t)   —
                                           a*      C     [a,a*) U (t*,1)



where a satisfies:



                 uT(a,t) + ;Tu(al) —               (uT(a*,o)4uT(e*,o)]/(l.eT),

if   such   a value exists, and a — 0 otherwise.

       Checking that this constitutes an equilibrium is routine.



(ii)    We rewrite (2) and (3):




                    uT(a,0)    -
                                   UT(e,o) a (l6T)uT[L 0) -             uTL,l)J,           2'(a)

                                               $                                           2h)

                  (l53)[uSL,O) -           u5L,l)] 6st,0) - uSLtOfl,                       3'(a)
                                                       aaO.                                3(b)


Suppose that there stare two distinct solutions (a1t) and (a2 C3). 2y strict
                                       - 45     -




monotonicity   of the utility   functions, we       assusie without loss of generality

that a1 <a2 and t1 C t2. Thus 3(a) is an equality at (a2,t2) and 2'(s) is

an equality at (a1,t1). Lowering a from 22 to 21 lowers the left-hand side of

3(a) and, hence, the right-hand side. Since u5(a,O) is increasing and
                                                          -
concave, t1-a1 -C t7-a2.

     Raising   a from 1 to a2 raises neither the right-hand side of 2' (a) nor

the left-hand side. Since u(a,O) is decreesing and concave this implies that

      R t2-a2. Uniqueness of the solution to (2) and (3) follows frors this

contradiction. It   follows   fros Theorem 1 that the only possible steady states

are a and (a*,t*J. U
  aIs 9r w.




ON:; or 0;,;




               J!
                Flçvrt a
      me ;uLL3aIL CF ?qQPIS7IO C




a CCU 2II 5CPC1NC [r.rI j 5TL4T jIATE
                                                             SE: 341k;ng ?r2vr
                                                             PC:   Pjrifu1 Ccnsiian
                                                             IC: Miirc t Cnninl
                                                            MS:    i'l1inQ   r. Sdfltii
                                            içure 4
EQ(J[LtSRLL'I JLTCOM9 WHEN ThE SENCEa 3E!S AN LREE/ERSIELE ACTIEN 45Th A SENCLE SANCItCA
