NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HUNAR CAPITa, FERTILITY,
ANO ECONOMIC CROtCH

Gary S. Becker

Kevin N. Murphy

Robert

F. Femurs

Working Paper No. 3414

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1990

Our research was supported by National Science Foundation grant SES-8320258
and by National Institute of Child Health and Human Development grant SEP 1
R37 11022054. We bed helpful comments from Edward Prescott, Sherwin Rosen and
Henry Wan and useful aseistance from David Meltzer. This paper is part of
NBER's research program in Economic Crowth, Any opinions expressed are thosa
of the authors and not those of the Nationel Bureau of Economic Research.

NRER Working Paper #3144
August 1990

HUMAN CAPITAL, FERTILITY,
AdD ECONOMIC GROWTH

ABSTRACT

Our model of growth departs from both the Malthusian and neoclassical
appcoarhes by including investments in human capital. We assume, crucially,
that rates of return on human capital investments rise, rathar than, decline,

as the stock of human capital increases, until the stock becomes large. This
arises because the education sector uses human capital note tutensively than
either the capital producing sector of the goods producing sector. This
produces multiple steady scares: an undeveloped steady stare with little
human capital, low rstes of return on human capital investments and high
fertility, and a developed steady stats with higher rates of return a large,
and, perhaps, growing stock of human capital and low fertility. Multiple
steady states mean that history and luck are critical detecelnaucs of a
country's growth experience.

Gary S. Becker
Dept. of Economics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 606)7

Kevin H. Murphy
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637

Robert F. Taasura
Dept. of Eccuosjics

University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242

1. Int'oduction
Economic growth has posed an intellectual challenge ever since the
beginning of systematic economic analysis. Adam Smith claimed that growth
was related to the division of labor, but he did not link them in a clear

way. Thomas Malthus developed a formal model of a dynamic growth process,
in which each country converged toward a stationary per capita income.
According to his model, death rates fail and fertility rises when incomes
exceed the equilibrium level, and the opposite occurs when incomes ate less

than that level. Despite the influence of the Malthusian modei on
nineteenth century economists, fertility fell rather than rose as incomes
grew during the past 15t years in the West and other parts of the world.
The neoclassical model of growth responded to the failure of the
Malthusian model by essentially ignoring any link between population and the

economy. Adjustments in this model take place not in the population growth
rate, but In the rate of investment in physical capital. The physical
capital stock grows more slowly when per capita income exceeds its equilibrium level, and it grows more rapidly when per capita income is below
equilibrium. I

Neither Malthus'

nor the neoclassicists' approach to growth pays

much attention to human capital. Yet the evidence is now quite strong of a
close

link between investments in human capital and growth.

Since human

capital is embodied knowledge and skills, and economic development depends
on advenoes in technological end scientific knowledge, development
presumably depends on the accumulation of human capital.

for the twentieth century United States supports this
reasoning. Cross investment in schooling grew much more rapidly in the
Evidence

United States between 1910 and 1950 than did gross investment in physical

capital (Schultr fl960J). Denison [1965] found that the growth in years ci
schooling between 1929 and 1982 "explained" about 25 percent of the growth

in per capita income during the period. The experiences of nearly onehundred countries since 1960 suggests that education investments in 1960 ste
an important variable explaining subsequent growth in per capita incomes

(see Barro [1989]). Considerable circumstantial evidence also indicstes
that countries grow more rapidly when educetion and other skills are sore
abundant.

Our model of growth takes this evidence seriously, and departs
from both the Malthusian and neoclassical approaches by placing investments

in human capital at the center. Crucial to out analysis is the assumption
that rates of return on investments in human capital rise rather thsn

decline as the stock of human capital increases, at least until the stock
becomes large. The reason is that education and other sectors that produce
human capital use educated and other skilled inputs more intensively than do

sectors thet produte consumption goods and physical capital. This leads to
multiple steady states: an undeveloped steady state with little human
capital and low rates of return on investments in human capital, and a
developed steady state with much higher rates of return and a large and
perhaps growing stock of human capital,
Our analysis contains elements of both the Malthusian end neoclasethel models since fertility is endogenous and rates of return on

investments in physical capital decline as its stock increases. The endogeneity of fertility also leads to multiple steady states; a "Halthusian"

undeveloped steady state with high birth rates end low levels of human

capital, and a developed steady state with much lower fertility and abundant
stocks of human and physical capital.

Multiple steady statea mean that history and luck are critical
determinants of a country's growth experience. In our forieulaticn, initial
levels of human capital and technology and subsequent productivity and other
shocks determine whether a country grows richer over time or stagnates at

lnw income levels. Many attempts to explain why some countries and continents have had the best economic performance during the pmst several
centuries give too little attention to accidents and good fortune.
Our approach relies on the assumption that higher fertiliry of tho
present generation increasos the discount on per capita future consumption
in the intertemporal utility functione that guide consumption and other

detieions. Therefore, higher fertility discourages investments in both
human and physical capital. Conversely, higher stocks of capital reduce the
demand for children because that raises the cost of the time spent on child
care.

Section 2 sets our the basic assumptions of our analysis and
derives its main implications in an informal way. Section 3 provides a more
rigorous discussion of a special case without physical capital, but with
endogenous fertility and rates of return on human capital that are independ-

ent of its stock. Section 4 formally treats the case with both physical and
human capital, and the case in which the human capital sector uses educated
and other skilled inputs more intensively than other sectors.
Section 5 discusses several broad implications of the analysis.
Among other issoes, it explains why the brain drain occurs invariably from
less developed to developed countries, whereas less developed countries

import as well as export financial and ocher cangible capital. We also
discuss the "cakeoff" period, in which increeses in physical and human
capital and decreases in fertility are unusually rapid.
Section 6 suamactres the discussion and offers a few concluding
comnencs.

2, jc..Properties of the Model
This section firsc presents several basic assumptions about human
capital and fertility and then derives in en informal way the properties of

two stable steady-state positions, At one, human capital is negligible and
fectilicy is high, while at the ocher, human capital is widespread and
perhaps growing over time and fertility tends to be low.
The production and rearing of children are very rime intensive.
This implies chat higher wage rates physical capital per worker - -

induce

due perhaps to greater human or
a substitution effect away from fer-

tility by raising the cost of children.

A second assumption about fertility is more novel and comes from
recent work by Becker and Barro [1988J on dynastic families.

It states that

the discount rats applied by the present generation to the per capita consuispcion of subsequent generations depends negatively on the fertility of

the present generation. Becker and garro motivate the assumption with

a

utility function of parents who are altruistic toward their children. The
discount rets between generations is determined by the degree of

parental

altruism toward each child. Diminishing marginal utility implies that the
discount rate applied to the utility of each child declines as the number of
children innreases.

A simple formulation is

—

u(c)

(2.1)

+ a(n)nV+1 ,

with u' > 0, ii" < 0, and a' C 0; V and V41 are the utilities of parents

and each child, c is parental consumption, and n is the number of
children. The degree of altruists per child, a(n), is negatively related to
the numbec of children.

assume that the production of human capital is human capital
intensive and uses relatively note human capital per unit of output than the

consumption, child rearing, and physical capital sectors do. By contrast,
the production of physical capital is assumed to use physical capital as

intensively as the consumption sector. The evidence does indicate that the
education sector uses much highly educated labor as teachers and research
ers, whereas the production of physical capital does not seem to use
especially large amounts of physical capital.
In neoclassical models, the rate of return on physical capital
investments is assumed to fall as the per capita stock of physical capital

increases. A corresponding assumption for human capital is less plausible
since human capital is knowledge embodied in people.

embodying additional knowledge in a person may

depend

The benefit from

positively rather than

negatively on the knowledge he or she already has, There is a similar
assumption behind the mastery learning concept in education pedagogy, where
learning of complicated mathematics and other materials is more efficient
when the building blocks of elementary concepts are mastered (see Bloom

[l976)

I
A positive

effect of the stock of human capital on investments in

human capital is also part of tho "neutrality" assumption in the literature
on the lifecycle accumulation of human

capital

(see the pionooring paper by

Ben-Porath [1967]; and also Heckman [1976] and Rosen [1976]), the relation
between parents' human capital and the learning of children (in Becker and
Tomes [1986]). and the perpetual economic growth analysis in recent growth
models (Lucas [1988], Backer and Murphy [1968. 1969], Tamura [1966, 1989]).
The main implication of our two

assumptions

about human capital

investments is that rates of return on human capital do not ioonotically

decline as the stock of humen capital increases. Rates of return are low
when there is little human capital, and they grow at least for a while as

human capital increases, Eventually, they may begin to decline as it becomes incraasingly difficult to absorb more knowledge (see the discussion in
Becker and Murphy [1989]).

To discuss the implications of these aesumptions about human
capital and fertility, consider Figurea 2.1 and 2.2. Human capital per
worker (H) is plotted along the horizontal axis - -

physical

capital is

ignored for the present. The rate of return on investments in human capital, R.11(H), rises with H and it is relatively low at the origin where H —

0.

The discount rate on future consumption, a(n), is high at that point because
it depends negatively on fertility (n), which tends to be high when H is low
because the time spent bearing and rearing children is then cheap,
Therefore, the discount rate on the future would exceed the rate of return

on investment when H —

0:

[a(n)] >

when H — 0.

(2.2)

This inequality is a necessary and sufficient condition for a steady state

when H — 0 (at U), for it guarantees that the economy does not want to
invest when there is no human capital. Moreover, the steidy state is locally stable, for the inequality must continue to hold for small positive

values of H. Hence, the econooy returns over time to H — C for some values
of H > 0. As H increases, Rh also increases and a(.) falls as n falls, so
that eventually they become equal. Then investment in H becomes pcsitive,
but the economy continues to return over time to the steady state with

H —

as long as the amount invested is less than the capital that wears

out.

However, the amount inveated in human capital continues to rise as
the stock of human capital increases because the tate of return continues to
rise, and the demand for children falls as they become mote expensive.
Therefore, a steady state emerges when H is sufficiently large that it

satisfies the condition

—

Rh(H*),

where n* is the steady-state fertility rate.

(2.3)

If rates of return eventually

fall as H gets larger, H* refers to a constant level of H, as at L in Figure

1. However, if Rn asymptotes to a constant level, then H5 refers to a
constant rate of growth in H, shown by the curve h'h' in Figure 2.2.
The policy functions it end h'h' in Figures (2.1) and (2,2) give
human capital in period t+l as a function of the amount in t.

states at H —

0

and H —

H are

The steady

stable locally since hh and b'h' are below

the steady-state line H+i —

H

for all H C H, and are above the steady-

state line for all H > H. The point w where H — H is a third steady stats
but it is unstable; negative deviations (14cR) lead over time toward H —

C,

and positive deviations (H>H) lead toward
The steady state level H is nonoptimal when the program is not

globally concave. The unstable steady state H is then replaced by a
threshold human capital stock H s H. At H, a parent is indifferent between
reducing and raising the human capital of her children.

It is easy to incorporate physical capital into the story. With
the usual assumption that the rate of return on physical capital is very
high when there is little physical capital, the equilibrium stock of physical capital is positive at the steady state with H —

0.

The equilibrium

rate of return on investments in physical capital equals the endogenous

discount rate

[a(n)]1 —

K,5

with H —

0, K —

K,

(2.4)

where R,5 is the tate of return on investments in K.

The per capite amount of physical capital at the steady state
with H — H* is likely to be larger then at the steady state with H — 0

because the discount rate is lower, although the equilibrium per capita
stock of physical capital depends also on the degree of oomplementarity or

substitution in production between K and H. However, if H grows at a constant rate in this steady state, so too would the equilibrium stock of
physical capital.

4!

The lower and upper stable steady states correspond to undeveloped
and developed economies, respectively, where the lower one has smallaer per
capita incomes, lesser amounts of both human and physical capital per

capita, and higher birth rates. Our analysis implies that rates of return
on human capital CL0) rend to be higher in developed economies, whereas
rates of return on physical tapital (K,5) may be greater or smaller in

developed economies depending on birth rates in both steady states and the
rate of growth of consumption in the developed steady states.
An undeveloped economy is stuck there unless sufficiently big
favorable technology or other shocks raise the policy function above the

steady stare line at H —

0,

or increase the stock of human capital above H.

Similarly, an economy would remain developed unless war or other disasters
destroy enough human capital to lower it sufficiently below H, or reduce the

policy function below the steady state line. Even temporary shocks can
permanently jar an economy into development if it accumulatis enough human

capital (>H) before the shocks are over. Ey the same

token,

however, tem-

porary shocks could push an economy toward permanently low incomes if it
disinvasts enough human capital (Hc.H)

before

the shocks cease.

Human capital has a more fundamental role than physical capital in
determining these steady-state equilibria because Rh rises, at least for a
while, as II increases, while

falls with K. Given the human capital

investment function, the initial level of par capita human ospital deter-

ames where the economy ends up, regardless of the initial stock-of physical

capital. Although the stock of physical capital may

affect

the rare of

return on investments in human capital, we show in section 4 that an increase in physical capital could either raise or lower the return on human

4

10

capital, depending on the degree of substitution between H and K in both
production and consumption.

3. Fertility and Growth
The next two sections use specific models to illustrate the type

of

steady-state equilibrium and dynamics

discussed

in section 2. This

section highlights fertility, especially the time intensity of rearing
children and the effect of the number of children on the rate of discount of

future consumption. To concentrate on these properties, we ignore physical
capital and assume simple production functions in the consumption, human
capital, and fertility sectors.

We also assume that everyone is ideniical and lives for two
periods, childhood and adulthood, works T hours as an adult, snd spends all

his or her childhood time investing in human
have n children at the

beginning

capital.

A person chooses to

of the adult period, where v hours and f

units of goods are spent rearing each child (v and f are constants) and

each

child is endowed with H0 units of productive skills. The human tapital of
children depends on the endowments and human capital (H) of their

teachers/parents, and the time (h) spent on teaching. Assuming a CobbDouglas production function and H° and H as perfect substitutes, we have

(3.1)

The coefficient A measures the produttivity of investments, b gives the
number of H°units that are equivalent to one unit of H, end

I measures

the effect of scale on the production of human capital.
.4

11

The consumption sector also has a Cobb-Douglas production function:

c +

fn — Dlt(dR°+Ht)

(3.2)

where c is per capita adult tonsumption, D measures the productivity of this
is the time spent by each adult producing consumer goods, and 4 is

sector,

the rate of exchange between H° and H. We assume that the consumption
sector has constant returns to scale in the effective amount of time,

2(dH°+H). By summing over the time allocated to fertility, consumption, and
investment, we get the time budget equation:

T —

+ n1(v1.h)

(3.3)

.

This section concentrates on the effects cf fertility by assuming

b — d —

I

to eliminate any comparative advantage from using human capital in

the human capital sector instead of in the consumption sector. Both sectors
have a comparative advantage reletive to the production of children. It is
also assumed that fi — 1:

the economy accumulates human capital without

running into diminishing returns.
Psrents maximize the dynastic utility function in equation (2.1)
(or state planners maximize the intergeneration utility function in (2.1))

with respect to fertility and the time spent investing in human capitsl. We
simplify the utility function with

a(n) —

on

and u(c) -

,

(3.4)

12

C 1 and O<r < 1, e is the degree of pure altruism (when n—i),

where 0 a
and

Is the constant elasticIty of altruism per child as their number

increases.

The arbitrage condition between per capita consumption in periods
t

and tel is

1-a

u (ce)

a u'(c+i) —

0

1

n

C

bt —

1 +

(35)

where rh is the rate of return on investments in human capital, and equality

holds when investments are positive. The rate of return is determined by

—

A(tvn+t)

1

(3.6)
—

A(2+1+h+jn+1) 2

It is not surprising that the rate of return

depends

positively on the

productivity of investments (A). Since the rate of return measures the

effect on

of increasing Ht+ii it also depends on the productivity of

greater R5+i. which depends on 1r+l' n+1 and ht+i.
The first order condition for maximizing utility with respect tc
fertility comes from differentiating Vt in equation (2.1) with respect to

(le)anVt+i — u' (ct)[(v+ht) (H° )

af] .

(3.7)

.4

13

The second order condition requires that + a C 1, and u C 0 (see Becker
and Barro [1988)). The left hand side of equation (3.7) gives the marginal
utility from an additional child, and the right hand side gives the sum of
time end goods costs of producing and rearing a child. Coats depend on the
endogenous time spent investing in children as well as the fixed time (v)
and goods (1) inputs.

At the steady state with H — 0, equation (3.5) becomes the strict

inequality

nE>OIA(T.vn)

(3.8)

with nu being the steady state fertility rate, This inequality will hold
when parents have a sufficiently large I aisily.

The first order condition

for fertility in equation (3.7) simplifies in the steady state with

H — h — 0 to

0
(T-vnu )H -Inu
vH°+f

1-c

a(1-mn u

(I-dmn

(3.9)

The left hand side gives the financiel rate of return from

children in the steady state; the ratio of adult consumption to the consuisption foregone to produce a child. The rate of return from children is

greater when endowments are larger and the time (v) sad goods (f) spent to
produce children are smaller. Therefore, parents have teeny children when
they are cheap to produce and yet are reasonably well-endowed with earning

power. A sufficiently high race of return from hewing children would induce

14

parents to have enough children to discourage any investments in the

children's human capital. Then H — 0 would be a steady-state equilibrium.
This steady state must be stable for some positive values of H.
Since the race of return on investments is strictly less than the discount
race when H —

0,

it must also be lass for some H > 0.

Then H0+1 — 0, and

the economy returns to the steady state in one generation. Clearly, che
the steady state is also stable for some Ht with positive investment when

H+i C H.
An increase in the stock of human capital raises per capita income, and hence has a positive income effect as well as a negative

substitution effect on the demand for children. The income effecc dominates
in economies with little human capital if components of f such as food, housing, and clothing --

are

- necessities

the the mein cost of rearing

children, as determined from

>1-c .

(3.10)

v(H°+H)+f

A positive relation between fertility end per capita income is a Malthueian
property thst helps stabilize the steady state with H —

0.

Higher fertility

when H > 0 raises the discount on future consumption and lowers the rate of

return on investments, both effects reduce the incentive to invest, and
help return the economy to the steady state.
However, our analysis implies that the Malthusian assumption of a
positive relation between fertility and income is a myopic view of the
effects of development on fertility that may

hold

when countries have only a

little human capital, but does not hold when they manage

to

reach a moderate

4

15

stage of development, Even if parents do not invest

in children,

the cost

of the time input must rise as H increases, which reverses the inequality in

(3.10) when H is lsrge enough. Then the substitution effect begins to
dominate the income effect, and fertility declines with further increases in

H, Eventually, the rate of return on investment in children becomes as
large as the discount rate, and parents start investing in children (h>O).
The amount invested at first is insufficient to maintain the stock of human
capital, and the economy returns over time to the steady state (see point b
in Figure 2.2).

Investments rise further as the stock of human capitel increases

further. If investments are sufficiently productive (A), and there are
appropriate values of v, e, and r (see equation (3.14, below), the amount
invested would exceed the initial stock for sufficiently high initial stocks

of H. Then H does not decline over time toward H —

0,

but instead con-

tinues to grow over time. As H grows, the endowment H° becomes negligible
relative to H, and the goods coat of children, f, becomes negligible rela-

tive to time costs, (v+h)H. The economy converges to a steady-state growth
path (see Tazoura [1989] for a discussion of the stability of this path),

with a constant fertility rate (n*), a constant time (h*) spent investing in
H, and a constant rate of growth over time in both H end c

The steady-state values n and h* are determined from the first
order conditions for n end h when f and 1j0 are negligible:

(l_c)mn*Vt+l —

—

t+l

u(ct)(v4h*)Ht

u'(c

3

,

(3.11)

(3.12)

16

whete dvt÷i/dHt÷i is evaluated along the steady-state path with

1 +

Dividing
and

—

_s±1 —

_i±l — A3i*

(313)

equation (3.12) by (3.11) and substituting a —4 log \T/dJ)

h* — (1+g5)/A, we get

(3.14)

1-e- c

and
—

(3.15)

The steady-state fertility rats is found by substituting into equations
(3.5) and (3.6):

on5(T.vn*) —

A'(l+g)1°

(3.16)

Steady-state growth exists if the combination of A, v, r, and

on

the right hand side of equation (3.14) exceeds one. Equations (3.14) and
(3,16) show that an inorease in the productivity of investments (A) raises

both steady-state growth and fertility. Higher fixed-time coats of children
(v), or a more elastic altruism function (c) reduces nt and raises g* as
families substitute away from children when they become more expensive and
toward greater investment in each child.
Greater altruism (o), or lower adult mortality that expands adult
time (T), both raise n* but do not affect

(see Meltzer [1989] for a

general discussion of the effects of mortality within this model). Note
4'

17

however, that the absence of any effect of a and T

g* results from the

toostant elesticity form assumed for u(c) and a(n). With other functional
forms, increases in a or T fluid either raise or lower the steady-state
growth rate.

The analysis implies that fertility and the steady-state rate of
growth in per capita incomes could be either negatively or positively related among countries, or over time in a given country, depending on why
growth rates differed.

If gt differed mainly because the productivity of

*

*

a

invesbeants differed, n and g would be positively reletad; if g differed
mainly because the cost of children differed, g* and n* would be negatively
related; and if g* differed mainly because adult mortality or the degree of

altruism toward children differed, g and n might well be unrelated.
Studies of growth rates among countries since 1950 find that they are very

weakly negatively related to fertility rates (see Barro [l92]), This
suggests that growth rates do not differ mainly because of differences in
the productivity of investsents in human capital.

Our analysis does imply that the jgygJ of per capita income and

fertility would be strongly related. This is easily seen by comparing nu in

equation (3.9) with n in equation (3.16): n >

n for all values of

0. Therefore, countries with low levela of human capital that have not
undergone much

development

would have higher fertility than developed coun-

tries with much human capital. It is well known
among countries

between the fertility rate

that

the negative relation

and the level of per capita real

income is very strong (see, e.g., the evidence in Tamura [1988. 1989]).
Since we have been assuming that the value function V is concave,
the optimal human capital in period t+l is a continuous function of the

18

It

human capital in t. With the steady stats at H — 0 stable for some H 5. 0,
and the steady-otata growth path stable for some H, there must also be a
steady state with a constant positive level of H and a constant n -

- in

Figure 2.2, this steady stats is at H where H — H, and the policy function

intersects the line H+i —

H.

These steady-state values of H and n are

determined from the first order conditions in equation (3.15) with g —

0,

and a first order condition for n.
A comparison of equation (3.16) when g — 0 with equation (3.8)

shows that nd < nu. Even if n and a are positively related for H near

H — 0, n must decline below its level at H — 0 before the steedy state at
H H. Horeover, equation (3.16) shows that n C nd. fertility is lower
when H is growing at a constant rate than when H is constant. The economy
substitutes away from children as humsn capital and the time coot of raising
children increases.

When a steady stats with a —

0

exists, the steady state with

positive human tapital is locally and globally unstable (see temura [1958]

for a formal proof). As Figure 2.2 shows, the economy moves over tine to

H — 0 for all H C H. and it moves to steady-state growth for all H> H. The
instability of this steady state results from the negative relation between

fertility and human capital. The decline in fertility when H increases
above H lowers the discount rate on future constasption and also raises the

rate

of return on investments. Zoth forces raise investments and next

period's human capital relative to this period's. With H÷1

falls

> H,

fertility

further and th. process continues.
Indeed, if this interaction between n and H is strong enough, the

value function becomes convex. Then the function that relates H+i to
I'

19

has a jump at some capital stock El. The lover leg lies below the steady

state line, with H+i < H for all H C H. The upper leg lies above the
steady-state line, with H+1 > H for all H > El. Although El is not a
steady-state solution to the first order conditions because this solution
does not maximize utility if V is convex, El does have the properties of an
unstable steady state.

The policy functions become discontinuous even for "normal values

of the parameters. The discontinuous relation between H÷i and H at H —
is matched by a discontinuous relation between nt and H at H — El.

El

The jump

in investment when H increases slightly beyond H — El goes together with a

fall in fertility. Since the interaction between n and H produces the
convexity of V it is no surprise that they both are discontinuous functions
of the human capital stock. However, all the adjustment from a switch
between the decay regime and the growth regime occurs through investments
and fertility, leaving consumption unaffetted (see Tamura [1989] for a

formal proof). These results can be seen in figure 4.

4. Gomnerstive Advantese in the Production of Human Genital
In modern economies1 the human capital sector relies on skilled

and trained labor more then the consumption sector does. The teaching
sector has highly educated employees, while many services and some goods

rely on unskilled labor. Our analysis captures this difference in a simple
way if the endowment (H°) is less important in the production of human
tapiral; that is, if b < d in the production functions for H and t
tions (3.1) and (3.2).

in equa-

20

If H is small relative tc H°, and if fi in equation (3.1) is close

to one rates of

return

increase as a person accumulates acre human capital.

Therefore, the economy should be more efficient with specialization in the
accumulation of human capital -

- teachers

in the human capital sector should

have more human capital than workers in the consumption setter. However,
such specialization may not be feasible if the capital aarket, especially

the market between generaticns, is undeveloped. Teachers may be unable to
borrow the resources to finance very great investments in human capital.
This paper makee the strong asaumption that because of such capital market
difficulties, specialization is not feasible and everyone has the same human

capital, even when returns inctease as a person accumulates more human
capital (Becker and Murphy [1989] analyze efficient specialization between
teachers and workers)

We introduce physical capital into the analysis by assuming that
physical capital is accumulated consumer goods that do not wear out. The
consumption sector is assumed to use physical capital more intsn.sively than
the human capital sector, and we treat the simple case where human capital

does not use any physical capital at all. The Cobb-Douglas function in
equation (3.2) is extended to include physical capitaL

c + fn + dK —

D{1(dno+H))7X17

(4.1)

where AX is the net (and gross) irrvastment in physical capital. The human

capital production function is still given by equation (3.1), with

1.

If the human capital sector uses human capital much more intensively than the consumption sector --

if

b is much less than d --

the

rate

1

21

on

of return

investments in human capital would be low when H — C, and would

rise for a while as H increases, even if $ <

1.

The rate of return on H

when H — 0 would be below the discount tate on future consumption even with

moderate levels of fertility, and hence of the diacount rate. Therefore,
the comparative advantage of the human capital aector in using human capital
raises the likelihood of a stable steady state at H —

0.

The equilibrium conditions for the steady state are

Rh — m1n > Rh

(4.2)

with
— 1

+

(l-i)(c+fn)K1

(4.3)

and

K,11 —

A(T-vn

Clearly, for a sufficiently snail b, Rh C
n .

u

Sinte

(4.4)

.

mn for any positive value of

the rate of return on K goes to infinity as K—0, K must be
u

positive. Therefore, the rate of return on physical capital must exceed
that on human capital at this steady state.
When H is large relative to H°, h and d, the comparative advantage

the

of
—

1,

human capital eector in the use of H becomes unimportant. With
the economy approaches a steady state growth path as H increases,

where fertility is constant, aod human capital, physical capital, and per
capita consumption all grow at the rate g*, given by

l+g*

—

—

—

—

,

(4.5)

22

with c —
The slight difference between the right hand aide of this equation

and the right hand side cf equation (3.14) is that 3

log V/3 log H — -yr

C c

along the ateady state growth path when consumption depends also on physical

tapital. The ratio of K to H, constant along the steady-state path, is
determined by the condition

A(T-vn) —

— EL5

— a

n*5cl+g*)l

(4.6)

Since the discount rats on future consumption depends positively

on fertility, the interest rate with steady-state growth would be less than
that in the undeveloped steady state if fertility were sufficiently lower in
the growth equilibrium to make the right hand side of equation (4.6) less

than the middle term of equation (4.2). This implies that the rate of
return en K(R,5). which equals the interest rate, could be larger or smaller

in the growth steady state compared with the undeveloped equilibrium. An
increaae in the steady-state growth rate -- due to a change in P. or another
parameter -.

could

mean a lower interest rate sod rate of return on physical

capital if fertility fell enough. These results are quite different from
those in the neoclassical model, where interest rates and rates of return on

physicel capital are positively related to the growth rate hecauee the
discount rate is assumed to be constant,
Since h' the rate of return on human capital, equals K,5 in the
growth equilibrium, hut is less than P,5 in the undeveloped equilibrium, R1L
must increase relative to K,5 as an economy moves between these equilibria.

Indeed, P,0 must be higher in the steady-state growth equilibrium than in the

23

undeveloped equilibrium even if
reason is that

and

the interest rate are lower. The

can be lower only if fertility is lower, but lower fer

tility implies that

is higher; compare the left hand side of equation

(4.6) with the right hand side of equation (4.4) when fi —

I and b C d.

As H and K get larger, fertility ie encouraged by an income ef-

fect but it is discouraged by a substitution effect from the higher coot of
time. Fertility would be lower in the growth equilibrium then in the undeveloped equilibrium if the substitution effect dominates; if parents want

few children when they are expensive. Empirically, fertility is much lower
in rtcher than in poorer countries, which suggests that the substitutinn

effect dose dominate. The lower fertility in richer countries implies that
interest rates and races of return gn physical capital might also be lower
in richer countries.

The phase diagram in Figure 4.1 helps analyze the stability of the
steedy• state growth equilibrium and the dynamic paths of human capital and

physical capital. The point U is the steedy state with H —

0 and K > 0, and

the slope of the rey Op gives the ratio of K to H along the steady state
growth path. The isocline it — 0 is the locus of all combinations of K end H
that lead to zero investment in K; similarly, for the isocline ft — 0.

Since

U is a steady-state equilibrium, both isoclines go through U.
An increase in K discourages investment in K because K,5 declines

as K increases, An increase in H has conflicting effects on the incentive

to invest in K. It entourages investment because K and H are complements
in production (see equation (4.1) and if an increase in H reduces fertility. However, an increase in H would discourage investment in K if it
lowers the marginal utility of future consumption by raising investment in

24

H. We assume that, on balance, an increase in H encourages investment in K,
so that the isocline k — C is positively sloped, as in Figure 4.1.
An increase in K has conflicting effects on

investments

in H since

it raises the cost of the time spent investing in H, but it also raiaee the
ciarginal utility of future consumption by reducing investment in K and

perhaps by reducing fertility. For given fertility, the net effect of an
increase in K on investment in H depende on the elasticity of substitution

in production compared to that in consumption.3 Figure 4.1 assumes that on
balance, an increase in K discourages investment in H. So that ñ
positively sloped since an increase in H raises

— C is

and hence investment in

H.
The isoclines Li — 3 and k

—0 intersect not only at U but also at

an unstable steady state at H. An economy that begins to the right of the
stable manifold M through H grows over time toward the path given by Op (see
curve b in Figure 4.1), whereas an economy that begins to the left of H
declines over time toward point U with H — 0 (see curve a). Only economies

that begin along H end up at W. The increasing returna to H and the likely
decline in n as H increasea are what destabilize the steady state at H.
These effects could be strong enough to nake the value function V convex,

and hence the relation between n H+1, and Hi discontinuous, although the
relation between ct+l and H is continuous (Figure 4.2 gives an example).
The curve b in Figure 4,1 shows that H grows faster than K when an

economy starts off near the steady state at H. Then the ratio of K to H
falls as the steady-state growth path Up is approached. Human capital in
the United Statea appsrencly did grow faster than physical capital since the
turn of the century (Schultz [1960]), and human capital now accounts for a

25

large fraction of all tJS. capital (see the estimaces in Jorgenson and
Freusiani 1989J).

If a war or other disaater destroys some physical capirsl, rates

of return on K and investments in K increase. Investments in H also increase if the isoclines for H are positively sloped. If the economy had
been on the growth path, H as well as K would grow more rapidly over time
after the disaster than they did before. This implies that the stock of
huiean capital would be greater at any fucure year than it would have been

without the destruction of physical capital. Since the rstio of K to H
approaches the same equilibrium ratio that existed before the disaster, K
must at some future year also exceed the level it would have reached had the

disaster not occurred. Since both H and K exceed the levels they would have
had, per capita income must also eventually surpass the levels it would have
reachad!

It might appear from this conclusion that destruction of physical
capital should be encouraged, for per capita incomes eventually exceed the

levels they would have reached. But initial declines in per capits income
dominate any eventual increase for the generation that experiences the
disaster since its dynastic utility is reduced.
The story is quite different when a disaster destroys human capi-

tal, as when a conqueror kills off the educated class. Since investments in
both H and K are discouraged, the economy would always have lower per capita

incomes than if H had not been destroyed. Indeed, if enough human capital
is destroyed --

if the economy is moved in Figure 4.1 from point 1 on the

growth path to a point c that is to the left of the manifold N -

the

25

economy never returns

to

the growth path. Instead, it sinks toward the

undeveloped steady state at 13.

If the coefficient $ in equationS (3.1) is leaa than one, the rate

of return

on H eventually falls as H increases. Then a steady-state growth

equilibrium does not exist, but it is replaced by a stable steady state with

constant levels of H, K, and n (see point L in Figures 2.1 and 4.1). Pith
$ C 1, the slope of the isooline cI — 0 in Figure 4.1 begins to decrease es H

gets larger, and intersects k —

t

again at point L. The ratio of 1< to H is

lower at L than at W, hut is higher than along the growth path Op. The
steady state at L, like the steady-state growth path, is stable for all
initial quantities of H and K that are to the right of the manifold K.

5. Discussion
Kalthus did not pay much attention to human capital, as he assumed
parenta were concerned only about the numbtr of children they have. his
conclusion that ebbs and flows in birth (and death) rates help maintain wage
rates

at a conatant

level is valuable in understanding long run

developments

in England and elsewhere prior to his time. But the Malthusian world was
shattered forever by the persistent growth in incomes and decline in birth
rates that began in the West during the nineteenth century.
The undeveloped steady state in our model has }talthusisn
properties, for human capital is negligible, fertility is high, and changes
in birth rates may help the economy to return to this steady state when it

is not too far away. However, our analysis indicates that Malthusians have
a myopic view that is inappropriate when economies manage to diverge enough

from the undevelopment trap.

Economies would continue to develop and

27

diverge from that steady state if technological and other shocks either
raise the policy functions above the steady-state line or if they raise the
stocks of human and physical capital sufficiently, for example, if human
•

capital is raised above the unstable steady state amount 11 in Figures 2.1

and 2.2. Improved methods to uae coal, batter rail and ocean transports,
•

and decreased regulation of prices and foreign trade ara some changes that
helped trigger the early growth of the West (see the discussion in Rosenberg

and Birsell [1986]),
Considerable luck is needed in the timing and magnitude of shocks

to give a sufficiently big push to investments in human and physical capi
tel. But very unlikely configurations of events do occur in the course of
thousends of years of history. We believe that the West's primacy which

began in

the

seventeenth century was partly due to a "lucky" timing of

technological. and political changes in the West.

Even teaporary eventa, if they are strong enough, can permanently

wrench an economy away from undeveiopment. If temporary events lead to
favorable initial conditions, the economy continues to grow even without the
stimulus of major additional innovations or other events similar to those

that got the process started. Suppose a sequence of events raised the
policy function temporarily from h'h' in Figure 2.2 to h"h". The economy
moves along this function, and accumulates H" units of human capital by the

time these events cease end the policy function returns to h'h'. If new
technologies had raised the demand for human capital, the stimulus would
cease when these technologies were fully exploited, as long as no further

technological advances emerge. Nevertheless, the economy continues to
invest in human capital because it had accumulated enough for the process to

28

becoae self-generating. Analytically, growth displays "stare or path"
dependence, and initial conditions count (see Arthur [1985] for a good

discussion of such path dependence in the location of 'silicon valleyc;

also sea David [l98[).
According to our analysis, at some point in the growth process,
economies experience periods of particularly repid accumulation of human and

physical capital and declines in birth rates and family size. This happens
near the unstable steady states at W in Figures lÀ, 2.1, and 4.1, and near
the points of discontinuity in Figure 4.2. These periods of rapid change
are reminiscent of the 'takeoff' in Roetow's theory of growth (see Rostow
[1963) for an empirical evaluation of his analysis). Takeoffs in our approaoh are driven by increasing returns to investments in human capital and

increased costs of children as capital is accumulated. An economy that
starts at point Y is posed either to take off toward sustained economic
growth or to fall back toward stagnation.
Needham [1969] presents a well-known discussion of why the industrial revolution did not begin in medieval China, even though that
country was much more advanced technologically than medieval Europe.

lie

emphasizes the policiee of the Mandarin bureaucrats (a view criticized by
Chao [1986]; see also Jones' [1988] criticisms of Needham),

but

he also

recognizes the delicacy and instability of the prior European equilibrium:
"These many diverse discoveries and inventisns had earthshaking effects in
Europe, but in China the social order of bureaucratic feudalism was little

disturbed by them. The bniltrin instability of European society must therefore be contrasted with a homeostatic equilibrium in China," ([page 214]
our italics)

29

Cur analysis implies that rates of return

human

capital are

on education and other

higher in developed than in undeveloped countries, both

absolutely and relative to rates on physical capital. Rates of return on
physical capital may be either higher or lower in developed countries,

depending on fertility and rates of growth in consumption. Consequently, we
readily explain why the "brain drain" of educated and skilled persone almost
invariably occurs from poorer to richer countries -- such as the Indian
academics, engineers, and doctors who migrate to the United States.
Although tangible capital flows in both directions, it is not clear whether,
as implied by our analysis, physical capital goes both to rithet countries
that grow rapidly and do not have particularly low fertility and to poorer
countries that do some growing and have high fertility.
An increased stock of human capital raises investments in developing new technologies by expanding the education-intensive research and

development induatry. Since our analysis implies that human capital grows
sharply with development, it readily explains why ayatematit research and
development activities are confined to richer countries.

-

The rapid growth in the labor force participation of married women
is one of the more striking changes induced by economit development during

the past half century. Our formal model has only one ses, but it easily
incorporates the strong division of labor between married men and women in
undeveloped countries, where women spend most of their time bearing and

raising many

children

and doing other work that is complementary to child

care. The large decline in birth rates and riae In wage rates as countries
develop encourage married woman to spend much more of their time in the
lebor force, which greatly weakens the traditional division of labor.

3t

It has been known for a long time that recovery from wars and
other disasters is usually remarkably rapid. John Stuart Mill [184S,
page 74J remarked on "what has eo often excited wonder, the great rapidity
with which countries recover fruis a state of devastation the disappearance
in a abort time, of all traces of the mischiefs done by earthquakes, floods,

hurricanes, and the ravages of war." He erguee that recovery is rapid only
when the most of the populetion is left "with the same skill and knowledge

which they had before" (page 75]).
Figure 4.1 shows that a wartime destructions of physical capital
in a country that starts along the growth path (op) stimulates more rapid

investment in this capital. It may well also stimulate more rapid investment in human capital; see curve d in Figure 4.1 and the discussion in
section 4. Then per capita incomes eventually exceed what they would have
been had the war not happened, although it still lowers the dynastic utility

of the generations alive at the time. This analysis can explain the rapid
recovery and then vigorous growth in Germany and Japan after World War II,
which suggested to many people the erroneous conclusions that countries
benefit from wartime destruction of their physical capital stock.

We can alao explain Mill's proviso that knowledge and skills
survive. Countries recover from modest reductions in their knowledge, but
large-enough losses bring a cumulative decline as both physical capital and

human capital slide toward an undeveloped state. This happens in Figure 4.1
if human capital is reduced below the manifold through the unstable steady
state W (see point c). Wartime destruction of physical and human capital

have different consequences because human capital is knowledge embodied in

31

people. When

too

much knowledge is destroyed, an economy loses the founda-

tion for further accumulations of knowledge - disembodied in technologies - -

which

whether

embodied in people or

is the essence of economic growth.

6. Concludins Remarks
Our analysis of growth assumes endogenous fertility and a rising
rete of return on human capital as the stock of human

capital increases.

Societies can save across generations by the birth of many children, by

greet investment in each child, and by long-ten accumulation of physical
capital. When huisen capital is abundant, rates of return on human capital

investments are high relative to rates of return on children, whereas when
human capital is scarce, rates of return to human capital are low relative

to those on children. As a result, societies with limited human capita:
choose large families and invest little in each member; those with abundant
human capital do the opposite.
This increasing incentive to invest in human capital as the amount

of human capital increases leads to two stable steady states. One has large
families and little human capital, and the other has small families and

large and perhaps growing human and physical capital. A country may switch
from the first "Malthusian" equilibrium to the second "development" equilibrium if it has reasonably prolonged good fortune and policies that favor
investment,

There is still only a meager understanding of tha growth process:
of why some countries and regions have grown more rapidly than others, and
why the growth leaders are not the same in different historical periods.

32

Our analysis appears to highlight important variables in growth and developmeat - -

investments

in hunan

capital,

choices over family size and birth

rates, interactions between human capital and physical capital, the existence of several stable steady state equilibria, and the crucial role of luck

and the past, Perhaps this analysts will push the understanding of growth a
few steps forward.

*

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Arthur, Brian. "Urban Systems and Historical Path Dependence," In Cities
and Their Vital Systems: Infrastructure Past. Present, and Future,

edited by Jesse H. Ausubel and Robert Herman. Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press, 1988.
Barro, Robert J. " Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries."

Working paper no. 3120. Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, September 1989.
Becker, Gary S., and Barro, Robert J. "A Reformulation of the Economic
Theory of Fertility." Dusrterlv Journal of Economics CIII (February
1988): 1-25.

Becker, Cary S., and Murphy, Kevin H. "Economic Growth, Human Capital and
Population Growth." Paper presented at the Conference on the Problem
of Development: Exploring Economic Development Through Free Enterprise,
sponsored by the Institute for the Study of Free Enterprise Systems,
State University of New York, Buffalo, May 1988.

_________

"Human Capital, the Division of Labor and Economic Progress,"

University of Chicago, 1989.

Becker, Gary S., and Tomes Higel. "Human
Families," Journal

of

Capital

and the Rise and Fall of

Labor Econoaics 4 no. 3, Pt. 2 (July 1986):

SI- 239

Ben Porath, Yoram. "The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of
Earnings," Journal of Political Economy 75, no 4, pt. 1 (August 1967):
352-365.

Bloom, Benjamin S. Human

Characteristics

and School Le.axnina. New York:

McGraw-Hill, 1976.

Chao, Rang. Man and. T,and in Chinese History: An Economic Aoalvsis.
Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1986.

David, Paul A.

'CLIO and the Economics of QWERTY.'

American Economic

EsMiax 75 (May, 1985): 352-537.

Denison, Edward P. Trends in American Economic Growth. 1929-1982.
Washington, Cc.: The Brookings InstItution, 1965.
Dowyick, Steve, and Nguyen, Duc-Tho, "08CC Comparative Eccnomic Growth
1950-85: Catch-Up and Convergence," American Economic Review 79
(December, 1989):
Heckmao,

James J.

1010-1030.

"A Life Cycle Model of Earnings, Learning, and

Consumption." Journal of Political. Economy 4, no.

4,

pt. 2 (August

1976): 511-544:

Jones, Eric. Growth Recurring: Economic Ghaoee in World Hiato. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1988.

Jorgenson, Dale W. and Fraumeni, Barbara N. 'Investment in Education."
Educational Researcher 18 (May, 1989): 35-44.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr.

"On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal

of Monetary Economics 22 (July, 1988): 3-42.
Meltzer, David 0. 'Length of Life, Human Capital and Economic Growth, -

paper presented at the Conference on the Pemily, Gender Differences and
Development, Economic Growth Center, Yale University, September 1989.

Mill, John Stuart. Principles of Politicel Economy, with Some of Their
Atolications to Social Philosophy. London: Parker, 1848.

Joseph. The Grand Titration:
London: Allen and Unwin, 1969.

Needham,

Science and society in

East

and West.

Rosen, Sherwin, "A Theory of Life Earnings,' Journal of Political Economy
84, no, 4, pt. 2 (August 1976): 645-367.

Rosenberg, Nathan and Birdsell, L.E. How the West Grew Rich: The Economic
Trensformation of the Industrial World. New York: Basic Books, 1986.

Roatow, Walt W., ed The Econoaicsf Take-off into Sustained Growth;
Proceedings

Association.

of a Conference Held by the Internationaj.lconomit
New York: St. Martin's 1963.

Schultz, Theodore W.

"Capital Formation by Education," Journal of Political

Econo,v 68 (December 1960): 571-83.

Tamura, Robert. sPertility Human

Capital

and the 'Wealth of Nations',

Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago, 1988.

Fertility, Human

Capital

and the 'Wealth of Nations' ,

of Iowa Working Paper. Iowa City: University of Iowa, 1999.

University

I
1

FOOTNOTES

1. The convergence of per capita income in the neoclassical growth model
may help explain the experience of the developed countries; see

Dowrick and Nguyen [1989] However for the entire world, it fails
badly.

2. To calculate the Eulet equation for human capital investment, rewrite
the Bellman equation using the learning technology (equation (3.1)),
the budget constraint (equation (3.2)), and the time conetraint
(equation (3.2)) to yield:

V(H) —

max( [D(dHt+Ht) (T-n[v+H÷1A (bH0+Ht)D])fnt]c/o +nnV÷1(H+i)).

Differentiating with respect to

clD(dH0+Ht)ntAl(bH0+Ht)B +

produces;

anv1

a 0.

Using the envelope theorem provides

—

When p — 1 end b —

d,

the last two terms in square brackets drop out,

leaving;

—

cD(T-n.v)

.

p

Substituting this into the Euler equation yields;

+

antct

1A(T-vn

l

O•

3. Let a be the discount factor (we assume fertility is fixed), w the
wage in period t, and cthe corresponding level of consumption. The
first order conditions for human capital with log utility is simply

c

Cr41

and the first order condition for physical capital is simply

—a

tk

c+1

ct

where rk

is the marginal product of capital in period t+l.

t+l

Rewriting these equations as

I !s!
c

—

Mt it

and

kt+ltk
r+l

c

fwt+1Ht+i

we see that if

huxan

capital grows at the fixed rate An, the first

equation will be satisfied since labor's share is fixed with Cobb-

Douglas functions. If the savings tate is constant, theti k+1/c is
constant, and the second equation will be satisfied since capital's
share ia also fixed

h

I'K
?18u:s

ff*

IIc.1

h

t1

A
K

K

Rt

Figure 2.2
V

N

K•O

Il•0
KC0
—Nc 0

K0
g?'o

V

Figure 4.t

S

:: /
0H111

[550

Son

1

00
!oIl:y r.e.n..°., cn.!n.ma

oiloy Cn'i.n.no..: rti1Its

S

own
Figure

4.2

v—

.20

o— .45
b— .5
d—1

A—S

(

s—I

.25

e— .30

0—1
1— .15

t—1

