NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DID J.P. MORGAN'S MEN ADD VALUE?
A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
ON FINANCIAL CAPITALISM

J. Bradford De Long

Working Paper No. 3426

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1990

I would like to thank George Alter, Michael Bordo, David Corbett, Greg Clark,
Bill Lazonick, Perry Mehrling, Dan Raff, Elyse Rotella, Andrei Schleifer,
Mike Spagat, Eugene White, members of the Gliometrics Society, and
participants in seminars at Rutgers, the University of Michigan, and Indiana
University for helpful discussions. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #3426
August 1990

DID J.P. MORGAN'S MEN ADD VALUE?
A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
ON FINANCIAL CAPITALISM

£3 S TRACT

The pre-WWI period saw the heyday of financia1 capitalism" in the
United States: the concentration of securities issues in the hands of a few
investment bankers which had substantial representation on corporate boards
of directors. This form of organization had costs: it created a conflict of
interest that allowed investment bankers to heavily tax operating
corporations. It also had benefits: investment banker representation on
boards allowed bankers to monitor the performance of firm managers, quickly
replace mangers whose performance was unsatisfactory, and signal to ultimate
investors that a company was well managed and fundamentally sound. The
presence on one's board of directors of a partner in J.P Morgan and Co. was
associated with a rise of perhaps 30 percent in common stock equity value.
Some share of the increase in value almost surely arose because investment
banker representation on the boards of competing companies aided the
formation of oligopoly. But the development of similar institutions in other
countries that like the Gilded Age U.S. experienced exceptionally rapid
economic growth-Germany and Japan are the most prominent examples-suggests
that a substantial share of value added may have arisen because "financial
capitalism" improved the functioning of financial markets as social capital
allocation mechanisms.

J. Bradford De Long
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 314
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

June 16. 1990

1

I. Introduction

In the years before World Wax I, a corporate security flotation worth more than $10 million invariably passed through the hands of one of a very small number of mvestment banking
houses—J.P. Morgan and Co.: Kuhn, Loeb. and Co.: the First National Bank: the National City

Bank; Kidder. Peabody. and Co.; and Lee, Higginsori, and Co.1 The partners and directors of
these institutions were directors, voting trustees, or principal stockholders of financial and nonfinancial corporations with a total market capitalization—debt plus equity—including sub-

sidiaries of perhaps $30 billion.2 To place this quantity in perspective, this sum bore the same
relation to the size of the U.S. economy that $7.5 trillion would bear today: it amounted to about

one and a half times a year's national product. and to perhaps forty percent of the country's
produced capital stock (Goldsmith, 1954). Investment bankers profited immensely from their
role as the key middlemen on Wall Street: the commissions on the flotation of United States
Steel were as large a share of the American economy then as $15 billion would be today.
American finance just before World War I was thus several orders of magnitude more

concentrated than it has been at any time since World War II. Financiers possessed strong
voices, or at least strong potential voices, in corporate management. The implications of this
concentration of finance—this" money trust"—and its influence was a major political flashpoint
of the first half of this century. Progressives and their allies feared this money trust in finance as

an evil much worse and more dangerous than any monopoly in an individual industry. For
finance to be concentrated, and for industry to be beholden to finance, was in their eyes a deeply
disturbing departure from their populist ideal of small firms and competitive markets.
Historians, by contrast, have often been more approving of the large financial organiza-

tions and deals of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era. Alexander Gerschenkron (1962) argued

When questioned by Samuel Untermyer, chief counsel and guiding spirit of the investigating Pujo Committee (chaired by
issue of as
Louisiana Representative Amene Pujo). First National Bank Chairman George F. Baker was 'unable to name a single
members'
of
the
of
one
of
that had been made within ten years without the participation or cooperation
much as
the small group of dominant investment banks, Public securities issues by the members of the investment banking oligarchy then
amounted to about S5C mithon a year.

2The Pujo Committee report (Pujo. 1913b) gives a smaller number. Louis Brandeis (1914) points out that the Pujo calculations
neglect partially-owned subsidiaries' capitalization not owncd by the parent company.

June 16, 1990

2

that the heavy capital requirements of the modem technologies of the turn of the century required

large firms and large banks. Lance Davis (1963) wondered whether Great Britain's apparent re!ative failure after 1870 might be linked to its failure to develop "finance capitalist" institutions
like those present in Germany and the United States.
Economic theory provides little guidance, as it does not speak with one voice about

"financial capitalism." In the early 1970's conglomerate stocks appeared to sell for more than
the value their operating companies would bring standing alone. It was then used argued that
informed investors are scarce—that it is difficult to assess the prospects of individual industrial
firms—and that those skilled at making such assessments could add value by forming conglomerates, closely watching managers, and serving as "miniature capital markets" that direct

new resources to areas of greatest opportunity (Williamson, l975).
The end of the conglomerate boom and stasis in the market for corporate control followed

in the 1970's; theoretical arguments were then advanced that the absence of "financial capitalism"—in tht sense of an active market for corporate control and of financiers' monitoring managers—would not lead to large efficiency losses. In a world of informed investors, a firm's stock
price serves as a signal of its performance; managers can be provided with the correct incentives
to act in the interest of shareholders, their principals, by tying their compensation to the stock

market's valuation of the firm (see Jensen and Meckling, 1976).
In the early 1980's the relatively close links between banks and industrial firms in the
successful Japanese keiretsu became the focus of attention. Some observers (for example,
Thurow, 1986) then argued that the absence today of links between finance and industry charac-

teristic of the "money trust" is a serious weakness in the U.S. capital market, but today Thurow
calls his preferred system "merchant banking" rather than "financial capitalism" or "money
3Williamson estimated the transactions coats associated with the exercise of stoclholder control over management at fourteen
percent of equity value. Since these large coats block the exercise of stockisolder control over managers and there "turks Lhe
susptciort that these enclaves of private power will run amok,' Williamson argues that conglomerates evolved to do what
stockholders cannot do: "organizational innovations.., have mitigated capital market failures by transferring functions

traditionally imputed to the capital market to the firm instead."
4Shareholders can make a manager's incentives congruent with their own b; tying his compensation to stock returns even when
their interest is his dismissal. English investors obtained Jay Gould's resignation from the Erie Railroad by pointing out that tt

would trigger a large rise in the stock price whicb would give Gould substantial gains on his holdtngs.

3

June 16, 1990

trust." The diversification and LBO booms of the 1980's have seen a fourth group (as in Jensen
and Ruback, 1982) emerge to argue that there is a substantial difference between managers' and
shareholders' objectives. Good market performance then requires an active market for corporate
control, and perhaps such a market works best when changes in management are set in motion

not by merchant bankers or conglomerate CEO's with long-term links to and thus special
knowledge of a particular industrial corporation, but instead by free-lance raiders who have

developed expertise in assessing firms' performance in general.5
FIGURE 1
THEORETICAL DESCRIPTiONS OF APPROPRIATE
CAPITAL MARKET STRUCTURE
Relationships between finance and industry should be:
short-term (
unimportant

Jensen and
Meckling

) long-term
rare

Thurow
Firings of
the management
team
should be:

Conflict of interest between
managers and
shareholders is:

acute

Jensen and
Ruback
acquired easily
by specialized
arbitrageurs

Williamson

common

available only
10 those with
inside access

Information about a firm's prospects and performance is:

If expertise to monitor managers is scarce, it would be inefficient to waste it by long-term
links between scarce financiers and industrial corporations. But if monitoring managers requires

detailed knowledge of the business, financiers can be useful only with such links, if he conflict
of interest between managers and owners is minimal, financier intervention should be rare. But if
the conflict of interest is acute managers should frequently be dismissed. Arguments have be-en
S)ensen (1989) lakes a more Thurovian position. cnticizing '..thc dangerous tendency of LBO parlnerships.to take more of their
compensation in front-end fees rather than in back-end profits earned through utcTeascd [long-run] equity value-"

June 16. 1990

4

advanced for all four possible views on the questions of should links between financiers and
firms be long-term, and should financier firings of managers be common.
This paper tries to put some empirical meat on the theoretical bones of the relationship

between fmance and industry. It tries to untangle the question of what the money trust actually
was—what J.P. Morgan and Co. did to add value, where their initial comparative advantage
came from, and why the investment banking industry was so concentrated at the turn of the

century. Such a study is of obvious historical interest. J.P. Morgan and Co. must have had some
striking competitive edge in order to maintain its dominance over American finance at the turn of
the century: if not, such a profitable business should have seen the rapid arrival of new
competitors to reduce the magnitude of the wealth to be earned. The Morgan-headed "Money
Trust" remained a fixed point for more than a generation while all was in flux around it.

Such a study could be of direct interest to those concerned with the regulation of today's
securities markets. Perhaps the forces which allowed Morgan and Company to become the focus
of the turn-of-the-century capital market are still at work today. In such a case, how the turn-of-

the-century market functioned carries information about how today's markets ought to function.
On the other hand, perhaps styles of management, means of gathering information, and
shareholders' ability to discipline rogue management have all changed sufficiently that capital
market institutions that were effective in 1900 would be ineffective today. A look, however, at
Germany and Japan—which appear to have kept many "finance capitalist" institutions
throughout the past century—leads one to suspect that institutions that were effective in 1900
would still be effective in 1990.
The tentative conclusions I reach are most hospitable to Lester Thurow's position.
Morgan and his partners saw themselves, and other participants in the pie-World War I securities
industry saw them, as filling a crucial "monitoring" and "signalling" intermediary role between

finns and investors in a world where information about firms' underlying values and the quality
of their managers was scarce. In such a world it was valuable for a firm to have the stamp of
approval from Morgan and Company with its established reputation. The presence of Morgan's
men meant that when a fum got into trouble—whether because of "excessive competition" or

June 16. l990

5

management mistakes—action would be taken to restore profitability. The presence of one of

Morgan's men may also have reassured investors that a firm appearing well-managed and with
bright prospects actually was well-managed and did have bright prospects.
In addition, high concentration may well have played a role in supporting "financial
capitalism." in which investment bankers monitored firms and warranted their quality to ultimate

investors. A firm with a large market share reaps large benefits from reputation, and will not be
tempted to jeopardize it for any one deal. A firm with a small share may decide to "cash in" its
reputation by luring investors into a profitable deal that is unsound—as Standard Oil magnates
H.H. Rogers and William Rockefeller may have done with Amalgamated Copper (see Lawson,
1904) and as Jay Gould apparently did with the Erie Railroad (see Adams and Adams, 1871). A
firm with a small market share might find itself unable to compete with Morgan and Co. or
Kuhn, Loeb because no one trusted it not to sacrifice its reputation for immediate profit.

The disadvantages of fmancial concentration stressed by progressives were present.

Conflicts of interest were frequent and potentially severe. Often "Morganization" meant the
creation of value for shareholders by the extraction of monopoly rents from consumers: if
Westinghouse and G.E. share controlling directors, their competition is unlikely to be too
intense.6 And First National Bank Chairman George Baker sat on the boards of six railroads that
together carried 80 percent and owned 90 percent of Pennsylvania anthracite. But there were
positives on the other side—positives apparently strong enough to support Morgan dominance

over potential competitors for more than a generation. And the breaking of financier control over
managers raised a new worry: is better to have managers responsible to no one than to

financiers? (See Eerie and Means, l932.)
6An explicit watchwoi'd in Morgin reorganizations was "community of interest" as long as the Pennsylvania Railroad held a
large block of Erie Railroad stock, the Pennsylvania would suffer if its actions undeicut the profits of the Erie, On the other hand,
as Kolko (1963) points out. industries in which financiers could preserve n,onopoly by strangling competitors at birth were almost
nonexistent. And Brandeis allowed that iaceIy...the Westinghouse people were complaining that the General Elecinc's
competition was unfair" even though Lamont was a director of one and Steele a director of the other. See Lamont (1913).
7An issue present but unnoted in the Pujo report On the one hand, the report stresses how shareholder apathy allows investment
bankers to exercise dominant roles in choosing directors wish only a minority of the stock. On the other hand, it calls for direct

election of directors and managers by the small shareholders. The possibility that shareholder apathy implies that the eliminatton
of financial capitalism would produce complete managerial autonomy is not considered. Faced with executives who wished to
retain absolute control over the railroads they ran. Morgan's response was 'Your railroad? Yow railroad belongs to my

June 16,

1990

6

II. The Money Trust
Concern over the "money trust"—the concentration of the business of issuing the securities of large corporations in the hands of a few banks among which the most prominent was J.P.
Morgan and Co., and the associated presence of these investment bankers on boards of directors

—dominated the public policy debate over the appropriate role of government in the securities

industry for the first third of this century. The debate was resolved only by the Great Depression.
The presumed link between the stock market crash and the Depression left the securities industry

without political defenders. The Glass-Steagall act broke the links between board membership.
investment banking. and commercial banking-based management of asset portfolios that had

marked American finance between 1890 and 1930 (see Seligman. 1982). thus fulfilling the
progressive desire that "the arteries of credit now clogged well nigh to choking by [the money
trust] ...[be] opened [so]... business can be conducted on its merits instead of being subjected to

the tribute and good will of this handful of self-constituted trustees of the national prosperity"
(Pujo. 1913).
In retrospect, it is surprising that "financial capitalism" in America lasted so long, given

the heat of the political hostility to it. The money trust was subject to two major congressional
investigations, the first in 1912-3 by a special House committee chaired by Arsené Pujo and
counseled by Samuel Untermyer (triggered by the approach of a Presidential election and
Minnesota Congressman Charles Lindbergh's denunciation of the money trust: see Cleveland
and Huertas. l987);8 the second in 1932-3 by the Carter Glass-chaired Senate Banking

Committee, counseled by Ferdinand Pecora and perhaps triggered by Herbert Hoover's belief
that the NYSE was allowing short sellers to depress the market and so hindering recovery from
the Depression (Seligman, 1982).
clients.." (see Allen. 1935). The elimination of the investment banker willing to watch over and monitor the company pduces
the problems of nanagerial discretion outlined by Eerie and Means (1932).
8Lindberghs son Charles. the aviator, was to marry the daughter of then Morgan partner Dwight Morrow. later U.S. ambassador
to Mexico. Like Rome'i optimases and popuio.res. progressives and sobber batons moved in similar and connected social circles.

7

June 16, 1990

Progressives

like Louis Brandeis were sure that the Morgan and Co.-headed money trust

exercised enormous control over industry, and that such control was a bad thing. Brandeis, ever
sensitive to conflicts of interest, saw the money trust as a "concentration of distinct functions...
beneficent when separately administered [but]... dangerous... when combined." The money
trust's possession of monopoly power in the business of issuing securities imposed an unreason-

able tax on all companies raising money in the capital market. And the links between corporate
boards, investment bankers, and portfolio managers—First National Bank head George F. Baker
was on the board of A.T. & T. and the prime mover behind A.T. & T. 's appointment of Theodore

Vail as its president; Morgan partner George W. Perkins was also a director of New York Life.
which invested heavily in securities underwritten by the Morgan partnership—created a serious
conflict of interest. Corporations sought to get as much for their securities as possible, and saving institutions sought to obtain high returns.
Investment bankers like Baker and Perkins were thus in a position to sacrifice the interests of one set of principals to the other—or to increase the spread they received as middlemen.9
Perkins. testifying before Pujo and Untermyer. believed that he could determine whether a deal
had come to him in his capacity as Vice President of New York Life or as partner of J.P. Morgan

and Co. and bargain accordingly.'° The Pujo committee and Brandeis were unconvinced, concluding in Brandeis' words that:
...interlocking directorates... must be effectually prohibited before the freedom of
American business can be regained. The prohibition will not be an innovation. It will
merely give full legal sanction to the fundamental law.., that "No man can serve two
masters.' The surprising fact is that a principle of equity so firmly rooted should
have been departed from at all.... For no rule of law has... been more rigorously
applied than that which prohibits a trustee from occupying inconsistent positions....
And a director of a corporation is as obviously a trustee as persons... called specifi9For Brandeis. the freezing of individual initiative because few dared to run the nsk of crossing Morgan appears to have been an
equally serious problem. As Brandeis said to L.amont 'You may not realize it. but you are feared, and I believe the effect of
your position is toward paralysis rather than
1913).

expansion (

10But as National City Bank president Franl Vanderlip wrote. "There were times during [El-i. Hanimansl life.., when I opposed
underwriting fees becauic I felt they were too high. As a director I believed my obligation of trusteeship rats to the stockholders.
and not to Mr. Han-iman. I have in mind recollections of occasions when it was pointed out so me. in a hurt lone, that the City
Bank was sharing in those underwriting profits thai I thought were too fat..."

June 16, 1990

8

cally by that name.

Many contemporary historians of the U.S. financial industry appear to believe that there
never was a "money trust" in Brandeis' pejorative sense.11 Vincent Carosso, for example,

argues that investment bankers did not have a lock on their traditional clients. He argues instead
that there was "very frequently interference or attempted interference," as Kuhn Loeb head Jacob
Schiff told Samuel Untermyer (Carosso, 1970; Pujo, 1913).12 Carosso further points out that
Untermyer knew that there was no "unlawful industrial combination" in finance, and could only

proceed by redefming "money trust" as a "loose, elastic term" meaning a "close.., understanding
among the men who dominate the financial destinies of our country and who wield fabulous

power.. through their control of corporate funds belonging to other people." And he concludes
that Untermyer was unable to demonstrate "the existence of a money trust... even in the sense in

which... [he] defined it":
The concentration of banking capital in a few New York City institutions was neither
planned nor brought about by a few financiers... [but] was the result of the growing
needs of a burgeoning economy.., an inadequate and poorly functioning banking system.., and.., the natural consequence of 'economic laws which in every country create
some one city as the great financial center'.... The committee's detailed tables and
charts on interlocking directorates were equally misleading.... [The bankers did not]
purposely act together; and even if they had, they would have been unable to impose
their will upon the other directors... always more numerous than the representatives of
Wall Street" (Carosso, 1970, p. 151).

In a similar vein, Cleveland and Huertas (1985) also dismiss the existence of a "money

trust." They argue that the industry in which Morgan and his peers were engaged was contestable: anyone could accept a block of securities, and then knock on doors until he found will.
ing buyers who would take the placement. They argue that Untermyer, at least, was guilty of bad
this they take a different tack than earlier historians like Fritz Redlich (1954).
12The Committee interpreted Jacob SchiiT'a evidence differently than Caroaso. focusing initead on Schiff's assertion that he did
'not think that another banking house of the standing of J.P. Morgan and Co. would accept an oflà of the Union Pacific

Company to negotiate its securities while it fUnion Pacific) was ui the hands of Kuhn, Loeb, and Co." The Committee concluded
that there was little competition in the business of underwriting ecuritiea for large companies.

June 16, 1990

9

faith in his investigation. 13 The politically-ambitious Untermyer, Cleveland and Huertas say, as
"an aspiring politician the assignment [as counsel to the Pujo Committee) was a godsend." But
unfortunately, "not knowing... such an opportunity would come his way. Untermyer had stated in
November 1910, 'The fact is that monopolies and substantial domination of industries created in

that form could be counted on the fingers of your hand', and he [had] attacked 'political partisans
who seek to make personal and Party capital out of a demagogic appeal to the unthinking"

(Cleveland and Huertas, 1985, pp. 359-60; citing Kolko, 1963, p. 220),14 Pecora also is dismissed as a politician seeking press coverage.15

I 30n the other hand, no one (with the exception of NY. NH. and Hartford President Mellen. who suggested Brandeis was
working for Boston interests who wanted to loot the railroad) has challenged Brandeis' good faith. Brandeis claims that his
belief in the power of the "money mist" came 'S.. from my own experience... .1 found that the policy of the New Haven.. .was
loading it down so that.. it could not possibly bear the burden... .1 went to some of the lading Boston bankers... .1 said—'lf this
thing continues, the New Haven is going to be banbispt. Won't you please act in this manner and call Mi. Morgan's attention to
it'. Their reply. ..was that they would not dare to...that the New Haven was Mr. Morgan's particular pet, that he resented any
interference...and that it would be as much as their financial life was worth tony so poke their ringert in." See L.arnont (1913).
14Cleveland and Huertaa could have made their indictment stronger. During the formation of Amalgamated copper. Standard
Oil financiers William Rockefeller and HR. Rogers reportedly discovered that Untermyer was heavily leveraged and forced
lintermyer to sign over a mine under threat of being driven into banh'uptcy by sudden Rockefeller short selling. This alleged
episode—that when Untermyer tried to play with the Robber Barons he lost—may have played a role in Untermyer's subsequent
conversion so progreaaiviam. Unsennyet tried very hard to subpoena the aging William Rockefeller so that he could examine him
on the formation of Amalgamated. See Lawson (1907) and Pujo (1913).
Cleveland and Huertas do not use the tangled relationships between National Ciry Bank President Stillman, Standard Oil
magnate William Rockefeller. and lawyer Unsermyer to discredit Untermyer. This sword, however, cuts both ways. Stiilman's
successor as City Bank President, Frank Vanderlip, judged participations in which William Rockefeller appeared on both sides
of the deal as "the means of some of the worst abuses that occurred in Wall Street" (Vanderlip and Sparkes. 1935). And Redlich
says that the "element of power in business can be sensed... and.., becomes evident when William Rockefeller, for instance,
'declared himself in on 25 percent of the profits from a New York Central flotation handled by the National City Bank."
15Reading the transcripts of the hearings, it is easy to dislike Unsermyer and Pecors. Untermyer appears to have had no "theory
of the case": He bullies Chicago professor 3. l..aurence Laughlin. accusing him of being a shill for the money trust in his
advocacy of banking system reform'—and. worst of all, of having compounded his fsuli by trying so hide his dependence by
refuting to accept money from bankers so fund his National Citizens' League. One moment he attacks Morgan for causing the
panic of 1907. The next moment he attacks Morgan for stying so stop the panic by getting the New York Clearing House to issue
certificates that circulated as money during the 1907 panic, thus arrogating to himself "a right that is not possessed by other banks
or individuals.., to have a currency of their own." And the next he attacks the Clearing House for calling its certificates too
quickly when the panic has passed.
He attacks speculators like Jay Gould. Then he switches to another target, she stock exchange-created monopoly over the
printing and engraving of stocks and bonds, without ever noting that Gould and Russell Sage tried to break this monopoly. And
he sums up by painting these many actions as parts of a single grand conspiracy. Robber Barons are Robber Barons, but it is hard

to believe that Untermyer conducted his investigation in good faith and made his accusations of conspiracy with clean hands.
Pecora devoted much time to establishing that .l.P. Morgan. Jr., and his partners had paid no taxes in 1931 and 1932. He
implied thst such was the rule in good years as well as bad—working Americans paid taxes but Morgan partners did not. Morgan
and Co. had no tax liability is 1931 and 1932 because the collapse of the stock market inflicted huge losses on the partnership;

they had correspondingly heavy sax liabilities in the bull market of 1928 and 1929.
L as least, find is much easier to like and respect Brandeis, and so respect Morgan.

June 16. 1990

iii.

10

The Money Trust's Public View of Itself
But

Morgan's supporters arid ideologues

at

the time—for example, the writer and journal-

ist John Moody, founder of Moody's Investment Service—argued that there was a functioning
money trust, and that its existence was a good thing. Moody thought that the debate was marked

by "...a lack of sincerity on all sides." (Moody. 1904). According to Moody, control of firm
managers by financiers was necessary given the need of enterprises for capital and the need of
investors for trustwortjiy intermediaries to handle the selection of firms to invest in (Moody,

1904 and 1912). Without domination of boards of directors by the investment banking oligarchs,
there would be no effective way for scattered individual shareholders to monitor the performance
of corporate managers. Only investment bankers could effectively monitor firm managers, and
the presence of investment bankers on boards signalled to ultimate investors that the firm

management was competent and industrious.'6
Defenders of Wall Street before the Depression thus argued not that economic power was
decentralized and in the hands of industrialists, but rather that it was a good thing that power was
centralized and in the hands of fmanciers. It is thus difficult to agree with Carosso and with
Cleveland and Huertas that there was no "money trust"—that a few investment bankers did not
exercise substantial control over industry—in the years before World War 1. The existence of a
"money trust," however, does not mean that Untermyer and Pecora were right to advocate its
dismantling. Presumably the money trust arose for a reason and continued in existence because
it offered investors some valuable services that, although high priced, could not be provided by
potential competitors.

John Moody's positive view of the money trust was not his own invention. Moody's
16SUCI a signal may have been especially valuable given the climate of the turn-of-the-century stock market, Lit the seven years
1906-1912 the speculative stocks of the Reading. U.S. Steel, Amalgamaled Copper, and the Union Pacific turned over at average
rates of 27. 5. 8. and II times a year, respectively: it took only 2 112 months for the cumulative aharci of U.S. Steel traded to
mount op to the total number of shares outstanding. Demand relative to the number of shares outstanding was extyaordinarily
volatile. Unless arbitrageurs' stabilizing influences were functioning extraordinarily smoothly, such volatile demand would be
likely to lead to large short-run price fluctuations and make market prices poor signals of values. Under such circumstances, the
value of signals —like Morgan's stamp—other than current price would be greaL.
Such a stamp of approval might be unwelcome to a manager who sought to profit by speculating on inside information.
Richmond Terminal esecutive W.P. Clyde. lot example, rcpoiledlv told Morgan that "I've bought Richmond Terminal at 7 or S
and sold it at 15 twice in the last few years. I see no reason why I shouldn't do is again." He tried to block Morgan control.

June 16. 1990

11

view was more or less the consensus view held by the securities industry and was a common-

place in the early literature on investment banking. Willis and Bogen's early investment banking
textbook, for example, argued that the:
.investment banker, intimately concerned as he is with the affairs of the corporation
for which he has sold bonds, since the continued meeting of the obligation on these
bonds is essential to the maintenance of the investment banker's prestige, often takes.
.a voice a control as a matter of course....This kind of power over the affairs of the
borrowing enterprise represents the correlative of the moral responsibility which he
has assumed toward the holder of the bonds or stock he has sold.... [T)his management
function.. .gives the buyer...an assurance that the banker has knowledge of what is
being done by the borrowing concern, and also of better management...[and]
explains why investors.. place so much stress, in purchasing securities, on the character and reputation of the house of issue.... The history of American business has
hitherto been marked by a steady increase in the influence of the investment banker for
these reasons.... (Willis and Bogen, 1929)

The same assessment was made more pithily by New York, New Haven. and Hartford president
Charles Mellen, in a private conversation with journalist C.W. Barron: "I wear the Morgan collar, but I am proud of it" (Pound and Moore, 193 l).17

This assessment of the situation was also the official view of the industry. Morgan and
Co. responded to Pujo by writing an open letter giving their view of the functioning of the

securities market. This pamphlet (primarily written by Morgan partner Henry Davison) argued
that the reason the partnership had control over investors' funds was: "thousands of investors...
seeking.. .securities...have neither the knowledge nor the opportunity for investigating a great...

enterprise." They "look to a banking house to perform those functions and to give its stamp of

approval." Morgan and Co.'s approval had become "...a large factor which inspires confidence

statement made in private and off the recoed—Barron's notes of his conversations were later found, edited, and published.
A similar impression of Mellen's relationship to Morgan is given by Brandeis (in LSmOnL, 1913). who recalls that when he "hit
upon a mailer. - of manifest advantage to the (New Haven rail]road. and through a friend I submitted it to Mi, Mellen. Mr.
Mellen sent back word that he would submit 5 promptly to Mr. Morgan... Mellens reply was that Mr. Morgan did not think weU
of the matter.. At my behest, my friend went back to Mr. McUen.. asking if he would not submit it to Mr. Morgan once more
Mr. Mellen said—'What. go to Mr. Morgan a second time on a matter, after he has already eprcsscd his opinion on it? No one
would even dream of it!"

June-16, 1990

12

in the investor and leads him to purchase...." The practice of banker representation on boards:
has arisen not from

a desire on the part of the banker to manage the daily affairs of the

corporation or to purchase its securities more cheaply than he otherwise would: but
rather because of his moral responsibility as sponsor for the corporation's securities,
to keep an eye upon its policies and to protect the interests of investors in the securities of that corporation....Inquiry will readily develop the fact that the members of the
leading banking houses. ..are besought continually to act as directors...and that in
general they enter only those boards which the opinion of the investing public
requires them to enter, as evidence of good faith that they are willing to have their
names publicly associated with the management (Davison, 1913).18

Morgan and Co.. moreover, argued that their influence over investors' choice of
securities was not dangerous because it was disciplined by the market. If the firm lost its

reputation for "character"—placed investors in securities that were profitable to it but offered
poor returns—or another firm acquired a reputation as a superior judge of risk, Morgan control

would disappear:

The public, that is the depositors, are the ones who entrust bankers with such influence and power as they today have in every civilized land, and the public is unlikely
to entrust that power to weak or evil hands. Your counsel asked more than one witness whether the present power held by bankers... would not be a menace if it lay in
evil hands.... The only genuine power which an individual.., can gain is that arising
from the confidence reposed in him... by the community.... [M)en are entrusted with
such heavy responsibilities because of the confidence which their records have established, and only so long as their records are unblemished to they retain such trusts.
These... axioms.., apply... more emphatically... to banking than to any other form of
commerce. To banking the confidence of the community is the breath from which it
draws its life. The past is full of examples where the slightest suspicion as to the conservatism, or the method's of a bank's management, has destroyed confidence and

ISLamont provided Brandeis with a similar justthcation of Morgan representation on boards, saying that "as you realize, we
have generally drifted onto these various railroad and industrial boazds because we had fixt undertaken to place a large block of
the corporation's aecw'ities with our clients, and we felt a sense of responsibility to those clienta which we fulfilled by keeping an
eye upon the corporation in which they had invested. We have felt that that was a strong factor in enabling us to market these
iecurities, and while the responsibility was a very onerous one, nevertheless, we shouldered it. Don't you think there is quite a

little in thai point?" Brandeis agreed that ii was an important point, but saw no reason why bankers needed to exercise control
rather than merely gathering information. See LaiTloat (1913).

June 16, 1990

13

drawn away its deposits overnight (Davison, 1913. pp. 25-6).19
The investment bankers saw their oligarchy and their presence on boards as having three

benefits: First, investment banker representation on a board warranted that the firm was
managed by capable and energetic executives. Promising and well-managed businesses would
thus be able to issue securities on more favorable terms with investment banker representation.
Second. investment banker representation provided an easy way to learn about the performance of managers and to dismiss them if they failed to measure up. The investment banking
oligarchs provided an effective mechanism for monitoring executives and replacing those who

performed badly: in Morgan and Co.'s view such monitoring and supervision was more easily
performed on the board than off it.
Third, the concentration of the business improved the functioning of the market. The
wealth and dominant position of J.P. Morgan and Company depended on its reputation for
character. A firm with a large market share could never be tempted to sacrifice its reputation for
the sake of the profits of any one deal: a firm with a small market share might.
It is ironic that defenders of private property and capitalism like Moody and Davison
wound up advocating a system for the assessment and allocation of investment that appears
suspiciously socialist. The forty-five employees of Morgan and Co. approve and veto proposed
top managers, decide what securities they will underwrite, thus implicitly decide what securities
will be issued and what lines of business should receive additional capital. Savers follow their
advice. And the net effect appears similar to what would be done by a centralized investment

planning directorate. The major difference is that the judgment of Morgan and his partners is
substituted for that of some bureaucracy in deciding which investment projects are to be
undertaken.20 Instead of being decided by a market, the allocation of investment and the choice

19,1. P. Morgan and Co. never admitted that they possessed arty sort of discretionary power. Lamont, for esampk, appears unable
to understand Brandeis unwillingness to accept his argument that market discipline consuained J.P Morgan so tightly as to leave
it no freedom to abuse its power. Lamont thinks, or at least, says. that this is an obvious matter of "fact" and not of 'opinton.'
2O'fl is riot quite right. On the one hand. Morgan and Co. are shareholders' agents, not the public's. Ott the other hand. Morgan
and Co. have a strong incentive so run an efficient operation and make the "correct" investment decisions from shareholders
point of view they face potential competition from Kuhn, Loeb, from National Ciscy. and from others. Bureaucracies, by
contrast, have many other objectives than the accomplishment of their legally-mandated mission.

June 16. 1990

14

of firm managers is decided by a hierarchy, albeit a loose one (and one that feels itself subject to
market discipline in the long run in which the partnership can gain or lose its reputation for

"character").
The negative effects of fmanciaj capitalism stressed by Untermyer and Brandeis are not
blotted out by these investment-banker arguments that the structure of pre-Depression American
fmance served useful economic purposes.21 The conflicts of interest identified remain conflicts
of interest: the high fees and relative absence of competition for different firms' business remain
a tax on the provision of capital to the industhal sector. But the financial capitalists publicly
claimed that they saw themselves as providing value, at least to shareholders.

IV. Case Studies: international Harvester and AT&T

A brief examination of the role of investment bankers in the creation of International
Harvester and the expansion of AT&T provides some confirmation that the money trust's public

and official view of itself had at least some grounding in reality. The account of International
Harvester presented below is taken largely from Garraty (1960); the account of AT&T from
Paine (1921) and Brooks (1976). Both accounts stress that investment bankers played a powerful
and limited role in that they took great care to make sure that the firms they watched had the
right managers. A fair criticism, however, of these two case studies is that they examine
successes—that in other firms investment banker intervention either failed to create value or

created value only by creating monopoly. These criticisms will be partially addressed in section

V below.
An opening to consolidate the farm machinery industry appeared at the beginning of the

1900's. The McCormick firm—established by the inventor of the reaper, Cyrus H. McCormick
2lFor Brandeis. at least,

the key objection was in large part not economic but political and psycholog3cal, Brandeis tends to
speak not of efficiency and productivity but of expenmentation and individualism. He told Lamont that he saw J.P. Morgan's
power as "dangerous, highly dangerous. The reason. I think, it that it hampers the freedom of the individual. The only way that
we are going to work out our problems in this country is to have the individual free not free to do unlicensed things, but free to
work and to trade without the fear of mc gigantic power threatening to engulf him every moment, whether that power be a
monopoly in oil or in credit." See Lamont (1913).

June 16, 1990

IS

—had been under heavy competitive pressure from the rapidly expanding Deering firm.

Deering's founder, William Deering, died in 1901. His children were much less interested in
running their firm and establishing competitive predominance over McCormick. The three sons
of the original McCormick—Cyrus, Stanley, and Harold—were also eager to see a reorgan-

ization of the industry. But each family was also strongly averse to handing control of their firm
over to the other.
There did appear to be substantial economies of scale to be gained by integrating the

firms' production operations. U.S. Steel head Elbert H. Gary estimated that the stock of the
amalgamated firm would be worth thirty-five percent more than the stock of the two separate

firms. Moreover, he attributed this gain to efficiency improvements, writing that "this increase
would not be fictitious but real value, owing to the fact that by a combination they would secure
stability of prices and diminishing expenses even thought they did not secure increased average

prices" (Garraty, 1960).
If monopoly power did allow the new, integrated firm to increase its average prices, the
extra profits from amalgamation would of course be higher. J.P. Morgan and Co. felt that such
monopoly power would easily be gained, and that as a result the McCormick brothers should not

worry that using Wall Street money to combine the firms would harm their reputation with their
farmer customers: after all, the Morgan partners remarked, the farmers had no choice but to buy

farm machinery.
Morgan partner George W. Perkins explained to the brothers the terms under which J.P.

Morgan and Co. would take charge of the deal. Perkins emphasized that "Morgan would... insist
on choosing all officers and directors of the new company," and that "this point... Morgan and
Co. have found indispensable in making their combinations." The McCormicks, the Deerings,
and the owners of two other, smaller firms included in the new International Harvester
Corporations took all the stock of the new company since no issue of securities was required,
J,P.

Morgan and Co. charged less than their normal fee—they took only three percent of the

company up front in fees. After organization, Morgan and Co. retained ultimate control over the

firm. All stock was committed to a voting trust, the trustees of which were one McCormick. one

June 16. 1990

16

Deering. and Perkins.
For the first few years of its operation, the performance of International Harvester was

disappointing. Rationalization of the firm's product lines was blocked: integration of production
proceeded only very slowly. In 1906 Perkins, disappointed, forced a showdown to remove all
remaining McCormick and Deering family members from management and replace them with
salaried professionals. The younger Cyrus H. McCormick alone remained as head of the company. C.S. Funk, a salaried manager with long experience at McCormick and then International
Harvester in whom Perkins had confidence, was made general manager. And "the younger element in the company" was advanced to positions of greater influence. Thereafter International
Harvester's performance was more satisfactory—according to Garraty. sufficiently good that the
Deerings were no longer embarrassed to give its stock as an endowment.
Banker influence on American Telephone and Telegraph can be clearly seen in one

action: the return to the Bell System and accession to power of Theodore N. Vail. Vail had been
hired for the telephone company by Alexander Graham Bell's father in law, Gardiner Hubbard,

at the end of the 1870's. He performed very well as General Manager of American Bell and as
president of its long-distance subsidiary during the initial expansion of the telephone network to

the urban East and Midwest.
In 1887, however, Vail resigned. A growing dissatisfaction "with his position at this
period was due.. .to the company's reluctance to spend money in keeping the service at maximum" and rapidly expanding the network. Vail had wished to pay low dividends and to plough
retained earnings back into the rapid creation of a single comprehensive national telephone net-

work. The major stockholders and their nominees, for example John E. Hudson, President of
American Bell from 1889—1900, had a different view. They saw that they owned a money

machine: they thought this money machine should pay high dividends. After a clash of views
Vail left the company, unwilling to be the chief implementer of competitive strategies with

which he disagreed. The 1887 annual report made no mention of his resignation or indeed of his
services to the company at all, suggesting a high degree of strain and bad feelings.
After the expiration of Bell's key patents, Hudson's presidency, and to a lesser extent that

June 16, 1990

17

of his immediate successors, saw a steady loss of market share to a large group of alternative,

local telephone networks. American Bell did pay high dividends. American Bell did not, however. move to consolidate its nationwide natural monopoly.
A general consensus within the reorganized Bell System, now headed by AT&T, toward

a shift to renewed rapid expansion developed in the first years of this century. Frederick Fish
(President of AT&T from 1902—07) went to the markets to raise money for renewed expansion.

The subsequent securities issues gave the investment bankers their opening. The company's massive fmancing requirements, and the fact that it had become difficult to raise money

as the panic of 1907 drew near, brought the Bell system close to default. The investment
bankers' price for continuing to fmance the company was that its next president should be someone they trusted: Theodore N. Vail. First National Bank President and Morgan ally George F.

Baker had been very impressed with Vail's performance in other dealings. Vail's past record at
the telephone company was well known. And who better to head up a company now devoted to
rapid nationwide expansion than a man who had been advocating such a competitive strategy

twenty years earlier?
Vail did do for AT&T what he was installed to do. He oversaw its expansion to a true
nationwide telephone system. And he turned out to be very skillful at keeping the government
and public convinced that AT&T was a productive natural—and not an exploitative artificial—

monopoly. In the choice of Vail. as in the creation of International Harvester, investment
bankers appear to have exerted their influence in a positive direction.
Other case studies might paint a different picture. The International Mercantile Marine

Company was a failure from the beginning. The New York, New Haven, and Hartford Railroad
was denounced as unsound and monopolistic by Louis Brandeis for nearly a decade, at the end of

which Morgan's New England railroad system did collapse.22 The issue therefore turns on the
22Thomas W. Lamont. in Lamont (1913), tried to distance JP. Morgan and Co. as far as possible from the New York. New
Haven. and Hailford. protesting "But Mr. Brandeis. we don't attempt to manage railroads.. - Nobody realizea better than we that
that is not our function. We give the best counsel that we can lit the selection of good men, making mistakes sometimes, as in the
He tried to make it
case of Metier,, but or, the whole doing fairly well, and we give our very best advice or, financial policy
clear that the 'expansion of the New Haven was due, and solely due, to Ms. Mdlien's own policy and initiative, and that the
mistakes which Mr. Morgan and his fellow directors made.. was not of initiation, but of almost blindly following and endorsing

June 16. 1990

18

typical relative performance of the firms subject to investment banker influence and control.

V. The Value of Morgan's Men
A preliminary examination of stock market values does not contradict the claim that
Morgan control was associated with considerable enhanced value. According to the lists

compiled by the Pujo investigation, in 1912 Morgan or his partners sat on the boards of twenty
manufacturing, mining, distribution, transport, or utility companies which had actively quoted

common stocks—three utilities, nine railroads, and eight other companies. Data on these twenty
companies, and on one hundred and forty-two other randomly selected control companies, were
collected for 1911 and 1912.23

Table 1 reports regressions of the average relative price of the firms' common stock on
various measures of fundamental values, industry dummies, and whether or not the firm's board
of directors included a Morgan partner. The coefficient on the Morgan partner dummy variable
is often large—the addition of a Morgan partner raises the log of common stock values by

between five and forty percent, depending on the specification. Standard errors are also large:
taking line three of the table as representative we can be confident that there are nineteen chances
out of twenty that the Morgan partner effect is positive, but only take two to one odds that the
true coefficient lies between 10% and 40%.
The spread of results obtained from Morgan organizations was large—ranging from the

International Mercantile Marine Co. to the Lehigh Valley Railroad—and coefficient estimates
are quite sensitive to outliers, if the International Mercantile Marine Co. had been a success.
then the Morgan touch would have raised common stock prices on average by an additional fif-

teen to twenty percentage points. Conversely, if the New York, New Haven. and Hartford's
MclIens policies.

Mr. Morgan had that Large nature which led him almost blindly so have faith in a man when once it was
established." Even though L.amont (1913) is a Lamont-side memorandum of the three-hour conversation between Thomas W.
Lamoni and Louis D. Brandeis, it appears to be an accurate record of she meeting: the same memorandum is in both the Lamont

the Brandeis papers.
23The Morganized companies are among the largest in the economy. It ja possible that the Morgan dummy cocificient is
and

proxyng foe a size effect,

June 16.

19

1990

price had collapsed in 1911 rather than two years later, the estimated Morgan touch would have
been to raise common stock prices on average by from five to eight percentage points less.

TABLE 1

HOW MUCH VALUE IS ADDED BY PUTTING A MORGAN PARTNER ON THE
BOARD?
Dependent variable is log of average 1911-12 stock pace relative lo book value
(162 observatior, InCIUdUig 20 MDrgan Companies)

INDEPENDENT VARIABLES

llorgan

Utility

Other
R2

SEE

0.021

0.834

0.038

0830

0.270

0.730

log BooWPar Value

0.180

0.777

Log Earnings/Book

0.236

0.726

Partner" Company' Variable(s)

0259
(0161)
0.270'

0.281

(0.161)

(0.197)

0.253'

0.107

.1.834

(0.144)

(0.175)

(0.304)

0.375'

0.441

1.680

(0.151)

(0.186)

(0.374)

0.055

0.155

5.691

(0.102)

(0.124)

(0.730)

Earnings/Price

P(t) c .05 (one-tailed).
"Corporate board centains a partner of J.P. Morgan and Co.
Standard errors in parentheses.

The estimated impact of adding a Morgan partner does not seem out of line if one

considers how much Morgan's fmancial services cost. For International Harvester—a simple
and straightforward deal—the investment bankers' share was about four percent of the capital

value floated. For U.S. Steel the investment bankers' share was more than ten percent. Such
large fees can be justified—if they can be justified—only if the value added by the fmanciers is
substantial.

The estimated Morgan partner coefficient declines sharply (it is always imprecisely esu-

June 16. 1990

20

mated) as variables representing a firm's present earning power are added to the regression. This

hints that Morgan partners appear to add value in some of the specifications because they are on
the boards of companies that are and are publicly seen to be relatively well-run, not because the
presence of a Morgan partner provides an otherwise unobservable signal of a company's likely
prospects. Regressions, of course, cannot sort Out the causal chain. It could be that the addition

of a Morgan partner to the board leads to the replacement of bad and the shaping-up of good

managers. It could be that Morgan partners join the board only if they have confidence in the
management, that the companies would perform just as well if the Morgan influence was absent,

and that Morgan and Co. were skillful investors but had no effect on the performance of the
economy as a whole.24
Moreover, there are a host of omitted variables uncaused by Morgan and Co. actions for
which the Morgan variable could be a proxy. The most that can be claimed is that these
regressions are not inconsistent with the idea that perhaps conflicts of interest engendered by
having Morgan and Co. present on both sides of negotiations may have been outweighed, at least
for shareholders, by the advantages of having Morgan and Co. watching over firm managers.

Vi. Financial Capitalism in Comparative Perspective
Other countries around the turn of the century—chiefly Germany and Japan—also saw
the growth of their industrial securities markets take on a "finance capitalist" pattern (see Reisser.

1911: Davis, 1965: Eatwell, 1982: Thurow, 1986). Consider first Imperial Germany. In 1914
its largest banks—such as the Deutsche, the Dresdner. and the Darmsuidter—dominated the

German capital market. These Great Banks were founded in deliberate imitation of the French
Credit Mobilier, Abraham Oppenheim was both a supporter of the Péreires and a founder of the

Darmstdter Bank. These banks made it a business principle from the very outset to maintain
permanent representation on the boards of directors and to hold a significant number of shares of

24Theae questions can be resolved by studying the performance over time ol "Morganized' companies. This is the next step

June 16, 1990

21

the companies they promoted.25

The role played by the Great Banks in monitoring and supervising corporate managements was an accepted part of German fmancial theory in the years before World War I (Riesser.

1911). There was a clear sense that this 'monitoring' role was a very valuable one. Riesser, for
example, saw the German banks as valuable because of "both the continuity of their existence

and regard for their 'issue credit', i.e.. the permanent ability of maintaining among the German
public a market for new securities issued under their auspices," which "insured a permanent
interest on the part of these banks in the [health of the) newly created [corporations] as well as in

the securities which they were instrumental in placing on the market." He criticized the preWWI British banking system because of the lack of such a monitoring system: the "complete
divorce between stock exchange and deposits...causes another great evil, namely, that the banks
have never shown any interest in the newly founded companies or in the securities issued by
these companies, while it is a distinct advantage of the German system, that the German banks.
even if only in the interests of their own issue credit, have been keeping a continuous watch over

the development of the companies, which they founded."26
This line of criticism has been taken up and amplified by many who have seen the finan-

cial centers in the City of London as having failed industry. For example, as Ronald Dore (1987)
summarizes the argument originally made by Lance Davis (1963):
The rational liquid textbook shareholder exercises pressure on managers in.,. Ethel
direction [of doing well) primarily by. in Hirschman's (1970) classification, the
'threat of exit': through, that is to say, managers' knowledge that if shareholders'
returns seem about to fall, holders of the stock will sell, share prices will go down.
capital will be more difficult to raise, possibilities of managencidal takeovers will

25Historians have argued that the influence exerted by the Great Banks on industry was sub€iantial Milward and Saul (1977)

report that the Deutsche Bank had its representatives on the boards of 159 companies in 1912 Great Banks were at once
promoting Lyndicates. originating syndicates. acceptance houses, and sources of short- and long-terre commercial credit. In the
words of Feis (1964). 'the holders of shares in a German Great Bank were participants in an investment trust (among many other
things)... The risks arising from immobilization of resources" through their commitment to the development of industry "the
banks mel...Ihrough their large capital...thcir retention of control land]...subsidiary companies especially founded for this

purpose.'
2ttToday the Deutsche Bank votes the shares of many German stockholders, the stockholders presumably believing that the Bank
will do a better job of voting their shares than they would.

22

June 16. 1990

increase. The 'committed' shareholder, by contrast, is more loyally willing to wait
for better times... but to make sure those better times actually come, he is more likely.
not to 'threaten exit', but to 'exercise voice': to complain, cajole, offer constnlctive
criticism.., at shareholders' meetings and elsewhere.... ETihe development [at the end
of the nineteenth century] of the 'efficient' stock market without trust and commitment—particularly the nature of the new issues market—and the failure to create
investment banks as a substitute.., was [it has been suggested] a contributing factor in
Britain's industrial decline.
In Japan, the prewar zaibatsu and their more shadowy postwar replacements, the keiretsu,
appear to have played a similar role. Japanese firms have historically obtained almost all of their
capital from a single bank in the form of loans: Nippon Kokan K.K.. Japan's second largest steel
producer—and a substantial member of the keiretsu associated with the Fuji Bank, had a debt-

equity ratio of 9:1 in the early 1970's. In the late 1970's, as Nippon Kokan shifted resources out
of steel and into industries based on new materials technology, this was accomplished not by the

steel company's acquisition of assets, but by repaying some of its loans to its bankers. Capital
thus placed in the hands of the bank was used to set up new enterprises, managed by former staff
of Nippon Kokan—but the only formal organizational connection was through the bank.
The pattern of influence of finance over industry is once again reminiscent of J.P. Morgan

and Co. (see Hoshi ex al., 1989). In the words of Bieda (1970): "the... bank and the trading
company exercise some influence over the associated companies' policies and appointments....
However normally the influence of the bank and the trading company is very limited unless the

member company is in difficulties." In short, like turn of the century J.P. Morgan and Co., the
group monitors (and replaces if necessary) the individual company's management, and decides
on the allocation of capital within the group.

VII. The Decline of Financial Capitalism in the United States
Perhaps

the Morgan-dominated "finance capitalist" pattern of the l9(IXI)'s was peculiar to

that age, and subsequent changes—chiefly the wider diffusion of available information to individual stockholders—have eroded the informational advantage of fmanciers that sustained

June 16, 1990

23

"finance capitalism" in the early years of this century. It might be that the history of U.S. finan-

cial markets in the twentieth century should be written as one in which informational and technological changes drive organizational shifts: as the importance of private information declined.
the ability of investors to do their own security analysis grew, and managers' compensation
schemes placed greater weight on stock options, the stamp of approval and the service of monitoring managers provided by Morgan and Co. became worth less and less.
Two considerations, however, weigh against this interpretation of the eclipse of Morgan.
First, much current thinking in finance argues that the conflict of interest between owners and

managers is still a central feature of finance today. Some advocate bringing managerial
incentives into line by making managers the residual claimants, and argue that steps in this

direction have produced enormous efficiency gains in recent years—Jensen's (1989) admittedly
extreme estimate of these gains in the last decade pegs them as worth more than half of the total
cash dividends paid by the corporate sector.
It is possible to argue that informational and technological changes gradually made

"financial capitalism" and an active market for control obsolete in the first half of this century. It
is more difficult to argue that such changes made "financial capitalism" obsolete in the first half
of this century. and that subsequent changes in information and technology have made "financial

capitalism" viable once again in the 1980's. Occam's razor suggests that if such institutions
were viable then, and are viable now, they were probably still viable in between.
Second. historical accounts of the erosion of financial capitalism in the first half of the
twentieth century have not focused on informational and technological changes that made J.P.

Morgan obsolete. Instead, historical accounts emphasize relatively autonomous political events
and psychological shifts in the attitudes of small investors toward the stock market.

As historians like Sobel (1965) see it, the first sign of Morgan's impending decline comes
in the aftermath of the WWI door-to-door bond selling campaigns, as Charles Mitchell of the

National City Bank comes to recognize that a financial empire does not have to be built by
slowly creating a reputation as a shrewd judge of investments but can be built through direct
salesmanship by uninformed representatives (Cleveland and Huertas, 1987). The second sign

June 16.

1990

24

comes in the aftermath of Edgar Smith's (1924) popularization of the benefits of common stock

ownership: Smith argued that for as long back as he could trace stocks' dividends had been only
a hair below bonds' coupons, that stocks in addition promised capital gains, and that consequently at every investment horizon longer than five years stocks dominated bonds.

Smith's advice that everyone should shift from bonds to stocks—any stocks, they did not
have to be well-selected stocks—coupled with Mitchell's high-pressure sales campaigns and the
growing possibility that the New Era might really be a new era of prosperity, helped fuel the

stock boom of the 1920's. In the 1920's Morgan's or Kuhn Loeb's willingness to stand behind a
security issue was no longer of prime importance. Many investors were willing to bet along with
Samuel Insull that he was a financial genius, and that heavily-leveraged utility empires were the

way to riches. The subsequent crash led to investigations. And the investigations led to the
Securities and Exchange Commission and to the forcible divorce of bankers who had the capital
to take substantial long-term positions in firms from their places on boards of directors from
which they could easily monitor managerial performance.
This story traditionally told by historians is not a story of a shift in the balance of information flows, or in the form of the efficient organization of the relationship between fmance and

industry. The SEC took the form that it did largely because the populists in Congress had always

believed in Untermyer's and Brandeis' critiques of how the bankers used other people's money,
not because Untermyer's and Brandeis' critiques had suddenly become more correct than it had
been in 1910 (Seligman, 1982). The Glass-Steagall act was passed because of the Great
Depression, not because of an increase in ultimate investors ability to assess and monitor firms.
And organizations like the National City Bank and, later, Merrill Lynch appear to have prospered
not because they were the best judges of the worth of securities, but instead because their door-

to-door methods were able to directly tap savings that would otherwise have flowed into the life
insurance and banking systems, and would presumably have reached the capital market in the

hands of more sophisticated money managers.
It may be that historians have missed the true determinants of events. Underlying the
politics and the merchandising, perhaps the multiplication of security analysts and a shift in man-

June 16, 1990

25

agerial compensation schemes made it easy for investors to assess the fundamental values of

securities and aligned managers' interests with owners'.
But in recent years security analysts have continued to multiply, and managerial compen-

sation schemes have become increasingly intricate. If the underlying economic logic made the
tide flow away from financial capitalism in the 1920's. it is difficult to see when it reached its

ebb, and what shifts in economic logic led to its return flood in the 1980's. This line of analysis
suggests—especially when coupled with the presence of "financial capitalist" modes of
organization in fast-growing Germany and Japan—that the transformation of Wall Street in the
1930's may have pushed the United States away from a pattern of relationships between finance
and industry that offered benefits to investors and fmanciers, and toward a pattern that offered

rents to managers.

VIII. Conclusions

Many issues have not been addressed. Surely the most important unaddressed issue is the

balance between J.P. Morgan's adding shareholder value by improving efficiency as opposed to
by creating monopoly. This question is close to unresolvable. No one disputes that the Robber
Barons sought monopoly no one disputes that the Robber Barons took advantage of economies

of scale the relative weight to be given these two factors is very difficult to resolve.
This paper, however, has addressed one major element of the progressive critique of the

turn-of-the-century organization of American finance: that financiers' presence on corporate
boards of directors allowed them to impose an unwarranted tax on industry by exploiting the

conflict of interest created for their own benefit. The progressives' fear was well-founded—there
were conflicts of interest and investment bankers did exploit them.
But there is evidence that, from shareholders' standpoint, these negatives of fmancial
capitalism were balanced by positives. A strong argument in economics rests on three supports: a
coherent theoretical base laying out the strategies available to and the interests of market
participants, concrete evidence that actual individual investors, managers. and bankers

June 16. 1990

26

understood and acted according to the theoretical logic of the situation. And statistical evidence
that such a pattern of action is found not just in isolated anecdotes but is standard operating

procedure in the situation.
The first two supports are strong. The theoretical logic for interpreting Morgan's edge in
terms of its hard-to-match reputation as an honest broker and a skillful analyst of risk is clear.
Many observers at the time thought that the stamp of approval of Morgan and Co. was worth its

handsome price and gave confidence. And the large-scale correlation between "finance
capitalist" relationships and rapid growth remains intriguing and suggestive. The third support is
weaker. The most that can be said is that preliminary regressions are not inconsistent with the
argument made. Further investigation of this support is a very high priority for future research.
Since the decline of the House of Morgan, concern over the relationship between finance

and industry has centered around two themes. The first is the concern expressed by Berle and
Means (1932) that corporate managers had become accountable to no one. The second is the fear
that today investment projects are assessed not by far-seeing investment bankers with a keen

sense of fundamentals but by an erratic and flighty stock market committed to the short term. In
Keynes' words: "The spectacle of modem investment markets has sometimes moved me
towards the conclusion that to make the purchase of an investment permanent and indissoluble.
like a marriage, except for reason of death or other grave cause, might be a useful remedy for our
contemporary evils. For this would force the investor to direct his mind to the long-term
prospects and to those only" (Keynes. 1936).27 Both of these ills seem to call for large-scale
financial institutions to take an interest in firm managers, and to establish and hold long-term
positions in individual companies. It is an irony that today many of the intellectual children and
27One index of the poential seriousness of ,uch problems ii the fact that the combined receipts of NYSE firms cunently amount
to one-sixth of ill coeporite prof'its. Trading costs aye thus consuming seventeen percent of the return to capital generated in the
corporate sector, Is recent years Keynes' position has become more popular. Foci recent example ace Light (1989), who
remains optimistic and believes that investors are becoming more concerned with the long-term prospects and those only. Light
argues that 'large pools of capital such as pension funds arid endowments don't really need the liquidity the public market
offers... Fund managern are also realizing thai trading isa tough diacipline....ft)rading isa arro-sum game played in an efficient

rnarIet against equally talented rivals.... Instead of trading a number of small, liquid positions. the funds can buy and own smaller
numbers of large. illiquid [LEO) positions in a form where they... participate more actively.... This alternative can be a positive.
sum game... large institutional funds can behave more like owners and less like traders." A skeptic would note that all of this has
been clear for half a century. and yet moit institutions still act like "tders" and not like owneTS"

June 16. 1990

27

grandchildren of the Progressives appear to call for a return to "financial capitalism.

28

June 16, 1990

TABLE 2

COMPANIES WITHIN MORGAN INFLUENCE ON THE EVE OF WORLD WAR I
Adams Express Co.
AT&T
Atthison, Topeka, &Santa Fe Railroad
Baldwin Locomotive Co.

Chcago-Great Wesm Railroad

Er Railroad
Genarai ElecUic Co.

International MerctiIe Marine Co.
International Harvesr Co.
Le4igh Valley Railroad
New Yoit, New I4aen, and Hartlord Railroad

Northern Pacilc Raikoad

New York CenaI Railroad
Philadelphia Rapid Transit Co.

Public Service Corporation of New Jersey
Puilman Co.

Reading Railroad

Soem Railroad
Urted Slates Steel Co.
Westinghouse Co.

June 16. 1990

29

References

Adams, Charles F. and Henry Adams (1873). Chapters of Erie (New York).

Adler, Cyrus (1921), Jacob Henry SchW A Biographical Sketch (New York: p.p.).

Adler. Cyrus (1928). Jacob Henry Schiff His Life and Letters (New York: Doubleday, Doran.
and Co.).
Allen. Frederick Lewis (1949). The Great Pierponi Morgan (New York: Harper and Row).
Allen, Frederick Lewis (1935), The Lords of Creation (New York: Harper and Bros.).
Andrew. A. Piatt (1913). Some Facts and Figures Relating to the Money Trust Inquiry: Letters
to the New York Evening Post (Washington. D.C.: G.P.O. Senate Doc. No. 1003, 62d

Congress. 3d Session).
Atack, Jeremy (1985), "Industrial Structure and the Emergence of the Modern Industrial
Corporation." Explorations in Economic History 22 (January), 29—52.
Barton, Hepburn A. (1924), History of Coinage and Currency (New York: Macmillan).
Baumol, William (1965). The Stock Market and Economic Efficiency (New York: Fordham
University).

Berle. Adolf (1929). The Law of Corporation Finance (New York: ).
Berle. Adolf and Gardiner Means (1932), The Modern Corporation and Private Property (New

York: Macmillan).
Best, M. H. and J. Humphnes (1986), "The City and the Decline of British Industry: Liquidity
without Commitment," in Bernard Elbaum and William Lazonick. eds.. The Decline of the
British Economy (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Brandeis. Louis D. (1914). Other People's Money, and How the Bankers Use It (New York:
Frederick A. Stokes).
Brooks. John (1976), Telephone; The First Hundred Years (New York: Harper and Row).

June 16. 1990

30

lBureau of Corporations) United States Government, Department of Commerce (1913), The
International Harvester Company (Washington, D.C.: G.P.O.).

Burr. Anna Robeson (1927). Portrait of a Banker: James Stillman, 1850-1918 (New York:
Duffield and Co.).
Carosso. Vincent P. (1987). The Morgans: Private International Bankers, 1854.1913
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press).
Carosso. Vincent P. (1970). Investment Banking in America: A History (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press).

Chandler. Alfred D. (1956). Henry Varnum Poor: Business Editor, Analyst, and Reformer
(Cambridge. Mass.: Harvard University Press).
Chandler. Alfred D. (1962), Strategy and Structure (Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press).
Chandler. Alfred D. (1978). The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American
Business (Cambridge. Mass.: Harvard University Press).
Cleveland. Harold van B. and Thomas Huertas (1987), Citibank 1812.1970 (Cambridge. Mass.:
Harvard University Press).

Corey, Lewis (1930), The House of Morgan (New York: G.H. Watt).

Cowing. Cedric B. (1965). Populisls. Plungers, andProgressives: A Social History of Stock and
Commodity Speculation, 1890-1 936 (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press).
Danielan. N.R. (1939). AT&T. The Story of Industrial Conquest (New York: Harper and Bros.).
Davis. Joseph S. (1917). Essays in the Earlier History of American Corporations (Cambridge.
Mass.: Harvard University Press).
Davis. Lance (1966), "The Capital Markets and Industrial Concerns: The U.S. and U.K., a
Comparative Study," Economic History Review 19.
Davis. Lance (1963). "Capital Jmmobjljtjes and Finance Capitalism: A Study of Economic
Evolution in the United States," Explorations in Entrepreneurial History I (Fall): 88-105.

Davis. Lance (1960). "The New England Textile Mills and the Capital Markets: A Study of
Industrial Borrowing 1840—1860," Journal of Economic History 20 (March), 5—7.

June 16, 1990

31

[Davison, Henry) (1913), Letterfrom Messrs. J.P. Morgan and Co., in Response to the Invitation
of the Sub-Committee (Hon. A.P. Pujo. Chairman) of the Committee on Banking and Currency
of the House of Representatives (New York: p.p.).
De Long, J. Bradford e: al. (1988). "Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets" (Cambridge, Mass.:

HIER).

De Long. J. Bradford (1987), "The Revenge of the Chartists" (Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T.
mimeo).

Dewey. Davis R. (1934). Financial History of the United States (New York: Longmans. Green).
Dore. Ronald (1987). Taking Japan Seriously: A Confucian Perspective on Leading Economic
Issues (Stanford. CA: Stanford University Press).
Evans. George H. (1929), "The Early History of Preferred Stock in the United States," American
Economic Review,
Feis. Herbert (1964), Europe.' The World's Banker (New Haven. Yale University Press).

Ferguson, Thomas (forthcoming), Critical Realignment: The Fall of the House of Morgan and
the Coming of the New Deal.
Garraty, John (1960), Right-Hand Man: The Life of George W. Perkins (New York: Harper and

Bros.).
Gerschenkron, Alexander (1962). Economic Backwardness in Historical Pespecrive (Cambridge.
Mass.: Harvard University Press).

Goldsmith. Raymond (1954). Financial Intermediaries in the American Economy (Princeton:
Princeton University Press>.
Goldsmith. Raymond (1954), The Balance Sheet of the United States (Princeton: Princeton
University Press).
Graham. Benjamin and David Dodd (1934), Security Analysis (New York: McGraw-Hill).

Hirschman, Albert 0. (1970), Exit, Voice, and Loyalty (Cambridge. MA: Harvard University
Press).
Hollander, Jacob (1913), "Security Holdings of National Banks," American Economic Review 3

June 16, 1990

32

(December): 793—8 14.

Hoshi. Takeo, And Kashyap, and David Scharfstem (1989), "Bank Monitoring and Investment:
Evidence from the Changing Structure of Japanese Corporate Banking Relationships"
(Cambridge. MA: NBER Working Paper 3079).

Hovey, Carl (1912). The Life Story off. Pierpon: Morgan (London: Heinemann).
James. John (1987). Money and Capital Markets in Posibellum America (Princeton: Princeton
University Press).
Jensen, Michael (1989). "The Eclipse of the Public Corporation." Harvard Business Review
(September-October), 61-74.
Jensen, Michael and William Meckling (1976), "The Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior.
Agency Costs, and Ownership Stmcture," Journal of Financial Economics 3. 4: 305-60.

Jensen. Michael and Richard Ruback (1983), "The Market for Corporate Control: The Scientific
Evidence," Journal of Financial Economics 11. 3: 5-50.
Josephson, Matthew (1934), The Robber Barons: The Great American Capitalists, 1861-1901
(New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich).
Keynes, John Maynard (1936). The General Theory of Employment. Interest and Money
(London: Macmillan and Co.).

Koch, Albert (1943), The Financing of Large Corporations, 1920—39 (New York: NBER).
Kolko, Gabriel (1963), The Triumph of Conservatism (London: Free Press).

Kuznets. Simon (1960), Capital in the American Economy: its Formation and Financing
(Princeton: Princeton University Press).
[Lamont, Thomas W.1 (1913), "The Brandeis Talk" IA Conversation between Thomas W.
Laniont and Louis D. Brandeis on December 2. 1913] (Baker Library. Thomas W. Laniont
Papers, Box 84; an identical copy is in the Brandeis papers at Brandeis University).

Lawson. Thomas W. (1906), Frenzied Finance (New York: The Ridgway-Thayer Company).
Light, Jay (1989). "The Privatization of Equity," Han'ard Business Review (September-October),
62-3.

June 16, 1990

33

Manne, Henry 0. (1965). "Mergers and the Market for Corporate Control," Journal of Political

Economy 73. 2: 110-20.
McCloskey. Donald (1981), Enterprise and Trade in Victorian Britain (Cambridge. U.K.:
Cambridge University Press).

McCormick, Cyrus (1931), The Century of the Reaper (New York).

Moody, John (1904). The Truth About the Trusts.' A Description and Analysis of the American
Trust Movement (New York: Moody Publishing Co.).
Moody, John (1912), How to Invest Money Wisely (New York: Office of John Moody).
Moulton. Harold 0. (1918), "Commercial Bank Lending and Capital Formation," Journal of

Political Economy 26 (July): 705—31.
Myers. Margaret (1932), The New York Money Market (New York: Columbia University Press).
Neal. Larry (1971), "Trust Companies and Financial Innovation, 1897—1914," Business History

Review 45 (Spring): 39—43.
Nevin, Thomas. and Marian Sears (1955). "The Rise of a Market for Industrial Securities, 1887—
1902," Business History Review 29 (June): 109—120.

O'Hagan, H. Osborne (1929), Leavesfrom My Life (London: John Lane).
Paine, Albert B. (1921). Theodore N. Vail: A Biography (New York).
Peach. Nelson (1941). The Securir' Affiliates of Nail onal Banks (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins

University Press).
Pecora. Ferdinand (1939). WaIl Street Under Oath: The Story of Our Modern Money Changers

(New York).
Pollard, Sidney (1982). Peaceful Conquest (Oxford: Oxford University Press).

Poor's Railroad Manual Company (1913), Poor's Manual of Industrials 1913 (New York:
Poor's Railroad Manual Company).
Poor's Railroad Manual Company (1913). Poor's Manual of Public Utilities 1913 (New York:
Poor's Railroad Manual Company).

June 16. 1990

34

Poor's Railroad Manual Company (1913), Poor's Manual of Railroads 1913 (New York: Poor's
Railroad Manual Company).
Pound. Arthur and Samuel Moore. eds. (1931). More They Told Barron (New York: Harper and
Bros.).

(Pujo Committee] United States Congress, House. Committee on Banking and Currency (1913),
Money Trust Investigation. Hearings Before the Committee Appointed Pursuant to House
Resolutions 429 and 504 to investigate the Concentration of Control of Money and Credit
(Washington. D.C.: G.P.O.).
[Pujo Committee] United States Congress, House, Committee on Banking and Currency (1913).
Minoriry Report of the Committee Appointed to House Resolutions 429 and 504 10 Investigate
the Concentration of Control of Money and Credit (Washington. D.C.: G.P.O.).
(Pujo Committee] United States Congress, House. Committee on Banking and Currency (1913),
Report of the Committee Appointed Pursuant to House Resolutions 429 and 504 to investigate
the Concentration of Control of Money and Credit (Washington. D.C.: G.P.O.).

Redlich. Fritz (1951). The Molding of American Banking: Men and ideas (New York: Hafner
Publishing Co.).
Rhodes. Frederick L. (1932). John J. Carry (New York).
Rhodes, Frederick L. (1929), The Beginnings of Telephony (New York).

Riesser, J. (1911), The German Great Banks and Their Concentration in Connection with the
Economic Development of Germany (Washington. D.C.: G.P.O.: National Monetary
Commission. Senate Doc. No. 593, 61st Congress. 2d Session).
Ripley, William Z. (1927), Main Street and Wall Street (Boston: Little. Brown, and Company).

Satterlee. Herbert L. (1935). J. Pierponi Morgan: An Intimate Portrait (New York: Macmillan).
Sayers, R.S. (1976). The Bank of England (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Seligman. Joel (1982), The Transformation of Wall Street: A History of the Securities and
Exchange Commission and Modern Corporate Finance (Boston: Houghton Mifflin
Company).
Smith, Edgar L. (1924). Common Stocks as Lang Term investments (New York: Macmillan).

June 16. 1990

35

Sobel, Robert (1965), The Big Board. A History of the U.S. Stock Market (New York: The Free
Press).
Staples. Henry Lee (1954), The Fall of a Railroad Empire (Boston>.
Sylla, Richard E. (1975). The American Capital Market, 1846-1914: A Study of the Effects of
Public Policy on Economic Development (New York: Arno Press).
Untermyer. Samuel (1915), "Speculation on the Stock Exchanges, and Public Regulation of the
Exchanges." American Economic Review 5: 24-68.

Vanderlip, Frank A. and Boyden Sparkes (1935). From Farm Boy to Financier (New York).
Vishny. Robert, and Andrej Shleifer (1987), "Large Shaiho1ders and Corporate Control,"
Journal of Political Economy.
White. Eugene (1989). "Regulation. Taxes, and the Financing of American Business 1860—1960"
(New Brunswick. NJ: Rutgers University).

White. Eugene (1989). "When the Ticker Ran Late: the Stock Market Boom and Crash of 1929."
in Eugene White, ed., The Stock Market Crash in Historical Perspective (Homewood. NJ:
Dow Jones-Irwin).
White. Eugene (1985). "The Merger Movement in Banking, 1919—1933," Journal of Economic
History 45 (June): 286—7.
White, Eugene (1983). The Regulation and Reform of the American Banking System. 1900—1 929
(Princeton: Princeton University Press).

Wilkinson. William (1913), John Pierpont Morgan, an Appreciation: A Sermon Preached at the
Daily Noon Service at Wall and Broad Streets (New York: p.p.).
Williamson. Jeffrey (1974). Late Nineteenth-Century American Development: A General
Equilibrium History (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press).

Williamson. Oliver (1975), Markets and Hierarchies.
Willis, H. Parker and J.I. Bogen (1929). Investment Banking (New York: Harper and Brothers).
Winkier, John (1930), Morgan the Magnificent (New York: Vanguard Press).

