EBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

UNIVARIATE VS. NULTIVARIATE
FORECASTS OF GHP GROWTH AND STOCK RETURNS;

EVIDENCE AND IMPLICATIONS FOR THE PERSISTENCE OF SHOCKS,
DETRENOING METHODS, AlTO TESTS OF THE PERMANENT INCOME HYPOTHESIS

John N. Cochrane

Working Paper No. 3427

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1990

I thank Gene Fama for helpful coaoients. Parts of this research were
completed while I was a Visiting Scholar the Hoover Institution, and this
research was partially supported by NSF grant SES-88-09912. This paper is
part of EBER'a research program in Economic Fluctuations, Any opinions
expressed are thosa of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NEER Working Paper #3427

Septealber 1990
UNIVARIATE VS. HIVANINIt

FORECASTS OF (211' GRNIH AND PlUCK REIURNS:
EVIDENCK AND D1PIICAITCVS FOR TEE PFREISTENCE OF SlICKS,
DETRENDING HETEOLS, AND TESTS OF 1iE PFflThNENT INCNi4E HYFOTHESIS

iasrs2cr
Tagged (2W graith rates are poor forecasts of future GIP growth rates in
postwar US data, leadirq to the iirpreaaion that (2W is nearly a rardas walk.
However, other variables, aid especially the lagged oonsua'ptiorfCNP ratio, do

forecast long-horizon (2W growth, aid show that (2IP has taiorary orponents.

Labor inxrne aid stock prices (using the divider4/price ratio) display the
sane behavior. This paper documents these facts aid examines their
isplications for the persistence of shocks to (2W an] tine-variation in

expected stock returns. I find that UNP has en slacet entirely transitory
response to a (2W shock that holds ocnamçtion constant. This is intuitive:
if consumption dass not change, permanent incatie did not change, so the

change in (2W should be transitory. Similarly, a stock price shock that

holds divideids ounstant suggests a discaint rats change, an] prices display
a large transitory unvement in response to this shock. The paper also

examines iailications of transitory variations in (2W an] labor lnxre for
methods of extracting stochastic trerds or "cyclically adjusting" Gil', aid
for explaining "excess snoothnesa" violstions of the permanent iirnus
hypothesis.

3dm H. chrane

Epartnent of Econanica
University of Thicago
1126 E. 59th St.
Oticago IL 60637

Univariate vs. }fultivmriate Forecasts of ON? Growth and Stock Returns;
Evidence end Implications for the Persistence of Shocks, Detrending Methods,
and 'recta of the Permanent Income hypothesis.

1. Introduction

Lagged ON? growth rates are poor forecasters of future ONP growth rates

in postwar US data and data from many other countries. A high ON? growth
rete today does not seem to signal lower growth rates in the future that
would bring the level of GN? hack towards a trend. This observation has led

many researchers to the conciusion that ONP is reughly a random walk.
However, other variables are much better forecasters of future ON? growth,

and this multivariare evidence ahnwa that ON? does in fact contain strong
mean-reverting or temporary components.

The consumption/ON? ratio is the most important variable for long-run

ONP forecasts since it is stable over long periods of time, since it is
highly autocorrelated, and since consomptinn is neatly a random walk. ON?
deciines more than consumption in a recession, so the consumption/ON? ratio
riaes.

Viewing such a rise in the consumption/ON? ratio, one can forecast

that ON? must eventually rise again to reestablish the historical ratio.
Thus a change in the consumption/ON? ratio can be used to forecast long term
movements in ON? growth. Since consumptinn is nearly a rsndom wslk, ON? must

do mcst of the adjusting; the ratio forecasts long term ON? growth rather
than long tern consumption growth.

Its high autocorrelation means that the

consumption/ON? ratio can pick up long horizon movements in ON? that a more
chcppy right hand variable might miss.

Roughly similar statements are true of labor income and stock prices.

Lagged labor income growth is a poor forecaster of future labor income
growth, and lagged returns are poor forecasters of future returns.

The

nnnsumption/lahor income ratio is a much better forecaster of labor income
growth, and the dividend/price ratio is a much better forecaster of returns.

Each implies much sore temporary variation than is suggested by univerlate
regress ions

This paper documents this characterization of the data, extending the

results of Cochrane and Sbordone (1988), King, Pleaser, Stock and Watson

(1989), snd especially lass (1990), and explores its implications for
measurements of the petsistenco of shocks to GHP, for methods of detrending
or "cyclically adjusting" GNP, for the cxcess smoothness of consumption found

in tests of the permanent income hypothesis, and for time-variation in
expected stock returns.

Section 2 studies the persistence of shocks to GNP. This issua has been

the focus of a large body of empirical research (see Nelson and l'losser
(1982), Campbell and Msnkiw (2987) Clark (1987) ,
(1990) among many others).

Cochrane

(1988) .

Cogley

If CNP growth rates are not forecastable, then

shocks are permanent, so there is no "business cycle" to study,

We will find two novelties in using iaultivariate information to study

the persistence of shocks to GNP. Fitst, with aevéral variables there are
several shocks, and these shocks contain more information than univariate
shocks. A univariete "shock to tN?' is a movement in CNP growth not forecast

by pest GNP growth.

But a aoltivariate shock to GNP is a movement in GNP

growth not forecast hy!past CNP growth and other variables, and thus contains

more informatian. Furthermote, CNP will generally respond to (muitivatiate)
shocks to othot variables as well as shocks to GNP, where we can only trace
its response to its own shocks in a univariate regression.

I find that CNP behaves much like a random walk in its univariate
representation, but that GNP displays transitory variation in response to
multivariatm ahocks.

CNF's response to a consumption shock is partly

permanent but also partly temporary. Hare importantly, CNP's response to a
CEll' shock holding consumption coiistaoi is almost entirely transitory.

has a natural interptetation:

This

If consumption does out change, permanent

income must not have changed, so any such change in tHE' must be entirely
transitory.

Thus, by isolating tHE' shocks with no consumption change, the

multivariate system is better able to document temporary components in tHE'

than regressions of GM' growth on

lagged

GNP growth.1

Second even if we arc only interested in the response of GNP to
univariate shocks, an estimate of that response formed from a regression ut

GM' growth on its own

pest

is different from an estimate formed by finding

the univariate GM' process implied by a regression of GNP growth on other
variables. This is a general proposition: a pth order vector autoregression
implies

different univariate

than pth order univariate

processes

autoregressions (Zellner and Palm (1978)).

But it is especially true when

the lagged conswsption/GNT ratio is a right hand variable.

The VAR imposes

that this ratio is stationary, so the permanent tomponent of CUE cannot vary

more than that of consumption. The VAR exploits this information to make an
improved estimate of CUP's long-run response to uoivariate shocks, and this
estimate shows more transitory variation than estimates besed on univariate
autoregressions -

Section 3 examines implications of multivariate CUP forecasts for
detrending or "cyclically adjusting" CUP.

The linear trends of the GO's

hroke down with the "productivity slowdown" ef the JO's, and there has since

been much interest in estimating stothsstic trends for CUP.

This issue (in

part) originally motivated the literature on persistence and unit roots. A
good stochastic trend should not respond to business cycles (if they exist),

but should respond to long.tcrm fluctuations in CUP in a sensible way, to

allow definitions of cyclically adjusted budget deficits, or ratios of
monetary aggregatos to cyclically adjusted GNP.

1Cothrane and Shordone (1988) show that the permanent income hypothesis
implies that consumption and CUP are cointegrated and consumption is a random
walk, so one can measure the variance of the permanent component of CUP by
the variance of the permanent component of consumption, which is consumption
itself. Fama (1990) explores the permanent income story in detail and uses

it to interpret the response of CUP and investment to a consumption
He suggests the use of consumption to measure the
("wealth") shock.
pernanent component of income, and documents the imporrsnce for forecasting
CUP growth of the consumption/CUP ratio together with the observation that
consumption is nearly a random walk.

As univariate and multivariate forecasts of CHP growth differ1
univarjate and multivariato estimates of stochastic rrends differ.

A

stochastic trend based on a uuivariate OfT? autoregression is essentially the

same as OFF itself, since that autoregression has little power to forecast
ON? growth. The multivariate estimate of a stochastic trend is very close to
consumption multiplied by the mean ONI'/consumption ratio.

Thus it responds

to long-term movements in ON? as consumption does, but moves little over
business cycles. It can also be interpreted as an instance of the permanent
income hypothesis: the multivariate trend in ON? is (approximately) permanent
income, as revealed by consumption.

Section 4 examines implications fat "excess smoothness" rejections of
the permanent income hypothesis. The persistence of income shocks has hsd an

immediate economic application in this area.

If income really is a random

walk, as the univariate evidence suggests, then consumption changes should

equal income changes. Since the variance of consumption changes is a good
deal less than that of income changes, the permanent income hypothesis has

been rejected in favor of "excess smoothness" of consumption. (See Deaton

(1987). campbell and Deeton (1989), campbell and Mankiw (1989).

Flavin

(1988), Hansen, Roherds and Sargent (1990) and Quah (1990) criticize this
literature.)

Section 4 verifies this finding based on univariate labor

income regressions, but finds that the mean-reversion in labor income implied

by multivariate estimates easily explains the smoothness of consumption
growth.

Section 5 uses the same techniques to examine time-variation in expected

stock returns, or equivalently, the existence of temporary components in
stock prices. Fama and French (1988a) and Foterba and Summers (1988) found
some evidence that lagged returns forecast future returns. Richardson (1990)
end others have argued that the apparent forecast power of lagged returns is
statistically insignificant. However Fame end French (1988b) find that other

variables, end the dividend/price ratio in particular, are strong and
statistically significant predictors of futute teturns. (See also Hodrtck
(1990) for a statistical investigaricn.)

Similarly, Oochrane and Sbordone

(1988) find that sultiveriete generalizations of Poterba and Sumrsers'

variance ratios that include dividends indicate much larger temporary
components in prices.

I

find that prices and dividcnds behave much like CNP and consumptiod.

Returns have very little univariate
univariate

predictability, so

prices look like a

random walk. But prices diaplay very different responses to the

two ehocke one can define in a bivariate system. The response of prices (and
dividends) to a dividend shock is almost entirely permanent; the response of
prices to to a price shock holding dividends constant is entirely transitory,
while dividends show no response to this shock.

This also has a natural interpretation.

A

shock to

dividends can come

with no change in discount rates, and hence no change in expected returns.
The shock to dividends has an entirely permanent effect on dividends.

(One

interpretation of this feature has managers setting dividends to "permanent
earnings", inducing a random walk just like permanent income consumers.)
Hence, the shock to dividends should and does have an entirely permanent

effect on prices. On the other hand, a shock to prices with no
contemporaneous change in dividends suggests a discount rate or risk premium
change.

This changes expected returns, and thus sets in motion expected

changes in prices.

Eventually, discount rates return to their mean and

prices return to their customary multiple n dividends, which were unaffected

by the discount rate shock.

Thus, by isolating discount rate changes as

shocks to prices with no change in dividends, the multivariate system is able
to

decument time variation in expected returns that is missed by regressions

of returns on lagged returns.

2. Measuring the persistence of CNP in postwar US data.

Table 1 presents a vector autoregression of log CMI' end nondurable +

services

consumption growth on lagged log CMI' and consumption growth and the

lagged log consumption/ON?

ratio.

It also presents

a onivsriate

autoregression of ON? growth an lagged ON? growth. All the calculations that

follow are based on these regression ccefficients.2

The VAR

includes

two lags of each variabi.e, while the univariate

autoregression includes four lags.

More lags do not change the qualitative

results, but just add wiggles to the impulse-response and spectral density
functions. Both regressions are generous by the usual specification tests,
for example the last lag is statistically insignificant.

I also experimented

with a variety of extra right hand variables including stock returns and
term and default premia. These variables significantly forecast GNP growth,
but they do not have much effect on the long-run impulse-response functions.

Like isore lags, extra variables basically just add wiggles to thc
impulse-responses at short horizons.

Several features of the regressions in table I are noteworthy.

The

multivariate CNP forecast is a good deal belier than the univariate forecast:

the lagged consuisption/CNP ratio is highly significant in the VAR
forecasting equation, and the R2 of the VAR

CR?

CR? equation is higher than that

of the (longer) univariate autoregression. Consumption growth is slightly
predictable in the VAR,

but

with a much lower R2 than CR? growth.

Fig. I presents impulse-response functions of the consumptton-CRP VAR,

2The VAR imposes that CNP and consumption are cointegrated, or,

that

equivalently

the log consumption/CR? ratio is stationary and does not contain a unit
root or random welk component.
Cochrane (1989) provides a critique of the
methodology in which one conducts tests for cointogratinn and then imposes
the results in subsequent analysis, which is why such tests are absent hero.
Plots of the consumption/CR?, consumption/labor income and dividend/price
ratios show that they do not have trends, and suggest that the essumption
that these ratios are stationary is not unreasonable.
(The same is not true
of all ratios, for example nondurables alone/CR?.) However, the whole point

of these ratios is that they are slowly mean-reverting, and hence can
forecast slowly mean-reverting behavior in CN? or stock prices. Hence, they
are likely to spuriously fail to reject a unit root test if one does notallow for ample serial correlation.
All the left hand variables are one period growth rates. Hodrick (1990)
argues that this gives better statistical perfornance than aggregated left
hand variables that have been common in the mean reversion literature.

-c
1/)

T3

0(0

06
a)

w.t-

cO
0

a

ci

a:

P

00

5

10

15

20

25

35

30

40

Quarters after a unit shock

Rssportoooof
Fig. 1. Inptol.s-rcapoooe functions for cons oopiion-CNP VAR.
oonotoepoion (0) and uP (y) to ontO ronsoeFolon And liP shocks, The VAR is
regre00100 of oonooepiion end Gilt gooooh on the io1ged ooosooptlnn/Gt1P toils

sod too lago of conouepoiort ond COP rooth (see Table 1). The shocks ore
orohogoosiloed to force to 0 the loorsoroon040 roopoose of ooootoopolon- to a

GOP shook.

00

_
Univorote

00

I
5

0

1

I

15

20

I

25

30

Quorters after a unit shock

35

Fig. 1. onivorione Gilt topoloc-onopoose funootono, The "Goivocisoe' roopocon

in nsrnorod frooorogcooaioo of iN!' gr000b on 4 laoo of GOP grouch, The
'OAR" roopoooo Go ootijootod fron a vector a00000gtoonion of GOP sod
ooootaopolon grootli on too iogo and the la00od 000000ption/GNF ratio.

40

calculated from the regressions in table 1.

(The appendix details the

calculations.)

The VAR errors are orthogonalized with consumption first and

then income.

Equivalently, the instantaneous response of ON? to a

consumption shock is forced to zero. This is also equivalent to including
current ON? growth in the consumption growth regression! but not vice versa.3

Several features of fig. 1 are noteworthy. First, the eventual response

of consumption is the same as that of ON? to each of the shocks,

This

results from the assumption that the consumption/ON? ratio is stationary, and
hence can be included on the right hand side.

If consumption and ON? ended

up with different responses to a shock1 the consumption/ON? ratio would not
be stationary.

Second, look at the responses of consumption and ON? to a

consumption shock. Consumption is almost a random walk: its impulse response

function is almost flat. ON? has an instantaneous response of about 2/3 the
consumption change; this rises to about 1 1/2 times the consumption response

after 4 quarters, and then declines to equal the consumption change by the
time 40 quarters have passed. Fama (1990) interprets this as the response of
investment to a wealth shock.

Third, look at the response to a ON? shock.

This is a shock to ON? that does not contemporaneously affect consumption.

It has only a very small eventual impact on consumption, hot ON? shows a
strong mean-reverting response to this shock.4

.4. shock to ON? that does not

change consumption must not have changed permanent incnrsn, and thus must be

3iinfortunstely, some identification assumption is always needed on VAR
errors, since the system can always be equivalently reexprnssed in terms of

new errors that are a nonsingular linear combination of old errors.
Blancherd and Qush (1989) explore an identification method in which the
long run response to one shock is forced to zero. As it turns out, the two
methods produce nearly the sara result, as the income shock here has
essentially no permanent component.

4The slightly positive long run response to the ON? shock ts not robust to
changes in specification. Slight changes in veriebles or sample period yield
smaller or even negative responses to this shock.
For example, if one uses
private ON? (ON? - government purchases of good and services, CITIBASE series
Oct82), the long run response to the ON? shock is -.5! In annual data, the
positive serial correlation of consumption disappears, so both consumption
responses are basioally flat, and its response to a ON? shock essentially 0
at all horizons.

temporary.

Fig. 2 presents univariate impulse-response functions f or GM'.5 These

functions are estimated from the univariare autoregression of table 1 and
from the VAR.

the impulse-response function estimated froa the univariate

autoregression displays a good deal of persistence: in response to a unit
shock, CNP climbs to about 1.6 after a year, and then declines only to about

The univariate irpulse-reaponse estimated from the VAR has quite

1.4.

similar short run dynamics, but it displays much more mean reversion at long
horizons, ending up at about half its peak value.6

Compare either of the univariote impulse-responses in fig. 2 to the
eu].tivariate impulse-responses in fig

1.

Clearly, whether shocks to GM' are

persistent or not depends crucially on the information set one uses to
forecast GM' growth.

If one observes consumption as well as GNP, one can

forecast that a shock to GM' which does not contemporaneously move
consumption will almost entirely disappear.

If one is restricted to only

observing GUI itself, shocks induce a nuch larger persistent component.

Fig. 3 shows how the univariato Cli? dynaaics estimated from the VAR
differ from those implied by the univariace autoregression in the frequency
domain.

The long-horizon behavior of Cli? is reflected in the spectral

density at frequencies near zero, or long periods. (The appendix details the
connection between spectral donsitios at zero and impulse-response functions

as univariate measures of persistence.)

The VAil uses the information that

the spectral densities of consumption and CliP growth must be equal at

5The vertical scales of the univariate (fig. 2) and multivariate (fig. I)
impulse-responses are not comparable. Loosely, fig. 1 presents the responses

to one standard deviation shocks (unit shocks of the orthogonalized
representation); fig. 2 presents the responses to one percent shocks.
follows the conventions in the literature.

This

6The value of the long horizon response ia sensitive to variables and
For private GM', it is less than .5.
samples.
The basic pattern in which
the VAR indicates much more aean reversion than the univariate autoregression
is not sensitive,

S

10
N)

0:
N)

4) N
U)

-

C

00:
0C"J

Consumplion
CNP, VAR

a1U

Lii-

U
a)

0

0
d

8

4

2

Period in quarters
Pig.

3. Spectral density of CS? growth and consumption growth.

The

consunprion spectral density and the VAR CNP spectral density are estimated
from a vector autoregression ci consumption and GN? growth on two lags and
the laggad consunpttenfsgp ratio. The "unLvariata SN? spectral
density La
estimated from a regreasian ci SN? growth on four lags.

frequency zero so that the consusiption/GNP ratio is stationary.

This

results in the dip in the VA?. estimated spectral density of GD? growth near

0, which the univariate autoregression does not pick up.7

The univariete

autoregression and VAR imply similar spectral densities at other frequencies.

3. "Detranding" or "cyclically adjusting" DDE

Given a single time series, there are many ways to break it into "trend"

and "cyclical" components.
decompositions.

Different ON? forecssts will affect momt such

I will exaaine one attractive decomposition, due to

Beveridge and Nelsen (1981). This decomposition defines the stochastic rrend
in ON? as the level ON? will be after all transitory dynamics work themselves

out. Equivalently, the trend in ON? is ON? plus all expected future changes
in ON?.

Precisely, Beveridge and Nelson decompose ON?

into a stochastic trend

and a cyclical component 5

yr

—

+

The trend is defined as

— lim tt+k - kEdy).
or, equivalently,

—

4-. E(Ay÷-Edy) + E(Ay4-2-EAy)+

....

where RAy is the unconditional mean growth rate of

(3.1)
If ONE' Is expected to

grow a lot in the future, ONE' is below trend; if it is expected to decline,
ON? is above trend. (The appendix relates this trend to the impulse response.

function and spectral density of GNP growth at frequency 0, and gives
formulas for implementing (3.1) fron a VAR.)

7Watsen (1990) found a similar dip in the spectral density of output
estimated from a cointegrated VAR snd also the spectral density implied by
the King, Plosser, Stock and Watson (1989) model.
The contrast between
Watson's tesulta and univariate estimates of spectral densities implied by
the persistence literature inspired this section of this paper.

9

Fig. 4 presents log ON? and the Beveridge-Nelaon stochastic trend,

estimated from the consumption-CM? VAR of table I.

(Precisely, the

conditional expectations Et in (3.1) are formed from ON? growth, consumption

growth and rho consumption/ON? ratio, using the VAR regression of table 1.)
This stochastic trend responds to long-run movements in ON? growth during the

70's and go'5, yet shows the traditional NEER business cycles as transitory
variations about that trend.

If consumption were a pure random walk, the Beveridge-Nelson trend would

be exactly consumption plus the mean log CNP/consumption ratio. Fig. 4 also
plots this quantity, and shows thst it is almost the sane as the trend. This

provides a nice interpretation: consumption should be proportional to
permanent income, which is a natural measure ot the trend in actual income.
By using consumption, we are in essence using consumer's forecasts of income

growth to measure the trend.

The Beveridge-Nelson trend differs slightly

from consumption plus the mean ratio, as consumption data departs slightly
from the predictions of the permanent income hypothesis. Consumption growth

is slightly predictable,

and

the

trend calculations

exploit this

predictability to define the trend ss the level consumption will attain in
the future (plus the mean ratio) rather than its value today.

Fig. 5 contrasts univariate and multivariate Beveridge-Nelson trends.

The "VAR trend" is the multivsriate trend from fig. 4.
estimated" univariate trend,

For the "VAR

is forued from current and lagged OFF growth,

using the univariate impulse-response function implied by the VAR,

In the

other univariate trend, E is formed from OFF growth, using the parameters of

the univariate autoregression.

Since the VAR estimated univariate

impulse-response displays mote mean-rewersion than the directly estimated
univariate impulse-response, the two trends are different.

Eveb if one

insists on using past ON? only to form a detrended OFF, the univariste
impulse-response estimated from the VAR shows the recessions of the SO's to
be transitory, while the directly estimated univariate impulse-response views
these movements in ON? as permanent.

10

64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 64 86 88 90
Date

4. ImP,
veridge-Neinso trsnd, nod Coossaption. The geverLdgeRoluon
stochostic trend is colcoitred from the Lonstnption-CNP VAR as GNP plus all
oopocted fotore cheogpS to IUP.
GhbS •Cc.ors Lie ginas leg noedurebi.. +
Services tOflSUapCiOn plus the acan log GfPJconsumption ratio.

Fig.

GNP
8——

VAR trend
Urdv. trend VAR eeL

Unv. trend
a-

z0
0

3 80

81

8

82

Fig. I. CNP cod trono.
Ic
coosooptico-IAF VAR

lbs
.

4.

".AR

VAR.

85

trend io cAicoieLcd free the
rcd Is celosloted frcu u

The 'tjnie.

snlosniste sotoregresujoo cf CNP growth

eec. Ic o trcd based on

84

so

15cc lugs.

The 'Uoiv. ttand VAR

the .mlvacis La rspcesentstion of CNP

Implied by the

4, "Excess smoothness" and the permanent intone hypothesis
(I

If labor income e follows a process
—

Ae —

k

p(L)w

where w is a possibly multidimensional white noise process generating all
information observed by consumers, then the permanent income model predicts
that the change in consumption should equal the change in the present value
of future labor income,

Ac — (l-A)EA

[1et+

w.wi....] -

E[e.

w1, w2,

and r is the real interest rate. Sargent (198?) shows that the

where A —

right hmnd side is equal to

dct — P(A)wt
where p(A) —

p0

(4.1)

+ p1A + p7A2 +

If labor income follows a random walk, ae —

w.

then consumption growth

A weaker implication is that the
should equal income growth, Ac — Le5 —
variance of consumption growth should equal the variance of income growth.

w.

As we have seen, income is nearly a rsndcrn walk based on univariate
autoregressions, but consumption varies a great deal less than incone. This

is the heart of "excess smnnthnese" of ccnaumption.
assumes that income follows

as

a

Conversely, if one

stationary univariate process around a trend,

in Flavin (1981), one finds that consumption varies by more than it should

under the 8TH, which is the original

finding

of "excess sensitivity" (much

simplified).

The observations on persistence of rho last sections suggest a
resolution of excess smoothness.

Estimates of long run impulse-responses

U) in multivoriate systems were ouch ooaller than univariate estimates.
Since A

1, this suggests that multivsriato estimates of p(A) might also be

lower than univariate estimates, so the predicted variance of consumption

11

growth might be smaller.

To address this question, I repeated the VAR

of Table I. using labor income in place of GNP.

and univariate estimation
For labor income I used

personal disposable income less dividend, interest and rent income (CITIBASE

series GYP - CPRENJ

-

GPDIV

-

converted to 1982 dollars using the

CPINT)

personal disposable income deflator (CYD82/CYD) results.

Table 2 presents the

As before, the lagged consumption/income ratio is significant in

the incoms regression but not in the consumption regression. Labor income is

closer to a univariate random walk than GNP: the univariate regression of
income growth on two lags has an R2 of 0.000 with e p-value of A9.
Figures 6, 7, and 8 present the impulse-response functions and spectral

densities, analogous to figures 1, 2, and 3 for CNP. These results present
an even more dramatic case than CNP. The bivariate impulse-response function

(fig, 6) shows that income and consumption have almost che same, and
completely permanent, response to a consumption shock.

The response of

income to an income shock (with no contemporaneous consumption change) is
almost entirely transitory. The univariate impulse-response estimated from a

univariate autoregression (fig. 7) is sisost completely flat, as is the
spectral

density of

autoregrcsmicn (fig. 8).

income

growth estimated from the univariate

Based on univsriate information, labor income Is

slmust a perfect random walk. But the univariate impulse response (fig. 7)

sod spectral densities of income (fig. 8) estimated from the VAR

show a

substantial mean reversion at long lags. This occurs because, although both
Income and consumption look like random walks in univsriste autoregressions,

the variance of income growth is about three times that of consumption
growth.

The long run movements in the two series must be equal, or the

consumption/income ratio would not be stable over time.

To examine the excess smoothness puzzle, I estimated the variance of
revisions in permanent income, using the VAR forecasts of income, uoivariate

furecssts of income, and univsriste forecasts with the univariate process
implied by the VAR. The VAR for consumption and income can be rewritten in
orthugocalized moving average representation (see the appendix)

12

0
C
-c

—— c, c shock

k— y, c shock

1/)

c, y shock]
y. y sho1J

00
tO

0
U)

Q)0
C
C
cc
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Quarters after a unit shock

35

Fig. 6. Impulee-responso functions far c055nalptian-labor income VAR.
Responses of consumption (a) and labor Loonne (y) to unit shocks. The VAR

incLudes tim lagged onnsnsnnptfon/inaon ratio and too Lags of consumption end
income growth. The shanks ore orchogasslicnnl to form to U rho lcacentaoeooa
rosponse of consumption to en locono shank.

0

5

0

15

20

25

Quarters after a unt sHock
Fig. 7. Uetvaristo labor moons iepuion-eropocse Foncniocs. The ioirorisro
response is notiosrnd from a ccir000toe of Looorcs grocrli on f ran iois. The

TAR reSpOnse La astiearod from a vccr autorogrocoiar of means and

concariprior grouch on Lao laa and [he laged con000pticn/iccene ratio

40

ti)

0
c'.

>'

Period in quarters
The
Fig. B Spectral density of labor income and consumption growth.
consumption speciral density and the "VAR" income spectral density are

astiwated

from a vector autoregresalos of consumption and lncoee growth on
two lags and the lagged consumption/income ratio. The untvariata income
spactrsL docsity is estiautcd from a reroosLon of 1:icooo growth on four own

lags.

[Act] —
Act

; E(vv')

+ D(L)w

Denoting the elements of

—

[e

—

I, E(vV)

vJ'

the

0

permanent income hypothesis

(4.1) implies
—

D21(l)u +

and hence
+

var(Ac) — 021(1)

When consumption growth is expressed in its
p +

a(L)e

,

E(2) —

univariate

representation

1

we predict

var(Ac)

a(A)2.

Again, a(L) can be directly estimated from an inncme autoregression or
inferred from the VAR.

Table 3 presents the results. Note that income growth has about twice
the standard deviation of consumption growth.

Thus if income is a random

walk, consumption is in fact excessively smooth.

Line 2 of the table

autoregression

implies that consumption

replicates this result: the income

growth should have s standard deviation of 1,52%, compared to the actual
value of 0.58%.

However, when we estimate the parameters of the income

autoregression with the VAR in line 3, the predicted standard deviation of
consumption drops to 0.45%, less than the actual value.

Similarly, when we

forecast income from the VAR system itself, line 1, the predicted standard
deviation of consumption is 0.65%.

Tn either case, the evidence for excess

8One can make an eVen stronger prediction by noting that

Act is the same

variable on the left and right hand side, According to the Pt11, we should

see Ac —

v,

so the strongsr predicrion is

liansen, Roherds and Sargent (1909).)

Dpi(A)

0, D2(A) —

I

(See

sensitivity vanishes when we use ziultivariate information to forecast labor

4

.

income.

9

These calculations are intended to illustrate the importance of
multivariate rather than univariate forecasts of income and the forecaat
•

power of the legged consumption/income ratio in perticuler, using the rules

of the game of recent permanent income studies. They ere not intended as a
resolution of all the many puzzles confronting empirical implementations of

the permanent income hypothesis.

In particular, I intentionally do not

address the following issues

1) Non-testability.

Hansen, Roberda and Sargent (1990) show that the

present value part of the permanent income model is not testable. (The Euler
equation prediction that consumption growth should not be forecastable im, of

course, testable.)

If consumers really do only see past income in making

consumption decisions,

or any other set of variables observed by

econometricimns, then the model predicts an easily rejected stochastic
singularity; equation (4.1) holds with no error. If consumers have access to

variables not observed by the econometrician, and if there is a single
nondurable consumption good, Hansen, Roberds and Sargent show that there is

one testable restriction, namely that the present value of the change in
forecasts of future income following a $1 consi.seption change should be $1.
(This is a restriction on a regression of income on lagged consumption only.)

Restrictions on other aspects of a VAR

income forecast are not robust to the

possibility that agents posses superior information. Furthermore, they show

that if nondurables are only one component of consumption, even that one
restriction is not testable.

9'this explanation is related to Quabs (1990). Qnah examined decompositions
of a persistent univariare income process into components not observed by
econometritians, but that agents could be imagined to observe, that would

explain the relative variances of consumption and labor income.
Here,
consumers are assumed to only see the income process, and the puzzle is
resolved by noting that VAR estinstes of that process predict about the
nbserved standard deviation of consueption.

14

2) Non-cointegration of consumption aod labor income.

The PIE model

predicts that consumption and labor income should not be cointegrated, and

hence that the consumprion/labcr income ratio contains a random walk.
(consumption should bc cointegrated with capital income).

Yet the VAR

imposes that labor income and consumption are cointegratod. The data suggest

the same: the consumption/labor incoae ratio is stable over time

as the

labor and capital shares of income ate stable over time.

The prediction that consumption and labor income are not cointegrated
cones from rho linear technology adopted by the PIN.

No matter how much

capital consumers accumulate, this has no effect oo their labor income.

ln

growth models with nonlinear production functions, accumulating a large
amount of capital raises wage rates and hence links the level of consumption
(wealth) end labor income. This observation suggests that the instability of

the consumption/labor income ratio is not a serious prediction of the PIE,

which is meant as a local approximation.

(However, human capital may be

linearly accumulated, and the unskilled labor income/consumption ratio may
not be stable over time.

The oon-oointegration prediction may apply better

to this nonstandard inrerpretatiou of the variables.)

3) Specification issues.

The model is in ncnseasnuslly adjusted

per-capita levels. I followed Caapboli and Mankiw (1989) in applying it to
seasonally adjusted logs.

The speciiicatiou above does not allow for time

aggregation, nonsmparable or nouquadcatic prefmronces, dursbilicy in goods,
and ignores growth. This 'resolution" also ignores the fact that ccnsunption
growth is forecastablo.

4) who cares?
model.

The PIE is tested as a complete general equilibrium

It is no longer a "consumption function"--a small part oi a larger

model. Since the state of tho art in empirically oriented stochastic general

equilibrium models hae advanced beyond quadratic utility and linear
technology, why bother testing the PIN? (Cochrane (1990) makes this point in
detail,)

15

5. Mean reversion in stock returns

Table 4 presents a VAR

of

dividends and prices (cumulated returns) and

a regression of returns on Lagged returns
value-weighted NYSE portfolio.

The data are from the CRSP

They are annuaL to avoid the seasonal in

dividends. More lags and other right hand variables (term premiuis, default

premium, interest rate) add more wiggles to the short-run impulse-response

functions, but again do not alter

the pattern of

the

long-run

impulse-response functions. The table and subsequent figures use the entire

tRSP sample, from 1927 to 1989.

Results using postwar data are quite

similar.

The results in table 4 are similar to the previous results for CNP and

The lagged dividend/price ratio significantly forecasts

consumption.

returns, but nnt dividend growth. Dividends look a lot like a random walk,
as do returns when regressed only on lagged returns.

(In postwar data, the

dividend/price ratio forecasts both returns and dividend growth more
strongly.

The t statistics rise from 2.1 to 4.00, and 0.78 tn 2.71

respectively. However, the impulse-response functions are quite similar.)

Fig. 9 and fig. 10 present multivariste and univmriate impulse-response
functions. Note the similarity of the multivsriate impulse-response (fig. 9)
to the consuaeption-GNP impulse-response in fig. 1. In response to a dividend

shock, prices and dividends move immediately to their Long run values.

However, a price shock with no movement in dividends is completaly
transitory.

As I mentioned in the introduction, these results suggest s natural
interpretation.

A shock to dividends can occur with no effect on discount

rates, and hence no effect on expected returns. Since the shock to dividends

seems to have a persanent effect on dividends, it shouLd and does have a
persanent effect on prices. A pure shock to discount rates shouLd affect
prices and not earnings or dividends, as the price shock does in the VAR. A

shock tn discount rates changes expected returns, and thus induces future
temporary variation in

prices.

As discount rates cevert to their mean,

16

U

0
0)

-4- C

C
C
U

0

s-- d, d
p. d shooR
a—— ci, p shook

(0

E—•—-—

U)

p sboj

p.

U) N

C

0

a

fyi
(0

0

10

5

20

15

Years after a unit shock

Pig. 9. Impaine—reopenaa funetioa for dividrod-prire YAP.P,eopoeano of log
dividooda aod log 1,rirog (ouinoiaeod reraroa frog the value weighted NYSE no
ens otaotord deoiatloo dividend aod prtoe ehorko. Tho 'JAR loriudee the lugged

dividend/price ratio and 2 iago of dividond growth and roeufnn. Tho ahooko
are ofehogooaiizod to fofre to S the irotanteoroun feapooaa of dividneda Ce a
pfion shook.
14-i

N

00
C

oh0
C

00
u-i

lCd
UI

C

0
U) N

1Db

— — — unrvarialu

a:

VAR

C

2-

5

10

Yea:s after a unit shock
fig.

ti. lY.lloeeiaes nook print Lopai as-ceo 'oo0e foooeioo, TOn Unioaoiata
enaponee in nanimatat free a en grace icr of croon-ta an A io1god rarorro
TAn

VAR' oruporen

dinideod greet0

io

eotlnatnd fees

00 2 iogo

and tOn

e000toraotoregr,eetoe of torrent ord

found

dioidend/prirn ratio.

20

prices revert to their normal multiple of (unchanged) dividends.

Fig. 10 presents univariate Impulse-response functions for stock prices.

One is directly estimated from the regression of returns on past returns,
while the other is implied from the VAR. In

contrast to rhe

ONE' regressions,

these look the same. Thus, both the VAR and univariate estimate show little
evidence for univariate mean reversion; evidence for mean reversion in prices
(or predictability in returns) comes when you isolate a discount rate ahock,
as a price shock with no movement in dividends.

6. Concluding Remarks

Lagged growth rates of CNP, labor income and stock prices have little
forecast power for future growth rates, and imply little mean-reversion in
those variables.

Yet multiple regressions using the consumption/ON?.

consumption/labor income and dividend/price ratio imply much larger mean
reversion in ON?, labor income and stock prices.

Since these ratios are

stable, consumption and dividends provide informstion about the "trend" to
which ON?, labor income and stock prices most return.

In part, the ratios indicate mean reversion because they produce higher
in forecasting regressions.

But much more importantly, one can define

multiple shocks with multiple forecasting variables.

Thus, the response of

ON? to a ON? shock that holds consumption constant is almost entirely
transitory. ss the permanent income hypothesis suggests; stock prices have a
large transitory response to a shock to prices that holds dividends constant,

as a change in discount rates suggests.
consumption and dividends

induce

On the other hsnd, shocks to

permanent changes in 051', labor income and

prices. Since univariate shucka are a combination of the two multivariate
shocks,

they mask the underlying moan reversion.

These

observations help to document the existence of temporary
help to dcfine useful stochastic

components in ON? and stock prices, they

trends,

and they indicate s resolution of the "excess smoothness" purole of

17

Consumpti on -

I

conclude that if one is going to say that a variable is nearly a

random walk or that it displays some mean-revorsion it is crucially
important to say what information set one has in mind. It is quite possible

to find that a variable is nearly a random walk with respect to one
information sot (its own lags) but has large temporary variation with respect

to soother. Stable ratios (oonsumption/GNP, dividend/price) with near-random

walks are aonie of the most important other variables to consider for the
issue of long-run mean reversion.

18

Vable 1.
Consumption and GNF Regressions

1. Vector autoregression

Right hand variable
Left hand

variable

const.

Yic1 Ac11 AC2 Ay1

AYt2

R2

p-val

OLE coefficients

Act

-0,43

-0.02

0.07

-0.02

0.09

-0,02

0.06

.007

5.19

0.08

0.52

0.16

0.22

0.14

0.27

.000

-049

-1.23
3.45

0.90
3.81

t

act

3,49

2.

ratios
-0.19
1.12

1St -040
2.74

1.89

Univsriate autoregression.

Right hand variable

Left hand
variable

tl

eonsc,

dy -

0.55

0.33

0.19

4.82

417

2.39

______

Ay3 Ay4

Ayt.2

R2

p-val

OLE Coefficients

t

4y

is

-0.11

0.18 0.000

ratios
-1.37

-L36

log real ON?. c is log of nondurable + services consumption, A

denotes first differences, Ay —
1989:3.

-0,11

-

Data ars quarterly, 1947:1-

'p-val" gives the probability value of an F-test for the Joint

significance of the tight hand variab].cs.

19

Table 2.

I

Consumption and Labor Income Regressions

1- Vector autoregression
Right hand variable

Left hand
variable

const, e1_ci Aci Ac2 dec1 fe2

R

2

p-val

IlLS coefficients

dot

4e0

0.702

0.010

0.031

-0.049

0.098

0.071

0.07 0.003

0.930

0.087

0.574

-0.162

-0.054

0.005

0.11 0.000

5.88

0.57

0.37

-0.59

2.39

1.83

3.78

2.48

3.31

-0.95

-0.64

0.06

ratios
dOt:

dec

2. Univariate autoregression.
Right hand variable

Left hand
variable

oonst. 4tl

R2

4e2

p-val

OLS Coefficients

0.77

0.002

t
6.07

0.00 0.99

0,013

ratios
0.03

0.17

is log labor income, where labor income —

personal disposable income

less dividend, interest and rent income (CITI8ASE series CYD - CPRENJ
-

CPINT)

,

-

CPDIV

converted to 1982 dollars using the personal disposable income

deflator (CY082/010). o is log of nondurable +
percent units,

The sample is 1947:1-1989:3.

services

consumption, in

p-val gives the probability

value of an F- test for the joint significance uf the right hand variables.

20

Table 3.

Standard deviation of constuaption growth and predictions from the permanent
income model.

Std. dcv. nf consumption growth Ac
Std. dcvj of labor income growth Ae

Estimation

Income forecast

0.58 %
1.23 %

Predicted

sd.

1, VAR

VAR

0.65 %

2. Univariate

Univariete

1.52 %

3. VAR

Univariate

0.45 %

Ac

If labor income at has a moving average representation

Ac1 — a(L)w1,

I,

E(ww) —

than the PiN predicts the variance of consumption growth should be

var(Ac) — a(A)a(A'

A

i/(1+r).

In line 1, e(L) is the income row of the moving average representation of a

VAR in which Am1 and Ac arc regressed on two own
lagged consumption/income ratio.

lags

and c11-e11, the

In line 2, a(L) is the moving average

representation of a univariate autoregresaion in which Ae is regressed on
two own

lags.

In line 3. the parameters of the univariate autoregression are

inferred fron the VAR.

The results are the same to two decimal placee for

interest rates r between 1% and 10% per year.

Income is log personal

disposable income less dividend, interest and rent income (CITIBASE series

CYD

0PRENJ - GP0IV

-

CPrtTT)

converted to 1982 dollars using the personal

diaposable income deflator (CYD82/CYD).

Consumption is log consumption of
nondurablee and services (CITIBASE series CCN82 + GCSB2). The sample is
1947 :1-1989; 3.

21

Table 4.

Dividend and Price Regressions

I. Vector autoregression
Right hand variable

Left hand
variable

2

coast. Ptldtl 41 Ad2 hp1 tp

it

p-val

OLS coefficients

4p1

20.01

0.038

0.046

0.062

-0.082

0.040 0.038 0.320

72.65

0.225

0.060

-0.086

0.114

-0.090 0.140 0.012

0.47
2,11

0.23
0.25

r

0.78

tilt

2.34

2.
Left hand
variable

—-

ratios
0,34

-0.65

0.32

-0.36

0.68

-0.55

IJoivariate autoregression.

Right hand variable

coast.

4P2 t-3 tp4

2
it

p-val

OLS Coefficients

4t

11.91

Ap

3.46

0.075

-0. 179 0.015

0.57

-1.37

-0.18

.061

.797

ratios
0.12

-1.37

the log price (cumulated return) on the CR5? value- weighted NYSE
is the log return. d is the corresponding 1eg dividend
(oonthly dividends brought forward to the end of the year at the market
return). Dote are annual, 1927- 1988. pvaU gives the probability value of
en F-test for the joint significance of the right hand variables.
is

portfolio. Thus, tsp

22

Appendix

1. Characterizing persistence

Start from a Wold moving averaga representation for first differences
on its
(log growth rates) Aye, which nay be inferred from a regresalon of
past values.
—

or,

-

+

-

Prej(fyjAy1,

ty2.. .)

in lag operator notation,

AYt —

p+

a(L)c.

The a. give the response of the growth rate at t+j to a unit ahock at t.

Similarly, E,0a1 gives the response of the level of

The limiting value of the response of
— a(l).
increases is ç_o

to a unit shock at

to a unit impulse as k

t.

a

The series

may also be decomposed into a random walk and a purely

stationary component.

It turns out that no matter how one does this, the

innovation variance of the random walk component is the same, and equal to
the spectral density ac frequency 0 of dye.

Seth quantities are related to

the univariate impulse response function by
varArandom walk component) ='

S/0)

a(l)

In particular, the Zeveridge-Nelsou trend defined below is a random walk with
this innovation variance.

(See Cochraoe (1988) for a derivation

Thus one nay equivalently characterize the persiatente of univariate
shocks to

by the behavior of the univariate impulse-response function at

high lags, the innovation variance of a random walk component, or the
spectral density of growth rates at frequency 0.

If ' follows a random

walk, the impulse-response fuocrien is one at all horizons and the spectral
density at zero is equal to its value at other frequencies.

Processes more

persistent that a random valk feature impulse-response functions that rise

23

past one, and a spectral density at zero larger than elsewhere.
Mean-reverting processes have impulse response functions that fall, as

reverts following a shock, and spectral densities at zero lever than

In the halt that the level

elsewhere.

impulse-response

density

function fails all the

Is statinnaty, the
way back to zeto, and the spectral

of Ay is zero at frequency zero.

The above generalizes naturally to multivariate systems.

Far example,

when one variable ac1 is added, we write the joint Wold representation as

ax = p +
where

ax0

ayt

—

=

,

= ax

ac
and

-

Proj(Ax1IAx1 Ax2,.,

A(L) is a matrix of lag polynomials.

gives

Now Et
and X7_0

C

function.

=

C(l)

the response of

(and nt+k) to unit shocks at t,

measures the limiting value of this impulse-reaponse
on the right hand side of the VAR imposes that

Including

C(l) is singular, i.e. that the limiting responses of y and c to each shock
Ia the same.

2. VAR

A.

estimation

and transformations,

VAR

I stmrted by estimating a cointegrated VAR in error-correction form,
—

fi +
+ fl0)'Ay

4

+ ,

,. -e

.+

+ .

..+

+
+

..

fr)'(y l°tl> +
fl°(y

-t

)

+

Table I presents estiioaLes of this VAR for consumption sod GNP. to vector
notation, the VAJi may be uritten

= N

A(L)ax — p3 + -o'x1 +

24

(Al)

—

Ay

1pY

1

1

a—
-1

pC

Act

and A(L) is a matrix of lag polynomials.

B. Impulse-Response function

First I orthogonalized the error terms by Choleski decomposing the
variance covariance matrix of the innovations, in the order consumption,
income, other variables. This is equivalent to including current consumption

growth in the income regression, so all contemporaneous correlation between
the consumption and income errors in the Wold representation is assigned to
the consumption shock. Precisely, I found a triangular matrix R such that
—

E(f

fi) —

Then we can define new errors

E(vv) = R1RR'R1'

Vt R1t

I

Rewriting the VAR (A.l) in terms of these new errors,

A(L)Axt —

+

lOtX ff Ri

E(VtV!) —

I

To find the implied Wold moving average or VAR impulse-response
-function, I simu]ared the response of the VAR to the Vt: shocks without the
constants and starting from initial conditions
— 0.
ct_i — 0.

Ayt.

0, Ace.

0

This leads to the representation

Ax p + D(L)e.

(A.2)

The elements of 0(L) are the impulse-response functions plotted in Fig.s 1, 6
and 9.

C. Spectral density

I constructed spectral densities of GNF and consumption growth from

—

(A.2)by

25

(Al)

0. Implicd univariate impulse response

To find the univariate impulse
VAR,

response function for ON? implied by the
Precisely, the first row of

I factored the spectral density of Ay5.

(A.3) is

—

+ D12(m)P12(z)

To find the Weld representation of Ay aod hence its univariate impulse
response, one must find a polynomial a(z) whose roots are all on or outside
the unit circle, and such that

a(z)a(z) — D11(z)D11(zh + t12(z)D12(zH.
To do this, I found the roots of the right hand side numerically, selected
the roots outside the unit circle, and then constructed the polynomial a(z)
with those roots.

This polynomial a(L) is the univariate impulse-response

function.

E.

Beveridge-Nelsoo trend

Writing e one-leg VAR (without means) in companion form, we obtain

fl---

dy
—

01

0c

Acti

fly
---0--

Ay1
dcp
Ay2

0 0 1 -- 0 -.

Ay1

[00001J

—

xt

+

0

y11-c1
x t-1

B

0

Where the fl's are CLS regression coefficients.

+

c.
t

Then we can calculate the

trecd from (3.1) as
—

y

+ [ 0 1 0 0 J

B3 x =

[0

1 0 0 J B

(I-B)

j —l

I followed this procedure generalized to the number of lags in each VAR.

References

Beveridgo, Stephen, and Nelson, Charles R. (1981), "A New Approach to
Decomposition of Economic Time Series into Permanent and Transitory
Components with Particular Attention to Measurement of the 'Business
Cycle'" Journal of Monetary Economics 7 (March), 151-174.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Danny Quah (1989), "The Dynamic Effects of
Aggregate Supply and Demand Disturbances", American Economic Review 79
(September), 655-673.

Campbell, John Y. and Angus Deaton (1989), "Why is Consumption So Smooth?"
Review of Economic Studies 56 (July), 357-373.

Campbell, John Y. and N. Cregory Hankiw (1987), "Are Output Fluctuations
Traneitory?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 102 (November), 857-880.

Campbell. John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw (1989), "Consumption. Income and
Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence", NEER
Interest Rates;
Macroeconomics Annual 1989, Edited by Olivier 3. Blanchsrd and Stanley
Fisher, 185-216.

Clark, Peter K. (1987), "The Cyclical Component in U.S. Economic Activity",
Quarterly Journal of Economics 102 (November), 797-814.

Cochrsne, John H. (1988), "How big is the Random Walk in CS??" Journal of
Political Economy 96 (October), 893-920.

Cochrane, John N. (1989), "A Critique of the Application of Unit Roots
Tests", Journal of Economic Dynamics end Control, Forthcoming.

Test the Permanent Income Hypothesis?
Cochrane, John H. (1990), "Why
Comments on 'The Response of Consumption to Income: a Cross Country
Investigation' by John Y, Campbell and N. Gregory Mankiw." (Presented
at the Internationml Seminar on Macroeconomics, Mannheim, Germany, June
1990.) Manuscript, University of Chicago.

Cochrane, John H. and Argia N. Sbordone, (1988) "Multivmriate Estimates of
the Permanent Components of GNP and Stock Prices" Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control 12 (June/September), 255-296.

Cogley, Timothy (1990), "International Evidence on the Size of the Random
Walk in Output", Journal of Political Economy 98 (June), 501-518.

Demton, Angus 5. (1987). "Life-Cycle Models of Consumption; Is the Evidence
Consistent With the Theory?" In Advances in Econometrics: Fifth World

Congress. Vol. 2, edited by Truman F, Rewely. New York; Cambridge
University Press.

Fama, Eugene F, (1990), "Transitory Variation in Investment and Output",
Manuscript. University of Chicago.

Fame, Eugene F. and Kenneth N. French (1988a), "Permanent and Temporary

27

Components of Stock Prices", Journal of Political Economy 96, 246-273.
Fain, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, (1988b), 'Dividend Yields and Expected
Stock Returns", Journal of Financial Economics 22, 3-25.

Plavin, Marjorie A. (1981), "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing
Expectations of Future Income", Journal of Political Economy 89
(October), 974-1009.
Flavin,

Marjorie A.

(1988)

"The Excess Smoothness of Consumption;

Identification and Interpretation", N8ER Working Paper 2807 (December)

Hansen, Mrs Peter, William Roberds, and Thomas J. Sargent (1990), "Time
Seriee Implications of Present Value Eudget 8alance and of Martingale
Models of Consumption and Taxes", Manuscript, University of Chicago.

Hodrick, Robert J. (1990), 'Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns:
Alternative Procedures for Inference end Measurement", Manuscript,
Northwestern University.
King, Robert C. , Charles I. Plosser, James H. Stock and Mark V. Watson
(1989), "Stochastic Trends and Economic Fluctuations", Manuscript.
Nelson, Charles R. and Charles I. Plosser (1982). "Trends and Randen Walks in
Macroeconomic Time Series; Sone Evidence and Implications", Journal of
Monetary Economica 10 (September), 139-162.

Quah, Danny (1990) "Permanent and Transitory Movements in Labor Incnme; An
Explanation for 'Excess Smoothness' in Consumption" Journal of Political
Economy 98:3 (June), 449-475
Poderba, James M., and Lawrence H. Suamiers (1988) "Mean Reversion in Stock
Prices; Evidence and Implications " Journal of Financial Economics 22,
26-59.

Richardsen, Matthew (1989). "Temporary Conponents of Stock Prices: a
Skeptic's View", Manuscript, Stanford University.

Sargent, Thomas J. (1987), Macrccconomic Theory, 2nd Ed. New York; Academic
Press.

Watson, Mark V.

(1988), "Univariare Detrending Methods with Stochastic

Trends," Journal of Monetary Economics IS (July) 49-75.

Watson, Mark V. (1990). "Measures eC Fit for Calibrated Models", Working
paper, Northwestern University.

West, Kenneth 0. (1988), "The Insensitivity of Consumption to News about
Income" Journal of Monetary Economics 18 (July). 49-75.
Zeliner, Arnold, and Franz Palm (1978) "Time-Series Analysis and Simultaneous
Equations Models', Journal of Econometrics 2, 17-54.

