                         NBR %RKtNG PAP SERIES




                            MEDICAL WiLACTICE:
                          AN EMPIRICAL XllThTION
                          OF ThE LITIGATION ESS




                               Henry S. Farber
                              Michelle J. White




                           Workiog Paper No. 3428




                    NATIONAL JREAIJ OF CM1C RESEARQi
                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             cantridge, W 02138
                               Septvber 1990


We are particularly grateful for extenied discussions with Orley Ashenfelter.
We also received helpful cants frcu Edward Goldman, Dinah Seiver, Rthert
Mnooki.n, ard participants at the Conference on Disp.ite Resolution, Center for
Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences, Nov. 1989. R.eseanth surprt for
White was provided    the Funi for Research on Disp.ite Resolution ani the
University of Michigan Office of the Vice-President for Research. Farber
received suort for this research fran the National Science Fc*jrdation
(Grant No. SE—8912664) ard the I.jsse11 Sage Fcuniation. This research was
carried aft while Farber was a Fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the
Behavioral Sciences. The data used in this study will be available f mu the
Interuniversity Consortium for Political ard Social Research at the
University of Michigan. All opinions anI ocnclusions reached in this study
are solely      own. This paper is part of NB' s research program in Health
Ecxncinics ard Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
ard not those of the National Poreau of Ecnaic Research.
                                            NB Working Paper #3428
                                            Septar.ber 1990

                            MEDICAL ?LACFICE:
                         N NPIRICAL E3WThI
                         OF 11 LTIGATION HS




     New data on tredical malpractice clai against a sinle hospital where a
direct itasure of the quality of medical care is available are used to
address 1) the specific question of the role of the negligence rule in the
dispite settlement prss in medical malpractice, ard 2) the general
question of h the process of negotiation ard disp.2te resolution in medical
malpractice cçerates with regard to both the behavior of the parties ard the
cutcxne of the process. We find that the quality of malical care is an
extremely inportant determinant of deferdants' niical malpractice liability.
re generally, we find that the data are censistent with a nel where 1)
the plaintiff is not well infond ex ante ab.it the likelinood of negligence
ard 2) the ex ante expected value to the plaintiff of a suit is high relative
to the cests of filing a suit and getting mere information. Thus, suits are
filed even where there is no cencrete reason to believe there has been
negligence, and. virtually all suits are either drcçped or settled based on
the information gained after filing. We cenclixie that the filing of suits
that arpear, ex post, to be nuisance suits can be rational eguilibrium
behavior, ex ante, where there is inoxplete information aJ.it care quality.

Henry S. Farber                              Miehelle J. White
tparbtnt of Econcznics, E52-252f             tparthnt of Ecxunios
Massathusetts Institute of Technolcy         University of Miehigan
Cambridge,    02139                          Ann Arbor, MI 48109
                                       —I-


I. Introduction

      In this study we analyze a new data set on medical malpractice claims

against a single hospital where a direct measure of the quality of medical

care is available. These data are used to address 1) the specific question

of the role of the negligence rule in the dispute settlement process in

medical malpractice, and 2) the general question of how the process of

negotiation and dispute resolution in medical malpractice operates with

regard to both the behavior of the parties and the outcomes of the process.

      The question of whether negligence matters in determining liability in

medical malpractice cases is an important one for two reasons. First, it has

been suggested that medical malpractice law (like products liability law) has

been evolving from negligence toward strict liability (Epstein, 1979).

Second, a number of jurisdictions are considering abolishing the negligence

rule in medical malpractice and replacing it with a no—fault system.1

However, the operation of the negligence rule in medical malpractice has not

been studied empirically, since data that include a measure of quality of

medical care has not been available.

      We find that the quality of medical care is an extremely important

determinant of defendants' medical malpractice liability —-    including   both

whether defendants are liable at all and how much defendants compensate

plaintiffs in cases that settle out of court.2 More generally, we find that

the data are consistent with a model where plaintiffs are poorly informed ex




1See the Harvard Medical Practice Study (1990) for a survey.

2The direct relationship between quality of care and liability that we find
is a necessary condition for the negligence system to encourage efficient
levels of care quality. See Shavell (i978) and Danzon (i985) for discussions
of the incentive effects of liability rules in medical malpractice. See
White (1989) for an empirical test of the deterrent effects of liability
rules in the automobile accident field.
                                     —2—


ante about whether there has been negligence, file suit to gather information

and either drop the case if they find that negligence is unlikely to have

occurred or settle for a positive payoff if they find that negligence was

likely. Thus, we find that the negligence rule does matter in the medical

malpractice field and that liability provides a real incentive to avoid

negligence.

      In the next section of this study, we describe the multi—stage

litigation process for medical malpractice cases that applies in the state

where our study was conducted. This process is generally similar to that

used elsewhere in the United States. Section III contains the development of

an empirical framework for analysis of the litigation process. A description

of the data and simple summary statistics are presented in section IV.

Section V contains single equation estimates of models of settlement amounts

and the probability that a case Is dropped or settled, while a joint model of

the determination of these quantities is the focus of section VI. In section

VII, we present the implications of our empirical analysis for how case

outcomes are related to care quality and the severity of injury. Section

VIII contains a discussion of the role of information in the litigation

process in medical malpractice and a reinterpretation of nuisance suits.

Section IX concludes.




II. The Litigation Process in Medical Malpractice

      The first stage of the litigation process generally involves the

plaintiff filing a lawsuit, although case filing is sometimes preceded by

communication in which the plaintiff attempts to extract a settlement offer

without filing suit. In medical malpractice cases, plaintiffs' lawyers are

normally paid on a contingency basis. The lawyer receives a proportion,

typically around one—third, of the settlement amount if the case settles or
                                     —3-


of the damage award if the plaintiff wins at trial.     If the plaintiff drops

the case or loses at trial, the lawyer receives nothing. Usually,

plaintiffs' lawyers also pay for court fees and the cost of expert witnesses.

These costs are deducted from the damage award or settlement. Thus the

contingency fee system gives plaintiffs' lawyers   a   strong incentive to screen

prospective plaintiffs and to accept only cases having high expected value.3

      The second stage of litigation is pre—trial discovery, which involves

exchange of information (evidence) between the plaintiff and defendant. Our

data set concerns cases involving alleged medical malpractice incidents that

occurred during patients' stays at a particular hospital. Therefore, the

first part of discovery normally involves the plaintiff's lawyer demanding a

copy of the plaintiff's hospital record and the hospital demanding an

opportunity for a physician it names to examine the plaintiff in order to

verify damage claims. Later in the process, both sides must name medical

expert witnesses who will testify for them at trial concerning whether the

plaintiff's medical care was negligent. Expert witnesses are necessary in

medical malpractice cases since the judge or jury is not expected to be able

to evaluate the quality of medical care without having an expert in the

relevant medical specialty define the standard of care and indicate whether

or not It was met. Toward the end of the discovery process, each side's

expert is deposed by the other side to learn what evidence will be presented

if a trial occurs and how strong the other side's case is. The plaintiff

and/or the medical personnel involved in the incident may also be deposed In

order to learn whether they will make effective witnesses in court.




31n some states, medical malpractice cases can only be filed in court if they
are reviewed and approved by a screening panel beforehand. Depending on the
state, these panels may consist of physicians, lawyers, laypersons or some
combination of these groups. The panel must decide that the complaint is not
frivolous before It can go forward.
                                        -4—



Obviously, each step In the discovery process increases both sides' legal

costs.

         The next stage of litigation involves mediation (non—binding

arbitration), which must occur before a case goes to trial in a local court.

If the case has been filed in state court, mediation is not mandatory. In

mediation, a panel of three lawyers, one named by each side and one named by

the court, hears an abbreviated presentation of the evidence that each side

will present at trial.     It then decides on an award figure that is intended

to encourage settlement.4 Each side must explicitly accept or reject the

mediation award. If it is accepted by both sides, then the case ends with the

defendant paying the amount of the award to the plaintiff.      If either or both

sides reject the mediation award, then the case may proceed to further

settlement negotiations and/or trial.5

         The final stage of litigation is the trial. If the case goes to trial,

either side has the right to demand a trial by jury and, normally, plaintiffs

In medical malpractice cases do so. The jury decides both whether the

defendant is liable and, if so, the amount of the damage award.

         In practice, few cases go through all stages.   Instead, most medical

malpractice cases are either dropped by plaintiffs or settled out of court at

some point during the discovery stage. The two—way exchange of information

during the discovery process encourages resolution of cases without trial by

making the Information available to both sides more alike and increasing the




41n our empirical analyses we investigate how the mediation awards are
related to the level of care and settlement values.


51f a case proceeds to trial and the trial outcome is less favorable to a
party that has rejected the mediation award then that party is liable for the
other side's legal expenses at trial. However, this fee shifting generally
only benefits the plaintiffs because defendants usually do not find it
worthwhile to attempt to collect legal expenses from plaintiffs.
                                     —5—


likelihood that both parties have the same expectations about the trial

outcome. Perhaps most important is the flow of information from the

defendant to the plaintiff concerning the likelihood that negligence

occurred. For example, the plaintiff's hospital record may indicate that the

plaintiff was given a larger dose of a drug than the physician ordered. Or

it may indicate that a monitoring device failed and that the failure was not

noticed for several hours. These events demonstrate clear negligence, which

means that the defendant is likely to be found liable by a judge or jury.

But the record may not indicate clear negligence, and the plaintiff (or

his/her lawyer) may then decide that it is best to drop the case.6

      The mediation procedure also encourages the parties to resolve cases by

providing them with a common external evaluation of the plaintiff's claim,

which increases the likelihood that both sides will have similar expectations

about the trial outcome. The incentive to settle after mediation is

particularly strong, since if the litigation continues to trial, both sides

must incur the high legal expenses of the trial Itself.

      Cases may also be dismissed by the judge at any stage of litigation.

The judge may dismiss a case for a variety of reasons-——the statute of

limitations for filing a lawsuit has run, the case was filed in the wrong

court, the defendant hospital is public or non—profit and may have

governmental or charitable immunity from liability, the plaintiff fails to

appear or falls to produce an expert witness for deposition, or the judge

feels that the case Is without merit. Dismissals may occur early in the

litigation process or as late as during the trial.   It should be noted that

it Is often difficult to distinguish between cases dropped by plaintiffs and




6There is a potential conflict of interest between the plaintiff and the
plaintiff's lawyer here.
                                     —6—


cases dismissed by the judge.7 These two outcomes are combined in the data

set discussed below.



III. An Empirical Framework

      In any negotiation, the central governing factor is the dispute

settlement mechanism and what will be the outcome if the parties ultimately

fail to agree.° In our medical malpractice study, if the parties fail to

agree the case will ultimately be decided by a trial. Expectations about the

decision that would be made by a jury in a given case provide an important

constraint on negotiations in that each party will use this expected outcome

as a benchmark to judge settlement offers. With sufficient data, we would

estimate a model of trial outcomes as a function of the facts of each case

and use this estimated model to understand settlement behavior and the drop

decision. However, there are not a sufficient number of trial outcomes in

our data (and they all were decided in favor of the defendant! )   to   calibrate

such a model. Therefore, we have to make indirect inferences about

strategies, preferences, and trial outcomes based on the available data.9

      A trial under a negligence rule leaves a jury with a two—stage decision

process. In the first stage, the court decides if there is liability which

requires negligence on the part of the defendant.   If it decides there is




7When a plaintiff drops a case, the formal procedure requires that the
plaintiff ask the judge to dismiss it "with prejudice," meaning that it
cannot be filed again.

eS   Mnookln and Kornhauser (1979) and Farber and Katz (1979).

9me available data include information on 1) the facts of the case
including care quality and severity of injury, 2) whether the case was
dropped or settled, 3) the amount of the settlements in settled cases, 4) the
mediation award in mediated cases, 5) which of the parties accepted the
mediation award, and 6) the trial outcome in tried cases. The data are
described in detail in the next section.
                                        —7—


liability, the court then determines the amount of damages. The expected

trial outcome is therefore

               (111.1)       E(Y) =Pr(L)E(YL)
where Pr(L) is the probability that the court finds liability and E(YIL) is

the expected award given liability.

A. The Expected Settlement and Mediation Awards

      Both sides will base their behavior in settlement negotiations on the

expected trial outcome and the costs of pursuing the case. Suppose the

logarithm of the probability of liability is

               (111.2)       log(P) =
                                        pp
where X is a vector of variables that affect liability and           is a vector of
       p                                                         p

parameters. In our case, this vector consists of variables measuring care

quality. Suppose further that the logarithm of damages conditional on

liability is

               (111.3)       log(YIL) = X     f3
                                            yy
where X is a vector of variables that affect damages and         is a vector of
       y                                                     y

parameters. In our case, this vector consists variables measuring the

severity of injury and age of the patient.1°

      Without detailed information on enough trial outcomes we cannot

estimate equations 111.2 and 111.3 separately. However, we can add these

expressions to form the logarithm of the expected trial outcome as

                (111.4)      log(E(Y)) = Xj3 +

where X is the union of the sets of variables in the liability and damage

 equations and c is an additive error term that captures unmeasured factors




 10Under the negligence rule, liability depends only on whether the defendant
 was negligent.  If the defendant is found liable then the damage award
 provides full compensation to the plaintiff, which Implies that It depends on
 the severity of the Injury.
                                           —8—


affecting the expected trial outcome. We can identify only the elements of

     and        that relate to variables not contained in both X and X .   For
 p          y                                                   p      y

variables that are contained in both vectors (e.g., the constant) we can

identify only the sum of the a's. Note that this analysis provides a

foundation for analyzing the awards and settlements in logarithmic terms.

The natural multiplicative relationship between the liability and damage

variables is translated into a linear relationship in the logs.

           A wide class of bargaining models (e.g. Nash, 1950; Crawford, 1982;

Rubinstein, 1982) suggests that the average negotiated outcome (settlement)

will be equal to the expected trial outcome on average. This equality

requires symmetry between the parties in two dimensions. First, they must

hold either identical expectations about the trial outcome or expectations

that are symmetric around the true value.11 Second, the parties must have the

same cost of litigation, including both legal expenses and any risk premium

that they would be willing to pay to avoid the uncertainty of litigation.

Given the assumption of symmetry, we can estimate equation 111.4 directly

using the log of the settlement as the dependent variable.

       We can shed some light on the validity of the symmetry assumption by

assuming that the mediation award represents the mediation panel's estimate

of the expected trial outcome and comparing mediation awards with settlement

amounts in the same cases. The bargaining models referred to above suggest

that if costs are not symmetric then the negotiated outcomes will favor the

party having lower costs. Thus, finding that mediation awards are

systematically lower (higher) than settlements in the same cases would imply




Formally, suppose that          is the true expected outcome but that the plaintiff
expects           while the defendant expects        Symmetry requires that
If both a and a are zero then the parties hold identical expectations. If
both are positive then the plaintiffs are both optimistic.
                                          —9—


that the defendant has systematically lower (higher) costs of litigation.

         Another piece of information that can shed some light on the symmetry

assumption is information on how often each party accepts the mediation

award.     It is reasonable to assume 1) that parties independently accept or

reject mediation awards that yield them higher utility than they expect to

get from continuing the litigation (perhaps to trial) net of their costs and

2) that mediation awards are symmetrically distributed around the true

expected trial outcomes. In this case, if the parties are symmetric with

regard to both expectations and costs, they will accept mediation awards with

the same frequency.       If one party either is relatively optimistic about the

trial outcome or has lower costs of continuing the litigation, then that

party will reject mediation awards with higher frequency.

B. The Plaintiff's Drop Decision

         A risk—neutral plaintiff will compare the expected value of pursuing a

case to its cost and will decide to drop the case if cost exceeds expected

value. The criterion for dropping a case is. therefore,

                (111.5)             =   — log(E(Y))       > 0
                                d
where C is the logarithm of the cost to the plaintiffs of pursuing a case.

Let C be a function of observable characteristics of the case such that

                (111.6)         C =
                                          2

where Z is a vector of characteristics,            is a vector of coefficients, and c2

Is an additive error term that captures unmeasured factors affecting the cost

of pursuing a case.       In our empirical analysis, we assume that the costs of

pursuing a case are simply a constant plus an additive error so that the Z

vector Includes only a constant. Substituting into equation 111.5 from

equations 111.4 and 111.6, the criterion for the plaintiff dropping or

dismissing a case is

                (111.7)         I =      — X13 +      >    U
                                       —10—


where        c—c. Assuming normality for the c's, this is a standard probit

specification.

        The theory outlined here yields a set of testable restrictions based on

equations 111.4 and 111.7. Assuming risk—neutrality and that the costs of

pursuing a case are constant (the vector Z includes only a constant), the

coefficients on the variables determining expected liability estimated from

the log settlement regression (equation 111.4) ought to be equal in magnitude

and opposite in sign to the coefficients on the same variables estimated from

the drop probit function (equation III.7).12 The two equation system defined

by equations 111.4 and 111.7 is estimated by maximum likelihood in section VI

and compared to an unconstrained version where the variables determining

expected liability are allowed to have different coefficients in the two

functions (the vector Z includes all of the variables in the vector X).

        Another implication of this theory is that single-equation OLS

estimation of the settlement equation could yield inconsistent estimates of

the parameters because cases are dropped in a way that is clearly correlated

with the settlement values. The error in the log settlement equation
                                                                         (c1) is
correlated by construction with the error in the drop probit (z =
                                                                     c2—c1).
The maximum likelihood estimation allows us to investigate the seriousness of

this selection bias in the context of a carefully specified structural model.




'2Note that these restrictions enable us to identify the variance of .z which
is generally normalized to one in a probit analysis.  Essentially, this means
that the restriction implied by the theory is that the estimates of    derived
from a log settlement regression should be proportional to those derived from
a drop probit.  If there are k elements in , there are k—i restrictions.
                                       —11—


IV.   The Data and Descriptive Statistics
        The data used here consist of information concerning medical

malpractice charges raised against a single large hospital and the physicians

who treated patients during their stay at the hospital.13 In order to be

included In the data set, the case must have been initiated in 1977 or later

and resolved by the end of 1989. An unusual aspect of the data set Is that

the data are taken not from court records, but from the hospital's internal

records. There are 326 cases In total for which we have data on care

quality, the severity of injury, and the outcome. In 68 of these cases, the

hospital was one of several defendants.14 Since we do not have complete data

for these cases on how the case was resolved against defendants other than

the hospital, these cases are omitted from our analysis. Of the remaining

258 cases, six were resolved through a binding arbitration process that the

parties had agreed to ex ante, and these too are omitted from our analysis.15

        The first panel of table 1 shows how the 252 cases in the sample were

resolved. A total of 92 (36.57.) cases were dropped by plaintiffs or

dismissed by the judge. A total of 147 (58.3'!.) were settled out of court

(with or without mediation) and 13 (5.2'!.) were tried to a verdict in court.



13
  The state in which the hospital is located has not adopted tort reforms
which limit liability in the medical malpractice area, nor is the hospital
shielded from liability by governmental immunity.

14Other defendants include manufacturers of hospital equipment and other
hospitals or physicians who treated the patient for the same condition.

15Such an arbitration process may provide different incentives to the parties
than the usual court—based dispute resolution mechanism.   In fact, many
patients at the subject hospital signed a form upon admission agreeing to
submit any claims against the hospital to binding arbitration. However,
almost all patients who sue the hospital generally repudiate this agreement.
This binding arbitration procedure Is distinct from the mediation process
that cases filed in local court are required to go through.
                                       Table I

                             Disposition of Cases


                           Disposition of All Cases

Disposition                   Frequency               Percentage


Dropped/Dismissed                 92                    36.5%

Settled                          147                    58.3%

Trial Outcome                     13                      5.2%


Total                            252                    100.0%




                  Disposition of Cases Filed in Local Courts

Disposition                   Frequency               Percentage


Dropped/Dismissed                 51                     34.2%

Settled                           88                     59.1%

Trial Outcome                     10                      6.7%



Total                            149                    100%



              Disposition of Cases Filed in Local Courts by Stage
                                   Frequency
                                (column percent)

Disposition              Before Mediation        After Mediation


Dropped/Dismissed                 44                      7
                                 (53.0%)                (10.6%)

Settled                           39                     49
                                 (47.0%)                (74.2%)

Trial Outcome                      0                     10
                                  (0.0%)                (15.2%)


Total                             83                     66
                                (100%)                  (100%)
                                     —12-


These numbers demonstrate how rare trial outcomes are in this area.16 The

defendant won all thirteen cases tried in court.17

      With regard to stage of settlement, twelve cases were resolved without

the filing of a suit (two were dropped and ten were settled). The second

benchmark event is the mediation process. Considering only the 149 cases

that were filed in a local court (and, thus, had mandatory mediation), 34

percent were dropped or dismissed, 59 percent were settled, and 7 percent had

a trial outcome. This is not significantly different from the sample as a

whole (p—value= .31).18 These data are in the second panel of table 1.

      The last panel of table 1 shows that the disposition of cases was

strongly related to the stage of settlement for the 149 cases that were filed

in a local court. Over half (567.) were resolved prior to mediation, and more

than half (53%) of these were dropped or dismissed. Of the cases resolved

after mediation, only 11 percent were dropped or dismissed while 74 percent

were settled.

A. Care Quality as a Measure of Negligence

      A key feature of our data set is that it contains a measure of care

quality taken from the hospital's records. The hospital asks experts to

evaluate each incident to determine whether the professional standard of care

was met.   These evaluations may be provided by the supervisors of the

relevant departments, by other hospital personnel in the relevant specialty,




'6Twenty—one cases started trial, but seven of these were resolved prior to
the trial's conclusion. Six of the seven were settled and one was dropped or
dismissed.


17This win rate is significantly lower than the 327. plaintiff win rate found
by Danzon (1985, p. 54. ) in a much larger sample of medical malpractice cases
in 1975—79.


 '8Unless otherwise noted, the p-values presented throughout this section are
 based on a standard x test of independence in a contingency table.
                                     —13—


and/or by outside experts who would appear as the hospital's expert witnesses

if the case went to trial. The experts' evaluations of care quality consider

1) whether the correct treatment was provided, 2) whether the actual

treatment failed due to inadequate care or because it was not provided

quickly enough, and 3) whether any harm suffered by the patient was causally

related to the treatment.19

      Quality of care provided by the hospital is divided into three

categories. Care was coded as 'bad if the experts' reports prepared for the

hospital were in agreement that the care provided fell short of the

professionally accepted standard in the relevant medical specialty. Care was

coded as "good" if the experts' reports agreed that the care provided met the

standard. Care was coded as "ambiguous" if the experts' reports were

ambiguous or if there was disagreement. Although the evaluations of care

quality were made for the hospital and are not impartial, they are not

"discoverable" by the plaintiff.20 This means that there is no incentive for

the hospital to put biased information into its own record. These reports

were used by the hospital in deciding on its litigation strategy in

individual cases.

      Table 2 shows the breakdown of cases by care quality and disposition,

and there is a strong relationship between these two variables (p—value <

.0001).   Cases where care quality was rated as good were dropped or dismissed




19The last issue is important because a finding of liability by the jury
requires there there be both causation and negligence, and the care quality
variable discussed here includes a judgment about both. Thus, the
defendant's care quality would be rated good if the patient suffered harm but
the expert believes that the harm was not due to negligence.

20The expert reports are covered by the attorney's work product rule, so that
they are Considered to be part of the defendant's attorneys' legal work,
which is not "discoverable".
                                   Table 2

                    Disposition of Cases by Care Quality

                                   frequency
                                (row percentage)
                              [column percentage)


Quality             Dropped/Dismissed Settled       Trial Outcome   Total


Bad Quality               8               71             1           80
                        (10.0%)          (88.8%)        (1.2%)      (100%)
                         (8.7%]          [48.3%]        [7.7%)       (31.8%]



Ambiguous Quality        21               53             3           77
                        (27.2%)          (68.9%)        (3.9%)      (100%)
                        [22.8%)          [36.1%]       [23.1%]       [30.6]

Good Quality             63               23             9           95
                         (66.3%)         (24.2%)        (9.5%)      (100%)
                         [68.5%]         [15.6%]       [69.2%]       [37.7%)


Total                     92             147            13          252
                         (36.5%)         (58.3%)        (5.2%)      (100%)
                        [100%]          (100%)        (100%]        [100%)
                                      -14—


in   two—thirds of the cases, were settled in about one-fourth of the cases,

and were tried to a verdict in the remainder. Since hospital won all of the

trials, plaintiffs received damage payments in only one—fourth of the cases

where care was good. Where care quality was rated as bad, only ten percent

of the cases were dropped or dismissed, and plaintiffs received damage

payments in about 89 percent of the cases. Where care quality was rated as

ambiguous, the dispositions were intermediate, with the plaintiffs receiving

money in about two—thirds of the cases. This is strong evidence that

negligence matters in determining liability.

       An interesting feature of the data in table 2 is that the distribution

of care quality within outcome group is indistinguishable between the cases

that were dropped or dismissed and the cases that were tried to a verdict

(p—value     .99). Of the cases with these outcomes, about two—thirds had good

care and less than ten percent had bad care. This contrasts with the cases

that were settled, of which only 16 percent had good care and almost half had

bad care.21 The facts that the average care level was high in cases tried to

a verdict and that the plaintiff lost all of trials yield further evidence

that negligence matters.22

B. Severity of Injury and Age as Measures of Damages

       The data also contain a measure of the severity of damage that the

patient claims to have suffered as a result of the medical malpractice. The

severity measure is divided Into four categories: 1) temporary disability

(51.2%), 2) permanent partial disability (24.6%). 3) permanent total




21A 2—test of the hypothesis that the trial outcomes arid the settled cases
had the same distribution of care qualities rejects the hypothesis with
p—value <.0001.


22Unfortunately, there are not enough trials to estimate a model determining
trial outcomes.
                                        —15--



disability (4.4%), and 4) death (19.8'/.). Note that the severity of damage

due to medical malpractice is often a matter of dispute between the plaintiff

and the defendant. The severity measure is a key determinant of the damage

award if the defendant is found negligent at trial. Patients who suffer

permanent total disability have higher future medical care costs and more

lost income than patients who suffer permanent partial disability, so that

the hospital's expected liability is higher. For patients who die, future

medical care costs are zero, so that the hospital's expected liability is

lower in cases involving death than in cases involving permanent total

disability. The hospital's liability is lowest in cases of temporary

disability.

          Table 3 contains a breakdown of case disposition by the severity

measure. There is a relatively strong relationship (p—value.028) between

 severity and case disposition with higher damage cases (all but temporary

 disability) significantly more likely to be settled rather than dropped,

 dismissed, tried to a verdict. There is no significant difference in

 disposition patterns by severity across the three higher damage severity

 categories (permanent partial, permanent total, and death) (p—value =       .634).

 There is also no significant difference in disposition patterns by severity

 between cases that were dropped or dismissed and cases that were tried to a

 verdict (p—value =     .384). 23
          These results indicate that the cases that were tried to a verdict in

 court look like the cases that were dropped or dismissed in both the care       and

 severity dimensions. This suggests that trials tend to result from

 plaintiffs' mistakes. i.e., they occur when plaintiffs fail to drop cases




 23A X2—test of the hypothesis that the trial outcomes and the settled cases
 had the same distribution of severity rejects the hypothesis with p—value =
  .007.
                                    Table 3

                     Disposition of Cases by Severity

                                   frequency
                                (row percentage)
                              (column percentage]


Severity            Dropped/Dismissed     Settled   Trial Outcome     Total


Temporary               60                63             6           129
                        (46.5%)          (48.8%)        (4.7%)      (100%)
                        [65.2%]          (42.9%)       [46.2]        [51.2%]


Permanent Partial        18               39             5            62
                        (29.0%)          (62.9%)        (8.1%)      (100%)
                        (19.6%]          [26.5%]       [38.5%]       [24.6%)
Permanent Total           3                8             0            11
                        (27.3%)          (72.7%)        (0.0%)      (100%)
                         [3.3x]           [5.4%)        (0.0%)        (4.4'.]

Death                   ii                37             2            50
                        (22.0%)          (74.0%)        (4.0%)      (100%)
                        [12.0%]          (25.2%)       [15.4%)       [19.8%]


Total                   92               147            13          252
                       (36.5%)           (58.3%)        (5.2%)      (100%)
                      [100%]            [100%]       [100%)         (100%]
                                      —16—


which are not worth pursuing.

        One other measure that will be used is the age of the patient at the

time of the incident. This may be related to damages since both lost

earnings and the costs of future medical care resulting from any injury are

inversely related to age.

C. Settlement Amounts

        The top half of figure 1 contains a graph of settlement amounts and the

natural logarithms of the settlement amount for the 147 cases where there was

a settlement.24 The distribution of the settlement amounts Is dramatically

right skewed while the distribution of the logarithms is much more symmetric.

The mean settlement is $191,040 (sd=$544,878) while the median Is only

$35,140. In contrast, the mean log settlement is 10.39 with an almost

identical median of 10.47. For this reason and for the theoretical reasons

outlined in the previous section, the analysis here focuses on the log

settlements.

        The first two columns of table 4 contain average log settlement amounts

broken down separately by care quality and severity for the 147 cases where

there was a settlement. These results are presented in regression format to

highlight differences in mean log settlements across groups. The results

with regard to care quality in the first column are in accord with our

expectations in that settlement amounts are significantly lower where care

quality is good (the base group) than where care quality is ambiguous or bad.

The proportional differences are large. Settlements are about 2.5 tImes

larger on average where care is ambiguous than where care is good and about

4.7 times larger where care is bad than where care is good.

        The differences In settlements by severity of injury in the second



24
  All   dollar amounts in this study are expressed in real 1982—84 dollars.
 Figune                 1

SETTLEMENT AMOUNTS AND MEDIATION                                                 AADS
                                                                   .15
         .8
                                                                         -
                                                                  .125
         .6                                                 C
 C                                                          0
 0
                                                           .1-j
                                                            Li
 C)                                                         (0
 (0                                                         C-
 C-
Li.                                                                .05-
         .2                                                              -
                                                                  025
         .1
          0-                                                         0-                I
               6            l.Oe*0b   3.Oe÷06    5.Oe+0B                     5   7.5       iO   12.5

       PEAL SETTLEMENT IN                    (n=1.47)             LOG PEAL SETTLEMENT           (n1z7)
                                                                   .15
         .8
                                                                         -
                                                                  .125
         .6                                                         .1-
C                                                          0C
0
-I-i                                                              .075-
Ci       .4                                                (0
(0                 IV                                      =
C-
                                                                   .05-
                                                                         -
                                                                  .025
         .1
         0-                              0 0                        0 -
                                                                                       I I
               0            1.Oe÷06   3.Oe+06
                                                =5.0e+0
                                                                             5   7.5       lb   12.5
   PEAL MEDIATION AWARD                 IN      (n=75)
                                                                                   j
                                                                  LOG PEAL MEDIATION AWARD             (n=72)
                                    Table 4

            Average Log Settlement Amounts and Mediation Awards

                       by care quality and severity

Variable                   (1)            (2)             (3)          (4)
                           log            log             log          log
                       settlement     settlement       mediation     mediation
                          amount         amount          award        award


Constant                  9.31           11.14           10.48         il.3
                          (.389)          (.250)          (.306)        (.330)

Care 8ad                  1.54                            1.60
                          (.448)                          (.424)

Care Ambiguous              .931                           .273
                           (.466)                         (.394)

Temporary Disability                     —2.03                         -1.27
                                          (.314)                        (.402)

Permanent Partial                              .0352                     .i36
Disability                                    (.348)                    (.404)

Permanent Total                           2.13                          2.21
Disability                                    (.592)                    (.585)




                            .08                 .40        .18               .36
R—squared

n                          147                  147             83           83


Note: These are OLS regressions where the coefficients are mean differences
from the base group. The base group is good care quality in the first and
third columns and death in the second and fourth columns.
                                       -17-


column are even stronger. Compared to the death category (the base group),

patients who suffered temporary injury received settlements that were only 13

percent as large while patients who suffered permanent total disability

received settlements that were 8.4 times as large. There was no difference

between the base group and the group that suffered permanent partial

disability. Even more striking is the fact that almost 40 percent of the

variance in log settlements is accounted for by the four severity categories.

In contrast, only 8 percent of the variance can be accounted for by care

quality.

0. Mediation Awards

        A comparable analysis is carried out for the 86 available mediation

awards. The bottom half of figure 1 contains a graph of mediation awards and
                                                  25
the natural logarithms of the mediation awards.        The distribution of

mediation aiards is as right skewed as that of the settlement amounts, but

the distribution of the logarithms is much more symmetric. The mean mediation

award was $291,416 (sd=$777,295) while the median is only $44,399.      In

contrast, the mean log mediation award is 10.82 with an almost identical

median of 11.07. Once again, the analysis here focuses on the log mediation

awards.

        The third and fourth columns of table 4 contain average log mediation

awards broken down separately by care quality and severity for the 83 cases

where there was a positive mediation award. The results with regard to care

quality in the first panel show that mediation awards are significantly lower

where care quality is good (the base group) than where care quality is bad.

The proportional difference is large. Mediation awards are about five times



25Three cases where the mediation award was zero are deleted from the log
plot.
                                     —18—


larger on average where care is bad than where care is good. However, there

is no significant difference in mediation awards between where care is good

and care is ambiguous.

      The differences in mediation awards by severity of injury parallel

those for settlement amounts. Compared to the the death category (the base

group), patients who suffered temporary injury received mediation awards that

were only 28 perCent as large while patients who suffered permanent total

disability received mediation awards that were 9.1 times as large. There was

no difference between the base group and the group who suffered permanent

partial disability. Once again, almost 40 percent of the variance In log

mediation awards Is accounted for by the four severity categories while only

about 18 percent can be accounted for by care quality.

      One fact not apparent from the tables is that there are only three

instances out of 83 cases where the mediation award was zero. In actual

trials in medical malpractice cases, defendants usually win (Danzon, 1985),

so that the frequency of the plaintiffs receiving zero is much greater than

would be inferred from our mediation awards. This suggests that mediation

panels do not attempt to mimic actual trial outcomes. Rather, it seems

likely that they award the expected trial outcome, which Is the product of
                                                                     26
the probability of liability and expected damages given liability.

       Finally, consider the relationship between the mediation award and

settlement amounts in the 67 cases that both settled and have mediation

amounts available.   In 17 of these cases the mediation award was accepted by

both sides. The correlation between the mediation award and the settlement

 In the remaining 50 cases Is .93 in either levels or logs. However, the

settlement amounts are, on average, significantly lower than the mediation




 26The Implications of this finding are discussed in the next section.
                                        —19—


awards in the 50 cases (p—value < .001 from t—test). Using logs, the average

settlement amount is less than seventy percent of the average mediation

award.27 Based on the discussion in section III, this suggests a lack of

symmetry between the parties with regard to the costs of disagreement. The

plaintiffs appear to have higher costs of litigation than the defendant.

However, the defendant's legal expenses are likely to be higher than the

plaintiff's since, in addition to lawyers' fees, the hospital must pay for

the time of medical personnel while they are are involved in litigation and

also incurs reputation costs. This suggests that the risk premium the

plaintiff is willing to pay to avoid further litigation Is greater than the

risk premium the defendant is willing to pay   .   Thus, the plaintiff seems to
be risk averse relative to the hospital.

      Table 5 contains a breakdown of whether the plaintiff and/or the

defendant accept or reject the mediation award in the eighty cases for

which this Information is available. The simple framework presented in

section III suggests that the parties will make Independent decisions about

whether to accept a mediation award by comparing the award with their

expectation of the value of continuing litigation. The model also Implies

that the parties will accept mediation awards at the same rate If

expectations and costs are symmetric.

      The breakdown In table 5 is not consistent with this simple model.

First, the parties are not making decisions regarding the mediation award

Independently (p—value <.0001). More Importantly, the plaintiff is

significantly (p—value=.078 from t—test) more likely to accept the mediation

award than the defendant. This is consistent with our earlier fInding, and




27me mediation award was greater than the settlement amount In 37 of the
fifty cases.
                          Table S

            Acceptance of Mediation Awards

                      Frequency
                  (cell percentage)


                            Plaintiff

Defendant        Accepts                Rejects     Total


Accepts             6                    23          29
                   (7.5%)                (28.8%)    (36.3%)

Rejects            34                     17         51
                  (42.5%)                (21.3%)    (63.7%)

Total              40                    40         80
                  (50%)                  (50%)     (100%)
                                       —20—


suggests that plaintiffs either face higher costs of continuing litigation

(probably because they are relatively risk averse) or are relatively

pessimistic about the value of the case.



V. Single Equation Estimation of Models of the Mediation Award, Settlements,

and the PLQQ Decision

      The analysis in section III suggests that there is a common underlying

structure to settlement amounts and plaintiffs' decisions to drop cases. One

implication of this is that estimation of a model of settlement amounts

that ignores the endogeneity of the drop decision will yield biased

estimates. Another implication is that a test of the underlying structure of

the model can be carried out based on the implied restrictions of the model.

In this section we estimate single equation models of mediation awards, the

drop decision, and the settlement amount that ignore the cross—equation

restrictions. These estimates are important benchmarks that provide

information on the underlying variation in the data.    In the next section, we

estimate a structural model of the drop/settle decision and settlement

amounts using maximum likelihood.

      The analysis in this section is based on the 239 cases which were

either dropped/dismissed or settled.     It does not include the 13 cases that

were tried to a verdict. As was pointed out in the preceding section, the

cases that went to trial are indistinguishable on the basis of care quality

or severity of injury from the cases that, were dropped or dismissed.     It is

anomalous that these particular cases were pushed to a trial, and we present

no theory explaining it.   Our analysis should be seen as an analysis of why

some cases are dropped or dismissed while others are settled.28




281n fact, the estimation in this section was redone including the 13 cases
as cases that were not dropped, and the results were indistinguishable from
                                         -21—


A. OLS Estimates of the log Mediation Award

        The first column of table 6 contains estimates of the OLS regression of

the log mediation award on a constant, two dummy variables for care
                                                                        quality,
three dummy variables for severity of injury, and age of patient. The base

group for the analysis is good care quality and death as the severity of

injury. This analysis uses the 72 observations for which positive mediation

awards are available. The mediation award is significantly related to all

three dimensions of explanatory variables. Mediation awards are

significantly higher where care Is bad than where care Is ambiguous (p-value
=   .0017) or where care is good (p—value = .004).29 There is no significant

difference between cases where care is ambiguous versus those where care is

good. Compared to cases where the patient died, cases with temporary

injuries had significantly lower mediation awards and cases with permanent

total disability had significantly higher mediation awards. There was no

difference in mediation awards between cases where death occurred and cases

with permanent partial disabilities. Older patients had significantly lower

mediation awards ——     about 1.8 percent lower for each additional year of age.
       These results are in accord with our expectations and are Consistent

with the view that mediation awards reflect estimates of the expected trial

outcome.

B. OLS estimates of log Settlement Amount

       The second column of table 6 contaIns estimates of the OLS regression

of the log settlement amount on same explanatory variables for the 147 cases

that were settled. These estimates are qualitatively similar to those




those presented here.


29The p—values in this section are from regression—based t—tests, regression
based F—tests, or likelihood—ratio tests (x ) as appropriate.
                                      Table 6

                           Single Equation Estimation

                              Coefficient Estimate
                                 (standard error)
                   [mean effect on probability of unit change]


Variable                      (1)           (2)              (3)


                       log(Med. Awd) log(Sett. Ant) Pr(Drop)
                            OLS           OLS         PROBIT


Constant                    11.66         10.41              .186
                             (.451)        (.409)           (.307)

Care Bad                     1.06          1.67            —1.87
                             (.390)        (.340)           (.245)
                                                           [—.514]

Care Ambiguous                .0330        1.08            -1.15
                             (.368)        (.354)           (.217)
                                                           [—.316]

Temporary Injury            —1.30          -2.05             .462
                             (.393)         (.292)          (.255)
                                                            [.127]

Permanent Partial             .248               .111        .0650
Injury                       (.398)             (.325)      (.290)
                                                            [.0179]

Permanent Total              1.59           1.71             .156
Injury                       (.567)         (.563)          (.522)
                                                            [.0429]

Age of Patient               —.0180         —.0125           .00410
                             (.00633)           (.00539)    (.00475)
                                                            [.00113]


R-squared                     .562               .497

n                              72                 147         239

Log-Likelihood                                              -117.1



Note: The base group is good care quality and and a severity of death. The
log—likelihood for a constrained probit model containing only a constant
explaining the probability that a case is dropped is —159.3. The mean effect
on the probability of a unit change In the variable in the problt is computed
as the coefficient estimate times the mean value for the sample of the
standard normal POF evaluated at the parameters contained in column 3 (.275).
                                        -22-


presented for the log mediation award.30 Settlements are significantly higher

where care quality is bad than where it is either ambiguous (p-value =      .013)
or good (p-value     .0001). Settlements are also significantly higher where

care quality is ambiguous than where It is good (p-value =     .0015).   Compared
to cases where the patient died, cases with temporary injuries had

significantly lower settlements and cases with permanent total disability had

significantly higher settlements. Once again, there was no difference in

settlements between cases where death occurred and cases with permanent

partial disabilities. Older patients had significantly lower settlements —-

about 1.2 percent lower for each additional year.

C. Simple Probit on Drop versus Settled

      The third column of table 6 contains estimates of a reduced form

probit model of whether cases are dropped or dismissed based on the model in

section III. The probability that case I is dropped or dismissed is

             (V.1)          Pr(D=l) =       Pr(u    <   XF)
                                        =   '(xr)
where it is assumed that the error term (u) has a standard normal

distribution, (.)    represents   the standard normal cumulative distribution

function, D is a dummy variable that equals one if the case was dropped or

dismissed, X is the vector of explanatory variables for the ith observation,

and r is a vector of parameters. This is the reduced form version of

equation 111.8, and we cannot identify the cost of pursuing a case (a')




308ased on a regression (not presented here) of the difference between the log
settlement and the log mediation award in the 67 cases where both were
available, the hypothesis that all coefficients but the constant equal zero
is rejected (p—value = .055). Casual analysis of the point estimates suggest
that there is a significant negative difference between settlements and
mediation awards for the base group (good care, death), but this difference
is not significant in the lower care quality categories. The difference is
larger (more negative) in the other severity categories.
                                     -23--



separately from the constant in the settlement value vector (n).    In
addition, the parameters are identified only as a ratio with the standard

deviation of the error (normalized to one).31

      The probit model includes the same set of explanatory variables and is

estimated over the same sample of 239 cases that were either settled or

dropped/dismissed. It is clear from the probit estimates that care quality

has a strong and significant influence on whether a case Is dropped. Cases

with good care quality are significantly more likely to be dropped than cases

with either bad or ambiguous care quality. Cases with ambiguous care quality

are significantly more likely to be dropped than cases with bad care quality

(p—value.0044).

      In order to investigate the relative importance of the other variables

on the probability that a case Is dropped, table 7 presents log—likelihood

values and p—values from likelihood—ratio tests for various constrained

versions of the probit model in the last column of table 6. After

controlling for care quality, neither severity of injury nor age of patient

is significantly related at conventional levels to the probability that a

case is dropped.32

      These results present a puzzle when viewed in relation to the mediation

award and settlement equations. The theory implies that the plaintiff's drop

decision should be a function of the settlement value. Thus, any variables

that significantly affect the settlement value (i.e., care, severity, and




3tThis is the usual case with a probit analysis, but we will be able to
identify these parameters when we estimate the structural model in the next
section.


32A test of model *5 against the model *4 in table 7 fails to reject the
hypothesis that the coefficients on the severity variables are zero
(p—value=. 172). A test of model *5 against the model *3 in table 7 fails to
reject the hypothesis that the coefficient age is zero (p—value=.371).
                                    Table 7

        Likelihood Ratio Tests of Various Constrained Pr(DRQP) models



Model                    Log L    Parameters   p-value, v. *1   p-value, *7 v.


*1 constant,             —117.1      7                            <.0001
care, severity, age

*2 constant,             —153.0      5            <.0001           .0134
severity, age

*3 constant,             —119.6      4             .175           <.0001
care, age

*4 constant,             —117.5      6             .371           <.0001
care severity

*5 constant, care        —120.0      3             .215           <.0001


*6 constant,             —153.1      4           <.0001            .0061
severity

*7 constant              —159.3      1           <.0001




Note: All log—likelihood values are derived from a probit specification for
the probability that a case is dropped for dismissed and estimated using the
239 observations for cases that were either dropped/dismissed or settled.
                                            —24—


age) should be significantly related to the drop decision. However, we                                     find

that the drop decision is not significantly related to severity or age,

despite the fact that the settlement amount is a function of these variables.

It is possible that our estimates of the settlement amount are biased by the

sample selection process that results from the drop decision, but we would

still expect the drop decision to be related to variables that determine

damages.



VI. Joint Estimation of the Model of the U.i Decision and Settlement Amounts

      Equations 111.4 and 111.7 define a two-equation system determining the

settlement amount and the probability that a case is dropped assuming that

the settlement amount is equal to the expected trial outcome. A

log-likelihood function is constructed by assuming a joint distribution for

c and i, and we assume joint normality. The probability that case I is

dropped is

              (VI.1)         Pr(D = 1)             Pr(i.z       >   X          —   Z)
and that the joint probability—density that case I is settled (not dropped)

at S (the expected trial outcome) is

              (VI.2)         Pr(D = 0, lnS =
                                          I
                                                        X
                                                            I
                                                                    +   c 11
                             =   Pr(p         X - Z, c =                           lnS   -
                                                                                                 X1)
where D is a dummy variable that equals one if a case is dropped and equals

zero If a case Is settled.

       The log-likelihood function implied by these probabilities is

              (VI.3)         logL =
                                            {Dln[Pr(11>X1Z'))
                                        +                                                    ,

                                             (l_D)ln(Pr(t11<X-Z7                                 c11lnS1_X1))}.
 Note that this is the usual sort of likelihood function implied by a censored

 data problem. The settlement amount Is censored by the drop decision, and,

 because the drop decision is related to the settlement amount, joint
                                         —25—


estimation is required in order to derive consistent estimates.      In our case,

the advantages of joint estimation go beyond this because there are important

cross—equation restrictions. The        vector is common across the two

equations, and, in contrast to the usual case without a structural theory for

the censoring process, we are able to estimate the variance of the error Cli)

in the probit that determines the drop decision. The parameters to be

estimated include ,    ', and    the three elements of the covariace matrix of c

and iI (2 ().2 ad 0         ).
            li   C    JiC

       The restriction that the cost of pursuing a case is constant can be

tested by estimating the model allowing the vector Z to include only a

constant. The unrestricted model, which allows the cost of pursuing a case to

be determined by the same set of variables that determine the settlement

value (2 and X contain the same variables), can also be estimated.        In this

case, the model is identified only from the nonlinearjtjes in the normal

distribution function and we lose Identification on the variance of gi, but

the restriction can still be tested with a likelihood—ratio test.

       The first two columns of table 8 contain estimates of the settlement

value () and cost () functions for the constrained structural model. There

is a significant negative relationship between care quality and settlement

value. There is also a significant relationship between severity of injury

and settlement value, and older plaintiffs have smaller settlement values.

We estimate a significant positive cost of pursuing a case. Assuming

log-normality for the error, the expected cost is exp(8.Sl+5.35/2)

$72, 041.

      The covariance between the random components In the settlement and drop




33m1s computation is based on the fact that the mean of a log—normally
distributed random variable is exp(gi + (l/2)o'
                                             Table 8

           Joint Estimation of Model of Settlements and Drop Decision


                    log(Sett)     Cost          log(Sett) Drop               log(Sett) Drop
                         ()        (')                 ()     (-)/c'            ()

Variable                 (1)       (2)                 (3)        (4)            (5)         (6)

Constant                9.32   8.51               10.2           .186         10.4          .186
                        (.639) (.719)             (2.53)        (.307)         (.445) (.290)

Care 8ad               2.81                        1.82        —1.87           1.67   —1.87
                       (.595)                     (2.49)         (.251)        (.312) (.251)

Care Ambiguous         1.94                        1.19        —1.15           1.08     —1.15
                       (.438)                     (1.77)         (.225)        (.308)       (.224)

Temporary Injury      —2.02                       —2.08              .456     —2.05     .463
                       (.529)                      (.658) (.249)               (.378) (.247)

Permanent Partial       .0670                          .107          .0406      .110         .0647
Injury                 (.337)                      (.402) (.277)               (.387) (.276)

Permanent Total        1.35                        1.70              .152      1.72          .153
Injury                 (.590)                     (1.677) (.669)               (.667) (.664)

Age of Patient         -.0146                      -.0127   .00424             -.0125   .00409
                       (.00561)                    (.00823)(.00511)            (.00606)L00508)


Variance               2.18         5.35           1.87                1       1.86
                       (.621)      (2.54)          (.426)                      (.240)

Covariance                     —1.56                         —.159                      0
                               (2.27)                    (2.58)


Log-Likelihood            -384.1                        —371.3                        371.4




Note: The base group is good care quality and and a severity of death. The
models were estimated using the 239 observations for cases that were either
dropped/dismissed or settled.

aThe variance is normalized to one, and the parameter estimates are
interpreted as ratio of     to
                                        o.
                                      —26—


equations is rather imprecisely estimated and not significantly different

from zero. Recall from section III that the random component in the drop

equation is p =           where    is the random component in the settlement

equation and c is the random component in the cost of pursuing a case. One

potential constraint on the model is that c1 and c2 are independent so that

cov(cj.t) =   var(c).   The estimates of this constrained model, while not

presented, are virtually identical to those for the first model, and the

hypothesis that c and c2 are independent cannot be rejected at any

reasonable level of significance using a likelihood ratio test.34

      The estimates in third and fourth columns of table 8 refer to a

reduced-form censored—data model where the vector in the drop probit function

includes all of the variables in the model. The constraint that care

quality, severity, and age only affect the drop decision through the

settlement amount is relaxed in this specification. This model is similar to

a censored data estimation using a reduced form probit choice model, and it

can be estimated using a two—step estimator.35 There are no cross—equation

restrictions, and we can identify only the ratio of the parameters in the

drop equation (—/3) to the variance of the error in the drop equation

(p=c—c).

      There are two points to note regarding these results. First, this

model fits the data significantly better than the model that embodies the

cross—equation restrictions. A likelihood—ratio test of the hypothesis that



34
  The log—likelihood value of this constrained model is —384.3 compared with
the log—likelihood for the unconstrained model of —384.1. The constraint is
rejected with p-value =.841.


35fleckman (1974) presents an econometric analysis of wages and labor supply
that has a structure very similar to ours. Maddala (1983) presents a
detailed survey of related econometric models.
                                      —27—


the cost of pursuing a case is constant is rejected (p—value =     .0001), and we
must conclude that the simple model of the drop decision where the cost of

litigation is constant is Incomplete.36 The second point is that the reduced

form model is not estimated very precisely. The care quality variables are

not significantly different from zero in the settlement equation although

they are significant in the drop decision function.     In addition, the

covariance of the errors is estimated very imprecisely. This is not

surprising given that identification in this model is based completely on the

nonlinearity of the normal probability function.

        To explore this further, the last two columns of table 8 contain

estimates of the reduced form probit model where the covariance between the

errors in the settlement and drop functions (c and 1)     is   constrained to be

zero. These estimates are identical to those presented in table 6 using

single-equation methods separately for the log settlement equation and the

drop probit. The value of the log-likelihood function is virtually the same

as in the unconstrained reduced—form model in columns 3 and 4 of table 8, and

the hypothesis that this covariance is zero cannot be rejected using a

likelihood ratio test (p—value =   .65).   However, the parameter estimates are

much more precisely determined with the covariance constrained to zero. Both

care quality and severity are important in determining settlement amounts

while only care quality is significantly related to the drop decision.

        There are two conclusions to draw from this analysis. First, the




36me hypothesis that only a constant enters the cost function and that the
drop choice is made based on a comparison of this constant with the
settlement value implies five restrictions on the unconstrained model. There
are six explanatory variables in the settlement equation that are restricted
in the cost function. Noting that one of these restrictions was used to
identify the variance of the choice function in the structural model leaves
five restrictions relative to the unconstrained model in columns three and
four.
                                     —28-


simple model of the drop decision, where the plaintiff compares the expected

settlement value to a constant cost of pursuing a case, is not correct.

Second, there is simply not enough data to estimate precisely the settlement

equation and an unrestricted drop decision function together with an

unrestricted correlation in the unobserved components.37 Given that the

structural model with constant cost of pursuing a case Is rejected by the

data, any attempt to present "selectivity—bias corrected" estimates of the

settlement value equation must rely on unverifiable identifying restrictions.



VII. How are Case Outcomes Related to Care Quality and Severity of Inlury?

      Despite the fact that the constrained model of the drop decision was

rejected by the data so that we could not estimate the full structural model

very precisely, a reinterpretation of the estimations allow us to investigate

how expected settlement amounts are related to care quality and injury

severity. We cannot recover the expected trial outcome Unconditional on

whether a case was dropped, but we can reinterpret our single equation

estimate of the log settlement from equation 111.5 and table 8 as the

settlement conditional on a case not being dropped. This is

             VII.l         ln(YID=O) =      +c
where c is assumed to be normally distributed conditional on a case not being

dropped. Given our OLS estimates in table 6 of the log settlement amount,

the predicted expected value of settlement conditional on a case not being

dropped is

             VII.2         E(YID=O) = exp(xj3 +   l2
                                                  o-   )




37Estlmation of the reduced form model constraining the correlation between
the errors to a wide range of specific values shows that the likelihood value
is not affected to a significant extent by the choice of this correlation.
                                       -29—


where     is the estimated residual variance from the OLS regression.38 We can

also use the estimates, contained in table 6, of the simple probit model of

the probability that a case is dropped to derive the predicted probability

that case is not dropped as

              VIl.3           Pr(D=O) = 1 -   (Xr).
Finally, the unconditional expected settlement in a given case is computed as

              VIL4            E(Y) = E(YID=O)'Pr(D=O)

                                     exp(x +
                                               2).[i_ (Xr)).
        Table 9 contains the predicted values of E(YIDO) and Pr(D0). defined

in equations VII.2 and V.3, for the various combinations of care quality and

severity of injury. These calculations are based on the estimates in columns

2 and 3 of table 6, and they are computed assuming that the age of the

patient is forty years. The first panel contains the predicted expected

settlement amounts conditional on the case not being dropped. There Is a

high degree of variation of conditional settlement amounts with severity.

The predicted expected settlement in the highest category (permanent total)

is 43.2 times the value for the lowest category (temporary). In contrast,

the predicted difference between expected settlements for good care quality

and bad care quality cases is only a factor of 5.3.

        The second panel of table 9 contains the predicted probabilities that a

case is dropped. Here we see the primary influence of care quality. Cases

with good care are five to ten times more likely to be dropped or dismissed

than cases with bad care.     In contrast, severity of injury is simply not very

important. There are only small differences in drop probabilities among

three of the severity categories (permanent partial, permanent total, and




38The precise form of this expectation with the variance correction is based
on the assumption of normality of c.
                                   Table 9

           Predicted Values for Settlements and Drop Probabilities



      Predicted Settlement Conditional on Case Not Dropped or Dismissed
                                     Severity

                       Temporary     Permanent       Permanent        Death
  Care Quality                       Partial          Total

  Bad Quality            $36,460     $317,721       $1,575,096       $284,468


  Ambiguous Quality      $20,204     $176,064         $872,803       $157,637


  Good Quality            $6,859      $59,773         $296,325       $53,518



           Predicted Probability That Case is Dropped or Dismissed

                                     Severity

                       Temporary     Permanent       Permanent       Death
  Care Quality                       Partial          Total

  Bad Quality              .145        .0729           .0863          .0643


  Ambiguous Quality        .367        .230            .259           .211


  Good Quality             .792        .661            .693           .637


Note: The calculations assume patient is age 40 and are based on estimates in
columns 2 and 3 of table 6.
                                       —30-


death), and the fourth category has drop probabilities that are twice as

large at most and only about 25 percent larger at least.

      These numbers are combined in table 10 to compute predicted

unconditional expected settlements as defined In equation VII.4. These

calculations show that both care quality and severity are extremely important

in determining expected settlements. The largest expected settlement (bad

care quality, permanent total disability) is one thousand times larger than

the smallest expected settlement (good care quality, temporary disability).

      The last two rows of table 10 contain average expected settlements for

each severity class. The motivation for computing this is to explore the

notion that, while plaintiffs are likely to be well informed ex ante about

the severity of their injuries, they are probably not well informed about the

likelihood that the hospital was negligent. Weighted average *1 assumes that

plaintiffs know only the overall distribution of care quality in our sample

(31.8'!. bad, 30.6'!. ambiguous. 37.7'!, good) and they can compute an expected

settlement by using these probability weights in combination with the

expected settlement conditional on each care level for their particular

severity class. These numbers show that ex ante expected values are

substantial relative to the cost of the initial filing of a suit even where

severity Is low and where there is rio particular reason to believe that

negligence is likely. Weighted average *2 differs only in assuming that the

plaintiff both knows the distribution of care quality for his or her specific

severity class and uses this information in formulating the ex ante expected

value of the case.

      These calculations suggest that, within the class of medical cases

where the patient suffers harm and where suit has been filed, there is

substantial expected value In most configurations of the data. However, this

finding cannot be extended to the population of medical cases with bad
                                   Table 10

                 Predicted Unconditional Expected Settlement

         For Each Care—Severity Combination and Average by Severity



                 Predicted Unconditional Expected Settlement

                                     Severity

                       Temporary     Permanent       Permanent         Death
  Care Quality                       Partial          Total

  Bad Quality            $31,163     $294,564       $1,439,097        $266,176


  Ambiguous Quality      $12,794     $135,529         $646,949        $124,380


 Good Quality             $1,429      $20,277          $90,845         $19,444


 Weighted Average 1      $14,364     $142,788         $689,849        $130,034

 Weighted Average 2      $12,722     $138,946         $833,893        $163,685




Note: The calculations assume patient is age 40 and are based on estimates in
columns 2 and 3 of table 6, the calculations in table 9, and equation VII.4.
The weighted Averages for each severity level are probability (of a given
care quality) weighted averages of the expected unconditional settlement care
level by care quality for that severity level. Weighted average 1 uses the
observed overall marginal distribution of care quality for all severity
classes. This distribution is in table 2. Weighted average *2 uses the
observed care distribution within each each severity class.
                                         —31—


outcomes more generally. This is because it is likely that the probability

of anything other than good care quality is rather low so that the cases not

filed would have lower expected value than those that are filed. Since our

data are limited to cases filed. we cannot carry out the analysis of the

filing decision necessary to test this view.39



VIII. Incomplete Information and a Reinterpretation of Nuisance Suits

           In the medical malpractice field, plaintiffs generally have a good idea

of   the   severity of damage before filing a lawsuit, but do not have very good

information about whether negligence occurred. After the plaintiff files a

lawsuit, the hospital investigates and learns about care quality very

quickly. The plaintiff learns about care quality during discovery, first by

obtaining his/her hospital records, perhaps by consulting a medical expert to

interpret the record, and later by deposing the medical personnel involved in

the incident. The plaintiff also learns about care quality by whether or not

the defendant makes a settlement offer. But the plaintiff does not obtain the

hospital's evaluations of care quality, so that its information is generally

less certain than the hospital's.

           Suppose care quality was either good or bad. Then the hospital's

evaluation of whether negligence occurred or not is clear and certain, and

the information received by the plaintiff is also likely to be certain.

If care quality was good, the plaintiffs recognizes that the defendant

is unlikely to be found liable and usually drops the case. The data in Table

2 indicates that drops occur in 66 percent of the good care cases. If care




39Some evidence not fully consistent our view is provided by a recent Harvard
(1990) study with information on cases not filed as well as cases filed that
does not find a strong relationship between care quality and the likelihood
that a suit is filed.
                                      -32-


quality was bad, then the defendant recognizes that the hospital is likely to

be liable and a settlement is reached. This occurs in 89 percent of the bad

care cases in the data set. Now suppose the hospital's information is

uncertain, i.e., care quality is ambiguous.     In this case, neither party can

predict the outcome at trial with any degree of certainty, and this suggests

that litigation is likely to go on longer.

      The notion that clear information about care quality is associated with

relatively quick dispute resolution is supported by the analysis in table 11

of stage of resolution by care quality for the 149 cases filed in local court

(where mediation is required before a case can go to trial). About 60'!. of

cases having either good care quality or bad care quality are resolved before

mediation. However, only about one—third of cases involving ambiguous care

quality are resolved before mediation. This difference is statistically

significant (p—value =   .004).
      A high proportion of cases in the data set are dropped or dismissed.

In the litigation literature, the phenomenon of dropped cases has usually

been associated with nuisance suits.4° These are suits recognized by both

sides as having no merit (very low expected damages) that are filed by

plaintiffs in hopes of receiving a settlement. However, our calculations of

high ex ante expected values for suits filed suggest that suits that are

dropped are not nuisance suits. Plaintiffs simply do not know at the time of

filing whether their cases have merit or not.    In order to learn whether

cases have merit, plaintiffs must learn about care qualIty which requires

that they file a lawsuit.    If they find out that care quality was high, then

they drop the suit. Thus, the fact that many suits are filed and dropped




40Cooter and Rubinfeld (1989) and Bebchuk (1988) present models of nuisance
suits that are applicable to medical malpractice litigation.
                              Table 11

               Stage of Resolution by Care Quality

                     (133 Local Court Cases)

                           Frequency
                        (row percentage)




Care Quality      Before Mediation       After Mediation   Total


Bad Care                 24                      15          39
                        (61.5%)                 (38.5%)    (100%)

Ambiguous Care           i4                      28          42
                        (33.3%)                 (66.7%)    (100%)

Good Care                31                      21          52
                        (59.6%)                 (40.4%)    (100%)

Total                    69                      64         133
                        (51.9%)                 (48.1%)    (100%)
                                     —33—


implies that negligence was not indicated in these cases ex post, but it does

not necessarily imply that these were nuisance suits.



IX. Concluding Remarks

      We found strong evidence that negligence, as measured by care

quality, plays an important role in the negotiation and dispute resolution

process in medical malpractice cases faced by one hospital. We also found

evidence from a comparison of mediation awards with negotiated settlements

and from acceptance rates of mediation awards that plaintiffs face higher

costs of litigation, suggesting that plaintiffs are generally risk—averse

relative to the defendant/hospital. Although the number of cases tried in

court was too small to allow us to estimate a model determining trial

outcomes, we did find that cases tried were indistinguishable from cases

dropped or dismissed. This suggests that cases go to trial because

plaintiffs make mistakes, rather than because bargaining over a settlement

breaks down.

      Our model of the plaintiff's drop decision as being based on a

comparison of expected settlement values with a constant cost of pursuing a

case was not supported by the data, and were unable to estimate precisely a

joint structural model of the drop decision and the settlement amount.

However, we did find evidence consistent with the view that 1) the plaintiff

is not well Informed about the likelihood of negligence and 2) the ex ante

expected value to the plaintiff of a suit is high relative to the costs of

filing and getting more information. Thus, suits are filed even where there

is no concrete reason to believe there has been negligence, and virtually all

suits are either dropped or settled based on the information gained after

filing. We conclude that so—called nuisance suits can be equilibrium

behavior where there is Incomplete Information at the time of filing.
                                      —34—


                                   References
Bebchuk, Lucian A. 'Suing Solely to Extract a Settlement Offer," Journal of
      Legal Studies 17 (June 1988), pp. 437-450.


Cooter, Robert D. and Daniel L. Rubinfeld, Economic Analysis of Legal
      Disputes," Journal of Economic Literature 27 (September 1989), pp.
      1067-1097.


Crawford, Vincent. "Compulsory Arbitration. Arbitral Risk and Negotiated
      Settlements: A Case Study in Bargaining Under Imperfect Information,"
      Review of Economic Studies 49 (January 1982). pp. 69—82.


Danzon, Patricia. Medical Malpractice. Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
      1985.



Epstein, Richard. Medical Malpractice: The Case for Contract. Center for
      Libertarian Studies, 1979.


Farber, Henry S. and Harry C. Katz. "Interest Arbitration, Outcomes, and
      the Incentive to Bargain." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 33
      (October 1979), pp. 55—63.


Harvard Medical Practice Study, Patients, Doctors, and Lawyers: Medical
      Injury. Malpractice Litigation, and Patient Compensation in New York,
      1990.



Heckinan, James J. 'Shadow Prices, Market Wages, and Labor Supply,"
      Econometrica 42 (1974), pp. 679-94.


Maddala, G. S. Limited Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics.
      Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983.


Mnookin, Robert H. and Lewis Kornhauser, "Bargaining in the Shadow of the Law:
      The Case of Divorce," The Yale Law Journal 88 (1979), pp. 95O997.


Nash, John. "The Bargaining Problem," Econometrica 18 (January i9SO), pp.
      155—162.
                                        —35—



Rubinstein, Ariel. 'Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model," Econometrica
      50 (January 1982), pp. 97—109.


Shavell, Steven. "Theoretical Issues in Medical Malpractice," in The
      Economics of Medical Malpractice, Simon Rottenberg, ed., Washington,
      D.C., American Enterprise Institute, 1978.


Shave].]., Steven. "Sharing of Information Prior to Settlement or Litigation,
      Rand   Journal   of Economics 20 (1989), pp. 183—195.


White, Michelle J.,'An Empirical Test of the Efficiency of Liability Rules
      in Accident Law," Rand Journal of Economics 20 (Autumn 1989), pp.
      308—330.
</ref_section>
