                          NBER WORXINC PAPERS SERIES




                 ENFORCEMENT COSTS AND THE OPTIMAL MAGNITUDE
                           AND PROBABILITY OF FINES




                             A. Mitchell Polinsky
                                Steven Shavell




                           Working Paper No. 3429




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                September 1990




Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #3429
                                              September 1990


                 ENFORCEMENT COSTS AND THE OPTIMAL MAGNITUDE
                           AND PROBABILITY OF FINES


                                   ABSTRACT


     Some of the costs of enforcing laws are fixed" - - in the sense that they

do not depend on the number of individuals who commit harmful acts- -while

other costs are "variable"--they rise with the number of such individuals.

This article analyzes the effects of fixed and variable enforcement costs on

the optimal fine and the optimal probability of detection. It is shown that

the optimal fine rises to reflect variable enforcement costs; that the

optimal fine is not directly affected by fixed enforcement costs; and that

the optimal probability depends on both types of enforcement costs.




A. Mitchell Polinsky                          Steven Shavell
Stanford Law School                           Harvard Law School
Stanford University                           Langdell 357
Stanford, CA 94305                            Harvard University
                                              Cambridge, MA 02138
     ENFORCEMENT COSTS AND THE OPTIMAL MAGNITUDE
                        AND PROBABILITY OF FINES

                                   A. Mitchell Polinsky
                                           and
                                      Steven Shaveli


1. Introduction and Summary
        Whenever the government uses fines to control harmful activities, it incurs certain
costs in connection with the enforcement process. This article will show how these costs
affect the optimal magnitude of fines and the optimal degree of enforcement effort, that is,
the optimal probability of detection of those who commit harmful acts.
        We will distinguish between two types of enforcement costs. Fixed en/brcement
costs are costs that do not depend on the number of individuals who commit harmful acts.
These costs would include, for example, the expenses borne by a pollution control agency
in testing water quality in a lake. Variable enforcement costs are costs that do depend on
the number of individuals who commit harmful acts, such as the costs of prosecuting and
penalizing polluters. In our basic model, we assume that the fixed enforcement costs are
the costs of maintaining the probability of detection at a certain level, and that the
variable enforcement costs are the costs of fining individuals.
        The main conclusions of this article may be summarized as follows. The optimal
fine equals the harm, properly inflated for the chance of not being detected, plus the
variable enforcement cost of imposing the fine. If the fine is of this magnitude, the
expected fine will equal the harm caused by the harmful act plus the expected increase in


   ttanford University and National Bureau of Economic Research; Harvard University
and National Bureau of Economic Research, respectively. Polinsky's research was
supported by the John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics at Stanford Law School;
Shavell's research was supported by the National Science Foundation (grant SES.
8821400). We are grateful for helpful comments from Jeffrey Parker and seminar
participants at the University of Michigan and the Bay Mea Group in Economics and
Law, and for research assistance from Timothy Church and Joel Waldfogel.
enforcement costs occasioned by it. For instance, suppose that the probability of detecting
a polluter is 60%, that a polluter would cause $10,000 of harm, and that the cost of
imposing a fine on a polluter is $3,000. Then the optimal fine is $23,000: $10,000
multiplied by 2 because of the 50% chance of detection, plus $3,000. Given this fine, the
expected fine is $11,500 (50% x $23,000). Thus, if a party pollutes, he will take into
account the harm of $10,000 as well as the expected increase in enforcement costs of
$1,500 (reflecting the 50% chance that he will be caught and that the state will incur
variable enforcement costs of $3,000).
        Note that fixed enforcement costs do not directly affect the optimal fine. The fixed
cost of catching polluters — such as the expense of testing water quality - does not
directly affect the optimal fine because the fixed cost is, in essence, a sunk cost. When a
party pollutes, he does not increase this fixed cost. However, as will be explained, fixed
enforcement costs do influence the optimal probability of detection; they therefore
indirectly affect optimal fines, since the factor by which the harm is inflated is the
reciprocal of the probability of detection.
       The optimal probability of detection depends on both. types of enforcement costs. If
variable enforcement coatsare high, the optimal probability will be low because
enforcement will be expensive; and for sufficiently high variable enforcement costs, the
optimal probability will be zero. Similarly, if fixed enforcement expenditures are not very
productive (that is, if it is very costly to raise the probability), the optimal probability will
be low; in the extreme it will be zero. If it is inexpensive to raise the probability, the
probability will be higher, but may be less than one; for even if the probability could be
raised costlessly, it may not be desirable to raise it to one because variable enforcement
costs may then become excessive.
       Sections 2 and 3 derive the results just summarized in a model of optimal
enforcement. Section 4 discusses several extensions of the model: a stage of investigation
and prosecution after detection of an individual; variable onforcemont costs that increaso
with the magnitude of fines; the possibility that the probability of detection falls as the
line rises; the sanction of imprisonment; and the bearing of expenses by individuals in
connection with the enforcement process. Section 5 comments on the importance of




                                                2
enforcement costs, the practical ability to use the formulas developed in this article, and
the inclusion of enforcement costs in actual sanctions,'

2. The Model
        In the model, risk-neutral individuals contemplate whether to commit a harmful
act that yields benefits to them. Each individual is identified by the harm that he would
cause if he commits the act and by the benefit he would obtain from it. If an individual
commits the harmful act, he will be fined with some probability. The cost to the state of
establishing this probability, which is assumed to be independent of the number of
individuals who commit the harmful act, is the fixed enforcement cost. The cost to the
state of imposing the fine, which depends on the number of individuals who commit the
harmful act, is the variable enforcement cost.2
        The following notation will be used.
      h = harm caused if the harmful act is committed; h > 0;
   g(h) = probability density of h over individuals; g is positive for h >
      b = benefit from committing the harmful act; b 0;
   r(b) = probability density of b over individuals; r is positive for b 0;
      c = cost of establishing the probability of detection (fixed enforcement cost); c 0;
  p(c) = probability of detection; p(O) = 0, p'(c)> 0, p"(c) < 0;
    w = wealth of each individual;
  Rb) = fine given the harm; 0s f(h) s w;



    'Our article builds on Becker (1968), who recognized that the optimal magnitude and
the optimal probability of sanctions reflect not only the level of harm, but also the cost of
enforcement. He observed (p. 192), for example, that if the probability of detection is one,
the optimal fine equals "the sum of marginal harm and marginal (enforcement] costs."
Stigler (1970, p. 633) also mentions that fines should include enforcement costs. However,
the precise way that the two types of enforcement cost affect the optimal fine and the
optimal probability has not been investigated. But see note 7 below.
   2This cost can be viewed either as the expense of collecting a fine through a formal
enforcement process, or as the expense of settlement negotiations.
   'if h were the same for everyone, the model would not be interesting because,
regardless of the level of enforcement costs, the optimal fine would equal the wealth of
each individual.
                                                3
       k = cost of imposing the fine (variable enforcement cost).
 The following assumptions are made. The harm h is observable, so that the fine Ican be
 made to be a function of h, but the benefit b is not observable. The variables h and bare
 independently distributed (this assumption is made for simplicity). The probability of
 detection p is the same for acts resulting indifferent levels of harm.4
        An individual will commit a harmful act if his benefit is greater than or equal to
 the expected fine:5
 (1)                                        b>pf.
        Social welfare is the sum of the benefits individuals obtain from committing
harmful acts, less the harm they do, and less expected enforcement costs. Given (1),
social welfare can be expressed as

(2)                            f f (b - h - pk)r(b)dbg(h)dh -
                               0 pf
where p = p(c) and f = f(h). Note that the cost of maintaining the probability of detection,
c, is unaffected by the number of individuals who commit the harmful act. However, the
expected cost of imposing fines increases by plc for each individual who commits the act.
        Society's problem is to choose c and a schedule flh) to maximize (2). Let c and
f'(h) denote the solution to the social problem (and let p = p(c')).

3. Analysis of the Model
       This section derives the optimal fine schedule and the optimal probability of
detection, and shows how they depend on fixed and variable enforcement costs.
        3.1 OptImal Fines
        Given any positive c and p, the social problem for any h is to choose the fine (to



    4A justification for this assumption is provided in Shavell (1989): To the extent that
the investment in enforcement effort applies to a wide range of harms, it is appropriate to
treat the probability of detection with respect to any one type of harm as fixed. (If,
alternatively, p could be chosen independently for each h, the optimal fine would equal
wealth for each h.)

    tot convenience, we assume that when b      = p1,   an individual will commit a harmful
act.

                                              4
maximize

(3)                                    fIb -h-pk)rOi)db.
                                       pf
The derivative of(S) with respect to f is -p(pf - h - pk)r(pf), which is positive for pf c h +
pk or, equivalently, for f< h/p + k; zero at pf = h + pk or f = h/p + k; and negative for
greater pf and f. Hence, Nh) = h/p + k if this is feasible, that is, if h/p + k cw;
otherwise, Nh) = w.
       In other words, the optimal fine is
(4)                                      Nh) = h/p+k
if the harm caused by the harmful act is less than or equal to p(w - Ic). Therefore, if
w> Ic, there will be a range of harms for which the optimal rime is h/p + k.
        Observe that, for harms in this range, the expected fine equals h + pk, which is the
increase in expected social costs if an individual commits a harmful act — that is, the
harm caused plus the expected cost of imposing the fine. Thus, deterrence is socially
optimal. For harms greater than p(w - Ic), the expected fine is pw, which is less than
h + pk, so that there is underdeterrence.°
      Note too that the fixed enforcement cost c of establishing the probability of detection
does not enter into the optimal fine formula (except indirectly through its influence on the
probability of detection p).
         In summary,




     'In Polinsky and Shavell (1982), we studied a model in which firms causing an
externality were detected with probability one and enforcement costs were associated with
the imposition of Pigouvian taxes. In the notation of the present model, then, the only
enforcement cost was Ic. We derived the optimal tax, but it did not equal what (4) implies,
the harm plus the enforcement cost k. The reason is that we assumed that the sanction
took the particular form of a tax per unit of a firm's activity. (To be precise, if a firm's
level of activity is x, it causes harm lix, so that, according to (4), the sanction should be
lix + k. But we assumed that the tax was a constant t per unit of activity, so it took the
form tx.)
                                                5
        Proposition 1. For harms below a threshold (h c p(w - k)), the optimal fine Nh) is
 h/p + k; the expected fine is h + pk; and deterrence is optimal. The optimal fine includes
 the variable enforcement cost k of imposing the fine, but not the fixed enforcement cost c
 of establishing the probability of detection. For higher harms, the optimal fine Nh) is at
 its maximum, w; the expected fine is pw c h + plc; and there is underdeterrence..
         3.2 Optimal Probability of Detection
         Given Proposition 1, social welfare (2) can be expressed as
          p(w-k)
          5      JO, - h - pk)r(b)dbg(h)dh
          0       h+pk
 (5)

              +    5      J(b -h-pk)r(b)dbg(h)dh - c.
                   p(w-k) pw
The first term is associated with individuals who cause harm that is below the threshold
and whose expected fine is h + pk, whereas the second term applies to individuals who
cause higher harms and whose expected fine is pw.
        Differentiating (5) with respect to c and setting the result equal to 0, we obtain
(after cancelling several terms) the first-order condition
                   00

       r(pw)p(c)w f (h + plc - pw)g(h)dh
                  p(w-k)

(6)                         p(w-k)
              = 1 + p'(c)k[ 5(1 - R(h +
                                        pk))g(h)dh
                              0

                         + (1 - R(pw))(1 - G(p(w -
where K and G are the cumulative distribution functions ofr and g. The optimal

probability p is determined implicitly by (6). The left-hand side of (6)is the marginal
benefit of raising c and therefore p: for harms above the threshold p(w- k), there is
underdeterrence; raising p just deters those who would obtain benefits ofpw and
therefore raises welfare by h + plc - pw for each such individual. The right-hand side is
the marginal cost of raising c and p, which has two components: the direct cost of raising
c, 1; and the increase in variable enforcement costs accompanying more frequent
imposition of fines.

                                               6
      How p depends on variable and fixed enforcement costs is summarized in the next
two propositions.
       Proposition 2. As the variable enforcement cost of imposing the fine increases from
k = 0, the optimal probability pt may increase or decrease. Eventually, however, p' must
decrease and equal 0; in other words, if k is sufficiently large, no enforcement is optimaL.
        The proof of this proposition is contained in the Appendix. The reason that p
initially may increase or decrease as k increases can be explained as follows. The
marginal benefit of raising p grows because, as k increases, the social loss from
underdeterrence increases. However, the marginal cost of raising p may either rise or
fall: it tends to rise because, as k increases, the variable enforcement costs incurred when
more individuals are fined increase; but it tends to fall because, as k increases, fewer
individuals commit the harmful act (since the expected fine rises with k for those
individuals whose harm is below the threshold level of harm), thereby lowering variable
enforcement costs. If the marginal cost of raising p is greater than the marginal benefit
of raising p, p will fall; otherwise p will rise. The reason that pt must approach zero as
Ic grows large is that, otherwise, a positive fraction of individuals would be fined, and the
variable enforcement costs of imposing fines would grow without bound. Why p must
equal zero for Ic sufficiently large (rather than just approach zero) is more difficult to
explain; see the proof in the Appendix.
       Next, let us examine how the optimal probability of detection pt is influenced by
fixed enforcement costs. It will be helpful to define the "productivity" of fixed enforcement
costs in the following way: the probability of detection equals p(Xc), where X> 0 is the
productivity of costs c. Thus, the higher is X, the higher is p for any given c. How p
depends on X is summarized in the next proposition.
       Proposition 3.   If the productivity X of fixed enforcement costs in establishing the
probability of detection is sufficiently low, the optimal probability p is zero. Thereafter,
as X increases, pt may rise or (if positive) fall. However, as X grows large, p tends
toward p, the p that would be optimal if the probability could be increased at no cost; P
may be   lessthan 1..
       The proof of this proposition also is provided in the Appendix. The reason that pt
equals zero for X sufficiently low is evident; for X very low, the marginal cost of raising the
probability exceeds the deterrence benefits. The explanation for why p may either

                                               7
 increase or decrease with X thereafter is analogous to the corresponding explanation
 following Proposition 2. That p' tends toward p makes sense because, as X grows large, it
 becomes inexpensive to alter p. The reason p may be less than 1 is that, even if there are
 no fixed enforcement costs associated with raising p, there are increased variable
 enforcement costs since a greater fraction of those who commit the harmful act are
 caught.

 4. ExtensIons of the Model
       This section discusses several extensions of the model. Because they do not
substantially alter the manner in which the optimal probability of deteétion p is
determined, the focus will be on how the extensions affect the optimal fine.
        4.1 Investlgatlon.Prosecutjon Following Detection
       It was implicitly assumed that if an individual who commits a harmful act is
detected, a fine would be imposed with certainty. Suppose, however, that detection is
followed by a second stage during which the state investigates and prosecutes an
individual, and at the end of which a fine is imposed only with a probability. Let
     a = cost of the investigation-prosecution stage;
     q = probability of a fine being imposed after the investigation-prosecution stage.
Hence, the probability that an individual will have to pay a fine is pq.
      The investigation-prosecution costs are another type of variable enforcement cost
because they depend on the number of individuals who commit harmful acts. With these
costs included, expected variable enforcement costs become ps + pqk. The first term is the
expected cost of the investigation.prosecution stage and the second term is the expected
cost of imposing the fine.
       Since an individual will now commit a harmful act if b > pqf, the optimal fine Nh)
is determined by maximizing

(7)
                                  f(b-h-ps -pqk)r(b)db
                                  pqf
with respect to F. Differentiation yields the result that pqf = h + ps + pqk if the wealth
constraint on the fine is not binding, so that
(8)
                                   rch)=hjpq+s/q+k.
                                              8
Recall that, in the absence of investigation-prosecution costs, the optimal fine was flh) =
hip + k (see (4)).
       Formula (8) illustrates a general principle: the optimal fine equals the costs
incurred by society as a result of the harmful act -- the harm itself and any variable
enforcement costs -- divided by the probability, at the time the cost is incurred, that the
injurer will have to pay the fine. Thus, h is divided by pq because, when the harm occurs,
the probability of having to pay the fine is pq; s is divided by q because, when the
investigation-prosecution costs are incurred, the probability of having to pay the fine is q;
and k is divided by 1 because, when the cost of imposing the fine is incurred, the
probability of having to pay the fine is i.
      If the fine is computed according to this principle, the expected fine will equal the
expected social costs due to an individual committing a harmful act, including the harm
caused and the expected variable enforcement costs. Consequently, deterrence will be
socially optimal.
       42 Variable Enforcement Costs Increase with the Fine
       The variable enforcement cost k of imposing fines was presumed in the analysis to
be independent of the size of fines. More generally, however, it would be reasonable to
suppose that the cost of imposing fines increases with their size because individuals would
more strongly resist their imposition (e.g., by attempting to conceal assets).
        To allow for this possibility, let the variable enforcement cost Ic be a function k(f) of
the fine, with k'(f) > 0. Then, the first-order condition from differentiating (3) with respect
to f becomes
(9)                        -p(pf - h - pk)r(pf) - pk'(fXl - R(pO) = 0.
Hence, pf = h + pk - k'ffl(l - R(pO)/r(pfl, or
(10)                  P(h) = b/p + k - k'(IXl - R(pf))Ipr(pt) .c h/p + Ic.
In other words, taking account of the possibility that higher fines result in higher variable
enforcement costs lowers the optimal fine. This is because reducing the fine has the
beneficial effect of reducing variable enforcement costs.



    tAn essentially identical formula is contained in Cohen (1988, pp. 5-7). (His article did
not distinguish between fixed and variable enforcement costs and did not investigate the
effects of enforcement costs on the optimal probability of detection.)
                                                 9
        4.3 Probability of Detection Falls with the Fine
        The probability of detecting individuals also may be influenced by the fine.
 Because individuals presumably would do more to avoid detection as the fine increases,
 the probability of detection would be expected to fall.' Hence, let the probability of
 detection be a function off as well as c; since f = 1(h), p = p(c, 1(h)), where Pr c 0. Then,
 given c and h, the optimal f maximizes (3), where p is treated as a function off. The first-
 order condition becomes (after some substitution)
 (11)                  P(h) =   b/p + k - [p,k(1 - R(pO)1/((p,f + p)pr(pf)].
 It is evident from (11) that Nh) exceeds h/p + k if pf rises with ((since d(pf)/df = pf + p)
 and that Nb) is less than h/p + k if pf falls with f. Thus, takJng account of the possibility
that higher fines reduce the probability of detection has an ambiguous effect on the
optimal fine. This is not surprising because, on one hand, a fall in the probability of
detection saves variable enforcement costs, which is beneficial; but on the other hand,
raising the fine may reduce the expected fine, which may be detrimental.9
        4.4 The Sanction of Imprisonment
       The sanction of imprisonment can be analyzed like the extension discussed in
subsection 4.2 in which the cost of imposing fines rises with their level. Here the cost of
imprisonment rises with its duration. In particular, let
         z = length of imprisonment;




   'Another possibility is that the probability ofdetection rises with the fine. For
example, since the number of individuals who commit harmful acts falls with the fine, the
chance that any one of them is detected might rise.
    9An alternative explanation of why the optimal fine might be higher or lower than h/p
+ Isis as follows. First, rewrite (11) in the form -pk(l - R(pf)) =   (f
                                                                      + p)r(pf)(pf - h - pk).
The left-hand side is the margins] benefit of raising F, which is positive, and consists of
the reduction in variable enforcement costs due to the fall in p. The right-hand side is the
marginal cost of raising f, arid must be positive since the marginal benefit is positive. If
d(pfl/df = pf + p is positive, then fewer individuals commit the harmful act
                                                                              as (increases,
so for the marginal costs to be positive, each such individual must have been adding to
Bocial welfare. Because pf is the benefit of the marginal individual and h + pk is the
Increase in expected social costs due to his committing the act, this means that pf - h -
must be positive or, equivalently, f> h/p + k. Similarly, if p + p is negative, pf - h - pkpk
must be negative, or f c b/p + k.
                                              10
          a = per unit cost to the state of imposing the
              imprisonment sanction; a > 0.10
It will be assumed that the disutility to an individual of an imprisonment term of lengthz
equals z.
       Since an individual will commit the harmful act if b > pz, the optimal sanction
z'(h) maximizes

(12)                                   5 (b - h - paz)r(b)db
                                       pz
with respect to z. The first-order condition from (12)is, after dividing by p,
(13)                        -(pz - h - paz)r(pz) - a(1 - R(pz)) = 0.
This condition can be rewritten as
(14)                   z(h) =   h/p + az - 0(1 - R(pz))/pr(pz) c h/p + az,
which is similar to (10). As with fines in subsection 4.2, the optimal imprisonment
sanction depends directly on variable enforcement costs, but not all such costs are added
to the sanction because reducing the length of imprisonment has the beneficial effect of
reducing variable enforcement costs. Note also that the optimal imprisonment sanction z
does not depend directly on the fixed enforcement costs c required to maintain the
probability of detection (although z is influenced indirectly through the effect of c on p*).
         4.5 Individuals Bear Costs in Connection with Enforcement
         Thus far it has been assumed that all of the costs of the enforcement process are
borne by the state. In practice, of course, individuals who commit harmful acts also bear
costs in connection with enforcement -- in evading detection, defending against conviction,
or contesting the level of fines.
         Such costs do not affect the formula for optimal fines for the simple reason that
individuals will properly take these costs into account because they bear them. To
demonstrate this, let
       a1 = cost of trying to evade detection borne by each individual
           who commits the harmful act;




   '°One could also interpret a as including the cost bone by the individual punished.
                                                11
       = cost of trying to avoid paying the fine borne by each
         individual who is detected,
These costs affect social welfare (2) and the expression for determining the optimal fine
(3) in two ways. First, since an individual now will commit the harmful act if
b > a, + p(f + a2), the latter expression replaces pf as the lower limit of integration with
respect to b. Second, the part of the integrand representing the benefit to the individual
less the harm and less enforcement costs now becomes (b - h - a1 - p(k + a2)). It is easily
verified that these changes do not affect the first-order condition from maximizing (3), so
that it is still true that ('(h) = h/p + k, as claimed."
        Although the enforcement costs borne by individuals do not affect the formula for
optimal fines r(h), these costs do affect the optimal level of enforcement effort c, and
thus p. Presumably, as in Proposition 2, p' initially may increase or decrease as a, or
rises, but p eventually must decrease to zero as a, or a2 becomes large.

5. ConcludIng Remarks
       This section discusses the magnitude of enforcement costs, the ability to apply the
formulas in this article, and the incorporation of enforcement costs in actual sanctions.
      (a) Importance of enforcement costs. Enforcement costs often are not
inconsequential relative to the sanctions imposed. For example, the enforcement costs of
the Internal Revenue Service in its screening program to detect discrepancies between
income reported on tax.returns and income reported by payers amount to approximately
10% of the additional revenue collected; and its enforcement costs in its examination
program to audit returns are in the 20-35% range for most categories of taxpayers)2


   t1However this result does not hold if the costs borne by individuals rise with the
magnitude of fines (because individuals spend more resisting their imposition). In that
case, it can be shown that Nh) chip + k for reasons analogous to those in subsection 4.2.
We are grateful to Jeffrey Parker for suggesting this point.
    12The Information Returns Program of the IRS, which screens returns to detect
discrepancies, cost $54 million in FY 1981 and yielded $530 million in additional
revenues, resulting in a cost/yield of 10.2%. See President's Private Sector Survey on Cost
Control (1983, p. 79). The examination program of the IRS, which engages in audits of
returns, had the followingaverage costs per examination, additional yields, and resulting
cost/yield percentages in FY 1985: (a) for individuals earning between $25,000 and
$50,000, cost per return $235, additional yield $678, cost/yield 34.7%; (b)for non-farm
                                             12
The enforcement costs of the Securities and Exchange Commission in its fraud
enforcement program are about 10% of total penalties and disgorgements.'5 In general,
it seems plausible that the enforcement costs associated with many minor violations, such
as parking and traffic violations, are large in relation to the fines.'4 And, presumably,
when penalties are high, the state's prosecution, settlement, and collection costs often will
be substantial because of defendants' strong incentives to resist incurring such penalties.
         (b) Practical ability to use the formulas. The formulas in our article are not
difficult to employ. All that an enforcement agency would need to do is to add to the fine
that it otherwise considers appropriate the costs of investigation and prosecution,
multiplied by the reciprocal of the probability that a fine will be imposed after
investigation and prosecution, plus the cost of imposing the fine itself. (More generally,
the agency should include any type of variable enforcement cost, multiplied by the
reciprocal of the probability -- at the time the cost is incurred -- that the injurer will have
to pay the fine.) Thus, the information needed by an agency is simply its own
enforcement data. For instance, suppose that an enforcement agency knows the following:
only one-third of the cases it investigates and prosecutes result in the imposition of a fine;
the average cost of investigation-prosecution is $1,000; and the average cost of collecting
the fine is $500. Then the amount that the agency should add to the fine to reflect
enforcement costs is ($1,000 x 3) + $500, or $3,500.
       (c) Inclusion of enforcemeni costs in actual sanctions. There presently are
circumstances in which enforcement costs can be included in penalties. For example,


businesses earning over $100,000, cost per return $1,224, additional yield $5,187,
cost,5,ield 23.6%; and (c) for corporations earning between $1 million and $5 million, cost
per return $2,534, additional yield $12,383, cost/yield 20.5%. See Steuerle (1986, p. 28).
   Isrotal SEC expenditures on prevention and suppression of fraud were $46.6 million in
1989 and yielded $482.7 million, so the percentage of costs to yield was 9.7%. Since the
SEC obtained unusually high amounts from defendants in 1989, this cost/yield percentage
was much lower than normal. This information was obtained from an unpublished SEC
document entitled "Budget Estimate Fiscal 19917 pp. 11-i & 11-10.
    "Consider, for example, the enforcement costs associated with a $10 fine for an
expired parking meter. A ticket has to be written and recorded in a central information
system; the check the person sends must be cashed and a record made of that. If the total
time involved is even 6 minutes and the average hourly wage plus fringe benefits is $20,
the processing cost would be $2, or 20% of the $10 fine.
                                              13
federal district courts are permitted to add the costs of prosecution to the sanctions they
would otherwise impose.'5 This provision, however, does not inflate the prosecution
costs to account for the fact that the imposition of a sanction is not certain, and it ignores
 other components of enforcement costs (such as the cost of collecting a fine).
        A second example is that the United States Sentencing Commission recently has
required the inclusion of certain enforcement costs in penalties. The sentencing
guidelines applicable to individuals provide that "the court shall impose an additional fine
amount that is at least sufficient to pay the costs to the government of any imprisonment,
probation, or supervised release ordered."6 According to our analysis, it is appropriate -
that these costs are not inflated, because they are borne only if the defendant is convicted.
However, the sentencing guidelines omit other kinds of enforcement costs that should be
included, such as the costs of investigation and prosecution.
      Other, more particular, examples of the inclusion of enforcement costs in sanctions
may be given. Three such examples, one federal, one state, and one local, are:'7 The
United States Department of the Interior's natural resource damage assessment
procedures make a polluter pay for the government's cost of determining the pollution
damages. The Massachusetts Department of Environmental Quality Engineering has
proposed a plan to bill owners of polluted property for the regulators' time, at $67 an
hour. And several police departments in the San Francisco area make it a policy to
charge drunken drivers for the time officers spend arresting them.
       These examples serve to illustrate the practicality of including enforcement costs in
sanctions.


    '5Section 1918(b) of Title 28 of the United States Code states: "Whenever any
conviction for any offense not capital is obtained in a district court, the court may order
that the defendant pay the costs of prosecution." See generally O'Malley (1987).
   18See United States Sentencing Commission (1989, p. 5.20). This provision may not be
applicable if the defendant cannot pay all or part of the fine, or if the payment would
unduly burden the defendant's dependents.
    "The examples listed below are based on the following sources: State of Ohio v. U.S.
Depart. of the Interior, 880 F.2d 432, 468 (D.C. Cit 1989); William M. Bulkeley,
"MasBachusette Wants to Bill Owners Of Polluted Land for Regulators' Time," Wail Street
Journal, January 10, 1989, p. A20; "Editorial: Paying Crime's Price," Peninsula Times
Tribune, February 25, 1989, p. A-9.
                                             14
Appendix
      Proof of Proposition 2. In this proof, let p(k) denote the optimal p given k, and
consider a k such that p(k) > 0. To see that p'(k) may be positive or negative, first
subtract the right-hand side of (6) from the left-hand side. The resulting equation is of
the form W(c, Ic) = 0, where W is the derivative of (5) with respect to c. W(c, Ic) = 0
determines c as a function of Ic, and differentiating W(c, Ic) = 0 with respect to k and
solving for c'(k), we obtain c'(k) = -Wk/WC. Since W < 0 (the second-order condition for (5)
to be maximized), the sign of c' equals the sign of Wk. But it is straightforward to verify
that the sign of Wk can be positive or negative. Hence, c, arid thus p, may either rise or
fall as k increases.
        It remains to show that p'(k) = 0 for all Ic sufficiently large. Let us first establish
that p(k) -e 0 as Ic —. . If this were not true, there would be an e > 0 and an increasing
sequence Ic, where k —' oc as i —. oc, such that p(k1)> e for every i. Note that there will
always be some fraction of the population who commit harmful acts: the highest possible
expected fine is bounded from above by w, so at least 1 - R(w)0 of the population will
commit such acts. Hence, the variable enforcement costs are at least (1 R(w))ck1. But
this grows unboundedly as —. oc• In contrast, it is always possible to choose c = 0, in
which case, since everyone commits harmful acts, social welfare is E(b) - E(h), where E
stands for expected value. This level of welfare must be higher than welfare under the
p(k,.) for large iç, which contradicts the optimality of the p(k).
        To complete the argument, it will suffice to show that for all Ic sufficiently high,
the derivative of social welfare with respect to c is negative for all c in a neighborhood
(0, 6] of 0. For this fact and the fact that p'(k) —. 0 imply that p*(k) = 0 for all k
sufficiently high. Now, for all k large, w is less than Ic, so that the optimal fine is w for
all h, and social welfare is

(15)                           5 5 (b - h - pk)r(b)dbg(h)dh   -
                               Opw
rather than (5). The derivative of this with respect to c is
(16)                -p'(c)w(pw - E(h)- pk)r(pw) - p'(c)k(l - R(pw))    - 1.

This expression involves terms not including Ic plus
(17)                             kp'(c)[pwr(pw) - (1 - R(pw))].


                                               15
As a approaches 0, (17) tends to kp'(O), which falls without bound as k increases. Hence,
(16) must be negative within a suitably small interval [0, O] for all k sufficiently large.
       Proof of Proposition 3. Since p = p(Xc), 4/dc = ?p'(Xc). Hence, the derivative of (5)
with respect to c is

       r(pw)kp'(Xc)wf (h + pk - pw)g(h)dh
                    p(w-k)

(18)                          p(w-k)
             - 1 - Kp'(Xc)k[ 1(1 - R(h + pk))g(h)dh
                             0

                        + (1 - R(pw))(1 - G(p(w - k)))].
This is less than or equal to -1 + cm, where m is the maximum over c of the terms
multiplying K. (It is easily seen that the maximum exists.) Hence, if K is sufficiently
small, (18) is negative for all c, implying that c = 0.
       When c is positive, the sign of the derivative of (18) with respect to K is
ambiguous, so that c may rise or fall with K.
        As K grows large, the cost of setting p equal to p becomes arbitrarily small.
Therefore, p must tend toward p as K —
        p may be an interior solution -- that is, be less than 1 -- in which case it is
determined by differentiating the first two terms of(S) with respect to p and setting the
result equal to 0; this yields

       r(pw)wf (h + pk - pw)g(h)dh
              p(w-k)
(19)                p(w-k)
              =   k[f (1- R(h + pk))g(h)dh
                    0
                        + (1 - R(pw))(1- G(p(w -




                                               16
References
Becker, Gary S., "Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach," Journal of Political
      Economy, Vol. 76, No. 2 (March/April 1968), pp. 169-217.

Cohen, Mark A., "Optimal Criminal Fines for Organizations," A Report to the U.S.
      Sentencing Commission, Draft, January 11, 1988.
O'MalIey, Kevin F., "The Assessment of Costs in Federal Criminal Prosecutions," St. Louis
      University Law Journal, Vol. 31, No. 4 (October 1987), pp. 853-874.

Polinsky, A. Mitchell, and Steven Shavell, "Pigouvian Taxation with Administrative
       Costs," Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 19, No. 3 (December 1982), pp. 385-394.
President's Private Sector Survey on Cost Control, Report on the Department of the
       Treasury (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,,, 1983).
Shavell, Steven, "Specific versus General Enforcement of Law," Discussion Paper No. 58,
       Program in Law and Economics, Harvard Law School, June 1989.

Steuerle, C. Eugene, Who Should Pay for Collecting Taxes? Financing the IRS
       (Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute, 1986).
Stigler, George J., "The Optimum Enforcement of Laws," Journal of Political Economy,
        Vol. 78, No. 3 (May/June 1970), pp. 626-536.

United States Sentencing Commission, Guidelines Manual (November 1, 1989).




                                           17
