                         NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




                       PATTERNS OF AGING IN THAILAND
                             AND COTE D'IVOIRE




                                Angus Deaton
                            Christina   H. l'axson




                           Working Paper No. 3436




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                September 1990




Prepared for the National Bureau of Economic Research Conference on the
Economics of Aging, The Boulders, Carefree, Arizona, April 5-7th, 1990. We
are grateful to the World Bank for providing data and other support; this is
part of a broader research project on household saving behavior in Thailand
and Cote d'Ivoire. We should also like to thank Noreen Coldman. Robert
Hecht, Valerie Kozel, Anne Pebley, and Charles Westhoff for useful
discussions. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Aging. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NEER Working Paper #3436
                                                Septater 1990

                PATTERNS OF' AGING IN ThAIIli4D AND (XYTE D' IVOIRE


                                     A&rR
     This paper is broadly concerned with the living staMards of older
people in two contrasting developing countries, Oath d 'Ivoire aid Thailani.
We use a series of household surveys fran these t.n rintries to present
evidence on factors affecting the living stardards of the elderly: living
arrangements, labor force participation, iflness, urbanization, incane aid
oonsunpt ion. One of the issues we examine is whether life—cycle patterns of
inccne aid consumption can be detected in the data. The fact that few of the
elderly live alone makes it diffiailt to acourately iiean the welfare
levels of the elderly, or to make statements axt the life-cycle patterns of
incxve aid consumption of iniividuals. We fini that labor force
participation aid initvidual inare patterns follaw the staniard life-cycle
hump shapes in both caintries, bit that avenge living staniards within
households are quite flat over the life-cycle. The data presented suggest
that changes in family caçcsition aid living arrangements of the elderly are
likely to be nore inportant sources of old-age insurance than asset
acxnnulation.


Angus Deaton                                    thristina H. Paxson
Woodzw Wilson School                            Wocdrcw Wilson School
Princeton NJ 08544                              Princeton MI 08544
o Introduction

       This paper presents and discusses somefacts about older people in two contrasting
developing countries, ate d'Ivoire and Thailand, We shall be concerned with standard
questions in the aging literature, namely demographic structure, living arrangements,
urbanization, illness, labor force behavior, and economic status. In this paper, we shall
go little beyond the presentation of data from a series of household surveys from the two
countries. Although recent years have seen an inaeased attention in the demographic and
sodological literatures to questions of aging in LDC's, data are still relatively scarce,
particularly for Africa, and we see our current task as providing stylized facts to help
focus further discussion.
       There are two research issues that provide the structure for our discussion;
household saving behavior, and, more broadly, the economi of aging in countries with
low living standards but with rapidly expanding shares of-old people in the population.
        Research on savings behavior in the United States, Japan. and Western Europe has
been dominated by permanent income and life-cyde models since their introduction in the
1950's. There has been a good deal less work on household saving behavior in LDC's, and
much of the work that has been done has simply transferred the analytical framework
from the more to the less developed context. It is not dear that this is the best way of
proceeding. While it makes sense to work with the same basic ideas, that saving an
smooth consumption over time, and that assets provide a measure of insurance against
an uncertain future, there are important differences in environment and in mechanisms,
so that the same aims may be achieved in very different ways. A much larger share of
the population in developing countries is engaged in agriculture, where incomes are very
variable, and there are many poor people close to subsistence, so that consumption insur-
ance may be of the greatest importance.
       Household size is typically larger in poorer countries. Extended families, or even
simply large households, may play many of the roles that are performed by asset markets
in more developed economies, so that, for example, wealthy older men may acquire
additional young wives as an alternative to an annuity. At the same time, the internal
organization of the family and its living arrangements are intimately tied to patterns of
inheritance, so that the means of transferring assets from one generation to the next will
themselves vary with household sthacture. Age composition within very large households
may not vary very much over time, so that main motive for saving becomes the pro-
tection of living standards from short-term covai-iate risk, and has little to do with
transferring resources between generations or between widely separated time periods.
One of the issues we examine in this paper is the extent to which there are dearly defined
economic and danographiccharacteristics of households that vary systematically with the
ages of their members, particularly characteristics that are likely to provide motives for
saving.
          •A number of broader issues have been raised in the literature on aging in LDC's,
and these also play a role in shaping our discussion. The dominant demographic fact for
LDC's is the effect of the demographic transition on raising the fraction of old people in
the population. In Thailand. where the demographic transition is largely complete, the
share of over 60's in the population, which was 6.2% and 5.7% In 1960 and 1985
respectively, is expected to rise to 11.9% in 2020, United Nations (1986), figures which are
repeated in much of South. South East, and East Asia, as well as in Latin America. United
Nations (1987) lists 3.8,3.5,5.1 and 43 as the percentages aged 65 and over for these four
regions in 1980, whereas the estimated figures for 2000 are 4.8,4.6, 7.8 and 5.2, rising in
2025 to 8.2,83,133, and 8.3. In Africa, where by contrast, there has been little decline in
the rate of population growth, the percentages aged 65 and over are 3.1, 3.0, and 3.9 in
1980, 2000, and 2025. The two countries discussed in this paper are good examples of
these two contrasting cases.
          It is also important to note that life-expectancy for older people in LDC's is high,
and although not as high as in Japan or the United States, the difference is much smaller
than the corresponding differences at birth. Life expectancy at birth in North America is
72.4 years for men, and 80.1 years for women, and at age 60, men can expect to live for
17.8 years and women for 21.8 years. In South Asia and Africa, respectively, life
expectancy at birth is 59.4 and 54.1 for men, and 60.2 and 57.4 for women, while at age
60, the figures are 15.1 and 143 for men, and 163 and 15.9 for women, see Treas and
Logue (1986) for these and other figures. Since women live longer than men, higher life-
expectancy for all tends to exaggerate the predominance of women over men in the
population, so that the ratio of males to females tends to decline with the level of
development. In the more developed countries in 1980, there were 62 males per 100
females aged 65 and over, compared with 82 per 100 in Thailand and 80 per 100 in China,
and In parts of South Asia where there is excess mortality among women, there are more
men than women in the older age groups, see Martin (1988). Several West African
countries also show a predominance of men over women, USAID (1982).


                                               2
       The growing relative importance of the elderly, particularly in Asia, has led to an
increased academic and policy debate minoring much of the earlier debate in more
developed economies. Two excellent reviews are provided by Treas and Logue (1986),
and for Asia, Martin (1988). One of the dominant themes of this debate is the contrast
between the status of the elderly in more and less developed countries. There are extreme
idealized versions of both types of sodeties. To some, the extended family provides
insurance for old-age, unemployment, and sickness, as well as an environment in which
the elderly are an integrated, useful and respected part of their families. This is seen as
a stark contrast to the "Western" treatment of the old, whereby they are unproductive,
isolated, and institutionalized, with social insurance providing only a poor substitute for
family Insurance. Cowgill (1974.1986, Chapter 8) sees the victimization of the elderly as
a natural concomitant of development, with education, urbanization, and technical change
as "processes that strip the old of daizns to respect, power, and independence." Treas and
Logue (1986, p.6661. To others, the security of the extended family is a romanticized myth
that appeals mostly to those who have long escaped the grinding poverty, poor health
conditions, and low life-expectancy with which it is typically associated. One person's iso-
lation is someone else's individual freedom. It is perhaps not surprising that Asian policy
makers, faced with the prospect of rapidly increasing absolute and relative numbers of old
people, view Western systems pensions, social security, and public geriatric care with a
mixture of envy and alann.
        These "big" questions of the effect of development on the status of the elderly are
not sufficiently well posed to be amenable to serious empirical evaluation. Nevertheless,
good work has been done on more specific issues, particularly on the living arrangements
of the elderly. Martin (1989) reviews a number of studies of Asian populations which
suggest that the proportion of the elderly living with their children, althougb still high
(typically between 70% and 80%) is declining over time, with a corresponding increase In
the numbers living alone, a pattern that is consistent with a move towards living
arrangements such as those in the U.S., where only 15 percent of the elderly live with their
children.
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 is concerned with
individuals, and reviews demographic characteristics and living arrangements for elderly
people in COte d'lvoire and Thailand. It also presents data on urbanization, on health, on
labor force partidpation and hours worked, and, to the extent possible, on levels of living.


                                             3
Section 2 is concerned with households, and looks for "life-cycle" type patterns in household
size, Income, and consumption patterns in relation to the ages of household members.
Section 3 summarizes and concludes.


1. Individual characteristics and age
Lisaniple data and population chancteristia
        The data presented in this paper come from two series of household surveys from
ate d'Ivoire and Thailand. ate d'lvoire is listed by the World Bank (1989) in the lower
middle-income division of its middle-income category with per capita GM' in 1987 of $740,
which grew at an annual average per capita growth rate of 1.0% from           1965-87.   Its
population in 1987 Is estimated as 11.1 million, and grew at an annual rate of 4.2% during
both1965-S0and1980-87. Theaudebirthrateperthousandwas5zinl9osandslin
1987, while life expectancy at birth in 1937 was 52 years. Thailand has a similar GNP of
SS50, but has had much faster growth, averaging 3.9% from 1965-87. if these figures can
be taken seriously, the average Thai was 280% richer in 1987 than in 1960, as opposed to
an inaease of only 30% for Ivorians over the same period. Whatever the precise
magnitude, young Thais are now very much better off than were their parents, either in
tenns of lifetime resources, or in tenns of income at the same age, and this is much less
true for young Ivorians. There were 53.6 million Thais in 1987, with a life expectancy at
birth of 64 years. The population growth rate was 2.9% from 1965-80, 2.0% from 1980-87,
and is projected to be 15% from 1987- 2000; the aude birth rate per thousand fell from
41 to 25 between 1965 and 1987.
       The Ivorian surveys are the Living Standards Surveys of 1955 and 1986, collected
by the Department of Statistics of COte d'lvoire with the technical and analytical support
of the World Bank. The survey design Is described in Ainsworth and Mufioz (1986), and
is a non-ftadjtional one, carried out on a simple random sample of 1600 households in
each of the two years. with 800 households common to both surveys. Although the
number of households is small compared with traditional designs, there are around 14,000
individuals in each of the two surveys. The emphasis is less on large sample size than on
the collection of comprehensive data for each household, so that interlinkages between
different economic and activities can be studied. The Thai surveys are the two
Socioeconomic Surveys of the Whole Kingdom, collected by the National Statistical Office
in the two years 1981 and 1986. These surveys are more like the traditional household

                                            4
income and expenditure surveys, they have sznple sizes in excess of 12,000, they have no
panel element, and there is less detailed infohnation about many of the activities covered

i.ntheLivingStandardsSurveys. Evenso,forthepurposesofthispaper,thetwosetso(
surveys provideroughly equivalent information-
       There are earlier household surveys for Thailand which could be used to examine
the same issues over a longer time period. However, after the 1975 survey, the definition
of the household was changed so as to exclude sub-unit households so that, for example,
in 1975 a married son and his wife living with parents would have been Included as part
of the parents' household, but not in later surveys. As a result, It is not possible to make
consistent comparisons about living arrangements over the two types of survey. This
seemingly technical issue points to a deeper problem in the measurement of household
structure in Thailand and, indeed, in developing countries in general. To quote Cowgill
(1986, p.70),
         "In Thailand, however, the term household Is somewhat elusive and ambiguous. The climate Is
         semi-tioplal. and a great portion of one's life is spent out-of-doors. To a very great extent, this
         Includes cooking, eating, and visiting. Thus the physical stnidure of the home Is little more
         than Wbedn,om situated within a compound, while the cooking. eating, bathing. visiting. and
         even much of the working takes place in.the compound rather than in the physical saucture of
         the home. Hence when we say that the young married couple lives with the parents of one of
         them, the young couple usually sleeps In a separate structure within the parental compound.
         This usually involves common cooking and eating facilities, but this too Is flexible, especially
         since eating is more of an lndividuai matter and less often a scheduled gioup activity. Western
         definitions of household membership are not easily applied in this type of society."

These Issues must be constantly borne in mind when interpreting the figures given below.
In particular, the "new" treatment of the household in the Thai surveys is likely. to overstate
 the degree to which people live either alone or in small groups,             and to understate house-
 hold size. By contrast, the Ivorlan survey used a more inclusive concept of the household,
 and tended to include subunits if they lived in the sante compound. As a result, house-
 hold size in the surveys is larger than household size in the 1975 Ivorian census, and the
 biases may be in the opposite direction from those in Thailand.
         Figures 1 and 2 show the age pyramids and sex ratios for Bangkok and for rural
 Thailand in 1981 and 1986. while Figure 3 provides the same information for COte d'lvolre.
 For most of the paper, we shall follow this practice of showing data for Bangkok and for
 rural Thailand, rather than for the more conventional urban-rural split. Bangkok contains
 nearly 70% of Thailand's urban population, and while the survey also collects data on
 other urban and semi-urban (sanitary district) data, these seem sufficiently different from
 Bangkok to merit separate treatment. In order to avoid a three, or possibly four way split

                                                     5
for each table, we compromise with two. For the same reason, and when it is not mis-
leading to do so, we shall normally present data from the 1986 Ivorlan survey. On
balance, the data from the second year are probably of somewhat higher quality.
       There are a number of problems with the lvorian data that are apparent from the
figures. although none are particularly serious for older people. There is vey pronounced
peaking at five year age intervals, particularly in 1985, and particularly among females.
Such effects are not uncommon among uneducated populations, see for example Ewbank
(1981, pp. 66-68) and are typically correlated with low education and low Incomes; the
1975 Ivorian   Census shows similar effects, see Ahonzo, Barrere, and Kopylov (1984. p.9).
In 1986, interviewers placed less reliance on reported figures, and acquired more
supporting information, and the problem is considerably reduced. Even so, it is wise not
•to make much of the precise age estimates, and to work instead with five or ten year age

brada      More serious is an apparent undercount of prime age males; in 1986 the sex
ratios (males per 100 females) in theage groups 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44,45-49, and
50-54, are, respectively, 85.1,74.2,83.2,65.3,60.7,78.9. and 77.6, with between 600 and 200
people in each sex-age cell, see Figures   b and 3d. Neither we nor the World Bank
currently have any explanation for these results. Again, there are similar, although not
identical problems with the 1975 Census, and other demographic surveys, as well as with
census data in other African countries. Ahonzo, Barrere and lCopylov (1984, Chapter 5),
find similar patterns in surveys carried out in the early sixties, as well as in the 1975
Census once the predominantly young, male non-Ivorian immigrants (22% of the           pou-
latión) are removed. Although the Living Standards Surveys include non-nationals, there
are only 14% in the two surveys in 1985 and 1986. Since it Is the same age group missing
in data ten years apart, and since there is no large-scale emigration from COte d'Ivoire, the
problems must come from measurement errors, possibly in connection with the many
prime-age males in the cities, where they are hard to count or survey. Respondents may
also exaggerate their ages, and it Is possible that men do so more often or by more than
do women. The figures for the fractions of old people appear to beconsistent with those
from the Census, again see Ahonzo a a? (1984), and USAID (1982);note that once again
differential oveneporting of age by nien may account for at least part of the apparent
excess of older men.
       Tables 1.A.and 1.B show the fractions of people, by sex and urbanization, who are
aged over 55 in both Thailand and COte d'lvoire. We have chosen the young cutoff age


                                             6
of 55 because, particularly in a young, rapidly growing population such as that in Cøte
d'Ivoire, there are relatively few old people. In the 1985 Ivorian sample as a whole, there
are 994 individuals aged 55 or over out of 13,271 people in all, or 73% (in 1986,1,046 out
of 12,296, or 8.1%). For Thailand. the urban sector is relatively oversampled, so that when
the appropriate weights are applied, the survey shows fractions 55 and over of 9.9 in 1981;
weights for the 1986 survey are not currenUy available. National Econoiitic and Social
Development Board (1985) gives a lower figure of 7.83% over 55 in 1980. This publication
notes a tendency for Thai survey data to underestimate the numbers of children under the
age of 10 and this may explain some of the discrepancy. The two esliinates for ate
d'Ivoire, which are only one year apart, provide some cross check on reliability, although
remember that half of the households are common to both surveys.
        In rural areas of both counfries, the age distributions of older men are very similar,
with around. 10% of men older than 54 in both cases. The .lvorian survey shows
(absolutely) more men than women in all the age categories over 54, whereas Thailand
shows the common pattern of more women than men, see Figures lb. Id, 2b, 2d, 3b and
3d. In Thailand, the proportions of elderly are increasing over time (except for males in
Bangkok), as is to be expected given the continuing decline in fertility. The major
difference between the two halves of the Table lies in the relAtive youth of the urban
sector in Cote d'Ivoire. Only 4% of the urban population is aged 55 or over, as opposed
to 10% in Thailand, and the much higher level of urbanization in ate d'Ivoire (42%
opposed to 27%) is what reconciles the similarity between the rural sectors with the
overall lower fraction of elderly in Cãte d'Ivoire. Of course, both fractions are still much
 lower than those for the more developed countries of the world; in the U.S.. 21.3% of the
 population is aged 55 or over in 1985, United Nations (1985), while for developed
 countries as a whole there were 15.8% of the population 60 years or over in 1985.
        The urbanization figures are given in Table 2 for the elderly and for the population
 as a whole. In COte d'lvoire, the urban population grew by 8.7% per annum from 1965-80,
 as opposed to 4.2% for the total population, World Bank (1988). and we see the picture
 that would be expected If it is largely the younger people who move to the dtia; most
 (three-quarters oO old people live in the countryside, as opposed to only sixty percent of
 the population as a whole. The towns are predominantly young; there are relatively few
 old people in ate d'lvoire in any case, and a relatively small proportion are urbanized.
 For Thailand, the picture Is different; the distribution of elderly acoss rural and urban


                                              7
regions is virtually Identical to the distribution of all people aaoss regions. For example,
in 1981, 17.5% of people older than 54 were urbanized, as opposed to 17.8% for the
population as a whole. However, these numbers mask the fact that that the fraction of
older people urbanized exceeds the fraction of children urbanized (14.9%), and is less than
the fraction of people aged 15-54 who are urbanized (20.9%). Thus, cities in Thailand have
a slightly heavier concentration of younger adults than older adults. The difference bet-
ween the fraction of older and younger adults who are urbanized is so small because there
is relatively slow growth of urban areas in Thailand, and because there are fairly high
rates of migration by the elderly to urban areas other than Bangkok. The growth of the
urban population in Thailand averages 4.6% a year bewteen 1965 and 1980, as opposed
to a 2.6% annual growth rate for the population as a whole, World Bank, (1988). MIgrants
to Bangkok tend to be young: only 2.6% of migrants to Bangkok in 1982 were aged 65 or
older, National Statistical Office, (1983). However, migration rates of older people to
urban areas other than Bangkok have been quite high, with rates for those 65 and older
exceeding rates for those aged 30-49, World Bank (1979).
        The Ivorian data also provide information on nationality of people sampled. ate
d'Ivoire has been one of the more successful West African economies, and has attracted
many migrants from its nghbors, particularly Burkina Faso, Mali, and Guinea. Of the
two samples, 13.9% in 1985 and 13.1% in 1986 are non-Ivorian, divided in the ratios 4:21:1
among the three countries listed and other Africans. As one might expect if many of these
migrants are young, the proportions among those 55 and over are lower, 7.6% and 6.8%.



1.2 Living amnngements
        Tables 3.A and 3.B tabulate marital status for those aged 55 and over. For women,
the modal status at ages 55-59 is manied, and at 70 and over, it is widowed, with the
weight shifting from one category to the other as we move from the younger to the older
women. These patterns are similar in the two counthes. The modal status for men is
manied in all of these elderly age categories. In Cote d'lvoire, where a quarter of men
have more than one wife, 83% of men aged 70 and over have at least one spouse. Of the
543 Then in Table 3.B, 492 are household heads, and for than we have data on numbers
and ages of wives. Of these 449 have one or more wives in the household, 59% have one
wife, 26% have two, 11% have three, and 4% have four or more. The average age of these


                                             8
449 men is 64, that of the first wife 51, the second wile 44, and the third wife 40. It is
difficult to become a widower in Cate d'Ivoire, and even among those aged 70 or more,
there are only 12% In this category, compared with 26% in rural Thailand.
        For Ivorian men, there is a strong association between wealth, especially cash
wealth, age, and the number of wive& Eiecht (1982) describes how, in the•1920's, which
were the early years of cocoa and coffee production in COte d'Ivoire, the cash from the
new crops, which were fanned by lineages, not families, was used to provide bridewealth
for the acquisition for the lineage of new wives, and thus ultiniateiy new labor. By the
1980's, the old lineage system had largely broken down and been replaced by one of
small-scale peasant farming, with alienable land and wage labor, but the use of the
surplus to acquire additional wives remains. Indeed, the acquisition of additional young
wives for wealthy Ivorians is a standard way of purchasing old age security. The
occurrence of polygyny rises with age until remarkably late in life, see Ahonzo etal (1984,
Table 5.8). Only ten percent of men aged 25-29 have more than one wife, and the pro-
portion rises with age until it reaches nearly a third for 65-74 year olds. Indeed, 13% of
men aged 70-74 have three or more wiva
        The effects of polygyny on living arrangements also appear in Tables 4.A and 4.B.
Over 80% of Ivorian males in the table live in households with at least one spouse, as
compared with only 60% of men aged 70 or more in Thailand. Elderly women, by
contrast, are increasingly widowed, and live with their children or with otherL About half
of these "others" are brothers who take their sisters into the household, the rest are women
living with a head of household who is more distantly related, perhaps a niece or nephew.
Very few of the elderly, either men or women, live alone in COte d'Ivoire; in the 1986
(1985) sample thereare only fl (17) people over 54 who live by themselves. Indeed, there
are very few couples; less than 5% of the elderly live in households with only two
members. Households are large In COte d'Ivoire, averaging 8.1 persons in 1986, and
neither the elderly (nor anyone else) are likely to live in small households; only 1% of the
people in the survey live In households with less than three members.
       The situation in Thailand is different, although the caveat about the definition of
the Thai household must be kept in mind. Household size is smaller, with 4.2 and 4.6
persons per household in Bangkok and rural regions in 1981, and 3.6 and 4.5 per Bangkok
and rural household In 198& There are corres ondingly more older people who live alone
or with their spouses. Among elderly women in rural Thailand in 1981, 5.6% to 14% lived


                                            9
alone, and a substantial fraction among the younger elderly lived together with a spouse
but with no other family members. The numbers for 1986 do not reveal an increase in the
tendency to live alone or with a spouse only. In fact, the fraction of rural females living
alone decreased substantially between the two survey periods for all age groups. Older
individuals who do not live alone or with a spouse only almost always live with adult
children. The fraction of older people living with "others onlf is small for all but
Bangkok females. Of women who do live with "others only," the age of the household
head is typically quite low, indicating that these women may live with adult grandchil-
dren. The "Western" view of the elderly living either alone, alone with spouse, or with
their children, Is perhaps closer to the truth in Thailand than it is in CaMe d'Ivoire. The
larger, more complex families in West Africa allow a wide range of possible living
arrangements, especially for the large fraction of widows.


1.3 Education, labor supply, and health status
      The data on education are not comparable between the two counthes, but
nevertheless Tables 5.A and 5.B show similar patterns across ages and sexes in both
Thailand and CaMe d'lvoire. By any measure, educational standards are much higher in
1'hailand, and even among rural women, over 90% of the 20-39 age group have had a least
one year of school, whereas only 37% of Ivorian women in the same age group have ever
been to school. But even in Thailand, very few individuals have ever completed
elementary school (seven years of education), and in the rural villages, less than one
percent of men or women over 40 have done so. In CaSte d'Ivoire none of the sample
women aged sixty or over can read a newspaper, or do a simple written calculation, arid
only a negligible fraction of women over 50 have ever been to school. But apart from the
differences in levels, the patterns are the same; men have more education than women,
and young people have much more education than their elders. Conventional concerns
about education separating the generations are clearly relevant in these sorts of situations.
Three quarters of Ivorian males and more than a half of lvorian females between 15 and
19 can read a newspaper, something that be accomplished by about half of their fathers,
and perhaps a quarter of their mothers, and almost none of their grandparents. One
might legitimately wonder if the experience and wisdom of older farmers, real though it
is, may not be offset by their inability to read the label on a bag of seeds or fertilizer.
Experience may be more valuable than education in a stationary environment, but much


                                            10
growth in LOC's has come from exploiting new aops, and new techniques of growing
them; indeed, there appear to be large gains to greater use of fertilizer and insecticide in
coffee and cocoa production in ate d'Ivoire, gains that have so far gone almost entirely
unexploited, see Deaton and Benjamin (1988).
        Labor force participation and hours worked show the standard life- cycle patterns
in both countries. In rural areas in Thailand, almost all prime-age males and females
participate in (mostly agricultural) work, though substantial fractions of time are spent idle
according to the dictates of the agricultural calendar. Participation rates are lower for
women than for men in Bangkok, and fall off very rapidly among the elderly. Among
those who continue to work, hours and weeks remain high. This contrasts with behavior
in the rural sector, where hours and weeks decline along with participation among the
elderly, perhaps because of the physical demands of agricultural work.
        Participation rates in ate d'Ivoire are surprisingly low, especially among males
in the 20-39 age group. Note that these figures, although covnmn a broad range of
activities, relate to the last seven days, so that those farmers who did nothing in the past
week would be counted as non-participants. Furthermore, the traditional allocation of
tasks among many West African groups is for women to undertake food growing and
trading activities, leaving men free for hunting, fishing, and fighting. Cocoa and coffee
farming are, however, legitimate activities for men, and are undertaken by a large fraction
of Ivorian households. Participation rates among older workers remain relatively high
into the their late sixties, only falling off among the oldest group. Among older
participants, weeks worked declines hardly atall, although both days and hours per day
fall with age, which is exactly the pattern that might be expected in a predominantly agri-
cultural economy. Note that the hours, days, and weeks figures for ate d'lvoire relate
only to the activity defined as the main job over the last seven days. Many Individuals
have second jobs, and there are a large number of small family enterprises, many run by
women.
        Table 7 presents information on the health of the respondents in the Ivorian
survey. These are self-reported figures. and the investigators have no means of checking
the reliability of these reports. Although all respondents were weighed and measured,
such measurements are of relatively little value in detennining health status, except for
children. Except for those under 30, more than a quarter of all respondents in each age
 group report some sickness or injury in the last four weeks, with the fraction rising to well


                                              l1
over a half among the older groups. For those aged 55 or over, 6 to 13 days a month are
days of illness, and these illnesses are sufficiently severe to cause a suspension of normal
activities in 3 to todays. Women show more Illness than men until about 40 years of age,
but subsequently show less, considerably less in some of the older age groups. Somewhat
less than a half of all illnesses lead to a medical consultation, or the purchase of medicine,
and the figures suggest that, among the elderly, a smaller fraction of illnesses in females
are severe, or are treated as such. Comparable data from the Thai survey are not
available.


IA Levels of living
      Although much of the concern about the elderly is a concern about living
standards, it is remarkably difficult to measure their consumption or income levels, even
in more developed countries, and the difficulties are much greater in poor countries. In
 the US, where many old people live alone or with their spouses, their household income
 and expenditure levels can give some idea of living standards in relation to the rest of the
 population. Indeed, work on the status         the low-income elderlS' in more developed
 countries, e.g. Coder, Smeeding, and Torrey (1990). effectively define the population of
 interest to be this group, typically female, one-person families and married couples,
 groups that together covered 91% of the U.S. population aged 65 and over in 1982, see
 CowgiU (1986, p.19).
       In Thailand, and even more so in COte d'Ivoire, the vast majority of the elderly live
 with other people, children, spouses, and other relations, and very few live alone.
 Household surveys collect data on household levels of living, not on those of the
 individuals within them. Disentangling who gets what within the household is difficult,
 even for 'privat& goods like food, and attempts to do so require costly and intrusive
 techniques of observation. For public goods, such as housing, entertainment, and many
 services, individual consumption levels are not even well defined. In contrast to
 consumption, many income flows can be assigned to individual members of the
 household, although only with great difficulty in farm households, although such
 assignment, even when possible, tells us only a limited amount about the distribution of
 welfare within the household, which is our main concern. There is a belief in much of the
 development literature that individuals who bring money into the household receive better



                                               12
treabnent than those who do not, but there is little aedible evidence to support the
contention.
       This problems of Isolating the living standards of the elderly Is conceptually the
same as that of isolating the living standards of children, a topic on which there exists a
large and venerable literature. However, as argued In Pollak and Wales (1979) and
elaborated in Deaton and Muellbauer (1986), much of this literature sets out by assuming
what it wants to measure, and, even after more than a century of research, no generally
acceptable methodology has been derived that would support the Isolation of children's
living standards from household level data. One possible avenue, suggested in Deaton,
Thomas, and Ruiz-CastiII 0989), Is to identify a set of goods that are not consumed by
adults, for example children's goods, and, on the grounds that additional adults exert
negative income effects, but no substitution effects on such goods, measure the "cost" of
old people versus that of younger adults by calculating their relative (negative) effects on
the consumption of child goods. However, it is difficult to Isolate commodities that are
only consumed by children, especially in less developed countries where children consume
little beyond food, shelter, and clothing. Moreover, (unreported) experiments with the
Spanish data used in Deaton, Thomas, and Ruiz-Castillo, did not lead to sensible
estimates.
        if these problems of measuring living standards are taken seriously, it is unclear
that it possible for most LDC's to make statements about, for example, the fraction of old
people living In poverty; let alone to address broad topic like the effect of development
on the status of the old. Even so, something can be said, and we report some fragmentary
but relevant evidence.
        The simplest procedure Is to assume that everyone in each household Is treated
equally, and to impute to each person the per capita or pa adult equivalent total
expenditure or Income for the household In which they reside. If the assumption is
correct, the procedure yields the right answer. If it Is false, as it almost certainly Is, then
the calculations are still infonnative. If old people live predominantly in households with
low avenge living standards, we are more likely to be concerned about their welfare than
would otherwise be the case. Of course, it may be that it is the children or younger
people in such households that we should worry about, not their likely powerful elders.
       Table S shows the relevant calculations for Cote d'lvolre in 1986. In computing
adult equivalents, children under 5 have been assigned a weight of 0.25, and those from


                                              13
5 to 14, a weight of 0.45. These numbers   are essentially arbitrary, but they are relatively
low in the light of the considerations discussed in Deaton and Muellbauer (1986), and it
is better to make some such assumptions than to work with either total or per capita
household expenditure. As the age of the individual inaeases, the average number of
household members with which he or she resides deaeases, from 12 at age 0 to 9 at age
70,but rises to around 10 for the oldest ages. The economic measures, Income,
consumption, and income and consumption per equivalent all have the same general
shape, rising to their maxima for the 30-34 year age group and falling steadily thereafter.
Among the oldest people, household total income and expenditures in the households in
whichtheylivearelittlemorethnahllthelevelsinthepeakyears,andtheper
equivalent measures are less than a half of the peaks If consumption per equivalent is
taken as a representative measure, the average for those 55 and over is 79% of the average
for all individuals.
        Older Ivorians live in households that have less income and consumption than the
national average. However, old people live mostlyin rural areas, and the much better-off
urban residents are typically young. Moreover, the rural-urban difference is likely
overstated by the fact that no allowance is made for price differences between rural and
urban areas, and because urban residents typically pay rent, or have rents imputed for
them, something that cannot be done for rural residents. Table 9 repeats the information
for rural areas only. Now the relationship between living standards and age has
essentially disappeared; while total consumption and income fall with age, at least until
the late sixties, adult equivalents fall at much the same rate, so that there is little or no
relationship between age and the per equivalent measures.
        Tables 10 and 11 show income and expenditure by the age of the individual for

Bangkok and rural areas in 1981. Unlike Cote d'lvoire, the number of adult equivalents
per household does not vary with age. However, family income and expenditure do not
vary greatly with age either. There is a small peak in income in the 50-54 age range for
males in both Bangkok and rural regions; in Bangkok, this peak in income is offset by a
corresponding peak in the number of adult equivalents. Overall, income and expenditure,
as well as income and expenditure per adult equivalent, are very flat acoss age groups.

The average consumption per adult equivalent of those 55 and over is 100.3% of the
average for all individuals in Bangkok, and 109% for rural regions. On average, older
Thais in both Bangkok and rural regions do not live in poorer households.


                                             14
       Unlike the lvorian surveys, the Thai surveys provide a good deal of information
on individual income levels and the sources of individual income. If the allocation of
consumption to members within a household depends on the amount of income members
bring to the household (and again, it is not known if this is true), then the patterns of
individual income with age provide evidence on standards of living over the life-cycie.
Information on the distribution of income between pensions, annuities, and
                                                                              property
income, as opposed to remittances and gifts, provides evidence on the extent to which
older individuals rely on asset markets for old-age support.
        It is possible to disaggregate individual income into that derived from wages.
fanning and self-employment (called business income), property, transfers (remittances,
pensions and annuities), and other sources. The measures of profits from farming and
self-employment are problematic in that they do not exclude the value of free family labor
used, and are usually "assigned" to the household head "or to the operator of the
enterprise if he could be identifiet" For most family businesses, it is not clear that the
profits from the business should be assigned to any one person. In what follows, no
adjus&nents were made for these problems.
        Table 12 provides infonnation on individual income and the distribution of income
for males and females in Bangkok and rural regions. Unlike the household incomefigures
discussed above; there is a clear pattern of individual income over the life-cycle. For both
rural and Bangkok males, income levels peak in the 50-59 age range and then decline
rapidly. Female income levels in are flatter over the 30-60 age range but then also decline.
These results are consistent with the declines in labor force participation for both males
and females after the age of 60, and much of the declining income levels of older
individuals can be accounted for by the increasing fraction of those who earn no income
at all.
        As Is to be expected, the share of income from wages and business declines for
older people, although the share of income from farming and self-employment remains
quite high for men (49% and 79% for Bangkok and rural men aged 60-69). This reflects
the fad that the oldest man in the household is usually the head of the household and
would typically have all family business income assigned to hint.
       The share of income derived from transfers (including pensions, annuities, and
remittances) inaeases dramatically with age for both men and women in Bangkok and
rural regions. Transfers account for a large share of individual income, particularly for


                                            is
women. These transfers consist mainly of remittances, presumably from family members
or friends in other houseboldL Although transfers cannot be divided up between
remittances and pensions and annuities at the individual level, they can be disaggregated
at the household level. Of all households that receive transfers, 93% of those in Bangkok
receive no pensions or annuities, and 97% of rural households receive no pensions or
annuities. The share of income from property (including interest, dividends, and rents)
inaeases with age but, like pensions and annuities, is quite small, reaching only 10-12%
of income for both Bangkok and rural residents in the 70+ age group. Thus, sources of
old-age income that are standard in developed countries have only a very small role in
Thailand.
       Table 13 tabulates income by source for rural males and females who live alone
or with a spouse only, and for those who live with at least one person who is not a
spouse. Older people living with others are less likely to earn any income at all.
However, the shares of income from different sources are not too dissimilar for those in
different living ai+angements. The fraction of total family income derived from goods
received free does vary with living arrangements. For example, for rural females aged 60-
69, goods   received free accounts for 18% of family income for those alone or with a spouse
only, and only 5% of family income for those living with others. For females living alone
dr with a spouse only, free goods and transfers make up a significant share of their
income.


I Househoidlile-cycles
        In this section we move our focus away from individuals and towards households,
and how they change with the ages of their members. Households in LDC's are typically
larger than those in more developed countries, particularly so here for COte d'lvoire, so
that, with several generations living together, the life-cycle patterns of the household as
an aggregate may be much attenuated compared with the patterns observed in the West.
Households with between ten and twenty members are not uncommon in Cow d'Ivoire,
and in the limit, it is possible to imagine a state of affairs in which each household's
demographic composition is a miniature version of that of the country as a whole, and the
life-cycles of the individuals within the household offset are subswned into a stationary
structure for the household.



                                             16
       In fact, such is far from being the case in ate d'Ivoire. Table 14.B shows the
breakdown of household heads by age and sex. If household composition were stationaiy,
and the oldest male was always designated as the household head, there would be no
heath outside this category. In reality, 42% of household heads are under the age of 55,
and only 19% are men over the age of 70. Only five percent of households contain one
or more married sons of the head, and less than one percent have two or more. Similarly,
it is rare for married brothers to live together; only three percent of male headed
households contain a married brother. These households seem to conform wefl to what
Cowgill (1986. p.62) describes as the common pattem among polygynous households; 'a
man, his several wives, their (unmarried) children? and possibly "some additional
consanguines, such as unmarried or widowed sisters of the husband, and perhaps his
aged parents." New households are set up by married sons, so that, while there is a clear
bias towards older heads and there are more heads in older groups than their share of the
population would warrant, there are many households headed by younger men.
        The economic status of the household is also dearly related to the age of its head,
as shown In Table 15. These data are presented for both years; they are probably a good
deal less reliable, particularly for assets, than previous data, so that one year cannot be
safely taken as representative for both. The figures show that older heads preside over
bigger households, but that both household income and household total expenditure reach
a peak among households headed by 30-34 year.olds. and then steadily decline. The
pattern, if It Is there, is a good deal less obvious in the rural areas. As was the case for
patterns in the individual data, the hump in household incomes and expenditures Is
exaggerated by pooling older, poorer, rural individuals with younger, richer, urban ones.
Since household size and the number of equivalents increase with the age of the head,
deflation by either measure produces a pattern in which household living standards
decline with the age of the head, so that the hump is moved to the extreme left of the age
distribution.
        The hump-shaped pattern, in which incomes and consumption shapes are closely
matched, is one with a peak that occurs much earlier in the head's age distribution than
is the case in many LDC's, particularly those in Asia, see Deaton (1990) for evidence on
Thailand. Korea, Indonesia, and Hong Kong, the first of which we return to below. These
 cross-country patterns are important because, as pointed out by Carroll and Summers
 (1989). if tastes are common across countries, then the rapidly growing countries are those


                                             17
where young people are relatively much richer than their parents and grandparents, so
that age consumption profiles should peak earliest in the most rapidly growing economies.
But ate d'lvoire is a very slow-growing economy relative to Thailand and the other
Asian counfries listed above, and this slow growth is accompanied by the earliest peak In
household consumption. As Carroll and Summers emphasize, these results make it
difficult to believe that life-cycle saving Is responsible (or the cross-country correlation
between growth and savings that edsts in the data. Instead, the obvious alternative is that
consumption tracks income over the life-cycle, a hypothesis that is fully consistent with
the data in Table 15.
        Saving itself is as often negative as positive, arid shows no clear pattern with age.
The measurement of Income for poor. largely illiterate, self-employed farmers in LDC's
is an undertaking fraught with difficulty, and little weight should be attached to the
magnitude of these figures. However, analysis of the micro data from COte d'lvoire
provides evidence that farmers undertake short-nan saving to smooth their consumption
relative to their noisy incomes, and this evidence is also consistent with the earlier results
on farmers' saving behavior in Thailand In Paxson (1989).
        The asset figures are likely to be al ost as unreliable as the savings data, and there
is a still unresolved question as to why the (largely self reported) figures (or agricultural
assets are so much lower in 1956 than in 1955. The data in the upper panels suggest that,
over the country as a whole, asset levels continue to increase with -the age of the
household head, but some of this is an aggregation effect; in the rural panel, agricultural
assets are more or less equally distributed across age groups, something that would follow
from a process in which land is closely tied to household formation. Note that, at least
until recent years, land has not been particularly scarce in Cote d'lvoire (nor in Thailand),
and, given permission from the lineage owning the land, new cocoa and coffee farms
could be established by clearing virgin forest, with ownership gradually established by
use. Even today, fathers would typically assume responsibility for providing their sons
with land, and If uncultivated land is no longer available within the lineage boundaries,
the acquisition or use of land elsewhere will be arranged, preferably close by, but
sometimes at some considerable distance. See again Hecht (1982) for a description of the
evolution of land markets in response to increasing scardhes, first of labor, and later of
land.



                                             18
      Table 16 presents regressions of income, consumption, and the asset variables on
household demographic structure, and on dummies for the five main urbanization and
agrodlirnatic zones in the country. These results should not be interpreted as structural
equations, but as an alternative and more informative description of the relationship
between head's age and these economic variables. High income and consumption levels
are associated with the presence of prime age males and females; in itself evidence of
consumption tracking income. The presence or absence of individuals aged 55 and over
seems to contribute little to household income or consumption levels. Asset levels,
however, are positively associated with the presence of older men, (but not older women)
particularly those aged from 55 to 64. This is certainly consistent with a steady
accumulation of assets by the male head, passing on to sons at or before death. Women
aged 25-34 also attract a very large positive coefficient in the agricultural assets equation.
Since daughters would not normally inherit land, there is no obvious explanation for this
result, although it could conceivably reflect the propensity of older wealthy men to marry
young second or fluid wivet There is no evidence of an association between business
assets and women, although many small business in ate d'lvoire are owned by women.
        Thai households (as defined by the Socioeconomic Surveys) are much smaller than
those in Cote d'lvoire. Using 1981 data, approximately 50% of rural households have four
members or less, and households of ten or more members are rare. Households in
Thailand are also likely to have younger household heads. Sixty-three percent of rural
household heads and 69% of urban household heads are younger than 55, see Table 14.A.
The size of households also varies with the age of the household head. The first column
of Table 17 shows that the number of household members first inaeases and then
decreases as the household head ages. These numbers are consistent with the "Western'
pattern of children marrying and setting up their own households, which grow as children
are added, and then shrink as children move out. Cowgill (1986, pp.69-70) describes the
Thai system as a "residual stem family" system, in which young married couples often live
with one set of parents but only until a younger sibling marries and takes their place. The
last child married, often the last daughter married, stays with the parents until the parents
die, and then inherits the land. This would explain why households with very old house-
hold heads have, on average, four members rather than one or two.
        These patterns of household formation may make life-cycle models of household
consumption more relevant for Thailand than Cote d'lvoire. With smaller households It


                                             19
is less likely that household members span a broad range of ages, and the age of the
household head should be a good Indicator of where a household is in Its life-cycle. Given
the fairly rapid growth in Thailand, one might expect to see younger (richer) households
both eaniing and consuming more than older households.
       The results in Table 17 indicate that income and consumption do follow a hump-
shaped pattern similar to that seen in COte d'lvoire but with a much later peak in both
income and consumption. Household income reaches its highest level in the 60-64 age
category for Bangkok. and in the 50-54 age category for rural areas. Consumption tracks
income closely, and saving also appears to follow a similar pattern, with those in the
highest income groups saving most, although the pattern for saving is less pronounced.
These patterns are consistent with the age patts of individual Income shown in Table
12, and are also consistent with the patterns of household size shown in Table 17.
Household heads in their 40's and 5(Ys have the largest households, and it is likely that
the children in these households are old enough to contribute substantially to household
income.
        Although total household income and consumption are both strongly related to
the age of the head of the household, income and consumption after adjusting for the
number of adult equivalents are not. Since family size and the number of adult
equivalents follows the same hump-shaped pattern as income and consumption, adjust-
ment for family size results in extremely flat income and consumption profiles that appear
to have no relation to the age of the household head.
        The absence of any difference in income and consumption per equivalent adult
between young and old households is puzzling, especially in a rapidly growing country
such as Thailand. One possible explanation is that households in Thailand may be much
more complex than the data suggest. As discussed earlier, a small "household" may
actually be part of a larger group of several related households in a single compound, and
there may be significant transfers between such households. The fact that older people
"living alone" receive a large fraction of their incomes in the form of free goods (most of
which are food) suggests this might be so. If each household, as measured by the survey
data, is actually part of a network of closely linked households containing people in
different generations, then it becomes quite unclear whether one ought to expect
individual households to operate in ways predicted by life-cycle models. One can imagine
a situation in which household formation is itself the mechanism that is used to smooth


                                            20
consumption (and income) across individuals in different generations: inthviduaLs may be
'allocated' across households so as to maintain roughly equal consumption levels across
all family members within a group of households. Much more detailed data on links
between households would have to be collected to determine whether or not this is so.


& Conclusions
       We have presented a considerable mass of evidence, most of it not well structured
by any theoretical concerns. This is perhaps inevitable given the current state of the
subject; aging in developing countries is an issue that looks like it might be important, but
concern is still unfocussed on any particular set of economic research questions, or even
outstanding policy issues. There are many large and attractively wooly creatures at loose
in the forest the role of development and the status of the aged, the relationship between
marriage patterns, polygamy, living arrangements, and the treatment of the elderly, and
what policy steps, if any, should be considered by those Asian countries that are facing
rapidly rising shares of elderly inhabitants. But we are very far, not only from answers,
but even from a well-defined set of topics that economists could usefully think about.
        Even so, we feel that we have learned something by looking at these data and by
writing this paper, and it is perhaps useful to conclude by sununarizing some of what Is
known, and what might usefully be learned:
        i: Questions of the economic status of the old in LDC's are not answerable and
have to be rethought. In more developed countries, where perhaps nine tenths of the
elderly live by themselves or with elderly spouses, household surveys can tell us a great
deal about their living standards. In LDC's, to a greater or lesser degree, older people do
not live by themselves, and until a method can be found for measuring intrahousehold
allocations, we have no method of assigning welfare levels to than, or indeed to other
members of the households in which they live.
        2. More work needs to be done on the question of whether the source of income,
i.e. who earns it, affects what individual members of the household receive. This cannot
be done directly, but if the earnings of the elderly are spent differently from other
household income, the fact should be detectable from consumption data Data such as
those from Thailand show considerable variation in source of Income with age, although
the patterns are quite different from those in the Unites States or Western Europe.



                                             21
        3. In the U.S. and other developed countries, where many elderly people live
alone, there has been concern about thepossible abandonment of the old. However, such
cases seem to be rare, most old people live alone because they want to do so, and
frequency of contact with children is generally high, see Mancini and Blieszner (1989) for
a review. In ate d'Ivoire, under current living conditions, abandonment would seem to
be an unlikely event, because very few old people live alone. There are perhaps more
grounds for concern in Thailand, but the population at risk is still small, and is probably
overstated by the survey results quoted here. However, there is evidence from elsewhere
that suggests that these results should not be generalized to all poor countries. In many
areas of India, living arrangements for newly-weds are strictly patrilocal, so that, alter
marriage, women are effectively cut off from their parents' family. In turn, they will be
looked after in old age by their sons, their daughters having themselves moved to their
husbands families. In consequence, women who fail to produce sons, or fail to produce
surviving Sons, are likely to fall into destitution as widows. Drèze (1988) provides
evidence on this problem, and highlights it as an outstanding issue for social security and
poverty policy in India.
        4. The living rrangenents of the elderly will vary from place to place according
to marriage arrangements, agroclimatic conditions, and the availability of labor and land.
The position of Indian widows has already been cited. In Cote d'Ivoire, living patterns
have been changing in response to the increasing scarcity of land, since sons, who
previously were guaranteed land nearby, now are often required to set up households at
considerable distances. The shortage of land itself reflects a great deal of immigration to
the cocoa and coffee areas, an immigration that responded to original laborshortage, and
that contnbuted to the destruction of the original lineage system of cocoa and coffee
production. One may also wonder whether the pattern of inheritance in Northern
Thailand, whereby as a result of the residual stem family system, the youngest daughter
typically inherits the land, will continue unmodified into ann where land is increasingly
scan
      5. Individual participation and earnings patterns show the standard life-cycle
hump shapes in COte d'lvoire and Thailand. and presumably do so more wiØeiy.
However, households act so as to make average living standards within households much
less variable over the life-cycle than are the individual patterns. The degree to which this
happens in the data is different between the two countries, and depends on how house-


                                            22
hold size is measured. Even so, sharing resources between household members is pre-
sumably one of the main economic functions of the household. What needs a great deal
more research is the extent to which household size and composition ibeif adapts to
facilitate sharing, and to guarantee the best possible living standards to its members. In
both Thailand and CAte d'lvoire, there is a great deal of migration, on both a seasonal and
non-seasonal basis. In Thailand, the process of household formation is explicitly tied to
the pressure on resources within the compound, so that the departure of a previously
married child on the marriage of a youngEr sibling is as much a matter of economics as
of immutable custom. In the panel households in COte d'lvoire, there are major
differences in membership between 1985 and 1986, and while there is undoubtedly some
measurement error, careful attempts were made to link household members from one year
to the next, and there Is certainly a great deal of movement. Fosterage of children, often
children not closely related, is a widespread phenomenon in West Africa, see Ainsworth
(1989). and provides a mechanism, not only for education, training and apprenticeship,
but also for sharing economic burdens between members of the same lineage. There has
been a good deal of emphasis on the role of risk sharing in determining patterns of
marriage and migration, see for example. Rosenzweig (1989). But there is scope for more
modeling here, particularly for a simple unifying theory that explains how potential
household members decide how to form household groups given the economic
opportunities available to them.
       6. There are a number of interactions between urbanization and age distributions.
Migration tends to lead to young cities and an older countryside, as is the case in COte
d'Ivoire, but much urban growth in LDC's comes from reproductive behavior, as well as
from migration. The fall in fertility in the demographic transition often begins first in the
cities, so that cities are likely to age more rapidly than more rural areas. The balances
between these forces will produce different age distributions in different countries, for
example, younger cities in Africa, and older cities in Asia, and these have a number of
repercussions for policy, for example in the provision of services, as well as in the likely
effectiveness of older people as a political force.
        7. Many LDC's are in a state of transition, not only demographic but also
educational. In both countries examined here, there are very large differences between the
educational attainments of the different generations. The consequencesof these differences
are much less clear, and we do not wish to subsaibe to the view that they always and


                                             23
everywhere undermine the status of the old. Nevertheless, models that provide a theo-
retical framework for the role of the elderly would do well to bear these facts In mind.
        8. The life-cycle model of saving and capital accumulation, which has brought so
many insights in developed countries, cannot be applied without modification to
economies where the functions of households are different. Asset accumulation for old
age, with a large share of the capital stock being accounted for (or not accounted for) by
life-cycle saving, is not likely to be a very useful model for savings in LDCs. Households
can and do provide old-age insurance without an obvious need to accumulate and
decumulate assets. Our data do not suggest any run down of assets with the age of the
household head. Of course, as in more developed economies, heads have a range of other
motives for keeping control of assets for as long as possible.
       9. As In developed countries, there is a pronounced household life-cycle, with a
hump shaped income, peaking much earlier in CaMe d'lvoire than in Thailand. However,
we doubt that there is much long-term consumption smoothing associated with these
humps, and tend to attach more importance to saving as a means of smoothing con-
sumption over short-term fluctuations in income that are typically associated with
agricultural activities. Indeed, it is possible that variations in household structure
contribute more to long-term smoothing than do variations in assets.

S List of works dtedi-
Ahonzo, Etienne, Bernard Barrere, and Pierre Kopylov, (1984), Population ale Ia Côte d'fvoire:
      Analyse des donnS dmnwgragraphiques disponibles, Abidjan. Directionde Ia Statistique,
       Ministere de l'Economie et des Finances, République de COte d'lvoire.

Ainsworth, Martha, (1989), "Economic aspects of child fostering in COte d'Ivoire, The
      World Bank, processed. (September)

Ainsworth, Martha, and Juan Mufioz, (1986). The Côte d'Ivoire living standards survey,
      Washington, D.C. Living Standards Measurement Study Working Paper No. 26,
      The World Bank.

Carroll, Christopher and Laurence Ft. Summers, (1989), Consumption growth parallels
       income growth some new evidence; Departments of Economic, Harvard
       University and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, processed

Codey, John, Timothy M. Smeeding, and Barbara Boyle Torrey, (1990). "The change in the
       economic status of the low-income elderly in three industrial countries: circa 1979-
       1986,' Washington, D.C. Bureau of the Census, processed.


                                             24
Cowgiil, Donald 0., (1974). "Aging and modernizatioit a revision of the theory," in D.O.
      Cowgill and LU. Holmes (eds,). Aging and Modernization, New York. Appleton-
      Century-Crofts.

Cowgill, Donald 0., (1986), Aging around the World, Belmont, Ca. Wadsworth.

Deaton, Angus, (1990), 'Saving in developing countries: theory and review," World Bank
        Economic Review (Supplement), Vol.

Deaton, Angus, and Dwayne Benjamin. (1988), "Coffee and cocoa in the Cote d'lvoire,"
      Washington, D.C. Living Standards Measurement Study Working Paper No.
      The World Bank.

Deaton, Angus, and John Muellbauer, (1986), "On measuring child costs in poor
        countries;' Journal    Political Economy, 94, 720-4.4.

Deaton, Angus, Javier Ruiz-Castillo, and Duncan Thomas, (1989). 'The influence of
      household composition on household• expenditure patterns: theory and Spanish
        evidence." Journal of Political Economy, 97, 179-200.

Dreze, Jean P., (1988), "Soda! insecurity in India: a case study," London School of Econom-
        ics, processed.

Ewbank, Douglas C.. (1981), Age misrepofting and age-selective underenumeration: sources,
      patterns and consequences for demographic analysis. Washington, D.C National
      Academy Press.

Hecht, Robert, (1982), 'The transformation of lineage production in Southern !vory Coast,
        1920-1980," Ethnology, VV, 261-77.

Mandni, Jay A., and Rosemary Blieszner, (1989), "Aging parents and adult children:
     research themes in intergenerational relations," Journal Marriage and the Family,
        51, 275-90.

Martin, Linda G., (1988), 'The aging of Asia," Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 43, S99-
        9113.

Martin, Linda C., (1989), "Living arrangements of the elderly in Fiji. Korea, Malaysia, and
        the Philippines," Demography, 26, 62743.

National Economic and Social Development Board, (1985). Population projections for
        Thailand 1980-2015, Bangkok.

National Statistical Office, (1983), The survey of migration in Bangkok metropolis, Non thaburi,
        Patliun Thani and Sanut Prakai, Bangkok.

l'axson, Christina H., (1989), "Savings in Thailand: responses to income shocks," Princeton.
        Research Program In Development Studies, processed.


                                               25
Pollaic, Robert A.. and Terence J. Wales, (1979). 'Welfare comparisons and equivalent
       scales," American Economic Review, 69, 216-21.

Rosenzweig, Mark It, (1988), "Risk, implidt contracts and the family in rural areas of low
      income countries; Economic Journal, 98, 1148-70.

Treas, Judith, and Barbara Logue, (1976), "Economic development and the older
       population," Population and Development Review, 12,645-73.

United Nations, (1986), World Population Prospects: Estimates and Projections as Assessed in
        1984, New York United Nations.

United Nations, (1987), Demographic Yearbook 1985, New York United Nations.

United States Agency for International Development, (1982), Selected Statistical Data by Sex,
       Part 13, Ivory Coast, Washington. D.C
World Bank, (1979), "The population of Thailand: Its growth and welfare," World Bank
      Staff Working Paper #337, June.

World Bank, (1988), %brld Development Report 1988, Washington. D.C.

World Bank, (1989), World Development Report 1989, Washington, D.C.




                                             26
                                           TABLE l.A
                           AGE DISTRIBUTION BY SEX: 55 110 OVER
                                 THAILAND 1981 110 1966
                             BANGKOK                                   RURAL
              FEMALES                  MALES              FEMALES                 MALES

AGE:       1981       1986      1981       1986        1981     1986       1981       1986

55—59       3.2        3.5       3.5           3.0      3.3      3.8           3.0        3.4
60—64       2.3        2.3       2.1           2.2      2.5      2.6           2.1        2.5
65—69       1.6        2.1       2.0           1.3      1.8      1.9           1.5        1.8
70—74       1.1        1.0       1.0           1.3      1.4      1.7           1.3        1.5
75—79       0.5        0.7       0.7           0.5      0.8      1.3           0.6        0.6
80+         0.8        0.0       0.2           0.8      1.0      1.0           0.4        0.8
>—55        9.5       10.5       9.5           9.1     10.7     12.5           9.0    10.6
035        3399       2209      3028       1879      11941     10260      11359       9862




                                           TABLE 1.3
                           AGE DISTRIBUTION BY SEX: 55 120 OVER
                               COTE D'IVOIRZ 1985 120 1966
                             URBAN                                     RURAL
                 FEMALES               MALES              FEMALES                 MALES

AGE:       1985       1986      1985       1986        1985     1986       1985       1986
55—59       1.5        1.8       1.9           2.0      2.7      3.0        3.6        2.9
60—64       1.1        1.3       1.5           1.5      2.1     2.7         2.3        3.1
65—69       0.7        0.8       0.5           0.6      1.7      1.7        2.2        2.5
70—74       0.3        0.3       0.6           0.5      0.9      1.1        1.3        1.4
75+         0.4        0.5       0.3           0.4      1.4.     1.3        1.3        1.5
>—55        3.9        4.7       4.8           5.0      8.9      9.7       10.6       11.4
OBS        2842       2805      2678       2662        4014     3846       3737       3583

Notes:  Figures are percentages of the relevant -group, so that, in Thailand in
1981. 3.2% of all women in Bangkok were aged 55—59. OBS is the total number of
observations forall ages in the sample, so that, e.g., there are 3144 females
in the urban Ivorian sample in 1985. Note that the Ivorian sample is a simple
random sample, so that the sasmple numbers can be used toestimate the fraction
urbanised.   This is not true for the Thai survey, see Table 2 below. The Thai
results exclude urban non—Bankok and the suburban sanitary districts" sector.




Tables, page 1
                                               TABLE 2
                             URBANIZATION AND THE ELDERLY
                              COfl D' IVOIRE MiD THAILAND
                          ?ercentages      of people living in:
COte d'Ivoire               1985        1986             Thailand        1981
Aged 55 or over:
Urban                       24.3        25.3             Urban           17.5
                                                         Semi-urban      10.3
Rural                       75.7        74.7             Rural           72.2


All ages:
Urban                       41.6        42.4             Urban           17.8
                                                         Semi—urban          9.0
Rural                       56.4        57.6             Rural           73.2

                                               TABLE 3.3.
                            MARITAL STATUS OF THE ELDERLY
                                    THAILAND 1981
                          RURAL FEMALES                                      BANGKOK FEMALES
       NEVER               DIVOR-                             NEVER -                       DIVOR—
AGE: MARRIED MARRIED WIDOWED CED TOTAL                      MARRIED MARRIED WIDOWED CED TOTAL
55—5 9      1.8    63.9      29.6         4.8      396         2.8    73.2         15.7      8.3     108
60—64       2.0    57.6      37 .   3     3.1      295         3.9    39.7         48.7      7.7      78
65—6 9      1.8    43.6      51.8        2.7       220         1.8    49.1         43.6      5.5      55
70+         2.2    21.4      74.5         1.9      364         3.7     9.8         79.3      7.3      82


                          RURAL MALES                                        SMGKOK       MALES
          NEVER                DIVOR-                         NEVER               DIVOR-
AGE:     MARRIED MARRIED WIDOWED CED TOTAL                  MARRIED MARRIED WIDOWED CEO TOTAL
55—5 9      2.3    66.3       8.4        2.9       344         0.0    87.6          6.7      5L7     105
60—64       0.4    83.8      13.7        2.1       234         1.6    89.1         17.5      0.0      63
65—69       0.6    64.3      13.4         1.7      172         3.3    80.0         13.3      3.3      60
70+         0.8    71.9      25.8         1.5      267         0.0    60.7     36.1          3.3      61

                                               TABLE 33
                            MARITAL STATUS OF THE ELDERLY
                                 COTE D'IVOIRE 1986

                          FEMALES                                              MALES
       NEVER                DIVOR-                            NEVER                 DIVOR—
AGE: MARRIED MARRIED WIDOWED CED TOTAL                      MARRIED MARRIED WIDOWED CEO TOTAL
55—5 9      0.6    65.0     25.6         8.6       163         1.9    90.5      5.1         2.6      157
60—6 4      0.0    54.4     39.1         6.5       138        2.0     91.5      2.0         4.6      153
65—6 9      0.0    41.9     55.9         2.3        86        0.9     85.9     11.3         1.9      106
70+         0.9    15.5     81.9         1.7       116        0.0     82.7     11.8         5.5      127

Tables,   page 2
                                                                                                                   0      >....
                + 'o.-.__0\_ '0 UI0• NN
               oN                                                  + 0'CUNC.CflN'O CDec
                                                                  0N                                    N          .— C — a, >.
                                                                                                                   0o—io.-.
                  rNUIcN0'w 'ON                                      (nOwmo',C00C ,40                   O          =a,lc4j
                                                                                                                   03uac
                          N# N                Nr-                            ——    I1            NN     CM

                                                                                                              o0aUJ
                                                                                                                 o a, C -140
               a'
               '0
               I
               Ul
               '0
                       0'N00NUI
                         N N
                                00
                                InN
                                   .0N
                       OlflIflU,OOlflO UI0 0                      0'
                                                                  'I'
                                                                  UI
                                                                            9°°
                                                                        InN.-.-Ioenoo
                                                                          N.4 C.
                                                                                        0.C a.Co
                                                                                       NO CO.0.
                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                        CC
                                                                                                              Id Ofl a, —U
                                                                                                                        (4OUJ.4
                                                                  CD                    >,—-4
                                                                                      -.Oto     C>,
                                                                      9°.1°. Na N
                                                                                                              14
          '0           tor-.#4oUN N . N0                          C.                    CtO—
                                                                                        00C      0C
                                                                  0 C'Ia'CDNCCmOW ON —  too—.S
               CD

          00
          O
          .4             fl.i0UIen N N
                        #4N •
                                                                  '?
                                                                                     N C0.4O                  0_a     tu
                                                                                                 -
               CD                             CON                 CD         —     U,            ON
                                                                                                              U U IOO IS 0
               a'                                                 a'                                         •0 C#4 c a, .C
               U,      NW .-40'a' cr10                UI
                                                                  Sc1
                                                                                                       ('1
                                                                                                       r1
                                                                                                             .-I — 0 0 .C a
                                                                                                              Ca, 14-C
                                                                                                             —4         0
    01
    Cd
               U,
               U,
                  m.-.mrlaINedm
                    .-IN q      NO
                                COO
                                    Cfl                           UI
                                                                  UI
                                                                      NU,CD-4C.enoW
                                                                       —   '0       00
                                                                                   OCN
                                                                                                       en
                                                                                                                     a,
                                                                                                              U U Ot.C.C
                                                                                                               a, -C — Ui a
    4I                                                      UI                                               .03ai0
                                                                                                             a      .C.I3—
                               '00. to a4I 0+ NWWNN'OInUI (no
                                                            Cd
                                                                                                             .4 14 a, 0 0
    Cd
               0N+ NalUIONOnen
                    mWNNNOr,
                                                                                                       en     3a,ca,               0'
                            N NW0. fl aC N .enNr.nnC.oCo
    CU                                                                                                 to      >—IDC  C
                    — N##4
                                                         CU,
                                                N#4 en — NW                                            N      0'OEO4'-4
                                                                                                              C Ut>>
    IC
                                      C
                                                                                                             ..4ta, —I-I
                                                                                                             > C U) I' a—
    o          OI (nNOWNCON COIn  . 0 0 a,
               CO
                I
               UI
               C0
                  •-l.-4N m.r-en
                          N      —n N
                                    —         WNWNrCO
                                        UI N..4.4N.4
                                        to  N.4 UI NW Nfl
                                                      ON
                                                                  t                                    ('1
                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                       —
                                                                                                             .4
                                                                                                             #4
                                                                                                                    4 0 .C .5
                                                                                                                   U,
                                                                                                              (401141.0.
                                                                                                              C .'O 0
                                                                                                                        0-4
          O        N.OqON a'.-,. UIC,                                                                         Ct        110
                                                                                                              a, a, 0c 410.
          a' '0
              I mNNmONe4 U,O     N                                SO ..4C.40.COW.-4 N0\
          —
               O  .4.4N en     Into                               0  UIU,OI'lONNUI  ..4r                    m.C>..j0
                                                                                                       N I(alicia.
                                                                                                       en
               to                                                 SO         UI     ON                             C
                                                                                                              0.4.1.5              0
               0U, WNC,r,WU,.40 N                                 0'
                                                                        In
                                                                                                  —4 0.0
                                                                                  0UI0(n0 #40 In .1C00.OcaC .4           —4

                                                  •   0'          '?                                     UU
h              U,.flNrIU1NNm.
                    N                                                                             • a,
               U,             N
                              toN                     fl          UI
                                                                  IC
                                                                     U1C.NN.-4NOUI
                                                                       —   '0      UI
                                                                                    ON                 In
                                                                                                             - 0.a0144514
                                                                                                                      01.5
                                                                                                             >'>'C  0
                                                                                                             —-4 .C.o              Il-U


                                                                                                             C C maa, a,
                                                                                                             00— Ott
               + 00CC Cnr,.-10 lOON
               O                 • In
                                                                   + NNen.4W..4C0 cC.
                                                                  0N                         au -
                                                                                         11.—IC
                                                                                                              a,
                                                                                                                         I 04.1
               N —0#.4,•IOU1NO
                    r1.4   .   00'
                               —N
                                                                     0NC.C0045.ON
                                                                      •-I#4 rI N 0'N
                                                                                  CCC
                                                                                      C4 DC
                                                                                         04'- .oa,lI   CC


               0'                                                 a' Nr0en0en0n          0.14(40 CCI          •1 -o c — 0 —               a
                  0C00ONOInN 044 CO
               CO

               Ul 0OOfl.#40WN  UI                                 di         OOC.U,C.0C. #4CC          N
                                                                                                              .5-4.40_a IS
                                                                                                                taCIt. IC
                                                                                                                              01


               CO -41fl.-IN   rICO                                CO               N             OCN         Colt,
                                                                                                             U).>                    •1.4
          to   CC 00000000 00 0                                         rlCOtoOOC.ON 4CO                     _4 0.44O>.O
                                                                                                             304'   C.4.4t
                                                                                                                    0CC
          0' 0 W'OCOC0W0NW 00                         UI
                                                                  0 NC.400N0N 0511                     — C'00I4,
                                                                                                         .J00000
          —    CO  fl.-4N InN                                     CO  •-4.-4 14 NN
                                                                                                       —.
                                                                                                             C 00
                                                                                                             .4t      ('IC
                                                                                                                  0.0140
    C),
    Cd
    ..         0'                                                 a'                                         'Ca,   .CO4
    4S
     Cd
               U, OOCN4. rlrl.0' r,UI
               U,  I
                  a'c.Nwm—UIr) NOC
                                   . 0N Cd
                                        a '?
                                           InflOfl.4WN..4
                                                            In

                                                          N a'd'                 9°.°9 99 N —
                                                                                            03
                                                                                               0oa.4
                                                                                              -VIt
                                                                                                40cC O UI
                                                                                                               4' E 14 3 .C t

               i3      en en               in        to     Or-                             C4tU0.-i         C0
                                                                                                             0 I C..0_C
    CU                                                                                                                                    C)
                                                                                                                    C .C a -C
    0           + 0.0o,0to0 en0 N0                          0          aI—UNIn.-,COC4a N.                     EC  co—Ia.'
               0N                                                 0N+ C.rC                             —            043-4
    C,
    zIC           0CNN0W0 NUI
                           NN       en
                                                            ICC
                                                            C-,
                                                                           a'flSC.4toC. UI N
                                                                                   114 —
                                                                                                       to    a,
                                                                                                             O
                                                                                                               #4
                                                                                                                (St 0—0 D
                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                         0' 3
                                                                                                             51 14 0-4 -C C 0'
    •0
                                                CO
                                                                                                             .a,0.   -#IC
                                                                                      ro 0  0..Cc.4'         0 a o C 0>—
               OC                                                 0'
               CC      fllflN#4lflO#4#4 O' UI                           Onr-ocr-oen
               U' N InOCU1.-4a'a'
               CO      N
                                            UI
                                              .-i%O               U,
                                                                  50
                                                                     U,O.4U,U,COO
                                                                         .4 01
                                                                                  OU,
                                                                                  NN
                                                                                         to
                                                                                            I 50
                                                                                              Xa,CO—
                                                                                            CO 0'O Xa—i-.-.

              C.                                                  C.
                                                                                             -0 14_II4C
                                                                                                410      0   a,
          0  CO  CCNWOC.CONn InC..                                                          CUUCC0..4
                                                                  0 N0'0C.IU1C,.40C OCCO to 000 3 0a,a
                                                                  CC CWCU,WCCCCCIIC C.N                1
          CC
              oCO NOC#-4.-4NNen-I
                     fl.-IN .4
                                  Inc
                                  ('1CC
                                                      to
                                                      N
                                                                  CO               UI
                                                                                                    000      #4
                                                                                                             It'              140I5
                                                                                                                 •1'0 0 U U
               a'                                                 a'                                         0'ca.-.O.
                                                                                                             COCO a,    4-4
               Ui      0Na'lfl.aoUI N to
                                  0                               575110'
                                                                     ("9000          50 U,0 >—I0C.CI4fla,
                                                                                               >0a, C
               Ul mU100m.weno
                    — C.      U,0 —                               511     to#4#4N#40 Inc   .4 00
                                                                                             14a,U41.C_OUJ
                                                                                                                        Ii 00 '0
                                                                                                             —4 t a, 0 a —
               Ui             COO                                 511              CD
                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                             0.-I  .CCOC                       In
                                         U,                                                10                COt
                                                                                                             OCCO  45345
                                         Cd                                                                  a,  .5 44 CO                       0)
                                         Z Cd
                                            (0..                                           =Cd
                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                C- aOOa,                        C,
                                                                                                                                                4'
                                  01 +
                                     0 0(0
                                       00
                                         —
                                                                                        10
                                                                                        0 +0 CO"
                                                                                           1-.
                                                                                             0(0
                                                                                                 Cd                    04.1
                                                                                                             4 45(4 CL.' '444
                                                                                                             a, 0 a—. C a, a
                                                                                                                                                0.
                                              0.1-4
                                                                                    =00
                                                                                   o(001(11010.00            C
                                                                                                             OSC04)14
                                                                                                                 a,0s1
                                                                                   0ca
                                COCd(MCO
                                                                                                                      U                         5,
                                  0=ca==
                                ++44+,CE-I44          (.1
                                                                                   44 Cd 4-4(11 01
                                                                                      4X
                                                                                + + (4 +               In
                                                                                                             14 C O4 44 Ii a,
                                                                                                     IC14 000.0.0>
                                                                                                            0 tO                               'l.00
                        Cd
                       WV' COCUICdOISIE-II.I1-4 =
                           InIn+CO03Z Cd0                                Cd COCdCdOCdE4E4(             tUOa,.-4
                                                                                                 0Cd ...4oQ..cOa,                               'a,
                                                                        5 0 UI Cd 0D(00I. 3 3 o o—a a .0
                       ZCd00tMO-                                        CaIn 0In01+CO0141-4
                       aa.a..ao
                       000=00000                      S
                                                      0                 00000o00
                                                                        aIC0.1-4               ozZ aCE—.
                                                                                                     ouo—.a,.C0a,
                       4012C0CO0flC1010               5                      (0 00.tI 0. 0. 0
                                                                                         (1110       ZS   Ec.OaJa
                                              TABLE 4.3
                         LIVING AJR1RGnNTS OF THE ELDERLY
                                       COn D'rVOIRZ, 1986
                                           FEMALES                          MALES
                          55—59 60—64 65—69 70+               5559 60—64 65—69 70+
ALONE                         0.6     0.7      2.3   0.0          2.5     2.6     2.6      5.5
SPOUSE                        4.2     0.7      0.0   0.9          1.9     4.6     1.9      3.1
KIDS                          2.5     2.9      0.0   0.9          1.3     0.7     0.9      0.8
OTHERS                    15.3 16.7 26.7 21.6                     3.8     4.6     7.5      6.3
SPOUSE+KIDS                   3.7     2.2      4.7   0.9      17.2 14.4 18.9 11.0
SPOUSE+OTHERS             20.2 23.9 16.3  5.2                     3.6 11.1        6.6 10.2
KIDS+OTHERS               22.1 27.5 31.4 62.1                     3.8     1.3     5.7      6.2
SPOUSE+KIDS+OTRERS        31.2 25.4 18.6  8.6                 65.6 60.8 55.7 56.6
SUBTOTALS:
     WITH SPOUSE          59.5 52.1 39.5 15.5                 88.5 90.8 83.0 81.1
     WITH KIDS            59.5 58.0 54.7 72.4                 87.8 77.1 81.1 82.6
NUMBERS                       163     138       86   116          157     153     106      127

Note: Spouse means living alone with spouse and no others, kids with children and no
others, and so on. Children are defined as biological children of the reference
elderly person, living in the same household, so that a woman living with her spouse
and the spouse's children who are not her own would be classed under "spouse and
others, - which Is different from the treatment in Thailand.




                                              TABLE 5.A
                   EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT BY AGE, SEX AND LOCATION
                                            THAILAND 1981
                       EMJGKOK                                            RURAL
            FEMALES                   MALES                 FEMALES                MALES
AGE       SCH ELEM SEC          5CR ELEM SEC         SCM ELEM SEC               SCM ELEM SEC
20—39 .96 .29 .17
10—49 .77 .05 .04
                                .99 .38 .22           .91 .02 .02               .96 .04 .03
50—59 .58 .04 .02
                                .89    .14 .10        .94 .00 .00               .90 .01 .01
60—69 .27 .00 .00
                                .67    .09 .05        .65 .01 .00               .85 .01 .01
          .13 .01 .01           .40 .03 .02           .32 .00 .00               .63 .01 .01
70+                             .36 .07 .03           .06 .00 .00               .47 .00 .00
Notes: SCM means that the respondent had completed at least one grade higher than
kindergarten. ELEM means that the respondent had completed elementary school. SEC
means that the respondent had completed high school or a technical/vocational school.


                                      TABLE 5.3
                        EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT BY AGE AND SEX
                                       COTE D'IVOIRE 1986
                          FEMALES                                       MALES
AGE        YEARS      ARITH    READ           SCM?        YEARS     ARITH         READ      SCM?
20—39       2.60       0.35         0.32      0.37         5.94     0.70          0.66      0.68
40—49       0.28       0.04         0.03      0.04         2.36     0.37          0.32      0.32
50—59       0.05       0.01         0.01      0.01         0.96     0.19          0.17      0.18
60—69       0.05       0.00         0.00      0.01         0.49     0.11          0.09      0.09
70+         0.00       0.00         0.00      0.00         0.29     0.06          0.05      0.04
Notes: YEARS is years of school compj.eted, ARITH          is fraction of
                                                                 people who can do
written caiculat4ons, READ is the fraction who can read a newspaper, SCM? is the
fraction who are attending or who have ever attended a school.



Tables, page 4
                                  TABLE 6A
           LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION AND WORK HOURS, BY AGE CATEGORY
                                       THAILAND,     1981
                                             BANGKOK

                         FEMALES                                       MALES
AGE       085 ISP WEEKS              HOURS WEEKS       085 LFP WEEKS                   HOURS WEEKS
                                             IDLE                                              IDLE
15—19     460       .37      43.3     51.6 2.1          365 .32              48.4       45.7 6.9
20—39    1338       .67      48.3     49.3   1.2       1131      .85         50.2       49.4   1.8
40—54     437       .57      49.7     52.7   0.0        375      .97         51.4       50.4   0.7
55—59     108       .45      50.2     52.2   0.0        105      .87         51.1       51.5   0.0
60—64      78       .32      51.5     53.0   0.0         63      .67         51.4       55.7   1.7
65—69         55 .16         51.3     62.2   0.0            60 .53           49.3       53,8   0.0
70—99         82    .06      52.0     58.8   0.0            61 .23           52.0       53.7   1.1
                                             RURAL

AGE       OHS LFP WEEKS              HOURS WEEKS       OHS LFP WEEKS                   HOURS WEEKS
                                           IDLE                                                IDLE
15—19    1304       .86      46.0     57.3   4.2       1270 .89              47.6      58.1    5.7
20—39    3295      .94       45.3     57.8   3.3       2927 .99              50.6      61.4    5.0
40—54    1569      .93       45.4     57.1   2.9       1493 .99              50.8      61.9    4.3
55—59     396      .80       44.7     54.2   3.8       344 .96               50.9      60.0    5.4
60—64     295      .62       44.2     52.0   2.0       234 .88               49.9      55.6    4.3
65—69     220       .47      42.3     48.6   3.2       173 .77               47.2      53.9    4.2
70—99     365 .24            41.3     41.0   3.0       267 .46               46.7      19.5    4.1
Notes: Labor force participation was defined as spending at least one week in the last
year employed, self—employed (on or off farm), or working as free family labor.
Average weeks in the labor force includes weeks unemployed. Weeks unemployed (called
'weeks idle" in the table) consists mainly of weeks spent waiting for the agricultural
season or 'because no work was available.' 'Hours" Is the individual's reported
hours/week when working.


                                    TABLE 6.B
               LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION AND WORK HOURS, DY AGE CATEGORY
                               COTE D'IVOIRE 1986
                      FEMALES                            MALES
AGE       N        LFP      WEEKS DAYS HOURS                 N     LFP        WEEKS      DAYS HOURS
15—19    690       .41      45.2    4.92     6,70            707       .43      44.0     5.12     7.60
20—39 1643 .59              45,5    5.09     6.84           1281 .66            44.7     5.43     8.02
40—54    792       .76      47.0    5.16     6.90            566 .86            47.0     5.37     8.10
55—59    163 .69            46.7    4.81     6.53            157       .73      49.4     4.90     7.56
60—64    138       .62      46.4    4.72     6.40            153 .71            45.9     5.06     7.55
65—69     86 .63            46.0    4.93     6.59            106 .63            47.2     4.72     6.61
70+      116 .22            44.5    4.52     5.72            127       .40      45,5     4,53     6.25
Notes: These relate to household members. For a person to be a non—participant, he or
she must answer "no" to the following three questions, "During the past 7 days have
you worked for someone who is not a member of your household, e.g. an empioyer, a
firm, the Government, or some other person outside your household?" "During the past 7
days, have you worked in a field or garden beionging to yourself or your household or
have you raised livestock?" "During the past 7 days, have you worked in a trade,
industry, business, enterprise or profession belonging to yourseif or your household?
For example, as an independent merchant or fisherman, lawyer, doctor, or other
self—employed activity?" WEEKS are number of weeks last 12 months in main lob only,
DAYS is days worked in the last 7 days, and hours hours per day in the last week,
again in the main job.


Tables, page 5
                                    TABLE 7

                       EZAITH AND sxcnzss BY SEX MO AGE
                              COTE D'IVOIRE, 1986

                  FEMALES                                  MALES
AGES
         ILL   DAYS1 DM52 CON        MED       ILL DAYS1 DAYS2 CON       MED

15—19    .16     1.5    0.7   .51    .58       .12   1.0    0.4    .45   .56
20—24    .21     2.0    1.0   .59    .61       .17   1.6    1.0    .51   .54
25—29    .27     2.4    1.6   .49    .60       .20   2.1    1.3    .57   .63
30—34    .27     3.3    1.6   .59    .61       .30   2.7    1.2    .52   .62
35—39    .34     4.8    2.8   .48    .55       .32   3.5    1.6    .58   .69
40—44    .36     4.7    2.1   .10    .53       .36   3.5    1.8    .50   .59
45—49    .40     5.4    2.7   .45    .50       .42   5.5    2.5    .41   .58
50—54    .36     5.2    2.2   .47    .54       .47   6.2    3.1    .43   .62
55—59    .40     6.2    2.9   .35    .45       .45   6.2    4.0    .47   .57
60—64    .41     7.2    3.7   .30    .43       .52   7.6    4.4    .41   .47
65—69    .37     5.2    3.4   .25    .38       .57 11.8     6.9    .45   .58
70—74    .50     9.8    6.0   .2e    .60       .67 11.2     7.6    .26   .40
75+      .59 12.0       7.9   .10    .36       .66 13.0     9.6    .38   .48

Notes: These are self—reported figures for all household members. ILL       theis
fraction of respondents who, during the last 4 weeks, experienced an illness
or injury, "for example, a cough, a cold, diarrhea, an injury due to an acci-
dent, or any other illness." DAYS1 is the number of days in the last four
weeks during which the respondent suffered from the illness or injury,
counting in zero days for those not sick. DAYS2 is the number of days the
illness prevented the respondent from carrying on his or her usual activities.
CON is the fraction of persons reporting an illness, who consulted "a doctor,
nurse, pharmacist, healer, midwife, or other health practitioner." MED is the
corresponding fraction of cases where the respondent bought medicine.




Tables, page 6
                                    TABLE 8
                         AVERAGE HOUSEHOlD CHARACTERISTICS
                            BY AGE OF HOUSEHOlD }4E)CEBS
                               COTE D'IVOIRE 1986
                 nmerna      mae    y     cnd        ype    cndpe number
       0—4        11.7       7.6   1760   1748       267     264   2176
       5—9        12.0       7.9   1779   1878       248     262   2140
       10—14      11.8       7.9   1995 2011         278     278   1841
       15—19      12.0       8.7   2232   2264       294     295   1395
       20—24      11.3       8.3   2127   2111       296    296    1021
       25—29      10.7       7.6   2239   2080       366     341    763
       30—34      10.1       7.0   2262   2143       385     387    608
       35—39      10.4       7.1   1839   1890       313     325    528
       40—44      10.4       7.2   1610   1661       258    252     489
       45—49      10.5       7.4   1642   1780       239    270     423
       50—54      10.2       7.4   1356   1407       211    220     443
       55—59       9.3       6.9   1391   1534       224    243     320
       60—64       9.4       6.8   1815   1468       340    220     288
       65—69       8.9       6.6   1049   1135       169     185    190
       70—74       9.8       7.2   1262   1378       191    246     113
       75—79      10.5       7.7   1653   1540       22?    224      64
       80+         9.8       7.5   1397   1348       175     178     66
       All        11.2       7.7   1884   1895       278    279 12868
                           FEMALES AGED 55 AND OVER
                  nmema      nae    y     cnd        ype    cndpe number
       55—59       9.5       7.2   1382   1570       209    234     163
       60—64       9.9       7.2   1991   1560       362    228     136
       65—69       9.2       6.8   1047   1177       164    187      85
       70—74      11.9       8.4   1379   1498       159     179     50
       75—79      10.8       7.8   1744   1723       196    227      28
       80+        10.0       7.8   1234   1239       159     165     38

       All        11.4       7.8   1877   1898       273    273    6636

                            MALES AGED 55 AND OVER
                  nmetns     mae    y         cmi    ype    cndpe number
       55—59       9.1       6.6   1400   1497       240    252     157
       60—64       8.9       6.5   1657   1386       322    214     152
       65—69       8.7       6.3   1050   1100       1'12   183     105
       70—74       8.1       6.2   1170   1283       216    298      63
       75—79      10.3       7.5   1583   1398       252    221     36
       80+         9.6       7.3   1617   1496       198    196     28
       All        11.1       1.7   1890   1892       285    285    6232

Notes: These are calculated on an individual basis, i.e. each individual in the sample
is assigned the number of househoLd members, househo4d income, or household income per
equivalent, and then averages are calcuiatedconditional on individual age, nmems is
number of household members. nae is number of adult equivalents, where children aged
0—4 are counted as 0.25, aged 5—14 as 0.45, and 15 and over as 1. y is household in-
come. cnd is household consumption excluding purchases of durables, and ype and cndpe
are the corresponding figures per equivalent adult, number is the number of persons
over which the means are calculated. Money amounts are in CFA '000 per annum (about
$3.)

Tables, page 7
                                   TABLE 9
                        AVERASE HOUSEHOlD CBAaACTERISTICS
                           BY ASS OF HOUSEHOLD ICNBEBS
                            RURAL COTS D'IVQIfl 1986
                 nmems     nae      y        cnd   ype   cndpe number
         0—4     11.8      7.6    1307   1310      179   181    1327
         5—9     11.8      7.7    1263   1384      167   185    1245
         10—14   11.6      7.7    1334   1400      173   183    1039
         15—19   12.3       8.7   1472   1471      170   168     690
         20—24   11.2      7.9    1345   1300      180   169     471
         25—29   11.5      7.9    1318   1349      194   200    354
         30—34   10.6      7.3    1293   1301      187   190    300
         35—39   10.7      7.2    1272   1319      184   195    310
         40—44   10.2      7.0    1108   1175      165   174    305
         45—49   10.3      7.2    1124   1243      165   185    272
         50—54    9.7      7.0    1013   1088      156   169    320
         55—59    6.9       6.6   1006   1130      166   185    218
         60—64    9.2       6.6   1082   1158      163   172    211
         65—69    8.2       6.1    842       945   148   170    151
         70—74    9.0       6.6   1086   1190 .    186   245     92
         75—79    9.0       6.7   1004   1132      150   182     49
         80+      9.5      7.3    1280   1138      165   153     55
         All     11.2      7.6    1262   1313      173   181   7409
Notes: y 13 household income. ond is household consumption excluding pur-
chases of durables, and ype and cndpe are the corresponding figures per
equivalent adult, number is the number of persons over which the means are
calculated. Money amounts are in CFA '000 per annum (about $3.) For other
notes, see Table 8.




Tables, page 8
                                          TABLE 10
                          AVERAGE HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS
                              BY AGE OF HOUSEHOLD )eXBERS
                                     BIRGKOK, 1981

                   nmems     nae      y             cnd    ype    cndpe        nwriber
      0—4           5.0      3.4     7141           5693   2173    1729         565
      5—9           6.0      4.3     8031           6600   1949    1615         515
      10—14         6.5      4.8     7945           6760   1754    1500         629
      15—19         6.2      5.5     9044           7540   1678    1423-        625
      20—24        -5.4      4.9     9152           7185   1962    1574         816
      25—29         4.7      4.1     8518           6260   2229    1680         783
      30—34         4.6      3.7     8496           6121   2527    1800         546
      35—39         5.1      3.9     7947           6240   2208    1752         324
      40—44         5.4      4.3     8209           6671   2176    1759         317
      45—49         5.7      4.9     9057           7159   2059    1574         252
      50—54         5.5      5.0     9971           8051   2092    1697         243
      55—59         5.1      4.8     9467           7135   2111    1591         213
      60—64         4.8      4.4     9682           6781   2238    1662         141
      65—69         5.3      4.6     7659           6354   1778    1518         115
      70—74         5.4      4.6     8596           7733   1958    1842          69
      75—79         4.6      4.3     7026           5872   1929    1596          39
      80+           5.3      4.7     8515           7151   2031    1719          35
      ALL           5.5      4.5     8513           6739   2043    1624        6427
                                          FEMALES

                   nmems     nae      y             aid    ype    cndpe        nuxter
      55—59         4.9      4.6     8334           6679   1905    1504         108
      60—64         4.6      4.2     9196           6195   2220    1655          78
      65—69         5.2      4.4     7856           6662   1908    1674          55
      70—74         5.4      4.6     7757           7587   1795    1784          39
      75—79         4.1      3.6     5307           4861   1632    1544          17
      80+           4.9      4.5     8517           7127   2157    1840          26
      ALL           5.5      4.5     8486           6772   2010    1616        3399
                                          MALES
                   nmems     mae                                           -
                                      y             cnd    ype    cndpe        number
      55—59         5.3      4.9    10633           7604   2324    1680         105
      60—64         5.0      4.6    10284           7506   2261   1671           63
      65—69         5.3      4.8     7478           6072   1660   1376           60
      70—74         5.3      4.6     9685           7924   2170   1916           30
      75—79         5.1      4.8     8355           6653   2159   1637           22
      80+           6.4      5.2     8510           7220   1665   1369            9
      ALL           5.4      4.5     8544      -    6702   2080   1634         3020


Notes: Noney amounts are baht per month, Variables are defined in Tables 0
and 9 above.




Tables,   page 9
                                         TABLE 11
                           AVERAGE HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS
                              BY AGE or HoUSEHoLD )GERS
                                  RURAL THAILAND, 1981

            nmems    nae          y             cnd   ype   cndpe    number
   0—4       5.5     3.7        2316           2158   673    624     2536
   5—9       6.0     4.1        2455           2270   636    582     3328
   1.0—14    6.2     4.5        2789           2530   659    597     3272
   15—19     6.1     5.0        3074           2716   643    569     2572
   20—24     5.3     4.3        2892           2486   718    619     1880
   25—29     4.8     3.6        2545           2234   766    685     1656
   30—34     5.1     3.5        2622           2296   784    693     1458
   35—39     5.5     3.9        2587           2374   705    640     1225
   40—44     5.7     4.3        2828           2612   723    656     1123
   45—49     5.6     4.4        2853           2596   696    635     1097
   50—54     5.2     4.3        3288           2862   852    772      839
   55—59     4.8     4.1        2877           2479   773    665      740
   60—64     4.3     3.8        2858           2410   900    720      529
   6569      4.3     3.7        2525           2228   781    707      393
   70—74     4.4     3.6        2336           2260   710    685      309
   75—79     4.7     3.9        2650           2466   748    678      160
   80+       4.9     4.1        2711           2441   724    656      164
   ALL       5.6     4.2        2706           2430   703    631    23280

                                     FEMALES
            muems    nae         y              cnd   ype   cndpe    number
   55—59     4.6     3.9        2583           2316   718    646      396
   60—64     4.2     3.6        2684           2337   848    743      295
   65—69     4.2     3.4        2482           2237   852    784      220
   70—74     4.4     3.6        2309           2263   674    662      163
   75—79     4.9     4.0        2504           2512   656    664       94
   80-4'     4.9     4.2        2934           2472   769    671      108
   ALL       5.5     4.1        2699           2435   708    640    11935

                                      MALES
            nmem.s   mae         y             aid    we    cndpe    number
   55—59     5.1     4.3        3215          2666    837    688      344
   60—64     4.5     4.0        3077          2501    965    690      234
   65—69     4.6     3.9        2580          2216    705    610      173
   70—74     4.3     3.6        2367          2256    750   712       145
   75—79     4.4     3.8        2857          2399    879    697
   80+                                                                 66
             4.9     4.1        2474          2382    639    616      56
   ALL       5.6     4.2        2714          2425    697   621     11345
Motes: Money amounts are baht per month. See Tables 8 and 9 for definitions
of variables.




Table,, page 10
                                    TABLE 12
                   DISTRIBUTION or xcoie, BY AGE,     SEX AND LCCATION
                                  THAILAND, 1961.
                                     BANGKOK
                     MEAN
   FEMALES    INDIVIDUAL %INC SHARE OF INDIVIDUAL INCOME: INC/   FREE/
   AGE:    OBS INCOME     >0 WAGE BUS. PROP TRANS OTHER FAk1INC FAMING

   20—29 870         1177    .54 .75 .09 .01 .11 .04            .18      .05
   30—39 468         1733    .62 .61 .25 .01 .06 .07            .24      .05
   40—49 299         1648    .58 .39 .37 .04 .14 .07            .23      .05
   50—59 245         1764    .58 .25 .35 .03 .32 .05            .23      .04
   60—69 133         1523    .47 .05 .31 .06 .56 .03            .19      .07
   70+       82       456    .26 .00 .10 .12 .74 .05            .11      .05
   MALES

   20—29 729         2141    .71 .81 .09 .00 .08 .02            .34      .05
   30—39 402         4517    .93 .73 .24 .01 .01 .02            .62      .06
   40—49 268         4899    .96 .60 .37 .00 .01 .02            .65      .05
   50—59 211         5418    .89 .48 .41 .01 .06 .04            .53      .03
   60—69 123         2719    .67 .26 .49 .07 .15 .04            .34      .07
   70+    61         1168    .41 .07 .23 .11 .58 .01            .16      .08
                                    RURAL
                     MEAN
   FEMALES         INDIVIDUAL %INC SHARE OF INDIVIDUAL INCOME: INC/  FRZE/
             OBS     INCOME    >0 WAGE BUS. PROP TRANS OTHER FANINC FANINC
   20—29 1893         241    .39 .67 .21 .00 .09 .03            .09      .06
   30—39 1400         394    .42 .50 .36 .02 .07 .04            .12      .04
   40—49 1134         473    .46 .35 .45 .03 .13 .04            .17      .04
   50—59 830          369    .44 .23 .49 .03 .21 .05            .17      .05
   60—69 515          384    .46 .10 .42 .07 .38 .03            .16      .08
   70+   365           129   .38 .08 .21 .12 .55 .04            .10      .10
   MALES

    20—29 1643         808    .71 .55 .42 .00 .01 .01           .37      .05
    30—39 1283        1591    .94 .27 .69 .00 .01 .02           .66      .04
    40—49 1086        2031    .98 .18 .77 .01 .02 .02           .68      .04
    50—59 749         2278    .96 .16 .75 .01 .05 .02           .65      .04
    60—69 407         1665    .87 .06 .75 .03 .13 .03           .55      .06
    70+      267       825    .63 .03 .54      .10   .29 .04    .29      .09


Notes: Individual income includes wages, buSiness income (farm plus self—
employment income), property income (interest, dividends, income from roomers
and boarders), transfer income (pensions and annuities, remittances from
friends and relatives), other income (lotteries, insurance, sales of durable
goods.) Family income equals the sum of all member's individual incomes plus
the rental value of owner occupied homes, home—produced goods not included in
farm income, and goods received free. INC/FAMINC is individual income over
family income. FREE/FANINC is the valueof goods received free as a fraction of
family income.



Tables, page 11
                                    TABLE 13
                  n4COME COMPOS ITION AND LIVING ARRANGEMENTS
                                  THAILAND, 1991
                                     RURAL

    FEMALES, LIVING ALONE OR WITH SPOUSE ONLY
                    MEAN
              INDIVIDUAL %INC SHARE OF INDIVIDUAL INCOME: INC/   FREE/
    AGE:    aBS INCOME     >0 WAGE BUS. PROP TRANS OTHER FAI4INC FAMINC
    50—59 157        417    .64    .27   .37 .04 .27
                                                 .05            .25   .11
    60—69 133        394    .69 .11 .35 .09 .43 .03             .28   .18
    70+      75      292    .81 .07 .25 .13 .52 .04             .32   .30
    FEMALES, LIVING WITH AT LEAST ONE CHILD OR OTHER PERSON
                  MEAN
              INDIVIDUAL %INC SHARE OF INDIVIDUAL INCOME: INC/  FREE!
    AGE:    OBS INCOME     >0 WAGE BUS. PROP TRANS OTHER tAI4INC FAMINC
    50—59   669      359    .40 .21 .53 .03 .19 .05             .15   .04
    60—69   381      382    .38 .10 .46 .06        .35 .03      .12   .05
    70+     289       87    .25 .09 .19 .11        .57   .05    .05   .05

    MALES, LIVING ALONE OR WITH SPOUSE ONLY
                  MEAN
               INDIVIDUAL %INC SHARE OF INDIVIDUAL INCOME: INC/   FREE/
    AGE:    OBS INCOME     >0 WAGE BUS. PROP TRANS OTHER FAIIINC FANINC
    50—59   144    1984     .99 .26 .63 .03 .08 .01             .68    .07
    60—69    89    1479     .96 .09 .67 .06 .15 .04             .59    .11
    70+      73    1038     .96 .05 .47 .15 .31 .03             .50    .18

    MALES, LIVING WITH AT LEAST ONE CHILD OR OTHER PERSON
                  MEAN
               INDIVIDUAL %INC SHARE OF INDIVIDUAL INCOME: INC/  FREE/
    AGE:    OBS INCOME     >0 WAGE BUS. PROP TRANS OTHER FA1IINC FAMINC
    50—59 602      2352     .95 .14 .79 .01 .04 .03            .64    .03
    60—69 318      1717     .84 .05 .77 .03 .12 .03            .54    .04
    70+     190     761     .51 .01 .59 .07 .28 .05            .22    .06




Notes: See Table 12.




Tables, page 12
                                        TABLE 14k
                 AGE AND SEX COMPOSITION OF HOUSEHOLD HEADS
                                      THAILAND, 1981
                     BANGKOK                                    RURAL

            females       males all                       females males      all
   15—19     1.05       1.31          2.36              0.20     0.42     0.62
   20—24     2.16       4.52          6.69              0.52     3.87     4.39
   30—34     2.62      11.67      14.30                 0.66     9.29    1.15
   35—39     2.36      12.33      14.69                 0.66    11.06    11.94
   40—44     2.30       8.46      10.75                 1.08    10.51    11.58
   45—49     2.30       8.79      11.08                 1.68    10.21    11.88
   50—54     2.23       7.34       9.57                 2.14    10.29    12.42
   55—59     2.82       6.23       9.05                 2.00     7.87     9.87
   60—64     2.30      5.70           8.00             2.34      6.55     8.89
   65—69     2.16      3.54           5.70              1.94     4.51     6.45
   70—74     1.25      2.95           4.20              1.78     3.24    5.01
   75—79     0.66      1.25           1.90              1.24     2.52    3.75
   80+       0.66      1.05           1.70              1.30     1.74    3.04
   ALL      24.85       75.15         100.00           17.91     82.09    100.00




                                  -    TABLE     148
                 AGE AND SEX COMPOSITION or HOUSEHOLD HEADS
                                 COTE D'IVOIPE 1986
                         males                 females           all
           20—24           1.3                   0.1             1.4
           25—29           1.9                   0.1             2.1
           30—34           3.5                   0.2             3.7
           35—39           6.1                   0.8             6.9
           40—44           8.8                   0.9             9.7
           45—49           9.2                   1.1            10.3
           50—54          11.3                  0.9             12.1
           55—59          10.6                  0.8             11.3
           60—64           9.4                  0.9             10.4
           65—69          10.9                  1.0             11.9
           70—74          10.4                  0.5             10.9
           75—79           6.6                  0.6             7.3
           80+             1.8                  0.1              1.9
           All            91.9                  8.1            100.0




Tables, page 13
                                           ThBLE 15
                   ME)eZR$, INCOIC, EflENDXTURZ, AND ASSEtS BY KflD' S ASE
                                tOTE D'IVOXRE 1985AND 1986
                                            1985
            AGE      nmems nae       y        aid        a       agass buns. perass
           20—24      3.5   2.7     926       933        —8        911     90     386
           25—29      5.3   3.8    1491      1542       —51        560   6148*    804
           30—34      7.0   4.8    1937      1916        21       2435    596     910
           35—39      7.5   5.0    1885      1880            5    2687   275      656
           40—44      8.8   5.9    1610      1832      —222       2632    893     716
           45—49      9.7   6.6    1857      1749       107       3666    636    1108
           50—54      9.2   6.5    1271      1409      —137       5161   230      796
           55—59      9.2   6.7    1496      1377       120       3732   708     1008
           60—64      9.7   7.0    1497      1537       —40       5199   737     1314
           65—69      9.6   7.0    1470      1415        55       4655   752     1251
           70+        8.0   6.1     870       932       —62       6882   155      976
                                            1986
           AGE      ninelTis nae     y        cnd        a       agass busass perasa
         20—24        4.1   3.0     843       912       —70       1194    27      198
         25—29        5.5   4.0    1845      1659       186        613   211      726
         30—34        6.7   4.5    2096      2050        46       1055   170      780
         35—39       7.9    5.3    2132      2119        13       1173   398      979
         40—44        8.4   5.6    1455      1677      —222       1575   296      969
         45—49        9.4   6.4    1835      1831            4    1693   602     1326
         50—54        9.0   6.3    1298      1340       —41       2187   274      658
         55—59        8.7   6.4    1381      1481      —100       2710   523     1367
         60—64        8.4   6.2    1700      1391       310       2199   684     1117
         65—69       8.1    6.0     994      1041       —47       3275   287      628
         70+         8.5    6.4    1224      1277       —53       2568   492     786
                                          RURAL 1986
           AGE      ninems mae       y        cnd        a       agass busass perass
         20—24       5.5    3.8    1072       602       471      2982      9     101
         25—29       6.5    4.4    1223      1088       135      1672     79     211
         30—34       7.3    4.9    1185      1022       162      2394     89     187
         35—39       8.6    5.6    1089      1100       —11      2334    111     263
         40—44       8.6    5.5     831      1033      —201      2855     79     185
         45—49       9.0    6.0    1025      1096       —71      2042     57     264
         50—54       8.7    6.0     919       963       —44      2699     64     192
         55—59       8.1    5.9     851       998      —146      3879
         60—64
                                                                          33     235
                     7.9    5.7    1116      1123        —6      2364    390     301
         65—69       8.0    5.8     842       899       —57      3572     70
         70+                                                                     319
                     8.1    6.1     927      1052      —124      2938     41     176

totes: nn,emg is number of members, mae, numbers of adult equivalents, y is household
income, and cnd consumption excluding purchases of durable goods.    a, for saving, is
the difference bewteen y and cnd.   agass is the value of agricultural assets,
including a farmer estimated figure for the value of agricultural land. busass is the
value of assets used in family business, and perass is the value of
                                                                      personal assets.
*   This
       figure is dominated by one outlier, a 28 year old head near Aboisso, in the
extreme South—East of the country, who reported business assets worth more than
CFA700,000 ($2.1 million).

Tables, page 14
                                         TABLE 16
                   REGRESSIONS OF INCOME, CONSUMPTION, AND AS SETS
                           ON HOUSEHOLD COMPOSITION
                              COTE D'IVOIRE 1966


             income       consumption      agricultural business           personal
                                               assets        assets         assets
Variable    Eat     ti     Eat iti          Efl (ti         Eat Iti        Eat RI
CONSTANT    124 (0.7)      259 (2.3)       —603 (1.4)      —378 (2.9)     —791 (3.7)
110—4       —65 (0.9)      —76 (1.7)        131 (0.8)        40 (0.8)       29 (0.3)
115—14       67 (1.4)      127   (4.3)      —44 (0.4)       —29 (0.8)      —22 (0.4)
1115—24     214   (3.7)    173   (4.7)      417 (3.0)       195 (4.5)      401 (5.7)
1125—34     394   (4.0)    213   (3.5)       196   (0.6)     64   (0.9)    229   (2.0)
1135—44     257   (1.7)    219   (2.4)       167   (0.5)     59   (0.5)     23   (0.1)
1145—54     157   (1.0)     25   (0.3)       525   (1.4)    193   (1.6)    221   (1.2)
1155—64     302   (1.8)     29   (0.3)       947   (2.3)    375   (3.0)    635   (3.1)
1165—74      24   (0.1)    —19   (0.1)     1475    (3.0)    248   (1.6)    373   (1.5)
1175+       373   (1.2)    124   (0.1)       547   (0.0)    374   (1.7)    430   (1.2)
F0—4        —47   (0.7)   —107   (2.4)       180   (1.1)    —30   (0.6)     15   (0.2)
F5—14        64   (1.3)     90   (2.9)       —40   (0.4)     10   (0.3)     29   (0.5)
r15—24      199   (3.0)    279   (6.0)       164   (1.1)     20   (0.4)    150   (1.9)
F25—34      345   (3.5)    257   (4.1)     1033    (4.4)     75   (1.0)    291   (2.4)
F35—44       43   (0.4)     89   (1.3)       713   (2.7)     26   (0.3)    222   (1.7)
F45—54     —163 (1.4)        4 (0.1)       - 144(0.5)        66 (0.8)      —37 (0.3)
F55—64     196 (1.4)       102 (1.2)        408 (1.3)       147 (1.5)      360 (2.2)
F65—74    —144 (0.8)       —62 (0.5)       —257 (0.6)        38 (0.3)      142 (0.6)
F75+        17 (0.1)        —5 (0.0)       —262 (0.4)      —113 (0.6)      101 (0.3)
ASIDJAN   1742 (9.0)      1673(13.9)       —937 (2.0)      1077 (7.6)     1907 (8.3)
OTHER URB 909 (4.8)        739 (6.2)       —358 (0.8)       405 (2.9).    1266 (5.6)
¶4.FOREST   34 (0.2)        36 (0.3)       1742 (3.7)       120 (0.8)       38 (0.2)
E.FOREST   186 (1.0)        96 (0.9)       1979 (4.7)        16 (0.1)      —74 (0.3)


Notes: The figures are total income, consumption, and assets, undeflated
by any measure of household size. K is males, F is females, and the ind-
ependent variables are the numbers of people in the relevant age category
in the household. The omitted region is the northern savannah region.




Tables, page 15
                                         TAZLE 17
                     afls,       INCO)a flJD EflENDITTJRE BY HEAD' S AXE
                                      THAXLMO, 1981
                                         BANGKOK
   AGE     nmems flaB       y          cnd         a    y/nae cnd/nae      s/nae
   15—19   1.6     1.5    2225        1961        264    1682   1467       215
   20—24   2.3     2.0    3736        3285        451    1939   1779       160
   25—29   3.1     2.5    6065        4570       1495   2564    1993       571
   30—34   3.9     3.0    7239        5348       1891   2724    2002       722
   35—39   4.5     3.3    7017        5540       1477   2294    1822        472
   40—44   4.8     3.8    7598        6165       1433   2437    1940        497
   45—49   5.3     4.4    6951        6245        706   1758    1543       214
   50—54   5.3     4.9    9284        7570       1714   2073    1676       397
   55—59   4.9     4.6    9631        7114       2716   2289    1670       619
   60—64   4.3     4.0   10033        6806       3227   2449    1765       684
   65—69   4.8     4.3    6933        5941        991   1832    1588       244
   70+      4.0 3.6       6293        6053       240    2128    1991       137

                                         RURAL
   AGE     mnems   nae     y.          cmi-       s     y/nae cnd/nae s/nae
   15—19   2.3     2.0   1459         1295        164    810     760        49
   20—24   3.0     2.3   1845         1652       193     923     800       123
   25—29   3.7     2.6   1969         1749       220     875     781        94
   30—34   4.5     3.0   2381         2090       291     838     735       103
   35—39   5.2     3.5   2302         2196       106     714     658        56
   40—44   5.5     4.0   2852         2593       259     805     713        92
   45—49   5.6     4.3   2762        2439        323     701     624        76
   50—54   5.1     4.1   3137        2825        312     861     801        60
   55—59   4.8     4.1   2883        2461        422     797     678       119
   60—64   4.1     3.5   2826        2310        517     983    750        233
   65—69   4.0     3.4   2483        2172        311     843    751         92
   70+     3.7     3.1   2095        2010         86     756    711         44




Note: See Table 15 for variable definitions for the first six columns. The
last three colwnns are income, non—durable consumption expenditures, and
saving divided by numbers of adult equivalents.




Tables. page 16
                      Figure Ia                                              r;,ure lb
                                                        a            Seo ra 10: Oangok            93
0

0
0                                                      0
                                                       003!
                                                                                         A
0
0                                                                                         v
                                                        0
                                                                0     20    30      40    50 0 0            1:
                                                                                   age




                       Figure ic                                                 Figure id
         Age distribution: Thai villages I 981                       Sex ratio: Thai villages I 981



    0
                           I
              Males                 F. ale



3

    a
    0

                                                            0   IC     20   30      '0       50   60   70   SO
        — .8 —1.2 —0.6 0.4 0.0 0.4 0.8   .2 Là   2.0                                age
                percent 01 population
           Figure 2o                                               Figure 2b
Ace distribution: Bangkok 1936
                                                            See ratio Bangkok 1985

                                               a
                           rmo
                                               C
                                               Cc
                                               6)0
                                               'no

                                                    a
                                                    a
).6   .2 0.8 0.4 0.0 0.4 0.8     .2   1.6 20
                                                        0    20   30      40   50   60   O
        percent of population                                            age




            Figure 2c                                                  Figure 2d
 Age distribution: Thai villages 1985                       Sex ratio: Thai villages i 936


                           r.me'n              h
                                               0
                                               Oo


                                               'U

                                               S



        percent a'                                                       ale
                   Figure 3a                                                                    5b
Ace distributror,: Cote dIvoire 1935                             0
                                                                                c': 'ole d'i'icire


                                 r,,cle'                    II
                                                            000      —.-,

                                                            a
                                                            Do



 1.6        1.2 0.3 0,4 0.0 0,4 08      .2        .5 20
                                                                            0   10   30   40
                                                                                          095
                                                                                                 50 60:i-:
              percent at population




                     Figure 3                                                         Figure 3d
 Age distribution: Cote dIvoire 3936                                        Sex ro ho: Cole dIvoire 936

                                                            xl
                                                            0

                                                            0
                                                            0
                                                                                                     //
                                                             0.

                                                            0



       .4     1.2 0.8 0.4 0.0 0., G.e        .2    1.4 LU                                 age
                percent 01 population
