                        NBER WDREING PAPE1 SERIES




                      MEASURES OF WICES AND WICE
                     OI4PFTTIIVE24ESS IN flCEPNATIOtThL
                        TRADE IN MENUFACIURED CCOIE




                              Robert E. Lipsey
                               Lirda Moliriari
                              Irviop B. Eravis




                           Wrkir Paper No.       3442




                    NATIONAL 3JPEAU OF ECDNCI4IC RESEARCI4
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             carbride, NA 02138
                               Septesber 1990




This paper is part of NBER's research prcrain in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors ani not those of the National
Moreau of Ectnanic Research.
                                                  NBER   working Paper #3442
                                                  Septesber 1990

                    MEStJPES OF PRICES AND PRICE 4PE1'ITIVESESS
                    IN INTEPNTION1LTRADE IN W4MJFACIUPED G(XX


                                      Br
     The porxse of this paper is to present, and to explain the construction
of, a set of price indexes relating to international trade in manufactured
goods. These inclixie:

      n
1. Indexes of export prices for the U.S., Gennany, and Japan, based on their
        weights, and indexes of canpetitors' prices for each of those
    countries based on the sane set of weights;
2.    Indexes   of dcstic prices for the U. S.,   Germany, and Japan based on
      export weights;
3.    Indexes for develced crsintry exports of manufactures based on weights of
      developad country exports of manufactures to developing countries and of
      total developad country exports of manufactures, and indexes for exports
      of the U.S., Germany, arid Japan on the sane sets of weights.
       The   indexes for
                     develocd country exports       sake use of a nethod for
estimatir missing prices that takes acxrsint  not only of conteirareous
price danges in the sane country within the sane cnnumxiity groups, bit also
of price d-anges for the partiailar Ccsusodity in other countries.
     Cariparisons are made between mavements of daiestic arid export prices and
between price indexes based on weights of early and late base years. In
addition, an attextpt is made to     corrt
                                        the price indexes for changes in the
quality of sate manufactured goods not usually taken acx,ount of in measures
of e)qx)rt or import prices.




Rshert E. Lipsey             Linda   1inari              Irving B. Kravis
Queens College arid          University Ccspiter         University of Pennsylvania
Graduate Center, aJNY        Center, aJNY                parbtent of Ecorimnics
Flushing, NY 11367           555 West 57 Street                      PA 19104
                                                         Phi1ade1çiia,
        and                  New York, NY 10019                   arid
NB
269 Nercer Street                                        269 Nercer Street
New York, NY 10003                                       New York, NY 10003
        MEASURES OF PRICES AND PRICE COMPETITIVENESS IN INTERNATIONAL

                              TRADE IN MANUFACTURED 000DS*


                                  Robert   E.   Lipsey

                                   Linda Molinari


                                  Irving B. Kravis


                                    I. INTRODUCTION



    Our purpoae in thia paper ia to explain the conatruction of a aet of pri-

ce indexes relating to international trade in manufactured goods. The indexes

are intended   to   be free   of some of the defects of existing measures and more

suitable for the calculation of changes in quantities traded and for the

analysis of the relations between prices and quantities.
    Measures of the prices of manufactured goods are a weak link in empirical

studies of international trade. While most authors have accepted the existing

indexes for primary products       as reasonably accurate and representative,   quite

a few have been skeptical       about the data for manufactured goods prices. Their

deficiencies affect studies of competitiveness,          of real exchange rates, of

income elasticities of demand, of price and substitution elasticities,          of the

terms of trade, and of the supply of exports.



*We are indebted     to Catherine Mann and 3. David Richardson for many valuable

comments and suggestions, and to Ossan Sari, assisted by Nisangul Ceran and

Zhang Zhu, for price collection and statistical          work on the recent data and to

Jases Hayes and Rosa SchUpbach for the preparation of the manuscript. An

earlier version of the paper was presented at the Conference on Internmtional

Economic Transactions of the NBER Conference on Research in Income and Wealth,

in Washington, D.C.,     Nov. 3 and 4,     19e9.
                                         —2—
     The list of defects is e long one. For many
                                                 countries, no price date are
 collected for exports end imports,     end seny studies of trade rely on indexes

of export end isport unit values, despite a long
                                                 history of adverse appraisals
of their accuracy, particularly for sanufactured
                                                 goods.1 Not only are the unit
values inaccurate as seasures of the
                                     prices of individual        products,    but in
each country they are cosbined with different                and using different
                                              weights,
index nusber formulas.

    In the case of primary goods, quality
                                          changes were thought to be relati-
vely small, end where they were not, prices based on narrow
                                                            specifications
were often available as a check on the data based on unit values.
                                                                  The intro-
duction of new products was not thought to be a
                                                major problem. While there
have been ssny large shifts in sources of
                                          supply for primery products, moat
scholars have been willing to accept that, for these
                                                     goods at least, the law
of one price worked well enough that a
                                       missing price observation could be
safely filled in using the price of the same product from another
                                                                  country.
    None of these reassurances can be applied to the
                                                     prices of manufactured

goods. It is possible that there is serious
                                            underrepresentationof new com-
modities, at least for part of their history. There have been suggestions that

price indexes for manufactured goods suffered from upward bias due to the

neglect of quality chartyc. Export prices for automobiles, for example,             might
not take into account gains in horsepower,     the shift to power brakes end

steering,   anti—pollution devices,   etc. More important,               is the
                                                             perhaps,
omission of many products from most countries'     price indexes.                    and
                                                                        Computers

computer accessories may be excluded completely,     although they have become a
major part of manufactured goods trade. The fact that manufactured
                                                                   products
from different countries are less substitutable for each other than
                                                                    primary
                                       —3—
products from different sources meanm that the omission of one country's pri-

ces for some manufactured products is much more likely to bias an index than

the omission of one country's primsry product prices.

    An alternative to the unit value indexes is the use of wholesale or pro-

ducer price indexes.   These are collected with a much higher degree of quality

control   than is applied to the unit value indexes,   at least in some countries.

However, the prices do not purport to spply to externsl    trade.   The difference

in movmsent between domestic and export prices can be significant,     as is

pointed out in the sources mentioned   above and in Kalter (1978), Krsvis and


Lipsey (1977a and 1977b), where these differences are interpreted as
                                                             Dornbusch (1987),
reflecting changes in export profit margins, Baldwin (1988),

Krugman (1987), Mann (1986), Msrston (1989), and Ohno (1989).2 The producer
                                                                          are
price indexes share the characteristicof the unit value indexes that they
                                               and index number formulas   in dif-
computed with different weighting, coverage,

ferent countries. For both types of indexes, the fact thst the methods of coa—

putstion differ greatly from one country to another stems from the fact that
                                                                           for
they are computed by national statistical agencies for their own purposes,

which they may be quite satisfactory.

    A further consequence of the dependence on price collection by individual

countries is that it builds in an assumption about price behavior.       The

                                                                    collection
assumption is that prices of goods not covered by a country's price
                                                            in the saae
process move identically with prices of covered commodities
                                                        the prices of
general class or, if the whole class is uncovered, with

commodities in general.     It is implicitly assumed that price movements of the

 same product in other countries convey no information at all about the likely

 change in the missing prices.    That is en odd choice of assumptions for a
                                       —4—
profession that often assumes the operation of purchasing power parity or the

"law of one price." The practical      implication   can be imagined in the case of

a comparison between a country    that covers computer   prices in its price index
and a country that omits them and assumes they follow
                                                      prices of other pro-
ducts.

     In this paper,   we construct s set of international   price indexes for manu-
factured goods for 1953 to 1988, that addresses these issues in several
                                                                        ways.

t.   Weighting. We construct two types of indexes of manufactured goods prices.

     One is intended mainly for studies of competition in international     trade.

     It is calculated for the United States and for the
                                                        aggregate of many of

     its eajor competitors, using the export weights of the United States and


     weighting at e fine level of commodity detail such as the 4—digit SITC.         A
     similar calculation is performed for Germany end its competitors, using

     German export weights, and for Japan and its competitors, using
                                                                     Japanese

     export weights.    Index of domestic prices with own-country export weights

     are also calculated for each of the three countries to examine the

     possibility of divergences between export and domestic price movements

     and their implications for changing margins of profitability of export

     and domestic seles.

         A second type of index, used, for example,    in studying world trends in

     terms of trade, is a "world" index of manufactured goods
                                                              prices, using as

     weights aggregate OECD exports or developed country exports to developing

     countries: We also conatruct indexes for individual     countries based on

     these two sets of weights.

         For all of these types of indexes, we carry out the calculations using

     weights from a relatively early date, 1963, and from a later date, 1975.
                                         -5—
2.   Missing prices.    In place of the assumption that prices for products not

     covered move in the same way as those covered in the same country,      we use,

     in the aggregate indexes for all developed     countries,   a method that incor-

     porates both country and commodity effects in estimating missing prices.

     The method is an adaptation of one developed by Summers (1973) for the esti-

     mation of country price levels.      It involves fitting an equation to each

     block of country and commodity price change observations for a given year.

     The block is defined by the full list of commodities and countries in, say,

     a two—digit SITC class.      The equation contains   dummy variables for both
                                                                       the degree
     country and commodity and therefore permits the data to determine

     to which each influences the estimate of the missing price.        The list of

     variables could be expanded to include,     for example, a dummy variable for

     the use of a hedonic price index or a variable to represent the movement of

     the price in the preceding year.

3.   Quality corrections. One reason for doubts as to the accuracy of price

     indexes for manufactured products is the suspicion that they do not take

                                                                       biased
     adequate account of changes in the quality of these goods and are

     Upward on that account.     There have been no studies that examine changes in

                                                                  studies of
     quality specific to exports and imports but a fair number of
                                                                            the
     quality change, and of the correction of prices for quality change, by

     use of hedonic price measures.     We show the effect on the U.S. export price

      indexes of introducing the quality—adjustedprice measures that have been

      calculated for a few commodities in the United States. We then also show

      the effect on world price indexes of introducing these quality adjust-

      ments,   under several   possible assumptions about the relation between

      quality change in the U.S. and quality change in other countries.
                                          6

                             II.   METHODS AND SOURCES

Sources of Detailed Price Data

    The indexes are based on disaggregated export price data for countries for

which they are available, with gaps filled by
                                              producers and wholesale price
indexes and hedonic price indexes, where possible.

    There are several basic ingredients for our indexes. The first are the

international price indexes for setals, metal products,    machinery,   and

transport equipment, for the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany,        and

Japan,   covering 1953—1964 from Krsvis and Lipsey (1971), with interpolations
based on the other types of data, as explained for the came of Germany in

Kravis and Lipmey (1972). The second are the official    export price indexes

produced by the U.S., Germany,     and Japan, the latter two fairly comprehen-

sive, the first starting with the same coverage am the Kravis-Lipmey indexes

and gradually increasing in coverage over time until they are now quite

complete.   The third element of our indexes is more fragmentary export price

data published by the U.K., Sweden, and the Netherlands,    the last gradually

increasing in scope over the years. The fourth type of data is producer price

indexes end/or wholesale price indexes for all the countries mentioned above

end elmo for France and Canada. The fifth type is hedonic price indexes for a

few types of machinery and transport equipment in the United States.          These

are used in two ways.    The first is to fill in prices for some commodities for

which no official   published indexes exist. The second is as a substitute for

conventional price series in a very rough attempt at adjustment for quality

change, where we consider it appropriate and important.

    The various sources of data, of course, overlap extensively in commodity

coverage.    It is therefore necessary to assign price series to the Index by
                                       —7—
systems of priorities, determined by our view 55 to the appropristenessof

esch type of dsts as messures of export prices.     In the world price series or

those for developed    country exports to developing countries, the highest

priority is given to series representing prices in international trsde, first

the Kravis—Lipsey series and then official export price series. The second

priority is for producer or wholesale prices, and the third for the hedonic

price indexes.     Although we consider the hedonic price series more sppropriste

for our purposes    than the conventional series, we have not given them priority

because we wished to produce indexes from something close to conventional

data.   However,   we have also calculated an alternative index in which hedonic

price series are given priority,    and we consider that to be the beat estimate

we can make of the movement of prices of manufactured goods.

    In the export price indexes based oW each country's own export weights,

only export prices themselves are umed in each own-country index.     The indexes

for competing countries give export prices the first priority,    end producer or

wholesale prices the second, but no hedonic price indexes are used because

the hedonic price data are confined to the U.S.     The results would depend too

heavily on whether hedonic indexes were applied only to the U.S. or are

assumed to reflect similar changes in quality in other countries' exports.

    The domestic price indexes based on export weights use no export prices

and are based entirely on producer or wholesale prices.

    The precise sources of the price data are given in Appendix A.

Weighting Schemes and Missing Price Observations

    As was suggested in an earlier paper (Kravim and Lipaey, 1984), the

selection of systems of weighting is second only to the selection of basic

price data in determining the characteristics of the resulting price indexes.
                                             —8—
Several different methods have been used, implying different assumptions not

only sbout the importance to be given to commodities but also, ususlly inad-

vertently, sbout the behavior of prices for which dsta sre unsvailable.

    We can think of a set        of worldwide weights representing the values of

exports of each commodity (defined here as a four—digit SITC subgroup) from

each country (ij)'     to be    used in weighting price reistives showing changes

over time in individusl prices
                               (Pd).
    If we think of the weights in the form of a country by commodity matrix,

we have:




                                            Country                         Countries

    Commodity              1          2           3


         1                (011       (012      13                "lm          "iT

         2                "21        "22       "23               02m          "2T
         3                "31        "32       "33               3m           3T



         n                "ni        n2        0n3               0nm          nT

    Z Commodities         w-           T2      "13               Tm

   "11       +   "12    + (033 .     'nm =    W   = 1.00


    The most common method for        constructing    price   indexes for aggregates of

countries, such as those umed in models that call for "world" or "rest—of—

world" prices of export goods or traded goods, is to ume the publimhed
                                                —9—
country aggregate price indexea and to weight them together by some met of

weights representing the importance of each country in world trade. The impor-

tance of each country might be measured by the value of trade or, in some

csses,   by weights derived from a model. In terms of the mstrix above, these

aggregate indexes are of the type:



                               5            n
                   P     =     E            E
                              j1           i1
                                                wjjpjj
                                                WTJ


    It is usually uncertain in these calculations, since they do not go

behind published aggregates, what commodities are included with what com-

modity weights,        and with what base years. It is likely that many of the

country indexes lack proper representationof complex manufactured products.
given all these characteristics, it is not surprising if elasticities of

substitution or price elasticities of demand are found to be low or if no

significant relationships can be found.

    In an effort to overcome some of these problems,               we have, at times, calcu-

lated    indexes   for various countries         in which the same set of coaaodity weights

at the four-digit SITC level was applied to each country's prices.4                   The dif-

ferences between one country's aggregate price change and those of rival

countries were then more clearly attributable to differences in price changes

for the same products rather than to some aixture of these with differences in

the coverage or weighting of products.                In terms of the matrix above,    theme

price indexes were of the fore


                         m          n
              P    =     E          E
                              WTJ         (OiTPij
                        j=l         i=1
                                         —
                                             10 —

    Both of these types of indexes involve the same assumptions about the

nature of the commodities priced at the most detailed       level and about price


relationships, since each involves filling in missing price observations using

only data for the same country. The justification for starting with the calcu-

lation of country indexes is the assumption that missing prices tend to behave

in a similsr manner    to the average of other prices    in the same country for

commodities in the sase 3-digit,     2-digit,   or 1-digit comsodity classes.    These

methods, therefore, ignore the behavior of other countries' prices for the

same commodity, a difficult assumption to accept for anyone who believes price

movements in different countries are correlated at all.

    An alternative method of calculating world or other price       indexes aggre-


gated over countries would be



             =                    wjjPjj
                 i=1        j=1     iT


in which a world price index for each commodity would be calculated first,

and all these would then be aggregated across commodities using worldwide

commodity trade weights. This procedure would come closer to acceptance of

the law of one price than those outlined above, since it assumes that one

country's price for a commodity tends to move with the average of other

countries' prices for the same commodity. However,       it therefore    assumes that

there is no country—specific effect on s price change. Thus, e currency revs—

lustion is presumed to have no effect on the export price of the revaluing

country in comparison to that of others, s proposition we have found in our stu-

dies of international price behavior to be contradicted frequently.5

     A preliminary test of the two extreme assumptions,       reported    in Krmvis end
                                      —   11 —

Lipsey   (1984), was to compare the variance of price movements among countriea

at the 1—digit SITC level with the variance among 4-digit commodities within

1-digit commodity divisions within countries, using year-to-year price move-

ments for the U.S., Germany,   and Japan. The variance among countries within

1—digit claaaea waa larger than the variance among 4—digit commodities within

a   claaa within countries. The conclusion there was that "... if either country

alone or commodity alone had to be used aa the criterion for assigning missing

price observations, country would be a better choice." However, considerable

further tests would be needed to make a definitive judgment on this issue.

Estimating Missing Prices by the Country—ProductDummy Method

      Despite the range of sources from which we collected price data, it was

not possible to collect prices for every item for every country for every

year. The earlier studies by Kravis   and Lipsey adopted the almost universal

procedure of setting some minimum level of coverage for a group of com-

modities and, if that level was achieved, using the average price change for

covered commodities am an estimate of that for the whole group, assuming in

effect that the prices of uncovered items move, on average,   identically to

those of covered items. We continue to use this method for the individual

country price indexes based on own—country weights (Appendix C).

      Common though this procedure for estimating missing prices is, it discards

some probably pertinent information about the missing category:    the price

change for the corresponding product in other countries. We have therefore

used a different method for the developed country price indexes. This method,

referred to as the country—product dummy (CPD) method, was developed by Robert

Summers (1973) for use in estimating missing price levels for inter—country

price comparisons in the United Nations International Comparison Project
                                          —
                                              12 —

(ICP).     Its   purpose wss to use informstion on both country influences and pro-

duct influences on the price of e product to estimate each missing price. In

its original version, discussed by Sumsers, it involved regressions for com-

modity groups using natural logs of the price levels as the dependent

variable, and country and product dummies as the independent variables. There

was a product dummy variable for every product in the group, end a country

dummy variable for every country but one, which was designated the base

country.    The coefficient of a country dummy term for country      j   in one of these

equations represents the natural log of the ratio of the price level in this

commodity group in country j to the price level in the base country.            If we

tranalate the equation into natural numbers, the price level for country           j


appears as an exponent in the equation.

    We wished to estimate not only commodity group price changes but also the

price changes for each missing item.          We created am dense a price matrix as

possible at the 4—digit level as a first step, thereby permitting weighting

and reweighting as our needs changed.         We estimate the missing prices by using

the commodity dummy coefficients in conjunction with the country dummy coef-

ficients.    Because there is no dummy for the base country,      the commodity dummy

coefficients are estimates of the prices for thome commodities in the base

country. To estimate a price missing in the base country's data therefore, we

used the exponent of the appropriate commodity dummy. For any other country,

we multiplied the exponent of the coefficient for the product by that for the

country: we adjusted the "base" price for a commodity for the group price dif-

ference between the base country and the dummy country.

    In running the regressions, we had two procedural problems to resolve.

The first wam to define the commodity groupm within which we would run
                                            13 —
                                       —



regressions.    A group should be defined narrowly to make it as homogeneoum am

possible while still retaining sufficient degrees of freedom for a regresmion.

The 2-digit SITC categories were the starting         points, but some groups had too

few SITC subdivisions and others had too few available observations.

Therefore, in cases where the regression for a 2-digit group would have had

less than 10 degrees of freedom,    we pooled it with other small 2—digit groups

in the same 1—digit division.    The second problem was that data were so scarce

for certain countries in various years and groups that we felt that the esti-

mates for these countries would be statistically meaningless. Therefore, in

any one regression, we included only countries for which we had price data for

3   or more commodities within the group, as well as those for which even a

smaller number of iteem accounted for 30% of the group weight. The weights for

commodities and groups were based on 1963 OECD exports.         Theme procedures were

applied on a yearly basis, so that while two groups may have been combined             in

an early year because neither one included a sufficient number of obser-

vations,   they may have been treated meparately in a later year if the nuaber

of available prices increased. Similarly, a country excluded in one year eight

be included   in another if the coverage of its price data improved.

Aggregation of Detailed Price Indexes

      Once we had run regressions for every 2—digit group and year for which it

was feasible,    and the resulting price estimates were used to fill in any holes

at the 4-digit level, the 4—digit price indexes were weighted up to the

3—digit level.     Not every 3—digit group price index could be estimated by

aggregation. If the price index for        a   3-digit group was "missing"   because

there were not enough data at the 4-digit level, the index at the 3—digit

level wam estimated by the same regression procedure, where posmible.            After
                                           14 —
                                       —



the   3—digit estimates were added,   and the data were weighted up to the 2—digit

level,   regressions were run to estimate any missing 2—digit groups. In both

cases,   the weights used were 1963 OECD exports to the world.

      After filling in as such data as needed, we created a master price file

for each country that contained all the necessary data at every level. These

are the files we used, weighted together using various weights,     to create the

various price indexes for total developed country exports and developed-

country exports to developing countries reported here.


             III.   INDEXES OF "WORLD" EXPORT PRICES FOR MANUFACTURES


Weighting end Country Coverage

      We have calculated two aggregate price indexes for exports of manufactured

goods by developed countries, differing in their weighting but not in the

price series used. One is an index weighted by the value of all exports of

manufactures by developed countries, including their exports to each other.

The other is an index weighted by the value of exports by developed countries

to developing countries. The former is relevant     to issues such as the terms of

trade between manufactures and primary products,    and the letter is more rele-

vant to discussions of the terms of trade between developed end developing

countries.

       Both of these indexes were constructed with two sets of weights:   1963

exports by all OECD countries end 1975 exports by the same countries. The

developed market economies, a class almost equivalent to the OECD, accounted

for B2 per cent of the world's exports of manufactures in 1965, B4 per cent in

1975, and 78 per cent in 1985.   Of the exports by developed market economies,

those countries covered by our indexes (although not necessarily covered for
                                        —
                                            15 —

all   commodities) accounted for 77 per cent or, in other words, about 60 per

cent of world exports of manufactures.6

Effects of Differences in Time Period Used for Weighting

      Two time periods,   1963 mnd 1975, have been used to weight the price

indexes   for all developed-country exports and exports froe developed countries

to developing countries. If we compared the price movements between 1963 and

1975 derived from the two measures,     it would be equivalent to the familiar

comparison of Laspeyres and Paasche price indexes, with the index on the 1963

weight base the Laspeyres price index (or the one based on earlier weights)

and the index on the 1975 weight base the Paasche price index. An increase          in

the 1963-based index relative to the 1975-based index would imply a negative

covariance between prices and quantities,      while a relative increase   in the

1975—based index would imply    a   positive covariance. We could associate the

negative covariance with a situation in which events were dominated by changes

in supply, with demand relatively stable.          The positive covarianca implies a

situation dominated by changes in demand, with supply relatively stable.7

       The differences in the trend of prices produced by the ahift in weight

base from 1963 to 1975 were as follows:
                                        -    16    -


                                    Export    Price    Index for All Manufactures,    1988

                                                          (1953=100)

                                     OECO Export Weights of

                                            1963         1975      1963/1975

     All Developed Countries                444.8       423.3          105.1

       U.S.                                 383.5        373.0         102.8

       Germany                              573.8       558.0          102.8

       Japan                                372.0        354.7         104.9


    Source:   Appendix Tables 61, B2, 65, 66, 89, 810, 613, 614.


In every case, the index with a later weight base rose less than the one with

an earlier base, implying the dominance of changes in supply and substitution

in favor of products for which price incresses were relatively small.                The

difference was larger in the index for all countries than in any of those for

individual    countries.   That fact implies thst in addition          to substitution

among commodities, there was also substitution smong countries             in favor of

those with relatively declining prices, presumsbly those in which productivity

and export supply were incressing most rapidly.

    Despite the fact that there were wide divergences among the countries in

the size of the increase     in prices over the period as s whole,         the effects on

the price indexes of chsnging weights were fairly small, rsnging only from

3 per cent for the US snd Germany to 5 per cent for Japan. That narrow range

reflects the fact that the same weights are used for all the countries'

indexes.   In the case of the export price indexes based on own—country weights,

shown in Appendix C, the differences are considerably larger, ranging from 3

per cent for Germany to 9 per cent for Japan and the U.S.              All the indexes
                                                 17 —
                                             —



show a larger price increase for the series using the earlier weight base,

implying    dominance by supply changes and substitution toward products

falling in price, and there was apparently sore substitution,                    or a wider

range of price changes,        within U.S. and Japanese exports than within German

exports or those of all developed countrie as a group.

     The relationship between indexes based on the two sets of weights varied

somewhat among commodity divisions. In most cases, the later weight base was

associated with a smaller price increase, but there were some exceptionm, em

can be seen below,


                                  Export Price Indexes for 1-Digit SITC Classes, 1988

                                                         (1953 = 100)

                                     Index on 1963 weights/Index on 1975 weights


                                                                SI TC

                                         5                6               7              8



     All Countries                     1.056             .ggo           1.113          1.018

          U.S.                         1.076             .979           1.035          1.042

          Germany                      1.075            1.003           1.044          1.049

          Japan                        1.046            1.031           1.023          1.041


     Source, Appendix Tables 81, 82, 65, 66, 69, 610, B13, 814


The cases in which the earlier set of weights led to lower price index changes

were in SITC      6,   which consists mainly of semimanufactures.               In that group,   for

the United States, changes in prices and in guantities were positively corre-

lated,    implying     the likelihood that the price changes were dominated by


changes    on the demand side rather than the supply side.
                                               18 —
                                           —



Export Prices to the World end to Developino Countries
      Since the composition of exports to developing countries might be dif-

ferent from that of exports to other countries, it is conceivable that they

faced larger or smaller price increases than other buyers. That poamibility is

examined below for manufactured goods as a whole and the four major categories

of manufactures.


                                      Export Price Index,      1988 (1953 = 100)

                                      1983 Weights                 1975 Weights

                                          Exports to                   Exports to
                                     All          Developing      All         Developing

                                  Countries      Countries     Countries     Countries


All Manufactures                    445               423        423                403

     SITC 5                         363               365        344            341

     SITC 6                         432               413        437                418

     SITC 7                         476               456        428            425

     SITC 6                         438               392        430                364


     Source:   Appendix Tables 81 through 84



      In most cases,   exports to the world (and therefore exports to the deve-

loped world to a greater degree) increased more rapidly in price over the

three and a half decades than exports to developing countries. That was the

case for sanufectured products as a whole, and for SITC divisions 6, 7, and

8.    The largest differences, over 10 per cent, were in SITC 8, a category

in which the developing countries were themselves substantial            exportera.
                                        —   19 —

   An earlier version of the price indexes for exporta to developing

countriea was compared,     in Krsvis and Lipsey       (1984), to the UN unit value

index for manufactures that ia customarily used for calculations of manufac-

tured goods prices and terma of trade.         The conclusion was that pricea of manu-

factured goods exported by developed countries           to developing countries had

risen much lesa than had been suggested by the unit value indexes,              something

in the neighborhood of 75 per cent over the period from 1953 to 1976, as com-

pared with 140 per cent for the unit value index. About a half of the dif-

ference stemmed from the corrections for quality change and the other half

from some mixture of differences in the type of price data used (pricea vs.

unit values),    in index number formulas, and in country coverage.           The different

price measure for manufactured goods also implied, of course,             a   larger decline

in the terms of trade of manufactured goods           relative   to primary products than

had been shown by the unit value indexes.

Adjustments for Quality Change

    The proper treatment in a price index of changes in the quality of goods

has been a controversial issue for many years. A considerable amount of work

has been done,    particularly by the application of hedonic methods,           to adjust

domestic price indexes for changes in quality that are supposedly not ade-

quately accounted     for, even in price indexes gathered         with considerable atten-

tion to quality specifications. Most of thia research             has been directed to

consumer and producer capital goods, almost all of which are included in

SITC   7   of our product range.

    Almost     no empirical attention   has been given        to the same issue in connec-

tion with prices in international       trade,     although    speculations on the effects
                                       —   20    —


of   omitting quality change have pleyed a role in discussions of the long—run

trends in the terms of trsde (Haberler,         1959; Viner,   1953, p. 114). The only

direct applications of hedonic methods to international trade prices that we

are aware of, mainly for deriving price level comparisons, were in Kravis and

Lipaey (1971). In a study of the terms of trade between manufactures and pri-

mary products, Kravia and Lipmey (1984) used hedonic indexes constructed for

domestic prices to adjust indexes of export prices of manufactured goods, and

we follow similar procedures here.

      There are many possible ways of using these domestic price adjustments

for quality to correct international    price indexes.         Since these calculations

have been performed only for domestic prices, it is necessary to assume that

any adjustments in domestic prices were equally applicable to U.S. export pri-

ces. The hedonic price indexes are available only for the United States, and

for only a few commodity groups even for the U.S.          Therefore, the adjustments

we make in the    U.S. indexes are probably minimal,      and those for the world can

be considered to be no more than rough approximations that give some notion of

the direction end range of conceivable quality corrections.

     One possibility would be to assume that the adjustments apply only to the

U.S..     If the quality adjusted U.S. indexes mre combined with conventional

indexes for other countries, the result         is a very conservative estimate of the

effect of such adjustments on world or developed country export price move-

ments.    That estimmte of the quality change omitted from conventional measures,

provided by the meriea demcribed below ma "adjusted for U.S. only," is conser-

vative in several respects. One is that it assumes that the upwmrd bias in

price indexes from this source effects only the U.S. data, an unlikely possi-

bility.    Another is that most of the hedonic price indexes end with 1983, and
                                        —    21 —

no adjustment can be made for later years in even those groups for which it

was performed earlier. A third reason is that       a   number of price indexes that

should be corrected for quality change were not, because appropriate indexes

were not available.

    The procedure of correcting only U.S. prices is likely to leave an upward

bias in a world price index.      Ideally,   we would like to have similar hedonic

price measures for all countries, but failing that, we believe it is more

appropriate to assume that any quality adjustsent applied to, for example,

U.S. computer and parts prices,     is equally applicable to the corresponding

prices of other countries than to assume that the unmeasured quality change is

confined to the U.S.    Also,   on this assusption, if an otherwise empty cell for

computer prices is filled in one country by a hedonic price index, it should

be filled in the other countries     by thiThane type of index. The assumption

implied by that procedure is that the law of one price in time—to—time form,

poor as we have found its predictions to be (Kravis and Lipmey, 1978), still

provides a better guess for these products than the assumption that, for

example,   computer prices in countries other than the U.S. move with all other

prices in those countries. The indexes based on the assumption of identical

price movements in all countries for products for which hedonic price indexes

were used are described below as "adjusted for all countries."

    This procedure of assuming identical price changem for a product in dif-

ferent countries is at variance with the method implied by our earlier conclu-

sion that country influences, rather than commodity influences, were dominant

in determining price changes. However,        that conclusion reflected mainly the

impact of exchange rate changes and differences in inflation rates on price

aoveaentm. The application of identical quality adjumtaenta to a commodity in
                                            —   22 —

different     countries reflects our judgment that radical changes in technology

in an industry auch as computers, for example, probably outweigh the country

influences on price changes.         That judgment is influenced partly by the fact

that   a   substantial part of exports of machinery from countries outside the

U.S., especially in the cosputer industry,             originates in subsidiaries of U.S.

firms, and therefore embodies U.S. technological            developments.

       The effect of the quality adjustment applied to a few groups in SITC 7,

Machinery and Transport Equipment,         can be seen from the following    comparison:


                                           Ratio of 1988 to 1953 World Export Price

                                           of Manufactures, With and Without Quality

                                                     Adiustments: 1975 Weights

             All Manufactures

                 OECD Export Weights

                        Unadjusted                            423.3

                        Adjusted for U.S. only                406.7

                        Adjusted for all countries            361.1


             SITC   7


                 OECD Export Weights

                        Unadjusted                            427.7

                        Adjusted for U.S. only                389.0

                        Adjusted for all countries             310.9


    Source: Appendix Tables B2 and 819


       If the adjustment is performed only for the U.S., the effect on the world

export price index for manufactures is fairly small: only about .15 per cent
                                        —   23 —

per year for aanufactures as a whole and about         .25 per cent per year for SITC

7. If the corresponding quality adjustments are spread to other countries, the

effect is multiplied. For manufactures as      •a   whole,   it is almost a half of one

per cent per year, and for SITC 7 it reaches almost one per cent per year.

    The quality adjustments for manufactures as a whole would be larger for an

index based on U.S., or especially Japanese, export weights because SITC 7 is

more important in the exports of those countries than in those of developed

countries as a group.

    These adjustments are too gradual and not large enough to produce a dif-

ferent picture from the standard one of short-term fluctuations in the terms

of trade between manufactures end primery products,          or the termm of trade of

individual countries. They are large enough, and sufficiently constant in

direction, to give a very different story about long—term trends in prices and
terms of trade.


           IV.   INDEXES OF EXPORT PRICES, EXPORT PRICE COMPETITIVENESS,

                         AND CORRESPONDING DOMESTIC PRICES


     The price indexes in Appendix B for all developed country exports of

manufactures and for exports by developed countries to developing countries

are constructed from indexes for individusl         countries   that are all based on

the same set of weights.    However,   these are weights that reflect the impor-

tance of products in world trade as a whole rather than in the trade of each

country.   To explain the exports of a single country, such as the U.S., we con-

sider an index based on that country's export weights more relevant. For this

purpose, we have constructed price indexes for each country's exports that are

based on the weight of aach product in the country's exports.           We have then
                                        —
                                            24 —

constructed price     indexes for competitors based on the sese set of weights.

Thus, for the U.S., we hsve en export price index end s competitors' price

index,   both bssed on U.S. export weights.    All of these ere shown in

Appendix C.

    For the individual country, the price index is s conventional export price

measure,   but unlike the indexes in Appendix B, which use domestic prices where

export prices are unavailable,     these include only export price data. The index

of competitors' prices is, in the came of the U.S., weighted by the same U.S.

export weights as the U.S. export price but includes both export price data

and, where they are not available, domestic        price data, am in the indexes of

Appendix B. That procedure produces manufactured goods price indexes for

Germany,   Japan,   and other countries with U.S. export weights.   To explain the

exports of the U.S.     itself, or its share via—a-vim the rest of the world,   we

combine these competitors'     price indexes on U.S.    weights into a mingle rest—

of—world price index. The weight for a competitor country in this index is the

mum of the total manufactured exporta of the country to destinations other

then the U.S., to represent the competition in world markets outside the com-

petitor country end the U.S., end total U.S.        exports to the competitor

country,   to represent competition with U.S. exports in that country's home

market.

     The same procedure ia followed to produce individual country end neat—of—

world indexes for the exports of Germany end Japan.

    One way to use theme indexes ia to ask what they show about the export

price movements for each country relative to those of competitors. For

example, if we separate the period into that preceding the Smithsonian

agreements of 1971 end that from 1971 to the low point in the exchange value
                                           —   25 —

of   the U.S. dollar in 1980, we find the following eatimates of changes in
                                                                            pri-
cea and relative prices.


                              Changes in Own and Competitors'         Export Price Indexes,

                                          1953 to 1971 and 1971 to 1980

                                                      (Ratio x 100)



                                        1971/1953                        1980/1971

                                 U.S.   Germanya 18P8n            U.S.   Germany     5Qj3

Export Price Index              146.5     147.9        93.0      176.4    306.2      231.1

Competitors' Price Index        123.7    118.5        123.9      272.9    249.6      252.6

  Ratio:    Own/Competitors     118.4     124.8        75.1       64.6    122.7       91.5


  a197]]1954


  Source:   Appendix Tables 04 through C6


      Both the U.S. and German export prices rose from 1953 to 1971 relative to

those of other countries that sold the same export products. Japanese prices

fell enormously relative to those of its competitors during the same period,

with a decline of 25 per cent in relative prices. From 1971 to 1980, the U.S.

gained greatly on its competitors, with a fall of more than a third in rela-

tive prices. Japanese relative prices also fell during this period, although

not as much as those of the U.S., while German relative prices continued to

increase.

      The corresponding changes for the period of the rapidly rising exchange

value of the dollar, which we can mark out as 1980 to 1985 in these annual

average data, and the subsequent period of the declining dollar, are shown

below:
                                        —
                                            26 —

                            Changes in Own and Competitors'         Export Price Indexes,

                                       1980 to 1985 and 1985 to 1988

                                                   (Ratio x 100)



                                     1985/1980                            1988/1985

                              U.S.   Germary       pjj             U.S.    Germany


Export   Price   Index       125.5       74.2        94.9      110.1         172.3       150.2

Compatitors' Price Index      82.1      94.6        87.8       160.6         140.3       146.6
  Ratio: Own/Coapetitora 152.9           78.4      108.1           68.6      122.8       102.5


  Source: Appendix Tables C4 through C6


The indexes show a large increase in relative U.S. prices during the rise of

the dollar and a sharp decrease during the next three years, with the net

result being some increase over the eight years. The movements for Germany

were the reverse of those for the U.S., but involved a small overall decrease

in relative prices. The changes for Japan were a relative price increase in

1980 to 1985, despite the rise in value of the $US, and an additional                 increase
after that, quite seal] considering the sharp increase in the exchange value

of the yen.

    Perhaps the most surprising feature of these price measures              is the

apparent relative increase in German prices after 1985 without a corresponding

reflection in German export shares. One possible reason for this seeming lack

of response to price changes is that.Germen exports gained from the growth and

enlargement of the EEC.     Another is that the omission of Italian and Belgian

prices froe our measures,    along with poor coverage of French prices, par-

ticularly of machinery in the earlier years, may have caused these indexes for
                                        —
                                            27 —

German competitors'   prices   to be biased upwards.

    These relative price indexes are similar to those we have referred to

elsewhere as indexes of price competitiveness (Kravis and Lipsey, 1971),

although the price competitiveness measures        were based on OECD weights for the

individual countries, as are those for individual        countries in Appendix B of

this paper. The relation between these measures        and broader concepts   of com-

petitiveness, including "nonprice" aspects, was discussed in the earlier work.

The "price competitiveness" measures were not intended to encompass all the

economic influences on that broader concept,        although the price measures must

reflect some of the broad movements in relative productivity and costs that

are part of changes in a country's competitiveness. We think of relative price

changes,   as we have measured thea, as useful for reduced form trade equations.

In more structural trade models, the export price changes become endogenous

variables in supply equations.8

     Even if these indexes have a more logical basis than the ones usually

used to analyze trade, an obvious question is whether they produce any more

reliable estimates of elasticities or better explanations of the flow of

trade.   An authoritative answer to that question could only come from attempta

to use these measures in various types of trade equations and models of trade.

We can report on a few experiments along these lines with earlier versions of

the indexes.

     In one of these experiments (Kravis and Lipsey,        1974), we estimated

elasticities of substitution between U.S. and German exports of metals, machi—

nery, and transport equipment to third-country markets using,        as alternative

price measures, indexes of the type constructed here from export price datm

and indexes based entirely on domestic prices. We considered the test to be
                                            —
                                                28 —

more favorable    to the doaestic   price       indexea than a comparison based on the

usual published indexes because we reweighted the domestic prices by inter-

national trade weights to match the export price indexes.

     The results of the comparison were that the degree of explanation was

between twice and three times as greet in equations using the export price

indexes,    and the elasticity estimates were much higher. Furthermore, the

response of relative exports was almost the same for a change in U.S. prices

as for a change in German prices, while in the equation based on domestic pri-

ces, the elasticities were quite different.

     A later version of these indexes covering machinery and transport equip-

ment was used in Bushe, Kravis, and Lipsey (1986) to explain changes in U.S.,

German,    end Japanese exports. It is difficult to compare the results with

those of other studies because of differences in commodity coverage and time

periods, but one conclusion was that the differences among countries in price

elasticities were smaller than had been estimated using other price data.

However,    we could not be sure whether our use of more accurate price data or

our confining the comparison to the same range of commodities was the explana-

tion for the greater similarity of elasticity coefficients. Another conclusion

was that lags in price effects on U.S. exports were much longer, extending out

to 4 years, than those in most previously estimated export equations, and that

     the United States might have to wait a long time for any relief from the

effecta of the high value of the dollar in the eid—1980s."

Margins on Export and Domestic Sales

    We have alao calculated (Appendix C) domestic price indexes for exported

manufactured goods for the U.S., Germany, and Japan, using each country's ex-

port price weights. These data can be used to examine changes in the ratio of
                                       -    29 —

export    to domestic prices for each country.     If coats for domestically sold and

exported goods changed identically,    that ratio reflects the direction        of

change in gross profit margins in export as compared with domestic salem and

also,    if domestic price movements are a good proxy for cost changes,        the

direction of change in export margins themselves. With the extreme volatility

of exchange rates that has characterized the 1980s, and the observation that

prices of Japanese goods in the United States have not risen in line with the

depreciation of the dollar since 1985, there has been        a   renewal of interest     in

this issue with- several studies of changes in the export/domesticprice margin

or "pricing to market" (Krugman,    1987;   Marston,   1989; Mann,   1986).   However,

as noted below, the phenomenon of pricing to market was evident to some degree

in earlier periods,    although not as dramatically as in the years since 1985.

        On the whole, we would expect relative declines in export margins in

periods when the exchange value of the currency is increasing or, more

generally, when domestic prices are rising sore rapidly than those of com-

petitors.     We would expect rising margins in periods of falling currency

values or falling relative domestic prices.

    The results for the U.S. from 1953 to 1980 do not give much support to

these expectations. U.S. export prices hardly changed relative to domemtic

prices from 1953 to 1971 when U.S. prices were rising relatively, and they

declined relative to export prices in 1971 to 1980 as U.S. prices fell-with

the depreciation of the dollar.
                                       —
                                           30 —

                          Changes in Export and Domestic Prices of Export Goods,

                                       1953 to 1971 and 1971 to 1980

                                                (Ratio    x   100)



                                    1971/1953                               1980/1971

                             U.S.    Germany                         U.S.   Germany     2an
Export Price Index          145.5     147.9        93.0          176.4        306.2     231.1

Domestic Price Index        145.8     165.0        88.2          210.9       306.3      243.0

  Ratio:   Export/Domestic 100.5       89.6       105.4              83.6     100.0     95.1


    Source:   Appendix Tables C4 through C6


    The export/domestic price ratios for Germany and Japan did move in the

expected direction during the period of mostly fixed exchange rates from 1953

to 1971. In the first period of changing exchange rates, 1971 to 1980, the

German ratio was stable even as German relative prices increased,                end the

Japanese ratio fell even while Japanese prices were declining relative to

those of competitors. That was a period in which Japan was under great

pressure to expand exports to offset the rise in petroleum import costs.

    The 1980 to 1985 period of great exchange rate turbulence and rising

exchange value of the dollar saw somewhat surprising changes in

export/domestic price ratios. U.S. export prices rose relative to domestic

prices despite a large increase     in U.S. export prices relative to competitors.

German export prices fell relative to domestic prices, although German export

prices were falling relative to those of other countries.               And Japanese export

prices hardly changed in comparison to domestic          prices while they were rising

relative to foreign countries' prices.
                                         —
                                             31 —

    The dollar depreciation in the following period was accompanied by a rise,

asexpected, in the export/domestic price ratio in the U.S., but it was a

small    one. There were also the expected declines          in export/dosestic price

ratios in both Germany and Japsn, the forser quite small.

                           Changes in Export and Dosestic Prices of Export Goods,

                                        1980 to 1985 and 1985 to 1988

                                                    (Ratio   x   1GO)



                                     1985/198G                             1988/1985

                            U.S.    Germany                         U.S.   Germany


Export    Price Index       125.5     74.2       94.9             110.1     172.3      150.2

Domestic Price Index        120.2     79.5       95.5             107.7     174.3      175.2

  Ratio: Export/Domestic 104.4        93.3       99.4             102.2     98.9       86.7


    Source:     Appendix Tables C4 through C6


That 14 per cent fall in the export/domesticprice ratio for Japan between

1985 and 1988 suggests that there must have been a vary large decline in rela-

tive margins on exports.

    A similar sat of identically weighted export and domestic price indexes

was used in Kravis and Lipsey (1977a and 1977b) to study separately the impact

of exchange—rate changes and of differences in inflation rates between

countries on ratios of export to domestic prices from the early 1950s through

the mid—1970s. We interpretad changes in those ratios, as we do here, as evi-

dence of changes in margins on export sales relative to those on domestic

sales.     U.S. export margins appear to be sensitive to changes in the U.S.

exchange rate with the    Dli   and the Yen, and also to changes in relative infla—
                                       —
                                           32 —

tion   rates between the U.S.   and the U.K.      German export margins were less

well explained but responded to differences in inflation        rates between Germany

and the U.S., the U.K., Japan, and France. Japanese export margins,        in the

period of more stable exchange    rates,   responded   more to European and U.S.

business cycle movements than to exchange rates, but in the 19705 began to

respond to exchange rate changes as well. The reactions to exchange        rates and

inflation rates could be summarized as a consistent response to changes in

real exchange rates, over the whole period for the U.S. and Germany, and in

the 1970s for Japan as well.     The estimates covering all Japanese manufactures

for whet Merston (1989) refers to as PTM elasticities, are somewhat        lower then

his for individual products in the 1980s, but suggest that the phenomenon is

not a new one.

Concluding Remarks

    Aside from the indexes for 1953—1964,       drawn at least partially from our

own date collection, all the indexes shown here are calculated from official,

publicly available, date. Therefore, aside from possible additions to the

country coverage mentioned earlier,    further updating of the weighting, end a

shift to e quarterly basis in place of the annual indexes presented here, most

mejor improvements in the date would require actions by the official        agencies

producing the date. An exception, open to outside scholars,        might be en exten-

sion of the hedonic price calculations to countries other then the United

States.

    Among the improvements in the official date thet would be useful would be

extension of the coverege of price series in countries for which there are

major gaps in the deta. French dete ere among the poorest in this respect

among the countries we cover.    In addition,     the cmlculmtion of export end
                                           —   33 —

import price indexes based on     price,       rather than unit value, data,   is still

confined to a small group of countries, although the recent attention to

"pricing—to—market'     and pass—through issues suggests that there is a great

deal to be learned by having separate dosestic and international price data.

    There are, in addition,     two other types of issues involving the quality of

official   price data that have not been extensively addressed, although both

were discussed in Kravis and Lipsey (1971). One is the treatment of intracom—

pany trade which, with the increase in the internationalizationof firms and

the increasing share in trade of the kinds of products in which international

transactions tend to be internal     to firms, is now a very large part of deve-

loped countries' trade. It is not clear to what degree the prices reported for

such trade are artificial and to what degree they therefore distort export and

import price measures.    The principle suggested in Kravim and Lipsey (1971) wam

to ume the price in the first arms length male in a country in preference to


intracompany prices, where that is possible, and we still believe that is the

appropriate practice.    For a U.S. export, for example,        it would be the price at

which the U.S. wholesale or retail trade affiliate in           a   country mold the pro-
duct rather than the price at which a U.S. manufacturer sold to its overseas

subsidiary. And for a U.S. import it would be, for example, the price at which

a Japanese car was sold to an unaffiliated buyer in the U.S. rather than the

price at which the Japanese manufacturer "mold" it to its U.S. sales

affiliate.

    Another type of question is raised by the very small extent to which U.S.

firms admit selling at different prices at home and abroad, in contrast to the

large differences reported by foreign firsm. While it is conceivable that U.S.

company trading policies are very different           in this respect   from those of
                                          -   34   —


other    countries, it is slso possible thst since the export snd domestic prices

are collected by the same agency in rsther similar ways, companies tend to

report    the same prices. For this reason, as well as others that have at times

been suggested to price collection agencies, even for dosestic
                                                               price collec-
tion, it would   be wise to   collect   prices not only from sellers,   but also from

purchasers.
                                              —    35 —

                                           References



Angermann, Oswald (1980), "External Terms of Trade of the Federal Republic

    of Germany Using Different Methods of Deflation," Review of Income and

    Wealth, Series 26, No.        4,    December.

Arndt,    Sven W., and   3.   David Richardson (1987), Real—Financial               Linkages   Among

    Open Economies, Cambridge, MIT Press, pp. 49—70.

Baldwin,    Richard E. (1988), "Hysteresis in Import Prices: The Beachhead

    Effect," American Economic Review, Vol. 78, No. 4, September, pp. 773-86.

Bushe,    Dennis M., Irving B. Kravis, and Robert E. Lipsey (1986), "Prices,

    Activity,    and Machinery Exports:           An Analysis Based on New Price Data,"

    Review of Economics        and Statistics, Vol. LXVIII.            No. 2, May, pp. 248-255.

Cartwright, David W. (1986), "ImprovedDeflation of Purchases of Computers,"

    Survey of Current Business, Vol. 66, No. 3, March.

Cartwright, David W., and Scott 0. Smith (1988), "Deflators for Purchases of

    Computers in GNP: Revised and Extended                Estimates,    1983—88,"    Survey of

    Current Business, Vol. 68, No. 11, November.

Crouhy—Veyrac, Liliane,        Michel    Crouhy,    and Jacques Melitz (1980), "More About

    the Law of One Price," Institut           National     de la Statistique et des Sciences

    Economique, Série des documents de travail,                No. 8002, March.

Dornbusch, Rudiger (1987), "Exchange Rates and Prices," American Economic

    Review,     Vol. 77, No. 1, March,       pp. 93—106.

Goldstein, Morris, and Mohsin S. Khan (1985), "Income and Price Effects in

    Foreign Trade," in Jones and Kenen (1985), Vol. II, pp. 1041—1105.

Gordon,    Robert J. (1990), The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices, Chicago,

    University of Chicago Press.
                                         —   36 —

Haberler,    Gottfried (1959), International    Trade and Econoaic Development,

    50th Anniversary Commemoration Lectures, National        Bank of Egypt.

Jones,    Ronald W., and Peter B. Kenen (1985), Handbook of International

    Economics, Amsterdam, North Holland.

Kalter,    R.J.   (1978), "The Effect of Exchange   Rate Changes Upon International

    Price Discrisination," International Finance Discussion Papers 122, Board

    of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.

Kravis,    Irving B., and Robert E. Lipsey (1971), Price Competitiveness in

    World Trade, New York, National Bureau of Economic Research.

_________________ and ________________ (1972), "The Elasticity of

    Substitution as a Variable in World Trade," in Donald J. Daly, Ed.,

    International Comparisons of Prices and Output, Studies in Income and

    Wealth, Vol. 37, New York, National Bureau of Economic Research,

    pp. 369—398.

__________________ and ________________ (1974), "Export Prices and Price

    Proxies," in Nancy 0. Ruggles (Ed.), The Role of the Computer in Economic

    and Social Research in Latin America,       New York, National Bureau of

    Economic Research.

_________________ and _______________          (1977a), "Export   Prices and the

    Transmission of Inflation," American Economic Review, Vol. 67, No. 1,

    February,      pp. 155—163.

_________________ and _______________          (1977b), "Export and Domestic   Prices

    Under Inflation and Exchange Rate Movements," NBER Working Paper 176, May.

________________and ______________ (1978),"Price Behavior in the Light
    of Balance of Payments Theories," Journal of International Economics,

    May.
                                              37 —

Kravis,    Irving B., Robert E. Lipsey, and Dennis Bushe (1980), "Prices and

    Market Share in International Machinery Trade," NBER Working Paper 521,

    July.

Kravis,    Irving B., and Robert E. Lipsey (1982), "Prices and Market Shares in

    the International Machinery Trade," Review of Economics and Statistics,

    Vol. LXIV,     No. 1, February,    pp. 110—116.

______________________________________ (1984), "Prices and Terms of Trade for

    Developed Country Exports of Manufactured Goods," in Bela Csikos-Nsgy,

    Douglas Hague, and Graham Hall, eds. The Economics of Relative Prices,

    New York, St. Martin's Press, pp. 415—445.

Krugman,    Paul   (1987), "Pricing to Market When the Exchange Rate Changes,"            in

    Arndt and Richardson (1987).

Lipsey,    Robert E. (1963), Price end Quantity Trends in Foreign Trade of the

    United States,        Princeton, Princeton University Press for the NBER.

Mann, Catherine     I..   (1986), "Prices,   Profit   Margins,     and Exchange Rates,"

    Federal    Reserve Bulletin,      Vol. 72, No.    6,   June,   pp. 366—379,

Merston,    Richard (1989), "Pricing to Market in Japanese Manufacturing,"

    NBER Working Paper 2905, March.

Murphy,    Edward E. (1972), "A Comparison of the Bureau of Labor Statistics'

    Indexes of Export Prices for Selected U.S. Products with Unit Value and

    Wholesale Price Indexes,"         1971 Proceedings of the Business and Economic

    Statistics Section,        American Statistical Association.

National Bureau of Economic Research, Price Statistics Review Committee

     (1961), The Price Statistics of the Federal Government, Report to the

    Office of Statistical Standards, Buresu of the Budget, New York, NBER.

Norsworthy, J,R., and Show—Ling Jang (1990), "Cost Function Estimation of
                                       —   38 —

    Quality   Change Embodied in Inputs: The Use of Semiconductors in Computers

    and Telecommunications Equipment," Paper prepared     for NBER Conference on

    Research in Income and Wealth Workshop on Price Measurements and Their

    Uses, March 22 and 23, Washington, DC.

Ohno, Kenichi   (1989), "Export Pricing Behavior   of Manufacturing: A U.S.—Japsn

    Comparison," Internstionsl Monetsry Pund Staff Papers, Vol. 36, No. 3,

    September, pp. 550-579.

Rostin, W. (1974), "Die Indices der Aussenhsndelspreisesuf Bssis 1970,"

    Wirtschsft und Ststistik, 6, pp. 387—394.

Summers,   Robert (1g73), "Internstionsl    Price Comparisons based upon


    Incomplete Data," Review of Income snd Wealth, Series 19, No.      1,   March,

    pp. 1—16.

Viner,   iscob (1953), Internstionsl   Trade and Economic Development, Lectures

    Delivered at the Nstionsl    University of Brazil, Oxford, Clsrendon Press.
                                         —    39 —

            Robert   E. Lipsey,   Linda Molinari,     and Irving B. Kravia


                                       Footnotes


   1See, for example,    NBER Price Statistics Review Committee         (1961), Krevis and

Lipsey (1971) and (1974), and Murphy (1972).

   2The profit margin interpretation and the literature on the related

"pass—through" issue are reviewed in Mann (1966).

   3We define manufactures here as divisions 5 through 8 of the SITC Re-

vision 1. The most serious omission for comparison with domestic industrial

data is of manufactured foods, although there are also some other minor

oeismionm, some of which were rectified in Revision          2   of the SITC. We did not

adopt them here because the indexes could not be recalculated to match the

later classification without a major effort.

   4Krevim and Lipsey (1972),      (1977a),   (1977b) and (1962) and Bushe, Kravis

end Lipsey (1986).

   5For example, Kravis and Lipsey (1978).

   5Within the developed market economy groups, of the $217 billion of manu-

factures exports by countries we did not cover, the largest omitted country

was Itmly, with $68 billion in exports, followed by Belgium/Luxembourgwith

$40 billion end Switzerland with $32 billion. Other European countriem, for

which at least some detailed domestic producer or wholesale price date could

probably be obtained with sufficient efforts, were the mourcem of another $67

billion. Thus, Europe am a whole accounted           for 95 per cent of the manufactured

exports of developed market econoimiem that we did not cover.

    Of the $265 billion in manufactured exports by other groups of countries

in 1965,   22 per cent of the total, over 60 per cent were exports by developing

countries, and the rest were from centrally planned economies. The $167
                                        -   40 —

billion   from developing countriem were concentrated in Southeast Amian

countriem. More than 40 per cent were from Hong Kong, Korea, and Singapore,

and the concentration in Amia would be even higher if the figurem included

Taiwan, omitted from UN tabulationa.

   7For a detailed dimcumaion of the relationship to the covariancem,   mee

Lipmey (1963), pp. 85-90.

   800ldmtein and Khan (1985). For an example uaing our price data, mee

Kravim,   Lipmey,   and Buahe (lgBO).
                                       -41—
           Robert E. Lipsey, Linda Molinari,   and Irving B. Krevis


                                    APPENDIX A

                               Sources of Price Date

Export Prices

    The German price data appear in Statistisches Bundesast, Preiae, Löhne,

Wirtschaftarechnungen,Reihe 1, Preise and Preisindizea fUr Aussenhandela—

gUter.    A brief description is given in Angersann (1980), and in articles in

Wirtschaft und Statistik, such as Rostin (1974). The Japanese export
                                                                     price
data are published in the Price Indexes Annual, earlier the Export and Import

Price Indexes Annual, of the Bank of Japan. The U.S. export price data are

from releases of the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics entitled,         "U.S. Import

and Export Price Indexes." A brief description of these is given in

Comparisons of U.S., Germen, and Japanese Export Price Indexes, BLS Bulletin

2046,    1980.

    Export price data for other countries were sore fragsentary. Two publica-

tions of the Central Bureau of Statistics of the Netherlands,         Maandstatistiek
van de Binnenlandse Handel and Bijvoegsel Pleendstatistiek van de Prijzen,

provided export price data with incomplete but increasing coverage.

    For the U.K., there are virtually no export price data outside thm period

covered by Kravia and Lipaey (1971). The exception is a set of export price

indexes for products in SITC 7 for 1976 through 1979, part of an experimental

program that was later discontinued.

    Swedish export prices are reported in various issues of publications of

the Central Bureau of Statistics, the latest of which is "Pricindex i

producent—och importled 1988" (1989). Soae of the indexes are based on unit

value data, and we tried to avoid using these as far as possible,        preferring
                                         —   42   —


the   data on doaestic prices aentioned below.

Domestic Prices

      For Canads, wholessle price indexes sre from tapes provided          by Statistics

Canada.

      Domestic price data for the U.S. were price series at the most detailed

level from a BLS Wholesale Price Index tape.            For the U.K., some individual

series were collected from publications of the Board of Trade and the

Department of Trade and Industry. However,            the U.K. did not publish indivi-

dual series for most machinery or "engineering" groups for many years. For

these,    we used a set of   indexes at the two—digit       SITC level calculated for us

by the Board of Trade from detailed price data using DECD weights we supplied.

For later years, we could not obtain these series and were obliged to use a

similar set of two—digit indexes calculated by the Department of Trade and

Industry based on U.K. export weights.        For more recent periods,     beginning in

the 197Dm, fairly detailed price indexes for machinery have been published in

annual    price articles such as "Wholesale Price Indices in 1981," in British

Business, 7 May 1982, and "Wholesale Prices in 1982," in British Business,

S May 1983.

      The German domestic price indexes are individual          series published   in


Preise,    Ldhne, Wirtschaftarechnungen,Reihe 3, Preise und Preisindixes für

industrielle Produkte,       Index der Erzeugerpreise,      and Reihe 8, Index der

Grosshandelsverkaufspreise(StatistischesBundesamt, Wieabaden). The Japanese

domestic price indexes are also individual            series from the Price Indexea

Annual     and the Wholesale Price Indexes Annual, published by the Bank of Japan.

         Swedish domestic producers price indexes are from the source listed above

for export price indexes, but many more detailed indexes are availsble for

domestic prices.
                                      -   43 —

     French prices through   1977 for a large number of products were kindly

supplied on tape by Dr. Liliane Crouhy—Veyrac of the Department Economie,

Centre d'Enseignement Superior des Affaires.     These data were the basis for

Crouhy—Veyrac, Crouhy, and Melitz (1980). These data were supplemented by

information from "Lea Indices des Prix de Gros Base 100 en 1982," the Bulletin

Mensuel   de Statistigue de la France and the Annuaire Statistique de la France,

all published by INSEE.

     The other Cain set of data are the hedonic price indexes substituted for

conventional price series in our calculation of the quality—adjustedprice

index.    These indexes are originally from a number of sources, but most of

them were collected in Gordon (1990).      The exceptions were the price indexes

for computers from Cartwright (1986) and Cartwright and Smith (1988) and those

for semiconductors, from Norsworthy and Jang (1990).
                          —   44 —




                     APPENDIX B




Indexes Based on Weights of DECD Exports to the World

              or to Developing Countries
                                  —   45 —



                            Appendix Table Bi
       Price Indexes For Manufectured Exports by Developed Countries
        All Manufactures (SITC 5—8) end SITC Divisions, U.S. Dollars
                                1963 Weights
                         (Annusl Averages, 1975=100)




              All
YEAR      Manufactures       SITCS        SITC6      SITC7       SITC8



1953          47.8            57.0           47.6     45.8        49.5
1954          47.4            57.4            46.5    45.7        49.1
1955          48.2            56.2           48.1     46.3        49.2
1956          49.5             65.5           50.1    47.9        49.8
1957           50.7           56.2           50.8     49.5        50.3
1958           50.3           55.8            48.7    50.0        50.4
1959           50.1           54.6           49.1     50.0        60.2
1960           50.3           54.4            49.5    50.0        50.7
1961           50.8           54.6           49.4     50.9        51.7
1962           50.4           53.0            48.3    51.0        52.3
1963           50.6           52.7           48.4     51.3        52.8
1964           51.4           52.4            50.0    51.9        53.6
1965           52.3            52.5          60.8     52.9        54.5
1966           53.4            52.7           52.2    54.1        56.0
1967           53.5            52.5          51.7     54.7        56.9
1968           53.0            50.9          51.6     54.1        56.8
1969           54.6            50.6           53.6    55.7        58.4
1970           58.0            52.7           57.3    59.6        61.4
1971           61.4            54.8           59.2    64.4        65.0
1972           66.7            58.3           64.6    70.0        71.3
1973           76.0            65.2           77.0    77.9        81.0
1974           89.6            86.3           94.4    87.2        90.9
1975          100.0           100.0          100.0   100.0       100.0
1976          102.3           100.2          103.9    102.3      101.3
1977          110.7           106.3          111.3   111.8       110.3
1978          125.7           117.6          124.9    128.7      126.6
1979          143.8           142.0          144.0   145.3       141.3
1980          161.5           165.2          161.8    162.3      157.9
1981          155.4           158.7          154.0    156.6      153.0
1982          151.4           152.9          146.8    155.2      148.6
1983          142.3           146.3          140.9    152.4      146.5
1984          142.4           141.6          136.8    147.0      141.4
1985          143.3           142.6          136.0    148.8      143.1
1986          171.6           166.4          159.5    180.1      178.6
1987          194.9           186.8          161.3    204.8      203.4
1988          212.6           207.0          205.8    218.1      216.6
                                   —   46 —


                              Appendix Table B2
       Price Indexes For Manufactured Exporta by Developed Countries
       All Manufactures (SITC 5—8) and SITC Divisions, U.S. Dollars
                              1975 Weights
                         (Annual Averages,   1975=100)




              All
YEAR      Manufactures        SITCS          SITC6       SITC7   SITC8


1953          49.4              58.9          46.8        49.5    49.2
1954          48.9              59.2          45.5        49.1    48.8
1955          49.3              57.6          46.9        49.4    48.8
1966          50.6              56.7          49.3        51.0    49.2
1957          51.8              57.1          50.1        52.8    49.7
1958          51.1              56.3          47.9        52.8    49.7
1959          50.8              54.9          48.1        52.4    49.5
1960          50.8              54.6          48.4        52.2    50.0
1961          51.2              54.6          48.4        52.8    51.1
1962          50.7              52.5          47.2        52.6    51.7
1963          50.6              52.0          47.1        52.5    52.1
1964          51.2              51.6          48.5        53.0    5i.9
1965          51.9              51.6          49.1        53.8    53.9
1966          52.9              51.5          50.1        55.0    55.4
1967          53.1              51.2          49.8        55.6    56.3
1968          52.8              49.6          49.6        55.5    56.1
1969          54.2              49.2          51.6        57.1    57.7
1970          57.6              51.1          55.7        60.6    60.7
1971          61.0              53.1          57.6        65.2    64.4
1972          66.4              56.9          63.1        70.9    71.0
1973          76.2              64.9          76.1        79.2    81.1
1974          90.0              87.9          94.6        88.5    90.7
1975         100.0             100.0         100.0       100.0   100.0
1976         102.4              99.7         103.2       102.7   101.2
1977         110.3             105.3         110.4       111.1   110.4
1978         125.9             117.0         126.2       127.7   127.0
1979         142.7             142.9         144.6       141.3   141.8
1980         158.5             164.7         161.6       155.3   158.3
1981         152.5             155.4         152.7       151.6   150.4
1982         148.3             148.2         145.8       149.4   145.3
1983         144.6             141.7         139.2       147.7   142.2
1984         139.8             136.2         134.7       143.1   136.5
1985         140.4             136.6         133.8       144.4   136.0
1966         170.4             161.5         160.0       176.3   174.1
1967         193.1             183.6         181.4       199.3   199.1
1986         209.1             202.6         204.3       211.7   211.4
                                —   47 —



                          Appendix Table B3
                  Price Indexes For Manufactured Exports
              by Developed Countries to Developing Countries
        All Manufactures (SITC 5—8) and SITC Divisions, U.S. Dollars
                           1963 Weights
                      (Annusl Averages,    1975=100)




           All
YEAR   Manufactures        SITCS           SITC6       SITC7   SITC8


1953      5D.6              57.9           50.1         48.1   55.6
1954      5D.3              58.5           48.9         48.0    55.3
1955      60.9              57.3           50.2         48.6   55.4
1956      52.5               56.5          52.8         50.7    56.1
1957      64.0              57.6           53.7         52.7   56.6
1958      53.7              57.4            51.3        53.2    56.4
1959      53.6              56.2           51.7         53.4   56.2
1960      53.6               56.1           52.1        53.3    56.7
1961      53.9              66.2           51.9         54.0   57.3
1962      53.4               55.1          50.6         53.9    57.8
1963       53.4             54.9           50.6         54.1   58.1
1964       54.1              54.7           51.9        64.7    58.6
1965       54.9             55.2           52.5         55.6   59.5
1966       56.0             55.4           53.6         56.9    61.1
1967       56.2             55.3           53.3         57.6   61.9
1968       55.7              53.7          53.0         56.9    61.7
1969       57.1             53.4           54.9         58.5    63.4
1970      60.0               55.1           58.0        62.0    65.7
1971      63.3              57.3           60.0         66.4    68.5
1972      68.3               60.7           65.7        71.5    74.5
1973      76.2              67.0           77.1         78.0    52.5
1974      89.3               85.2           94.3        87.5    91.4
1975      100.0            100.0           100.0       100.0   100.0
1976      102.3             100.4          103.7       102.6   101.7
1977      110.8            106.8           111.8       111.8   110.2
1978      126.4            119.5           127.2       128.5   125.9
1979      143.0            141.5           143.5       144.3   140.1
1980      161.1             164.3          161.6       162.2   157.6
1981      159.7            162.3           168.7       161.1   157.5
1982      156.0            157.6           151.3       160.2   152.1
1983      152.4             161.6          145.7       158.1   150.3
1984      148.7             147.1          143.0       154.0   146.5
1985      150.4             149.4          142.8       156.4   149.3
1986      176.6             173.2          166.2       184.1   182.5
1987      196.8             191.9          184.9       205.4   204.8
1988      213.8             211.4          206.9       219.1   218.1
                                    —   48 —



                           Appendix Table B4
                  Price Indexes Por Manufactured Exports
              by Developed Countries to Developing Countries
       All Manufactures (SITC 5—8) and SITC Divisions, U.S. Dollars
                           1975 Weights
                      (Annual Averages,    1975=100)




           All
YEAR   Manufactures         SITCS          SITC6       SITC7   SITC8


1953       51.9              58.7              49.6     50.1   53.4
1954       51.3              59.1              47.6     49.9    52.9
1955       51.4              57.4              48.9     50.1   52.8
1956       53.5              56.2              53.5     52.1    53.1
1957       55.2              56.6              54.8     54.2   53.2
1958       53.8              55.3              50.4     54.1    53.0
1959       53.5              53.9              51.2     53.9   53.2
1960       53.5              53.8              51.3     53.7    53.8
1961       53.5              63.7              50.9     54.1   54.5
1962       52.7              51.8              49.2     53.8   54.9
1963       52.5              51.2              49.1     53.8   55.3
1964       53.0              51.3              50.0     54.1   55.9
1965       53.5              51.4              50.2     54.9   56.6
1966       54.3              51.2              50.9     56.1   57.8
1967       54.6              51.0              51.1     56.8   58.8
1968       54.9              50.1              51.2     57.5   59.8
1969       56.3              49.6              53.2     59.1    61.5
1970       59.0              50.7              56.7     62.3    63.9
1971       61.6              51.9              58.2     66.1    66.5
1972       66.8              55.2              63.9     71.6    72.7
1973       77.1              63.6              77.7     80.1    83.0
1974       91.4              65.5              97.9     89.4    92.9
1975      100.0             100.0          100.0       100.0   100.0
1976      103.2             100.3          105.0       103.8   102.7
1977      110.5             104.9          111.7       112.0   110.6
1978      127.2             115.8          130.6       127.8   126.9
1979      139.7             137.7          144.7       139.8   135.7
1980      151.8             156.4          159.0       161.3   147.0
1981      152.9             154.9          158.7       151.3   148.6
1982      149.0             148.4          151.8       149.2   144.0
1983      145.8             143.9          144.2       148.0   142.8
1984      142.5             140.0          141.9       144.4   139.5
1985      143.4             140.2          141.0       146.2   141.4
1986      169.9             159.8          160.9       176.9   173.0
1987      190.4             180.5          178.5       198.9   192.9
1988      208.9             199.9          207.4       212.8   205.2
                                      —   49 —


                              Appendix Table B5
       Price Indexes for Manufactured Exports by Gereany, U.S. Dollars,
                    1963 Weights of OECO Exports to World
                         (Annual Aversges, 1975=100)




             All
         Manufactures        SITC S         SITC 6     SITC     7   SITC 8


1953          36.2            43.9           37.7       34.7         32.5
1954          35.4            43.4           36.6       33.9         32.1
1955          36.0            42.4           36.3       34.4         32.3
1956          36.4            41.6           38.8       34.9         32.6
1957          37.0            41.8           39.3       35.5         33.3
1958          37.1            42.4           38.9       35.7         33.5
1959          36.5            41.7           38.6       35.0          33.1
1960          36.7            41.0           39.3        35.1         33.5
1961          38.6            42.6           40.9       37.2          35.9
1962          39.3            42.1           41.0        38.3         37.3
1963          39.6            42.7           41.2       38.6          37.8
1964          40.2            42.3            42.7      38.8          38.6
1965          41.3            42.3           43.8       40.0          39.9
1966          42.1            42.5            44.7      40.9          41.2
1967          41.9            42.3           43.5       41.1          41.8
1968          41.6            41.1            43.3      40.9          41.7
1969          43.4            41.1           45.1        43.3         43.5
1970          49.1            45.7           51.2        49.0         48.8
1971          53.6            48.9           53.7        55.1         54.2
1972          60.2            53.8           59.5       62.4          62.6
1973          76.9            68.2            78.4      78.3          79.1
1974          90.8            92.4            96.1      67.6          89.0
1975         100.0           100.0           100.0     100.0         100.0
1976         101.3            98.6           101.8      101.8        101.0
1977         111.8           107.6           109.3     114.6         112.6
1978         130.7           123.5           127.0      135.0        132.7
1979         152.3           142.9           160.0     157.0         150.0
1980         164.0           158.0           162.6     166.9         162.8
1981         138.4           136.1           136.1      141.2        136.6
1982         134.8           129.2           132.8      138.2        132.9
1983         130.4           123.1           126.9      134.9        129.7
1984         120.8           114.2           118.7      124.4        119.1
1986         120.1           114.2           117.4      124.0        118.1
1986         162.0           151.1           151.0      172.5        163.7
1987         195.7           177.6           177.6      213.1        201.2
1988         207.7            186.4          195.2      222.2        209.5
                                         —   50 —




                              Appendix Table 66
       Price Indexes for Manufactured Exports by Germany, U.S. Dollars,
                  1975 Weights of DECO Exports to the World
                         (Annual Averages,   1975=100)




             All
         Manufactures        SITC    5       SITC 6      SITC 7     SITC     8




1953         36.7             46.0           37.1         35.6       33.4
1954         35.9             45.4            36.0        34.8       33.0
1955         36.4             44.4           37.4         35.3       33.0
1956         36.8             43.5            37.9        35.8       33.2
1957         37.3             43.6           38.5         36.3       34.0
1958         37.4             44.0            38.4        36.5       34.1
1959         36.8             43.2           38.0         35.7       33.7
1960         36.9             42.4            38.5        35.7       34.1
1961         38.7             43.8           40.0         37.7       36.4
1962         39.5             43.2            40.3        38.8       37.7
1963         39.7             43.5           40.4         39.0       38.2
1964         40.1             42.9           41.6         39.1       39.0
1965         41.0             42.8           42.5         40.3       40.3
1966         41.7             42.8            43.1        41.1       41.6
1967         41.6             42.6           42.0         41.3       42.1
1968         41.3             41.3           41.8         41.1       42.0
1969         43.1             41.1            43.7        43.3       43.8
1970         48.7             45.8            50.0        49.1        49.1
1971         53.5             48.8            52.7        55.3       54.5
1972         59.9             53.5            58.1        62.4       62.8
1973         76.2             67.8            76.5        78.2       79.4
1974         90.3             93.2            95.0        87.6       89.4
1975        100.0            100.0           100.0       100.0       100.0
1976        100.7             98.3           100.3       101.5       100.9
1977        110.9            106.7           106.7       113.8       112.5
1978        129.9            122.0           125.4       133.9       132.2
1979        151.4            142.4           147.5       156.3       149.2
1980        162.6            156.8           159.3       166.1       161.3
1981        137.4            134.2           134.4       140.4       135.0
1982        134.0            127.2           132.4       137.3       130.9
1983        129.4            121.2           125.6       134.0       127.5
1964        119.6            112.6           117.3       123.7       117.1
1985        119.2            112.4           116.3       123.3       116.3
1986        161.1            146.8           150.2       170.9       161.0
1987        194.1            172.8           175.5       209.9       197.3
1988        204.8            180.7           191.6       218.3       205.2
                                         —   51 —


                              Appendix Table 07
       Price Indexes for Manufactured Exports by Germany, U.S. Dollars,
             1963 Weights of OECD Exports to Developing Countries
                         (Annual Averages, 1975=100)




             All
         Manufactures        SITC    5       SITC 6    SITC 7       SITC 8


1953          35.2            40.6            35.8      33.6         32.6
1954          34.4            40.3            35.7      32.8         32.2
1955          34.9            39.4            37.1      33.2         32.4
1956          35.4            38.6            37.5      33.9         32.9
1957          36.1            39.4            38.3      34.5         33.8
1958          36.4            40.7            38.3      34.8         33.9
1959          35.9            40.0            37.8      34.4         33.5
1960          36.1            39.3            38.5      34.6         33.9
1961          38.1            41.1            40.2      36.7         36.3
1962          38.9            41.3            40.6      37.7         37.7
1963          39.3            42.3            40.7      38.0         38.1
1964          39.7            42.1            41.7      38.3         38.8
1965          40.8            42.3            42.6      39.6         40.1
1966          41.5            42.6            43.3      40.4         41.4
1967          41.4            42.7            42.3      40.6         41.9
1968          41.0            41.7            41.9      40.4         41.8
1969          42.8            41.7            43.4      42.7         43.6
1970          48.5            46.4            49.5      48.6         49.1
1971          53.3            50.0            52.7      54.6         54.4
1972          60.0            55.5            58.5      61.9         62.8
1973          76.4            70.3            76.3      78.0         79.3
1974          89.7            90.7            93.3      87.4         89.0
1975         100.0           100.0           100.0     100.0        100.0
1976         100.8            98.7           100.0     101.9        101.0
1977         111.7           108.0           107.7     115.1        112.5
1978         130.9           124.9           125.7     135.8        132.5
1979         151.6           142.2           145.7     158.6        150.0
1980         162.5           155.7           155.9     168.9        163.1
1981         137.8           135.1           131.9     142.7        136.8
1982         134.6           128.1           130.3     139.8        133.1
1983         129.6           121.2           122.9     136.6        129.8
1984         119.9           111.3           114.5     126.0        119.7
1985         119.3           111.5           113.5     125.5        119.2
1986         162.2           148.6           148.1     174.8        165.3
1987         195.9           174.3           173.6     216.2        203.0
1988         206.3           181.6           187.1     225.7        211.1
                                      —   52 —


                              Appendix Table RB
       Price Indexes for Manufactured Exports by Garaany, U.S. Dollars,
             1975 Weights of 0ECD Exports to Developing Countries
                         (Annual Averages,    1975=100)




             All
         Manufactures        SITC 5          SITC B       SITE    7   SITE    B




1953         35.7             44.0            36.3        34.3        32.5
1954         34.9             43.7            35.2        33.5        32.2
1955         35.4             42.8            36.5        34.0        32.4
1966         35.9             42.0            37.1        34.6        32.6
1957         36.5             42.3            37.9        35.2        33.2
1958         36.9             43.2            38.1        35.6        33.3
1959         36.3             42.5            37.6        36.0        32.9
1960         36.6             41.9            38.0         35.2       33.3
1961         38.4             43.5            39.5        37.2        35.7
1962         39.1             43.1            40.1        38.2        37.2
1963         39.4             43.7            40.1        38.4        37.7
1964         39.7             43.3            40.8        38.8         38.4
1965         40.7             43.3            41.6        39.9        39.8
1966         41.3             43.3            42.0        40.8        41.0
1967         41:2             43.2            40.8        41.0        41.6
1968         40.7             41.9            40.5        40.7        41.5
1969         42.6             41.8            42.5        43.0        43.2
1970         48.5             46.6            49.0        49.0        48.7
1971         53.3             50.1            51.9        54.9         54.2
1972         59.7             55.3            57.3         62.0        62.4
1973         75.9             69.5            75.4         77.8        78.9
1974         89.6             92.0            93.7         87.4        89.3
1975        100.0            100.0           100.0        100.0       100.0
1976        100.7             99.0            99.4        101.6       100.7
1977        111.1            108.0           104.7        114.6       111.8
1978        130.5            124.6           124.2        134.5       131.6
1979        153.0            143.2           144.2        159.7       148.9
1980        163.7            157.7           153.2        169.9       162.0
1981        138.6            135.8           130.2        143.6       134.6
1982        136.1            129.0           131.6        140.2       131.1
1983        130.3            123.2           120.7        136.6       128.2
1984        120.9            115.1           112.9        126.3       118.2
1985        120.4            114.2           112.9        125.6       117.6
1986        161.7             147.0          143.0        174.8       163.6
1987        195.0            173.3           164.9        216.2       200.9
1988        207.9             180.8          184.7        226.3       209.4
                                —       53 —


                             Appendix Table 89
       Price Indexes for Manufactured Exports by Japan, U.S. Dollars,
                 1963 Weights of DECO Exports to the World
                        (Annual Averages, 1975=100)




            All
        Manufsctures        SITO    5          SITC 6   SITC 7     SITC 8


1953        61.0             61.5               54.9     68.4       56.6
1954        58.6             61.5               50.7     66.9       55.1
1955        67.5             57.8               51.2     64.7       54.3
1956        60.3             57.3               56.9     67.1       53.9
1957        61.4             56.5               56.8     69.9       63.5
1958        56.6             52.5               49.2     66.2       52.9
1959        66.6             50.4               50.8     64.8       54.3
1960        56.4             50.3               50.9     63.7       56.1
1961        65.3             48.3               50.2     62.6       55.6
1962        54.0             45.7               48.2     61.7       56.0
1963        53.6             44.8               48.6     60.5       56.9
1964        54.2             46.9               49.5     60.4       58.0
1965        54.2             45.7               49.3     60.7       57.9
1966        54.2             43.4               49.9     61.1       57.4
1967        54.6             42.4               50.8     61.4       67.8
1968        56.2             42.8               51.4     62.1       68.6
1969        56.6             43.4               53.6     62.9       69.9
1970       58.1              43.0               56.1    64.3        62.2
1971       59.7              43.5               56.7    66.8        65.0
1972       66.7              47.0               63.4     73.1       72.3
1973       80.7              60.8               83.6    84.3        86.7
1974       99.0              92.3              106.3    96.5        97.6
1975      100.0             100.0              100.0    100.0      100.0
1976       103.2            100.8              107.1    101.1      102.9
1977      111.8             105.3              116.1    110.0      113.2
1978       135.8            120.0              142.1    135.1      138.0
1979      141.9             145.2              163.8    133.6      136.5
1980       151.3            167.1              171.3    136.0      141.2
1981      157.2             169.8              172.3    145.1      147.3
1982       143.8            149.8              156.3    134.8      134.6
1983      145.9             160.8              167.7    137.2      137.2
1984       146.6            148.7              159.4    137.8      138.8
1985      144.4             146.5              155.9    136.0      138.6
1986      181.2             178.3              189.9    173.1      184.4
1987      201.9             200.0              213.1    192.0      204.0
1988      226.9             230.0              249.1    210.2      220.7
                                     —   54 —


                             Appendix Table 610
       Price Indexes for Manufactured Exports by Japan, U.S. Dollars,
                 1975 Weights of OECD Exporta to the World
                        (Annual Averages,       1975=100)




            All
        Manufacturea        SITE 5          SITE        6   SITE 7   SITE 8



1963        62.3             63.7               55.3        6g.2      56.7
1954        60.1             63.8               51.0        67.6      55.1
1955        58.8             59.6               51.8         65.5     64.3
1956        61.7             58.9               58.3         67.7     53.9
1957        62.8             58.1               58.6         70.3     53.6
1958        58.1             53.8               50.4         66.3     52.9
1959        57.9             51.6               52.1         65.0     54.4
1960        57.6             51.4               52.3         63.9     56.2
1961        56.3             49.0               51.4         62.5     55.5
1962        54.9             45.9               49.1         61.6       56.0
1963        54.1             44.6               49.0         60.2     56.8
1964        54.5             45.7               49.9         59.9       58.0
1965        54.5             45.3               49.7         60.2     58.0
1966        54.4             42.8               50.0         60.6     57.5
1967        54.7             42.0               51.1         60.8     57.8
1968        55.2             41.9               51.4         61.6     58.6
1969        56.3             42.3               53.4         62.4       60.2
1970        58.0             41.8               56.2         63.9       62.8
1971        59.9             42.2               57.1         66.7       65.7
1972        65.8             45.6               63.4         73.1       72.7
1973        80.2             60.2               82.7         84.1       87.6
1974        98.9             92.8               107.6        96.3       98.3
1975       100.0            100.0               100.0       100.0    100.0
1976       102.6             101.6              106.2       101.0    102.5
1977       110.6            105.4               114.6       109.4    112.5
1978       134.4             118.5              141.2       134.4    136.6
1979       140.3            147.5               153.2       132.3    135.1
1980       149.0             169.6              170.0       134.9    140.1
1981       155.8            171.8               172.9       144.4    146.0
1982       142.7             151.7              156.8       134.3    133.6
1983       144.1            152.3               156.8       136.4    135.7
1984       144.6             150.0              158.5       136.8    136.8
1965       142.4             147.2              155.1       135.1    136.3
1986       177.2             173.8              186.2       171.3    178.8
1967       197.3             198.3              207.6       189.9    197.0
1966       221.0             227.7              243.4       207.8    212.4
                              —     55 —



                             Appendix Table   611

       Price Indexes for Manufactured Exports by Japan, U.S. Dollars,
             1953 Weights of DECO Exports to Developing Countries
                        (Annual Averages, 1975=100)




           All
       Manufactures         SITC 5         SITC    6   SITC 7      SITC 8


1953       60.7              62.8           56.1        66.8        55.8
1954        58.5             61.9           51.1        64.3        66.2
1955       573               68.6           51.6        62.4        54.5
1956        50.2             58.0           66.9        65.1        54.4
1957       61.6              67.5           57.3       68.3         54.2
1958       67.3              53.9           50.1        65.0        53.2
1969       57.1              51.8           51.6       63.7         54.7
1960       56.9              51.6           51.8        62.9        56.3
1961       65.9              49.7           51.1       61.9         55.6
1962       54.7              47.7           49.0        61.2        55.3
1963       54.3              46.9           49.2       60.2         67.2
1964       54.8              48.1           60.0        60.1        68.5
1965       64.9              48.3           49.7       60.4         58.4
1966       54.7              46.1           49.8        60.6        57.7
1967       55.0              46.1           60.8       61.1         58.1
1968       55.5              45.3           51.2        61.8        68.8
1969       56.7              45.8           53.2       62.6         60.2
1970       58.2              45.3           55.6        63.9        62.6
1971       60.0              46.2           56.7       66.3         65.3
1972       66.0              50.2           63.5       72.6         72.6
1973       80.5              63.3           82.8       84.1         87.2
1974       98.0              91.0          104.7        96.4        97.5
1975      100.0             100.0          100.0       100.0       100.0
1976       102.8             99.9          106.4       101.3       103.1
1977      111.2             105.6          114.6       110.3       113.5
1978       135.7            124.3          140.4       135.5       138.8
1979      140.2             142.1          150.1       134.0       136.3
1980       148.9            160.5          165.8       136.7       141.9
1981      156.0             165.3          169.6       146.2       147.2
1982       142.9            145.1          165.2       135.7       134.2
1983      146.6             146.0          155.5       138.1       137.3
1984       145.0            144.3          157.4       138.3       138.7
1985      143.4             142.8          154.7       137.0       138.7
1986       181.3            180.1          188.6       176.4       184.6
1987      201.1             200.6          208.7       194.5       206.6
1988       226.8            227.9          243.2       213.9       224.0
                               —     56 —

                             Appendix Table 012
       Price Indexes for Manufactured Exports by Japan, U.S. Dollars,
            1975 Weights of OECD Exports to Developing Countries
                        (Annual Averages,    1975=100)




            All
        Manufactures        SITC    5       SITC 6       SITC    7   SITC 8


1953        60.4             63.2            54.7        64.5        56.3
1954        58.4             62.6            50.4         63.2       55.0
1955        57.4             59.3            51.5        61.5         54.5
1956        61.0             58.8            59.1        64.4         54.3
1957        62.9             57.9            60.1        67.9         54.0
1958        58.2             53.7            51.0        64.6         53.2
1969        57.6             51.5            52.7        63.3         54.5
1960        57.6             51.2            52.8         62.7        56.0
1961        56.4             48.8            51.8        61.7         6S9
1962        54.9             46.0            49.0        60.9         56.4
1963        54.2             44.8            49.0         59.8        57.1
1964        54.6             46.4            49.8         59.7        56.0
1965        54.7             46.4            49.5         60.0        58.1
1966        54.5             43.9            49.7         60.4        57.6
1967        54.8             42.6            50.8         60.7        57.9
1968        55.1             42.6            50.7         61.5        58.4
1969        56.2             42.8            52.7         62.3        59.9
1970        57.7             42.2            55.5         63.6          62.6
1971        59.4             42.4            56.5         66.1        65.1
1972        65.3             45.7            62.9         72.5        72.4
1973        79.4             59.3            81.5         84.2        66.4
1974        97.8             89.4           107.5         96.2        97.5
1975       100.0            100.0           100.0        100.0       100.0
1976       102.3             98.9           106.4        101.3       102.2
1977       110.3            102.3           114.6        110.1       111.8
1978       134.5            117.6           142.0        135.1       136.2
1979       139.1            141.0           153.2        132.5       133.9
1980       146.8            160.7           166.0        135.1       138.0
1981       155.0            164.8           174.1        145.2       142.6
1982       142.9            146.0           160.3        134.9       131.5
1983       143.9            149.0           156.3        137.9       134.2
1984       144.6            147.2           159.2        138.1       134.9
1985       142.3            143.4           155.8        136.5       135.0
1986       173.6            163.2           177.2        174.3       172.7
1987       192.6            187.0           193.8        193.6       186.2
1966       219.5            216.6           235.9        213.6       200.0
                                        —   57 —



                             Appendix Table        813

       Price Indexes for Manufactured Exports by the U.S., U.S. Dollars,
                  1963 Weights of OECD Exports to the World
                        (Annual Averages,     1975=100)




            All
       Manufactures         SITO    5        SITC    6    SITC 7   SITC 8


1953        51.5             61.4             47.0         51.3     57.7
1954        52.0             62.9             47.1         52.0     57.7
1955        53.3             62.1             49.5         53.1     58.1
1956        55.6             60.8             51.9         56.1     59.8
1957        5T.8             62.5             53.8         58.9     60.8
1958        58.2             61.7             53.6         60.2     61.6
1959        59.1             60.9             54.7         61.3     61.7
1960        59.4             61.6             55.2         61.4     62.2
1961        59.1             61.8             54.7         61.1     62.2
1962        58.9             60.3             54.7         61.0     62.4
1963        59.0             59.5             54.7         61.4     62.6
1964        59.3             58.7             55.5         61.9     62.5
1965        60.1             59.1             56.5         62.5     63.1
1966        61.1             59.5             57.7         63.5     65.0
1957        62.4             60.1             57.9         65.5     67.5
1968        63.9             59.3             59.7         67.2     70.7
1969        65.7             58.5             62.2         69.0     73.3
1970        68.1             59.9             64.9         71.7     74.7
1971       70.5              60.3             66.8         75.3     76.0
1972       72.4              60.5             69.7         77.2     77.4
1973       76.0              62.3             75.6         79.4     81.2
1974       89.2              79.7             92.5         88.9     92.9
1975      100.0             100.0            100.0        100.0    100.0
1976      105.4             104.4            106.0        105.6    104.3
1977      111.8             108.6            113.5        111.9    110.3
1978      119.5             111.8            121.8        120.9    116.2
1979      132.3             132.5            136.2        130.6    127.9
1980      146.8             152.3            149.5        144.3    142.6
1981      161.7             166.3            164.9        158.1    162.2
1982      168.5             173.1            165.2        168.9    170.3
1983      171.2             172.4            164.7        173.7    176.3
1984       176.2            177.4            170.3        178.6    179.6
1985      177.6             177.4            168.0        182.4    183.8
1986       179.3            177.2            167.4        185.6    188.3
1987      185.3             185.8            175.7        189.5    191.7
1988      197.6             209.9            193.7        195.2    199.4
                                        —   58 —

                             Appendix Table         B14

       Price Indexes for Manufactured Exporta by the U.S., U.S. Dollars,
                   1975 Weights of OECD Exports to the World
                        (Annual Averages,          1975=100)




            All
       Manufactures         SITC    5          SITC 6          SITC 7   SITE 8


1953        52.3             65.5                  45.9         52.3    58.3
1954        53.0             67.0                  46.4         52.9    58.3
1955        54.1             65.9                  48.6         54.1    58.5
1956        56.4             64.5                  51.0         57.1    60.0
1957        58.8             66.4                  53.3         59.9    61.1
1958        59.5             65.2                  53.6         61.2    62.0
1959        60.3             64.0                  54.6         62.4    62.4
1960        60.5             64.7                  54.8         62.5    62.9
1961        60.1             64.6                  54.2         62.0    62.9
1962        59.8             63.1                  54.1         61.8    62.9
1963        59.8             61.8                  54.1         62.0    63.0
1964        60.0             60.4                  54.6         62.S    62.9
1965        60.5             60.6                  55.4         63.0     63.5
1966        61.5             61.1                  56.3         64.1     65.4
1967        62.9             61.7                  56.7         66.0     68.1
1968        64.5             60.7                  58.6         67.8     71.0
1969        66.2             59.8                  60.8         69.7     73.6
1970        68.5             61.0               63.6            72.3     75.0
1971        71.1             61.3               66.0            76.0     76.3
1972        72.7             61.2               68.7            77.6     77.6
1973        75.6             62.7               73.3            79.6     81.2
1974        88.6             79.7               90.5            89.2     92.9
1975       100.0            100.0              100.0           100.0    100.0
1976       105.3            104.6              105.7           105.4    104.4
1977       111.4            108.5              113.1           111.4    110.2
1978       119.2            111.5              122.3           120.2    116.0
1979       131.6            133.9              136.4           129.3    127.1
1980       145.8            152.8              149.8           142.8    141.5
1981       160.7            166.9              166.0           156.5    159.3
1982       168.3            172.9              168.3           162.0    167.4
1983       170.8            172.4              167.0           171.8    172.4
1984       175.4            176.2              172.4           176.5    175.2
1985       176.8            174.9              169.9           180.2    178.5
1986       178.6            174.1              168.5           183.2    183.4
1987       183.9            184.5              176.0           186.9    186.5
1988       195.1            208.3              193.2           192.3    193.4
                                   —    59 —



                             Appendix Table B15
       Price Indexes for Manufactured Exports by the U.S., U.S. Dollars,
             1963 Weights of OECD Exports to Developing Countries
                        (Annual Averages,       1975=100)




            All
        Manufactures        SITC    5          SITC    6    SITC 7   SITC 8



1953        51.2             61.6              47.6         49.8      59.2
1954        51.8             63.3              47.9          50.2     59.3
1955        53.0             62.4               50.1        51.4      59.8
1956        55.2             60.8               52.6         54.5     61.4
1957        57.6             62.9               54.5        57.5      62.4
1956        58.4             62.7               54.7         58.9     62.9
1959        59.2             62.1               55.8        60.0      63.0
1960        59.4             62.8              56.3          59.9     63.5
1961        59.2             63.0              55.7         59.7      63.5
1962        59.0             61.9              55.7         59.5      63.6
1963        59.0             61.1               55.6        59.9      63.5
1964        59.3             60.4               56.2         60.3     63.4
1965        60.0             61.0               57.1         60.9     64.0
1966        61.0             61.7               58.0         62.2     65.8
1967        62.3             62.3               58.2        64.1      68.3
1968        63.8             61.8               60.1         65.8     71.2
1969        65.4             61.0               62.1        67.6      73.9
1970        67.8             62.2              64.4         70.6      -75.1
1971        70.4             62.9              66.7         74.2      76.4
1972        72.3             63.1              69.8          76.1     77.9
1973        75.6             64.8              74.9         78.5      81.9
1974        88.6             80.3              92.1          88.3     92.9
1975       100.0            100.0              100.0        100.0    100.0
1976       105.5            104.4              105.7        105.9    104.6
1977       112.1            108.9              113.4        112.7    110.5
1978       120.1            113.8              121.7        121.8    116.0
1979       132.5            131.3              134.7        132.3    127.7
1980       147.5            149.3              149.4        146.6    143.3
1981       162.8            164.8              164.5        160.9    164.8
1982       170.6            173.2              167.3        171.8    1716
1983       173.0            173.7              165.8        176.5    177.0
1984       177.7            178.1              171.3        181.1    180.2
1985       179.6            180.9              169.5        184.7    184.6
1986       181.2            181.3              168.4        187.8    189.4
1987       185.8            187.3              174.4        191.0    193.1
1988       196.6            206.4              189.8        196.9    201.1
                                    —   60 —



                             AppendixTable 816
       Price Indexea for Manufactured Exporta by the U.S., U.S. Oollara,
             1975 Weighta of OECD Exporta to Developing Countriea
                        (Annual Averagea,      1975=100)




            All
        Manufacturea        SITC 5             SITC    6   SITC 7   SITC    8




1953        50.7             62.7              44.7         50.7    57.1
1954        51.4             64.2              45.6         51.2    57.2
1955        52.5             63.4              47.7         52.3    67.7
1956        54.9             61.6              50.3         55.4     59.2
1957        57.4             63.4              52.9         58.3    60.3
1958        58.3             62.8              63.5         59.7     61.1
1959        59.1             62.0              54.4         60.9    61.2
1960        59.3             62.8              54.6         60.8     61.7
1961        58.9             62.8              54.0         60.5    61.7
1962        58.5             61.5               53.8        60.1     61.8
1963        58.5             60.3              53.8         60.4    61.8
1964        58.8             59.3               54.2        60.8     61.6
1965        59.4             59.7              54.8         61.5    62.2
1966        60.4             60.3               55.5        62.7    64.0
1967        61.8             61.0               55.9        64.6    66.9
1968        63.3             60.1               57.5        66.5     70.1
1969        64.9             58.9               59.7        68.5    73.0
1970        67.3             59.9               62.3        71.1    74.0
1971        70.0             60.4               65.1        74.5     75.1
1972        71.7             60.3               68.0        76.1     76.3
1973        74.6             62.0               72.2        78.7     80.1
1974        87.6             78.8               89.1        88.8     92.2
1975       100.0            100.0              100.0       100.0    100.0
1976       105.3            103.1              105.7       105.8    104.0
1977       111.7            107.3              113.3       112.4    109.4
1978       119.9            111.3              122.9       121.1    115.1
1979       132.0            130.4              135.7       131.2    127.0
1980       146.6            148.6              149.4       145.3    141.8
1981       162.0            163.4              165.3       159.7    164.4
1982       168.2            169.1              169.6       170.4    173.4
1983       169.3            168.3              153.5       175.3    179.5
1984       173.9            170.5              168.4       180.4    183.1
1985       176.0            171.8              166.4       184.8    186.9
1986       177.4            174.1              162.4       188.5    193.3
1987       182.4            185.2              168.7       192.2    197.8
1988       195.0            206.3              186.3       199.3    206.3
                                      —   61 —

                               Appendix Table       B17

               Price Indexes for Manufactured Exports by the U.S.,
       With Quality Corrections for SITC 7 Using Hedonic Price Indexes,
       U.S. Dollars, 1963 and 1975 Weights of 0ECD Exports to the World
                           (Annual Averages, 1975100)




                               1963 Weights                    1975 Weights
                                All                            All
                           Manufactures      SITC    7    Manufactures SITC 7


1953                           59.5              71.1       59.9        68.5
1954                           59.6              70.7        60.1       68.2
1955                           60.8              71.3       61.2        69.2
1956                           62.7              73.8        63.1       71.7
1957                           64.7              76.1       66.3        74.0
1958                           64.0              74.6        64.7       72.7
1959                           64.0              73.8       64.8        72.3
1960                           63.7              72.2       64.4        71.1
1961                           63.2              71.3       63.9        70.3
1962                           63.0              71.2       63.6        70.2
1963                           62.7              70.7        63.2       69.6
1964                           62.7               70.3       63.0       69.3
1965                           62.8              69.2        63.0       68.6
1966                           63.3               68.8       63.5       68.5
1967                           64.1              69.6        64.5       69.5
1968                           65.3               70.5       65.8       70.7
1969                           66.8              71.6        67.1       71.8
1970                           69.3               74.5       69.6       74.7
1971                           71.2              77.1        71.8       77.7
1972                           72.9               78.5       73.3       78.8
1973                           76.3              80.2        75.8       80.2
1974                           88.7               87.7       87.9       87.9
1975                          100.0              100.0      100.0      100.0
1976                          105.4              105.5      105.3      105.5
1977                          110.9              109.7      110.3      109.3
1978                          117.9              117.2      117.6      116.9
1979                          128.7              122.7      128.0      122.2
1980                          144.3              138.8      143.0      137.2
1981                          158.8              151.6      157.3      149.8
1982                          165.5              162.1      165.0      160.4
1983                          166.9              164.2      166.6      163.1
1984                          171.5              168.3      170.7      167.0
1985                          172.5              171.0      171.8      170.2
1986                          174.2              174.2      173.5      173.3
1987                          179.4              176.9      178.5      176.3
1988                          190.9              181.3      189.2      180.8
                                        —   62 —

                                Appendix Table 618
                Price Indexes for Manufactured Exports by the U.S.,
        With Quality Corrections for SITC 7 Using Hedonic Price Indexes,
       U.S. Dollars,1963 and 1976 Weights of OECD Exports to Developing Countries
                           (Annual Averages,   1975=100)




                                  1963 Weights                   1975 Weights
                                 All                           All
                           Manufactures        SITC    7   Manufactures     SITC 7


1953                             58.0               64.5       57.6           64.8
1954                             58.2               64.4       58.2           64.8
1955                             59.1               64.7       59.0           65.3
1956                             61.0               67.2       61.2           68.2
1957                             63.2              .70.0       63.6           70.7
1958                             63.1               69.4       63.6           70.4
1959                             63.2               69.2       63.5           69.9
1960                             63.0               67.8       63.0           68.4
1961                             62.5               67.2       62.4           67.6
1962                             62.4               67.1       62.1           67.4
1963                             62.0               66.6       61.6           66.7
1964                             62.0               66.4       61.5           66.6
1965                             61.7               65.0       61.3           65.7
1966                             62.2               64.8       61.8           65.9
1967                             63.1               66.0       62.7           66.9
1968                             64.4               67.1       64.0           68.2
1969                             65.9               68.9       65.4           69.9
1970                             68.4               72.1       67.8           72.7
1971                             70.6               74.8       70.1           75.3
1972                             72.4               76.4       71.6           76.6
1973                             75.7               78.9       74.4           78.7
1974                             88.2               87.5       87.1           87.8
1975                            100.0              100.0      100.0          100.0
1976                            105.6              106.0      105.2          105.6
1977                            111.4              111.0      110.8          110.6
1978                            118.7              118.8      116.4          118.2
1979                            129.2              125.5      128.8          125.0
1980                            147.2              145.8      145.0          142.1
1981                            162.2              159.3      159.8          155.4
1982                            170.3              170.8      168.1          166.1
1983                            171.6              173.3      168.1          168.9
1984                            176.1              177.5      172.4          173.4
1985                            177.9              180.8      174.3          177.3
1986                            179.6              183.8      175.9          181.2
1987                            183.8              186.5      181.2          184.6
1988                            194.3              191.8      193.0          191.1
                                       —        63 —



Notesto Appendix Tables 817 and 818



     The hedonic price indexes for the commodities listed below were substi-

tuted for the conventional U.S. export or domestic price series used for the

indexes   covering SITC 7, and All Manufactures in Tables 813 through 816. The

hedonic indexes were also inserted    in a few cases for which no conventional

price indexes had been available, so that the commodity coverage in Tables 817

and 818 is slightly higher than in the earlier tables.

     SITC Group or Subgroup          Source                                 Period

               711.1                 Gordon (1990)                          1953—83

                                           "
               711.5

               712. 5**

               714.2                 Cartwright        & Scott   (1988)     1983—88   (Average

                                                                          of three quarters)

                                     Cartwright (1986)                      1970—82

                                     Gordon (1990)                          1953—69

               719.1                 Gordon (1990)                          1953—83

                                           "
               719.4

                                           "
               722.1
               724 . 9
                                           "
               725

               729.3                 Jang & Norsworthy (1990)

                                           "
               732.1
                                           I,
               734

     *With wheel tractors weighted 1/6 and crawler tractors 5/6 in accordance
      with U.S. export weights.
                                        —    64 —


                                  Appendix Table 819
         Price Indexes for Manufactured Exports by Developed Countries,
       with Quality Corrections for SITC 7 using Hedonic Prices Indexes,
            U.S. Dollars, 1975 Weights of DECD Exports to the World
                             (Annual Averages,     1975=100)




                         All Manufsctures                              SITC 7
                   Adjusted for   Adjusted for             Adjusted for     Adjusted for
                    U.S. Only     All Countries             U.S. Only       All Countries



1953                  51.0               57.6                  53.5             57.2
1g54                  5D.4               56.7                  52.8             66.1
1955                  50.7               57.0                  53.0             66.2
1956                  52.0               58.3                  54.4             67.7
1957                  53.1               59.4                  56.0             69.2
1958                  52.2               57.7                  65.3             66.9
1959                  51.7               56.9                  54.6             65.4
1960                  51.6               56.3                  54.1             64.0
1961                  52.0               56.5                  54.6             64.1
1962                  51.4               55.9                  54.5             64.0
1963                  51.3               55.6                  54.3             63.3
1964                  51.8               55.9                  54.5             63.1
1965                  52.4               56.1                  55.1             62.7
1966                  53.3               56.5                  56.0             62.6
1967                  53.4               56.4                  56.4             62.5
1968                  53.1                  56.0               56.2             62.3
1969                  54.4               57.2                  57.5             63.3
1970                  57.8                  60.6               61.1             66.9
1971                  61.1               63.4                  65.5             70.5
1972                  66.5                  66.2               71.2              74.7
1973                  76.2               76.8                  79.3             80.6
1974                  89.8               89.6                   88.2             67.7
1975                 100.0              100.0                  100.0            100.0
1976                 102.3              102.8                  102.7            103.5
1977                 109.9              109.1                  110.5            109.1
1978                 125.4              122.6                  126.8            121.5
1979                 141.7              136.5                  139.2            129.7
1980                 157.7              153.0                  153.6            145.0
1981                 151.7              150.1                  149.7            146.6
1982                 147.3              148.1                  147.8            149.1
1983                 143.4              144.5                  145.5            147.6
1984                 138.6              139.6                  140.9            142.8
1966                 139.0              139.9                  142.1            143.7
1986                 168.5              169.5                  173.5            174.9
1987                 191.1              192.0                  196.1            197.2
1988                 207.4              206.0                  208.1            208.9
                                          —   65 —



Notes to Appendix Table 619


       For the indexes labeled "Adjusted for U.S. Only," the U.S. indexes for

SITC   7   froe Table 61? are combined with the indexes for other countries in the

same way as for Tables 61 through 64.

       For the indexes labeled "Adjusted      for All Countries," each U.S. hedonic

price index was substituted for the conventional price index for that particular

SITC subgroup or group at the three or, usually,        four digit SITC level (or

inserted where there had been no conventional index) in the index for every

country.    The individual country indexes for all sanufactures and the world

indexes were then aggregated,     as in earlier tables. To prevent the hedonic

adjustment from affecting     uncovered   groups and subgroups, the substitutionwas

performed by subtracting the unadjusted indexes from the SITC aggregate and

adding back the adjusted indexes with the same weights.          Where no unadjusted

index existed for a group or subgroup,        the subtraction was done assuming   that

the uncovered items had the same price index as SITC        7   as a whole.
                                66 —




                          APPENDIX C




Indexes Based on Export Weights of the U.S., Germany,   and Japan
                                 —   67 —


                          Appendix Table    Cl

       Price    Indexes for Manufactured Exports by the U.S.
                  and its Competitors, U.S. Dollars
                     U.S. Export Weights of 1963
                      (Annual Averages, 1975=100)


                  U.S. Price Indexes
               Export        Domestic                Rest-of-World
               Prices         Prices                  Price Index


1953            50.9           48.0                       46.3
1954            51.5           48.6                       45.8
1955            52.1           50.1                       46.2
1956            54.9           52.4                       47.2
1957            57.5           54.7                       48.1
1958            58.5           55.5                       47.8
1959            59.3           56.6                       47.4
1960            60.2           57.0                       47.5
1961            61.1           57.0                       48.5
1962            51.6           57.1                       48.1
1963            62.2           57.2                       48.3
1964            63.1           57.6                       49.1
1965            63.7           58.3                       50.0
1966            64.8           60.1                       51.2
1967            67.0           61.7                       51.2
1968            69.0           63.6                       50.2
1969            71.5           65.4                       51.6
1970            73.3           68.1                       55.3
1971            76.9           70.3                      59.2
1972            79.1           72.0                      65.5
1973            81.8           74.8                       75.7
1974            90.0           87.5                      88.8
1975           100.0          100.0                      100.0
1976           106.1          105.6                      101.6
1977           112.7          112.1                      110.7
1978           118.5          119.9                      127.8
1979           129.4          133.2                      148.5
1980           143.3          148.6                      167.8
1981           157.6          164.1                      154.0
1982           169.3          169.5                     147.3
1983           173.8          173.1                      142.1
1984           178.4          177.6                     134.4
1985           179.1          179.2                     135.3
1986           181.6          179.9                     170.3
1987           187.4          184.2                     199.2
1988           198.3          194.9                     218.8
                              —    68 —


                     Appendix Table C2
       Price Indexes for Manufactured Exporta by Germany
              and ita Competitors, U.S. Dollara
                German Export Weights of 1963
                 (Annual Averages, 1975=100)


             German Price Indexes
           Export         Domestic              Rest-cf—World
           Prices          Prices                Price Index


1963       (36.0)           32.0                     62.3
1954        35.1            31.2                     52.3
1955        35.3            31.6                     52.9
1956        35.9            32.3                     54.9
1957        36.5            33.0                      56.7
1956        36.3            33.3                     56.4
1959        35.9            33.1                      56.5
1960        36.4            33.5                     56.4
1961        37.9            35.7                      56.3
1962        38.4            37.2                     55.6
1963        38.4            37.6                      55.5
1964        39.3            38.1                     56.2
1965        40.3            39.2                     57.0
1966        41.1            40.3                      58.2
1967        41.1            40.0                      56.5
1968        40.7            39.9                      57.5
1969        43.5            40.9                      59.0
1970        48.6            47.2                      61.6
1971        52.9            52.3                      64.8
1972        59.1            59.0                      69.6
1973        76.2            75.3                      75.0
1974        91.3            69.2                      88.2
1975       100.0           100.0                     100.0
1976       101.1           100.6                     102.2
1977       111.0           111.0                     110.0
1978       130.3           130.6                     124.8
1979       153.1           150.0                     143.3
1980       163.4           161.5                     164.2
1981       138.6           136.5                     164.4
1982       135.4           134.0                     161.3
1983       130.8           129.4                     156.0
1984       121.4           119.5                     154.4
1985       121.3           126.2                     156.5
1986       164.4           171.5                     180.8
1987       199.1           205.6                     200.2
1988       209.9           217.2                     219.5
                                      —    69 —

                             Appendix Table   C3

Indexes for Manufactured Exports by Japan and its Competitors, U.S. Dollars
                       Japanese Export Weights of 1963
                         (Annual Averages, 1975=100)



                   Japanese Price Indexes
                   Export        Domestic               Rest—of--World
                  Prices          Prices                 Price Index



1953               63.0            58.1                      50.3
1964               59.6            54.9                      50.0
1955               58.4            53.5                      50.6
1956                61.4           57.4                      51.5
1957               60.9            57.9                      52.7
1958                55.0           53.8                      52.5
1959               56.8            54.3                      52.0
1960                57.2           54.6                      52.0
1961               54.9            53.8                      52.4
1962               53.2            52.8                      51.7
1963               63.7            53.1                      51.6
1964                54.5           53.3                      52.3
1965               54.3            53.2                      53.1
1966               53.8            53.4                      54.1
1967               54.4            53.8                      54.0
1968               55.1            54.2                      53.4
1969               56.8            55.7                      54.7
1970                58.6           58.3                      58.2
1971               60.1            59.7                      61.7
1972               65.9            67.4                      67.1
1973               81.6            86.0                      76.4
1974               100.0          101.4                      90.2
1975              100.0           100.0                     100.0
1976               102.8           105.9                    101.4
1977              108.4           119.0                     109.2
1978               130.3           153.9                    123.6
1979              137.5           151.9                     139.8
1980              147.6           159.4                     157.3
1981              152.7           164.6                     150.2
1982              140.6           145.5                     147.4
1983              138.9           154.4                     143.0
1984              139.8           155.8                     137.6
1985              137.7           155.1                     139.1
1986              168.0            212.7                    165.2
1987              186.3           241.0                     186.3
1988               210.1           272.1                    200.6
                      —   70 —



                  Appendix Table C4
       Price Indexes for Manufactured Exports by
       the U.S. and its Competitors, U.S. Dollars
              U.S. Export Weights of 1975
              (Annual Averages, 1975=100)



         U.S.   Price Indexes
       Export          Domestic              Rest-of-World
       Prices             Prices              Price Index


1953    54.6              48.3                      48.1
1954    55.3              48.9                      47.5
1955    56.0              50.2                      47.7
1956    59.0               52.6                     48.7
1957     62.0              55.2                     49.7
1958    63.0               56.2                     49.1
1959     64.0              57.2                     48.6
1960    65.0               57.6                     48.6
1961     66.0              57.5                     49.4
1952    65.2               57.6                     48.8
1963     66.5              57.5                     49.0
1964    67.1               57.8                     49.6
1965     67.6              58.4                     50.5
1966    68.9               60.0                     51.6
1967     71.2              61.8                     51.6
1968    73.1               63.6                     51.0
1969    75.5               65.3                     52.2
1970    76.6               67.9.                    55.7
1971    80.0               70.4                     59.5
1972     81.6              72.0                     65.9
1973     84.1              74.4                     76.6
1974     92.1              86.5                     89.0
1975    100.0             100.0                     100.0
1976    106.2             105.6                     101.7
1977    112.6             112.3                     110.5
1978    117.3             120.4                     127.8
1979    127.3             132.9                     146.2
1980    141.1             148.5                     162.4
1981    154.6             163.2                     150.7
1982    165.4             169.7                     144.1
1983    170.9             172.8                     139.7
1984    175.7             176.9                     132.5
1985    177.1             178.5                     133.4
1986    179.5             179.2                     169.4
1987    184.9             183.0                     196.9
1988    194.9             192.2                     214.1
                       -    71 —

                  Appendix Table C5
       Price Indexes for Manufactured Exports by
       Germany and its Competitors, U.S. Dollars
             German Export Weights of 1975
              (Annual Averages, 1975=100)



         German Price Indexes
       Export         Oomestic               Rest—of—World
       Prices          Prices                 Price Index


1953    36.7               32.4                    53.7
1954    35.9               31.7                    53.6
1955    36.0               32.0                    53.8
1956    36.5               32.7                    55.8
1957    37.2               33.4                    57.5
1958    37.0               33.6                    56.6
1959    36.5               33.3                    56.5
1960    36.9               33.7                    55.4
1961    38.4               35.9                     56.1
1962    38.8               37.3                    55.0
1963    38.8               37.5                    54.7
1964    39.7               38.2                    55.5
1965    40.6               39.3                    56.0
1966    41.3               40.2                    57.1
1967     41.3              39.8                    57.5
1968    40.7               39.8                    57.1
1969    43.6               40.9                     58.3
1970    48.7               47.2                    60.7
1971     53.1              52.3                     63.5
1972    59.1               58.9                    68.7
1973    75.9               75.1                     75.9
1974    91.1               89.1                     89.7
1975   100.0            100.0                      100.0
1976   101.0           100.5                       103.1
1977    110.7           110.7                      110.3
1978   130.0           130.2                       125.1
1979    152.7           149.1                      141.2
1980   162.6           160.2                       158.5
1981   137.9            135.7                      157.8
1982   135.0           133.4                       155.4
1983    130.1           128.5                      151.5
1984   120.8           119.0                       147.7
1985   120.7           127.4.                      150.0
1986   163.2           1.73.9                      175.2
1987   197.2           209.2                       194.0
1988   208.0           222.0                       210.4
                        —    72 -

                   Appendix Table C6
       Price Indexes for Manufactured Exports by
        Japan and its Cospetitors, U.S. Dollars
            Japanese Export Weights of 1975
              (Annual Averages, 1975=100)



          Japanese Price Indexes
        Export         Domestic              Rest-of-World
        Prices          Prices                Price Index



1953     64.6            71.0                      49.4
1954     60.2            67.6                      49.1
1955     60.0            66.1                      49.7
1956     64.5            70.7                      50.8
isv      65.2            71.4                      52.1
1958     57.3            66.3                      52.1
1959     58.4               65.8                   51.4
1960     56.4            64.9                      51.0
1961     56.5               63.3                   51.2
1962     54.7            61.5                      50.6
1963     54.0               60.7                   50.2
1964     54.8            60.3                      50.7
1965     54.8               59.7                   51.3
1966     54.4               59.6                   52.3
1967     54.6               598                    52.3
1968     54.9               59.1                   51.9
1969     56.4               59.8                   53.4
1970     58.3               61.3                   57.3
1971     60.1               62.6                    61.2
1972     65.6               69.5                    66.4
1973     78.8               84.0                    75.1
1974    100.5               99.9                    88.8
1975    100.0           100.0                      100.0
1976     99.4           104.2                      101.4
1977    103.5           117.4                      107.9
1978    125.3           151.5                      122.6
1979    131.4           147.7                      138.4
1980    138.9           152.1                      154.4
1981    145.9           156.2                      146.1
1982    134.1           137.3                      144.0
1983    133.0           145.4                      139.4
1984    134.2           146.7                      134.0
1985    131.8           145.2                      135.6
1986    157.8           199.4                      163.4
1987    175.3           226.1                      185.0
1988    197.9           254.4                      198.8
