NBER SRKLNG PAPE1 SERIES

EO

RISK IE1'4IA EXPLAIN TT ALL?

EVIDENCE fltZ1 ThE 1 SUJCIURE

Workir paper No. 3451

Martin D.D. Evans
Karen K. Lewis

NATIONAL BJREPIXJ OF EO3NCt4IC RESEARQI

Massachusetts Avenue
Cantridge, NA 02138
Septenber 1990

1050

We are grateful for useful catunents f run Ken Froot, Jciin Huizina, Cr
Mankiw, Anelo Melino, Rick Misbkin, an Jim Stock as well as participants in
the NBER Sunmr Institute. Lewis gratefully acJocledges research support
fran the Olin Founiation ani the National Science Founiation urder grant #8902794. This paper is part of NBER's research prcxrain in Financial Markets
ard !.bnetary anics. Any opinions express&1 are those of the authors ard
not those of the National Bureau of Econanic Research.

NBER Workin Paper #3451
September 1990

EX)

RISK iE1IA EXPLAIN IT ALL?

EVIDENcE F ThE TE S'fl&JCIURE

BSTEC
?st studies of the expectations theory of the term structure reject the
irx1e1.

HcMever, the significance of the rejections depend stror1y upon the

form of the test. In this paper, we use the pattern of rejection across
maturities to back out the iiiplied behavior of tii-varyir risk premia
aM/or market forecasts. We then use a new tecthnique to test whether

stationary risk preinia alone can be responsible for these rejections.

Surprisirj1y, this test is rejected for short maturities up to 6 nnths,
suestin that tixre-varyir risk premia do not explain it all. We also
describe hew this nthod can be used to test other asset pricirx
relationships.

Martin D.D. Evans
University of Michigan
611 Tapan
Lorch Hall, Room 240
Ann Arbor, MI 48109

Karen K. Lewis

Iparbint of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
Roan 160 )keil Biildirg
3718 Lx,jst Walk

Fililadelithia,

PA 19104

1

1.

Introduction
Much of the empirical investigation of the interest rate term structure

has focused upon the "expectations theory" that relates the yield on long term

bonds to expected future short rates. This theory has frequently been tested
using regression tests of the slope of the yield curve (the "yield spread") or

forward rates.' In general, these tests reject the expectations theory citing

standard explanations that either (a)

risk prernia are time-varying, or (b)

market forecasts are biased when viewed ex post.2 In this paper, we investigate
these explanations with two goals in mind.

Our first goal is to ask what these rejections must imply about the
behavior of bond returns in two polar cases. In the first case, we assume the
conventional paradigm that forecasts are always unbiased so that time-varying
risk premia must explain all of the rejections. Using the pattern of rejection
across regression tests and maturities together srith a unifying framework, we
back out a number of restrictions on the behavior of risk prernia including the
following:
(a)

the variance of the risk premia increases with the maturity of the bond;

(b)

this variance increases faster than the variance of the yield spreads
across maturities;

(c)

the covariance of the forward premium with the current risk premium is
greater than the sum of covariances of the forward premium with all future

'For only a few examples, see Fama (1984), Shiller (1979), Mankiw (1986),
Shiller, Campbell, and Schoenholtz (1983). Fama and Bliss (1987) examine the
For a more extensive list of
relationship using long-term forward rates.
references, see Campbell and Shiller (1989) or the surves by Melino (1986) and
Shiller (1987). In addition to the regression tests that are the focus of this
paper, Campbell and Shiller (1987) also calculate the yield spread that would
be implied by the expectations theory and find that it is highly correlated with
the actual yield spread.
2See Campbell and Shiller (1989), for example. As discussed below, forecast
errors may appear biased when observed ex post even though agents use information
efficiently and in this sense may be considered to have "rational expectations."
Therefore, we call these forecasts ex pose biased and not "irrational."

2

risk premia over the maturity of the bond.

Any model of risk premia that assumes expectations are unbiased ex post must
incorporate these features.
On the other hand, recent research has shown that market participants may
make forecasts that appear biased when viewed ex post even though they are using

all information efficiently e.x ante.

They may make these forecasts if they

believe discrete changes in the process of rates are possible, if they are
learning about a recent change in the process of rates, or if the nature of the

process is non-ergodic.3 In view of these results, we next examine the polar
opposite case to the previous one by supposing that risk premia are constant.

Under this assumption, we document the behavior of expectations necessary to
explain the pattern of rejections from the regression tests. We find that when
the yield curve is upward-sloping, the market on-average predicts a higher future

interest rate than occurs ex post. Furthermore, we find sufficient conditions

for forecast errors to explain all of the rejections. Generally speaking, we
would observe the pattern of rejections if current forecast errors have greater

covariation with current information than do future forecast errors.

Although we document these stylized facts under the two polar cases of
either time-varying risk premia with unbiased forecasts or constant risk premia
with ex post biased forecasts, actual returns may contain both time-varying risk

premia and biased forecasts. Nevertheless, much of the literature has assumed

the first case, This observation leads us to the second goal of our paper.
Namely, to ask: can we find any evidence against the presumption that timevarying risk premia explain it all?
To ask this question, we test a condition that must necessarily hold when

3The impact of future discrete change on expectational errors was first
pointed out by Rogoff (1980), subsequently by Krasker (1980), and was recently
empirically investigated in interest rates by Lewis (1991).
The effects of
learning on forecast errors after changes in policy are described in Lewis
(1989).

Hodrick (1990) notes that non-ergodic processes may account for

expectational errors.

3

time-varying risk premia are both solely responsible for rejecting the theory

and are stationary.' Intuitively, If ex post biased forecast errors are not
present in the sample, the unexplained component of excess bond returns would
be comprised of a white noise forecast error and a stationary time-varying risk
premium. In this case, the unexplained residual must necessarily be stationary.
On the other hand, if ox post biased forecast errors are present in the sample,
then the residual may include runs of serially correlated forecast errors. Since

interest rates are non-stationary, these runs within the sample may make the

excess bond returns appear non-stationary as well. This intuition forms the
basis for testing the null hypothesis that no ex post biased forecasts appear
in the sample. Surprisingly, this test Is rejected for short maturities up to
6 months, suggesting that time-varying risk premia do not provide the only source

of rejecting the expectations theory.
An interesting feature of our test is that it. may be applied more generally

than the specific focus of this paper. Our test uses very recent results in time

series analysis that allow inference about parameters from cointegrating
regressions.5 Similar tests may be useful in future research.
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 develops the unifying

framework that allows for time-varying risk premia and evaluates existing
regression test results in the presence of these premia. Section 3 describes

how ex pose biased forecasts affect these results.

A summary of what the

regression results imply about either time-varying risk prernia or expectational

errors is contained in Section 4. Section 5 examines whether risk premia can be
solely responsible for rejections of the expectations theory. Concluding remarks
follow.

'Standard models of time-varying risk premia imply that these are stationary
since they depend upon the time-series properties of the change in consumption.
See, for example, Campbell (1987) and Grossman and Shiller (1981).

5See Stock and Watson (1989) and Hansen and Phillips (1989)

4

2. Regression tests and time-varying risk premia

2.1 A unifying framework
The "expectations theory" of the term structure of interest rates relates

the equilibrium yield of long bonds to the expected value of short rates over

the maturity of the bond. In order to evaluate how time-varying risk premia
would affect regression tests, we consider a unifying framework that incorporates

the expectations theory as a special case. For the case of pure discount bonds,

this relationship is:6
k-i

—

(1/k) E ER'+I + (1/k) ek
i —o

(1)

where Rk is the yield on a k-period bond purchased at time t, E denotes the
market's expectations conditional upon information available at time t, and 6k
is a time-varying risk premium on holding the k-period bond relative to rolling

over one period bonds.

The expectations theory implies a special case of

equation (1) where the risk premium is a constant,

A slightly different form of the risk premia will also prove useful for
the investigation below.

In particular, we will also define the one-period

holding premia:

—

k Rk -

(k-i)

ERk-i+1 -

(2)

where qSkt is the time-varying premium relative to the risk-free one-period rate

(R') on a risky position of holding a k-period bond for one period and then
selling the proceeds at the prevailing rate. Iterating (2) forward verifies that

—

E

E°+i, or that the risk premia on holding a long bond relative to

rolling over short bonds is equal to the expected value of the sum of holding
premia from today until the maturity period of the long bond.

6See Campbell and Shiller (1989), for example. In this paper, we will be
using data series for discount bonds rather than coupon bonds.

5

2.2 Yield Spread Regressions
According to the expectations theory, the difference between the long k-

period bond and the short 1-period bond should be the markets forecast of the

change in the long bond.

Therefore, tests of the expectations theory have

frequently used this yield spread as a regressor. These regression tests have

typically taken two forms.

In the first, the yield spread predicts the one-

period change in the long bond:

(k-l)

where

under

(R'+1

-

Rk)

— a0

+

a1

the expectations theory, a0 —

(R -

R')

- and

+

u11

(3)

a1 —

The second form of the yield spread regression relates the yield spread
to the ex post changes in the short rate over the maturity of the bond:

Z

(1
i—i

-

(i/k))

tR1+ —

b0

+ b1

Here the expectations theory requires b0 —

(Rk - R1)
-(1/k)

(4)

+

ek and b1 —

By contrast, when risk prernia vary over time, the generalized framework

in (1) implies that the coefficients a1 and b1 will be biased away from one.
In particular, the probability limits are:

plim a1 —

-

1

[Cov(ctt, Rk - R1)/

Var(Rkt -

(5)

R1fl

and
k-2

plini

b1 — 1

-

(1/k)E

[Cov()(i+j,Rk - Rlt)/Var(Rkt

-

R1fl

.

(6)

7Other studies with estimates of this regression include Campbell and
Shiller (1989), Shiller (1979), and Mankiw (1986).
8See, for example, Campbell and Shiller (1989).

6

Thus, when the holding premia are positively correlated with the yield spread,
the coefficients in the yield spread regressions will be biased downwards.

The first and second columns of Table 1 report the coefficient estimates

of a1 and b1, respectively, for one-month through 12-month U.S. T-Bill rates.
These series come from the Center for Research in Security Prices for the end
of the month over the period of availability from June, 1964 to December, 1988

and are used throughout the empirical analysis below. As the table indicates,
the parameter estimates for a1 are negative and increase in absolute value with
maturity k. All of the coefficients are significantly less than the hypothesized

value of one and even become significantly negative as the maturity horizon
lengthens. Furthermore, this pattern continues with longer maturities up to 10
years, as described in Campbell and Shiller (1989). Therefore, this regression
test points to a strong rejection of the expectations theory.

By contrast, the estimates for b1 are positive, though less than one at
values near .4. Since the residuals contain k overlapping forecast errors under

the null hypothesis, the reported standard errors are corrected for a moving
average component of order k-l. Using these standard errors, the hypothesis that

the coefficients are equal to one are rejected in all cases. But for the longer

maturities investigated in Campbell and Shiller (1989), the point estimates
increase and become insignificantly different than one.

Clearly, these two regression tests suggest different results for the
expectations theory. In terms of the generalized framework in (1), however,

this rejection pattern tells us about the behavior of risk premia across
maturities. To see why, note first that the a1 coefficients less than zero imply
from (5):

Cov(

-

R')

> Var(R -

R')

> 0,

and from (6) that,
k-2

(1/k) E

[Cov('+1, Rk - R')

)

> Var(Rkt -

R')

>

0.

7

Taken together, the negative estimates for a1 and the positive estimates for b1

imply that Cov(, Rk -

R')

> (1/(k-l))E Cov(4t+, Rk -

R').

In other

words, the covariance between the yield spread and the current k-period holding

premium is larger than the average of the covariances between the yield spread
and the expected future holding premia.

Such a pattern would likely occur if (a) the Cov(, R - R1) were to
increase with holding premia, j, and if (b) holding premia were stationary so
that the covariances between future prenlia and current yield spreads tend to fall

with the future forecast horizon.

To consider the validity of (a), excess

holding returns for bills of maturity j were regressed on each yield spread, Rk
-

R'.

These excess returns are defined by rewriting (2) and substituting the

actual for expected t÷1 rate giving,

—

j

R - (j -1) R+1 -

—

- (j -1)

(R'+1 -

ER'+I)

Therefore, the coefficients in regressions of holding returns on yield spreads

provide the ratio of Cov(, Rk -

R')

to the variance of yield spread.

Table 2 reports the results itt these regressions. Each column provides
the regression coefficient for different excess returns on the sane yield spread.

In each case, the covariances of premia with the yield spread increase
systematically with the maturity of the premia, consistent with the relationship

described above.

Furthermore, if risk premia are stationary, then the

covariances between the current yield spread and the future risk premia would
tend to fall with the forecast horizon.
More can be learned from the estimates of a1. As Fama (1984) has pointed

out, a finding that a1 is negative indicates that the variance of the risk

8

premium is greater than the variance of the yield spread.9 However, as the
third column in Table 1 indicates, the variance of the yield spread also
increases with maturity. These results therefore imply that the variances of
the risk premla grow across maturities at a rate even faster than the variance

in yield spreads. Therefore, if time-varying risk premia are responsible for
the pattern of rejecting the expectations theory, any model of risk prernia must

explain why variances increase so dramatically across maturities.

2.3 Forward Rate Regressions
A second type of regression test involves the "forward rate" for a contract

to buy a bond in the future. Using (1) this rate is given by:

k

—

Rkt -

(k-i)

k-2

Rk_l —

—

where

- 4,ki1

E R't+k_l + E Ei—n
E

I

-

R1tjk_l +

is defined as the rate at time t to buy a one-period bond at t+k-l.

This rate equals the expected future, spot rate plus the difference in holding
premia between a k period bond and the k-i period bond over the maturity of the
bond.

Hence, the second type of regression test uses as the regressor the

"forward premia", or the difference between the forward rate and the current spot
rate.

These forward rate regressions typically use two different left-hand side
variables:

(a) the change in the long bond yield over a short horizon; and

(b) changes in the short rate over a long horizon. In particular, the first form

regresses the excess holding returns on the forward premia:

9To see this, redefine yk —
(5), we have:
plirn (ar) —

Then

a1 < 0

Var(4,k) >

I

[(Var(Yk)

+

(k-I)

Rk).

Then, using (2) and

Cov(Yk, ))/(Var(Yk) + Var()

implies (i) Cov(Yk, ) <

Cov(Yk, 4)

(EtRkl+1 -

0,

)

I > Var(Yk), and (iii)
(i) and (iii) together with the

(ii) I Cov(Yk,

I > Var(Y). Combining

+ 2 Cov(Yk, )fl.

variance of the yield spread implies: Var(4) > Var(Rk

-

R1).

9

R')

hk+i — c0 + c1 (F'' -

+ e1+1

(7)

and c1 —

where, according to the expectations theory, c0 —

0.

The second form

regresses the ex post realizations of the future short rate on the forward
premia.1° In other words,

-

R1 —

d0

+ d1 (

- R')

F'

where under the expectations theory, d0 —

+

(8)

e2

- e'1

and d1 — 1.

The generalized framework in (1) implies:

plim(c1) Cov(,

F1 R')/Var(F'
-

-

R')

(9)

and
plim(d1)

—

1

-

Cov(e

-

-

Rit)/Var(Fkt

-

(10)

R1) .

In other words, c1 will differ from zero and d1 will differ from one if the risk

premia are correlated with the forward premia.

The first column of Table 3 reports the coefficient estimates for c1.

Except for the eight month bond, all of the coefficients are significantly
positive, thus rejecting the expectations hypothesis. The second column of Table

3 reports the estimated coefficients for d1. The standard errors are corrected

for the MA(k-1) process in the k period overlapping forecast error.

As the

results indicate, all of the coefficients are significantly less than one.

Comparing the rows of Table 3 provides further information about the
behavior of implied risk premia. Here we see that the coefficient estimates for
c1 are always greater than their counterparts for d1. Furthermore, on maturities

greater than 3 months, c1 is also greater than 1 - d1.

Comparing (9) and (10),

these estimates imply that, if time-varying risk premia are to blame for

10For example, Fama and Bliss (1987) find that the prediction of the forward
rate increases with the forecast horizon.

10

rejecting the expectations theory,

Cov(,
Recall

that

8k

are

Fk_l.

-

R')

> Cov(ek

9k1

Fk1 -

the sum of expected risk premia 'k

R')

over

the maturity of the

bond. In other words, we would find this relationship if the difference across

risk

premia of adjacent maturities have lower covariability with the forward

premium than does the level of the risk prenila.

In summary, if time-varying risk premia are solely responsible for
rejecting the expectations theory, the forward rate and yield spread regression

results place limits on the dynamics of the risk premia. Among the necessary
requirements implied by the regression results are:
(a)

the variance of the risk prernia increase with maturity of the bond;

(b)

this variance increases faster than the variance of the yield spreads;

(c)

the covariance of the forward premium with the current risk premium is
greater than the sum of covariances of the forward premium with all future

risk premia over the maturity of the bond.

Any model of risk premia must therefore incorporate these features.

3. Regression Tests and Ex Post Biased Forecasts
Our interpretation of the regression results above assumes the forecast
errors are uncorrelated with current information. This would be true if there
were no actual or anticipated switches in the time series process of interest
rates. However, recent studies have shown that this assumption may be incorrect
if agents rationally anticipate future discrete changes in policy or if they are

rationally learning about past discrete changes.'1 Furthermore, studies based

upon survey data find that expectations may be on-average incorrect for

111n addition, they may appear biased if the transition process for policy

regimes is not ergodic. Hodrick (1990) cites non-ergodicity as a source of
anomalies in financial markets.

11

significant periods of time.2 Clearly, this explanation need not exclude the

presence of time-varying risk premia discussed above. But in order to focus
upon the potential effects of ex post biased forecasts in this section, we will

assume that risk premia are constant. Later, In Section 5, we will allow for
both time-varying risk premia and ex post biased forecasts simultaneously.

As described above, ex post biased forecasts may arise in small samples

even though market participants use information efficiently. These forecasts
may be illustrated with an example. Suppose the market believes that the policy

process generating interest rates may change by period t+l with probability, .

Therefore,

the market's assessed forecast at time t

ER+1 — (1

where E°,

-

of

the rate at t÷1

1r) E°R+ + ,r, EAjR+i

is:
(11)

EA are the expectations operators conditional upon the current, and

alternative policy processes, respectively. But now suppose that ex post the

interest rate process continues to be driven by the current process •13 In
this case, the observed rates would be uncorrelated with the forecasts that were

conditioned upon the current process o. In other words,

E II.
(Rk

- E°t. Rk
t+j/

i

o

where I is the set of all information available at time t.

But the actual

market forecast error may be correlated with current information. The market's

error in forecasting when viewed ex post is the difference between the actual
realized rate and the forecast given in equation (11),

'2For example, see Friedman (1979,1980) and more recently Froot (1989).

13For the following analysis, this condition is more restrictive than we
need. As will be discussed below in Section 4, we require only that any switches
in the process occur infrequently within the sample. We use condition (12) only
to develop the example in this section.

12

- ERk+i — (Rk+j

—

-

E° Rk+j) + r(E°R+1 -

EAtRt+I)

(13)

.

Although the first term is uncorrelated with current information, the second term

may depend upon current information when

is not zero. As discussed in Lewis

(1989), a similar relationship arises if the market believes that a policy shift

may have recently taken place with probability w.
If expectations appear biased ex post, then the correlation between the
forecast errors and the yield spreads or forward premia will affect the point

estimates in the regression tests above. Then even if the risk premia were
constant, the limits of the regression coefficients in (4) and (5) would be:

plim a1 — 1 + (k- 1) [Cov('+1 ,

- Rlt),rVar(Rkj_Rlt)

(4'

1

and

plim

In

b1 — 1 + E

((k-i)/k) [Cov( +ji+j,Rk - R1)/ Var(R-R1)). (5')

this case, both of these sets of estimates in Table 1 indicate that the the

yield spread is negatively correlated with the ex post forecast errors.

On

average, when the yield spread was predicting higher interest rates, interest
rates turned out to be lower than expected.
Before proceeding, we should note a caveat to the limits described in (4')

and (5'). If the sample contains ex post biased forecast errors for reasons

discussed above, we would expect this bias to disappear asymptotically.
Therefore, (4') and (5') are the limits if the current sample were representative

of the true asymptotic distribution. We will address this issue more carefully
in Section 5 below.
With this caveat, the conflicting evidence between the signs of the a1 and

b1 estimates imply that:

k(k-l) >

k-i

E
i—i

(k-i) [Cov(c1+11+ ,Rk -

R1) /Cov( (kit

t+1 Rk

-

R')

1

13

Thus,

even if the covariance between the yield spread and the forecast errors

were the same so that the ratio of covariances were unity, this relation would
hold since k(k-l) > E..(k-i) — (½) k(k-i). Thus, a sufficient condition to find

the rejection pattern is that:

I Cov(t+j_i,+j,Rk - R'L)

I

Cov('+i,

-

R1)

This condition seems plausible since the variance of the excess holding returns

increases with maturity as the last column of Table 2 shows.

With ex post biased forecasts and constant risk premia, the coefficient
in the forward preniia regressions given in (9) and

piim(c1)

—

- (k-i)

Cov(1t+1 ,

F'

-

(10)

would instead be:

R1)/Var(F1

-

R')

(9')

and

piim(d1) —
The

positive

1 + Cov('tt+k_l

-

R1)fVar(F'

-

R')

(10')

.

estimates for c1 in Table 3 imply that periods of higher forward

premia are also periods when people forecast interest rates higher than occur

the

ex post.

As noted above, Table 3 also suggests that c1 > 1 - d1 for

maturities

3 months and greater. But even if the covariances between the yield

spreads and the forecast errors were the same across maturities, we would tend
to find this result since for k > 3,

(k-i) > 1 > Cov('+..1 pk- -

if

R')/

Cov(€+1 ,

- R')

errors within the sample period are correlated with the
yield spread and the forward premia, the conflicting pattern of coefficient
estimates found in the literature would arise under fairly weak conditions.
In summary,

forecast

14
4.

Summary of Stylized Facts
To this point, we have discovered that empirical evidence in the literature

based upon regression tests places explicit restrictions upon the behavior of
bond returns. Using a unifying framework, we have documented what these results

must imply about either time-varying risk premia or expectational errors under
two polar cases.

Table 4 summarizes these regressions and their implications under each

extreme. Part A gives the results for regressions on the yield spreads. The
first column refers to the left-hand side variable in the regression, while the

second summarizes the point estimates found in Table 1. The third, fourth, and
fifth

co]unlns list the Inip] I cd value of the coefficient under the "Expectations

Theory,"

table

"If Risk Premia Alone," and "If Forecast Errors

Alone." Part

in the

lists these same relationships when the right-hand side variables are

forward premia. Together, the results indicate the implied behavior of risk
premia or expectational errors.

Risk premia are capable of explaining the

pattern of rejection if they obey the necessary conditions listed in Table 4.

Generally speaking, expectational errors could explain this pattern if the
covarjance between short-term forecast errors and current information were less

than the covariance between long-term forecast errors and current information.

In reality, both time-varying risk premia and ex post biased market
forecasts could cause rejections of the expectations theory. However, since
these two effects are not separately identifiable, the typical approach has been

to assume that forecasts are ex post unbiased and treat all of the unexplained
component as time-varying risk premia. The rest of this paper will follow this

presumption and ask:

can time-varying risk premia explain it all? We will

address this question by testing a condition that must necessarily hold when
time-varying risk premia are both solely responsible for rejecting the theory
and are stationary. Standard models of time-varying risk premia imply that these

must be stationary since they depend upon the time-series properties of the

15

change in consumption.'4

For this purpose, we will develop a new test that may also be used to
examine other asset pricing relationships. The basic intuition behind the test

is straightforward. If ex post biased forecast errors are not present in the
sample, the unexplained component of excess bond returns would be the sum of a
white noise forecast error and a stationary time-varying risk premium. In this

case, the unexplained residual must necessarily be stationary. On the other
hand, if ex post biased forecast errors are present in the sample, then the
residual may include runs of serially correlated forecast errors. Since interest

rates are non-stationary, these runs within the sample may make the excess bond
returns appear non-stationary as well. This insight forms the basis of our tests
below.

5. Do risk premia explain it all?

5.1 Time-Varying Risk Premin and Biased Forecasts
As long as time-varying risk premia are stationary, then standard rational
expectations conditions imply that the sum of the risk premia and forecast errors

must also be stationary. Therefore, this minimal condition must hold if there

are no episodes of ex post unbiased forecasts. As an alternative hypothesis,
consider the example above in equation (11) where market participants anticipate

a future shift in policy or are learning about one that occured in the past.

To provide further structure, suppose that the forecast of interest rates
conditional upon a switch in policy can be written as:

t.A

t.

,k t+1

t.

t,k

114

t+1•

That is, the forecast of the interest rate conditional upon a switch in the
interest rate process, denoted A,

depends

upon the forecast conditional upon the

14See, for example, Campbell (1987) and Grossman and Shiller (1981).

16

current process, denoted o, according to a time-varying parameter, p.
Substituting (14) into (11) and rearranging implies,

ERkt+i —

(1 +

rt(pt

-

1))

(15)

EOtRkt+i.

defining S — (1 + 7r(p, - 1)), we have ERk+1 — S ER1. In other words,
the actual expected future rate depends upon the efficient forecast conditional

Or,

upon the current process according to a parameter that reflects both the
probability

of a switch, icc, and the difference between forecasts, (i -

1).

Equation (15) provides a simple and tractable interpretation of
expectations. When 8 is always and everywhere equal to one, we have the standard

rational expectations condition through (12). Rut if 8 varies over time, its
mean within the sample would give the direction of switch people anticipated on-

average. For example, if on-average people anticipated that rates would rise

so that EARk+i > EORk+i, then (14) shows that the mean of p would be greater
than one. In this case, the mean value of S would also exceed unity.

We can also consider this relationship by forming the ex post forecast
error based upon the expectations in (15) (and subsuming the k superscript)

Et,t+1

/0 t+1 -

t0t±1'\

— f'. t+1

—

Ot.+1
R t*1/

+ /1
"

ti

CO

tRt+1

As long as interest rates follow the current process 'o", the first term on the
right-hand side has mean zero. Thus, the expected mean of forecast errors equals

the expected mean of (1 -

&)

E°R+1. Clearly, S may vary above and below one

so that forecast errors could in fact still have mean zero. However, if shifts
in the interest rate process are expected, we may find within any finite sample

that S systematically deviates on one-side of unity for significant periods of
time. Since the interest rate process appears non-stationary, forecast errors
within the sample would look highly persistent in this case.
If switches occur within the sample, but market participants believe rates

17

may revert back to the old processs (as in Lewis (1991)) or they are learning
about the new process (as in Lewis (1989)), then forecast errors would continue
to have the same basic form as (16).15

5.2 A test of unbiased forecasts with time-varying risk premia
In the empirical results below, we will test a necessary condition for the

hypothesis that 8 is always and everywhere equal to one.

In our empirical

6kl

analysis, we will require for econometric identification that 5k —

for all

adjacent pairs of k and k-l. Clearly, this is not restrictive since under the
null hypothesis, these parameters are constants where 8k —

6k — 1.

Furthermore,

for clarity, we will subsume the k superscript on 6 for the remaining discussion.

'Jhen expectations incorporate process switches, the risk premium may be

written in terms of the current observed process, denoted o.

Specifically,

substituting (15) into (2) implies:

k

—

-

(k-I) 6 E° R'+1 - R'.

(17)

Substituting the actual for the expected next period interest rate into (17) and

rearranging, the equation can be rewritten.

(k- 1)

where

a—

(l/)

,

—

and

a0 +

v1 —

is the inverse of S,

a1

-

(k

-('/5)

R')

+ v1

+ (kl)(Rk+i - E0tRlt+i)

(18)

-

a0. Thus,

capturing the difference between expected future

interest rates under the alternative processes. When expectations are ex post
unbiased as under standard rational expectations conditions, 6 and cz are always

'51n this case, we would have:

— (R+1

-

EAtRt+i)

+

(1

-

(i/6))

EAtRt+i.

interest rate realizations arising from process "A", (R+1 - E*tRt+i) would
be white noise, while systimatic forecast errors would arise from the second

With

term.

18

and everywhere equal to one. If 6 varies over time, a1 would also vary. Within

any given sample, the average level of a1 would not in general equal one,

although it might coincidentally equal one as described above in (4.2).
Therefore, at a minimum, the null hypothesis of ox post unbiased forecasts
requires that a1 be equal to one. We will test this hypothesis below.

If the variables in (18) were stationary, then we could not obtain an

asymptotically consistent estimate from this regression due to correlation
between the right-hand side variable and the risk premium in the composite
residual, v,÷1

This estimation problem arose repeatedly when examining the

standard regression tests above. But here we formed the regression in terms of

variables that are typically considered non-stationary)6 We developed this

equation in order to exploit a result from recent advances in time-series
analysis of non-stationary variables. Specifically, as long as the residual is
stationary, a regression of a non-stationary variable on another non.stationary

variable will provide an asymptotically consistent coefficient estimate even
though the residual may be correlated with the right-hand side variable.17

This result means that, as long as v1 is stationary, the regression in

(18) provides an estimate of (1/6) that is asymptotically consistent and
independent of the risk premium. But by the definition of v1 in (18), this
residual equals a risk-premium, that is stationary on theoretical grounds, plus

a conditional forecast error that is white noise by construction. Therefore,

we expect v1 to be stationary a priori. In the results below, we also test
this condition with Dickey-Fuller tests.

16See, for example, Mishkin (1989). To verify this non-stationarity with

our data, we tested the hypothesis of unit roots for interest rates using
modified Dickey-Fuller tests,
17See West (1988) for a derivation of the property of asymptotic normality
when non-stationary regressors have drift. For a more general discussion, see
Pagan and Wickens (1989) and references therein.

19

In summary, we can test a minimum requirement for risk premia to explain
all of the expectations theory rejections by estimating a1 in equation (18) and

testing whether it is equal to one. Since we have written equation (18) in the
form of non-stationary variables, this provides coefficient estimates of a1 that
are asymptotically consistent even though the yield spread may be correlated with

the risk premia. On the other hand, this estimation introduces some additional
econometric issues to which we now turn.

5.3 Cointegrating Regression Results

Although the regression in (18) provides asymptotically consistent
estimates of a1, correlation between the residual and the right-hand-side
variable will bias these estimates in small samples. Two different methods have

recently been introduced to adjust for this bias. First, Hansen and Phillips
(1989) use the data to generate the asymptotic variance-covariance matrix and
then use this matrix to adjust the small sample bias in the coefficient estimate.

Second, Stock and Watson (1990) propose a method that purges the small sample

bias by including as regressors sufficient leads and lags of (the firstdifference) of the right-hand side variable. We use both methods to test the

hypothesis that

— 1 below.

Details of these methods are provided in the

appendix.

Before proceeding with the analysis, we should emphasize the relationship
between the asymptotic distribution of equation (18) and the sample distribution.

As long as market participants use information efficiently (and the distribution

is ergodic), the true asymptotic mean of 8 must be equal to one. However, in

this section, we treat the sample data as representative of the long run
distribution to test whether 6 is equal to one. In the next section, we address

the small sample problem more directly with Monte Carlo experiments.

The first column of Table 5 reports the coefficient estimates of 01

for

different (k month) maturities of Treasury Bills. All of the point estimates
are less than one. The second and third columns report the test statistics for

20

the null hypothesis that a —

1

using the Hansen and Phillips (H-P) method. As

described in the appendix, this so-called 'C-statistic" is a modified Wald
statistic based upon an estimate of the asymptotic variance-covariance matrix.

When the risk premium and, therefore, v are serially correlated, a consistent
estimator of the covariance matrix must incorporate lagged autocovariances of
the error process. Since we do not know the order of the process for the risk

premium, we calculated the "C-statistics for two extreme truncation lags. In
the first, reported as C0 in column (2), the truncation lag was assumed to be
zero with no serial correlation in Vt.

In

the second, reported as C5 in column

(3), the process could be correlated as many as 6 months. Inspection of the

regression residuals indicated that this provides a conservatively large
truncation lag of autocorrelation.

These results are reported in the table together with their marginal
significance levels. For the statistics assuming no serial correlation, under

C0, the hypothesis that o equals one is rejected with marginal significance

levels less that 10% for 6 of the. 11 maturities.

The more conservative

covariance estimates incorporating autocovariances up to 6 months tend to blow

up the covariance matrix.

As a result, the -C5 statistics cannot reject the

hypothesis except for the very short term 2 and 3 month maturities.

Stock and Watson (1990) propose an alternative approach that purges the
small sample bias due to simultaneity between the regressors and the residuals.

They include leads and lags of the first difference of the right-hand side
variable in equations such as (18). In the present case, this yields:

(k-l) R1+1 —

Intuitively,

a0

+

o

(k

Rk - R1)

n+1

+ E
i-n+1

(k Rk+ -

R'+1)

+

u1.

(19)

including the lagged and future changes in the regressor "soaks up'

the correlation between the regressor and the right-hand side variable. This
regression makes the residual independent of the entire sequence of interest rate

21

R1),

regressors, (k Rk -

and thus renders normal the asymptotic distribution

of the OLS estimator for a. As before, the estimated variance-covarjance matrix
of parameters must include autocorrelation lags in order to incorporate potential

serial correlation in the residual.

Column (4) of Table (5) reports the x2(l) Wald test that a1 — 1.

These

statistics were calculated assuming that n, the number of leads/lags of the
These results also assume that the truncation lag for

regressors, equals 2.

estimating the variance-covariance matrix is 1. The results are not sensitive
to these choices, however.

As the results indicate, the hypothesis that a

equals one is rejected only for the two and three month maturities.

The empirical results in this section rely heavily upon the assumption
that, if we were to view an infinite number of observations, they would look like

the sample data. However, this condition may not hold. If agents make forecasts
that appear biased when viewed ex post but use all information efficiently, the

systematic nature of forecast errors would disappear with a sufficiently large

number of observations.

Therefore, in the next section, we use Monte Carlo

experiments to calculate the standard errors of a1 directly from the observed
sample.

5.4 fronte Carlo Simulations

When

forecasts

appear biased ex post due to beliefs about future or past

shifts in the interest rate process, forecast errors will be systematically
biased in one direction for a period before a future shift or after a past shift.

Since interest rates appear non-stationary, runs of these systematic forecast
errors will likely appear very persistent within the sample. Thus, even if these

episodes disappear asymptotically, we may use the data to "bootstrap" the
standard errors of a conditional upon the sample.
For this purpose, we generated time-series for the future interest rate

based upon the data.

We constructed the series in two ways that reflect

different assumptions about conditional heteroscedasticity. We considered both

22

cases in order to examine the finite sample sensitivity of our Monte Carlo
experiments to assumptions upon heteroscedasticity.

As a first case, we

generated a benchmark series allowing for unconditional heteroscedasticity but

assuming conditional homoscedasticity. Specifically, we followed these steps:
(1)

Estimate eqn. (19) by OLS, saving the residuals and the estimates of o,

/3 for all 1.

(2) For each run, choose alternative values for:

—

0.9

Model A

(MA)

0.95

Model B

(Me)

0.99

Model C

(Mc)

1.00

Model D

(Me)

(3) Draw randomly from the distribution of residuals in the data. Using m,
the

and the constrained value of o, generate a time-series for (k-i) Rk+I

equal to the number of observations, 294.

(4)

Estimate the cointegrating

regression (18) by OLS and save a. (5) Repeat (3) and (4) 1000 times.
The second way we calculated the data was to parameterize the conditional

heteroscedasticity with an ARCH process. In this case, we followed the same
steps as above except for the data generating step (3). Here, we substituted

the following step: (3') Take the residuals from (19) and estimate an ARCH
process. Scale the residuals by the predictions of the ARCH model. Then, draw

randomly from the scaled distribution. Rescale the distribution of residuals
using predictions from the ARCH process and use these to generate the time series

process of rates.

In estimating the ARCH process, we used a simple rule of thumb to be
consistent across maturities. We first estimated an ARCH process of order six
and checked to make sure that the implied variances were positive. In the few
instances where negative variances were encountered, we reduced the order of the

ARCH process until variances were always positive.

In Table 5, columns (5), (6), (7), and (8) report the results of these

Monte Carlo experiments for Models A, B, C, and D, respectively. The first

23

numbers in each row are the mean of the distribution of a1 coefficients. None
of the mean estimates of the a coefficients from the heteroscedastic Monte Carlo

estimates differed from the homoscedastic Monte Carlo estimates by more than

l0. Therefore we report only mean values of a from the homoscedastjc case
for clarity. The estimates demonstrate the downward-bias in small samples due
to the correlation between the residuals and the right-hand side variables. In

all cases, the Monte Carlo estimates of a1 are below the true a1 used to
construct the time-series.
The numbers in parentheses in columns (5) to (8) report the p-values for
the hypothesis that the point estimates in column (1) are significantly different

from the values of a at the top of each column. The first number in parentheses
is the p-value from the distribution of coefficients when the data are generated

from the conditionally hornoscedastic case. The lower number in parenthesis is

the corresponding p-value based upon the conditionally heteroscedastic case.
These p-values describe the nature of the distribution. We would almost never
reject that the point

estimates

— .9 as in column (5) or a1
are near 1.

in column (1) are significantly different than
.95 as in column (6) since most of the p-values

Furthermore, for most of the maturities, we would not reject a1 is

different than .99.

The numbers in parentheses in column (8) give the p-values for our test

that a — 1.

As the table shows, we would reject this hypothesis at the

marginal significance level for all maturities except for 7, 8, and 9 months.
At the 10% level, we would also reject for the 9 month maturity. Therefore, the
null hypothesis that 6 is always and everywhere equal to one is rejected for most

maturities.

These results indicate that stationary risk premia alone do not fully
explain the departure of returns from the expectations theory regression tests.

Intuitively, since interest rates are non-stationary, systematic misprediction

of rates within a finite sample appear non-stationary as well.

Hence, the

24

empirical finding that forward rates at short maturities deviate from the
subsequent realization of rates by a non-stationary component suggests systematic

ex post bias.

5.5 Are yield spreads and excess returns non-stationary?
According to the cointegratirig regressions in Table 5, the market forecasts

future rates slightly differently than the ex post statistical forecast implies.

If correct, this implies that the residuals should appear to contain nonstationary components in standard regressions of excess holding returns. Put
differently, substituting the forecast error (16) into the definition of the
holding returns yields:

k

-

(k-i)

Rk_lt+i -

—

- (kl)(Rkl÷i

-

E°

Rkl+i)

(20)

-(k-l)(l-6)E° R1+I.
The first two terms on the right-hand side are, respectively, the risk premia
and the statistical innovation to forecasts of the k-l bond, Hence, both are

stationary. But the last term is proportional to the statistical forecast of
the long rate. If 8, systematically deviates from one for prolonged periods of
time, this component may appear non-stationary since long rates are themselves

non-stationary. Therefore, the evidence for our alternative hypothesis seems
to imply that the holding returns and yield spreads should appear non-stationary.

Because other studies in the literature find no evidence of this behavior, our
alternative model might appear inconsistent with these other studies.
To investigate the effects of the non-stationary expectational errors, we
included additional steps to the Monte Carlo experiments described above. Using
the process for future rates generated by the data, we calculated both the excess

holding returns, hk+1, as in (20), and the yield spreads, R -

R'.

For each

of these, we conducted a modified Dickey-Fuller test for unit roots using the
method in Phillips and Perron (1987).
Table 6 reports the results of these tests for the case of Model A where

25

at a — .9, the parameter deviates the most from one and is therefore the most
likely to appear non-stationary.

Column

(1)

reports

the

first-order

autocorrelation multiplied by 100. All of these estimates are far away from one.

Colunins (2) and (3) provide the Dickey-Fuller unit-root tests for the excess

holding returns and the yield spreads, respectively.

Since the 5% marginal

significance level for 250 observations is -3.43, all of these test statistics

strongly reject the hypothesis of unit roots. These statistics in columns (1)
to (3) were also calculated for Models B, C, and D where a —
respectively.

.95,

.99, and 1,

In all cases, the hypothesis of unit roots would be strongly

rejected. Not surprisingly, the first-order correlation coefficients become even

smaller. For a — .95, the maximum autocorrelation is .04 while for 01 — .99,
the first-order autocorrelations are all negative and near zero. Therefore, our

finding that 6 is significantly different than one (at short maturities) is
completely consistent with standard findings that excess holding returns and
yield spreads are stationary.

5.6 Row do long rates react when expectations include process switches?
In Section 3, we used results from regression tests to infer the behavior
of expectations under the extreme case that risk premia are constant. Under this

view, we found that on-average market participants predicted a higher interest

rate than was realized ex post.

This result is consistent with the general

finding in the literature that realized rates are lower than predicted by the
yield spread. But in this section, we have found that this phenomenon is highly

persistent in the data. The persistence of systematic forecast errors suggests

that market participants may anticipate switches in the process of interest
rates.

In order to evaluate the effects of these beliefs on the yield spread, we

calculated the "theoretical spread' that would occur at the average level of 6
as found from the estimates in Table 5.

Setting & equal to its mean, 6, and

iterating the risk premium relationship in equation (17), implies,

26

-

— (1/k)

k-2
3

81 E0tRlt+j

-

+ (1/k) E 6 E

1—0

Since 5 >

(21)

1—0

1, the market's forecasts of long rates include the probability that

a shift to higher rates will occur. The probability of the switch increases with

the forecast horizon, pushing up the levels of long term bonds. When 6 —

1,

we

have the standard model as in equation (1).

To compare with standard expectations theory assumptions, we calculated
the theoretical yield spread using (21) at both 5 —

the average level of 8. in the sample.

1, the standard case, and

For this purpose, we identified and

estimated the process for the short rate as:

— 0.792 tR'1 + c. - 0.862
(.161)

c

(.133)

R2 —

(Stand. Error)

0.91

(22)

S.E. 0.83

For both the standard model and at the mean 6, Figure 1 depicts the plots
of the expectations components of the, spread between the 11 month bond and the

one month bond, i.e., (1/k)

ELR't+I -

R'.

Similar pictures were also found

for the other maturities of the long bond. As the figure indicates, the yield
spread varies less than in the standard expectations theory case. In a sense,
long rates underreact to expected future short-rates. This finding is consistent

with the description of long rates found in Mankiw and Summers (1984) and
Campbell and Shiller (1984). Our results suggest that this behavior may be
partially due to market participants anticipating switches in the process for
interest rates.

6. Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we have asked what the pattern of rejecting the expectations

theory implies about the behavior of time-varying risk premia and/or ex post
biased forecasts of interest rates. We uncovered dynamics in either the risk

27

premia or forecast errors that must necessarily hold if either variable were
solely responsible for the rejections. Since time-varying risk premia are likely
to be present regardless of expectational errors, we tested a necessary condition

when risk premia are solely responsible.

Surprisingly, we rejected this

hypothesis at short maturities. Overall, our evidence using data since 1964
suggests the presence of systematic forecast errors on bonds of short maturities

together with time-varying risk premia.
research will be to explain this behavior.

Therefore, a challenge for future

28

References

(1987), "Stock returns and the term structure," Journal of
Financial Economics 7, 265-296.
Campbell, John Y. ,

Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller (1984), "A Simple Assount of the Behavor
of Long-Term Interest Rates," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings
74: 44-4.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller (1989), "Yield Spreads and Interest Rate

Movements: A Bird's Eye View," N.B,E.R Working Paper No. 3153.

Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller (1987), "Cointegration and Test of
Present Value Models," Journal of Political Economy, 95: 1062-1088.
Fama, Eugene F. (1984a), "The Information in the Term Structure," Journal of
Financial Economics, 13:
509-28.
Fama, Eugene F. (1984b), "Term Premiums in Bond Returns," Journal of Financial
Economics, 13: 529-46.

Fama, Eugene F. and Robert R. Bliss (1987), "The Information in Long Maturity
Forward Rates," American Economic Review, 77: 680-692.
Friedman, Benjamin H., (1979) "Interest Rate Expectations Versus Forward Rates:
Evidence from an Expectations Survey," Journal of Finance, 34: 965-73.
Friedman, Benjamin M. , (1980), "Survey Evidence on the Rationality of Interest
Rate Expectations," Journal of Monetary Economics, 6: 453-65.

Froot, Kenneth A., (1989), "New Hope for the Expectations Hypothesis of the Term
Structure of Interest Rates," Journal of Finance, 44: 283-305.

Grossman, Sanford, and Robert Shiller, (1981), "The Determinants of the
Variability of Stock Market Prices," American Economic Review, 71: 222-227.

Hansen B. and P. Phillips, (1989), "Statistical Inference in Instrumental
Variables Regression with 1(1) Processes," Review of Economic Studies, 57 No.
189: 99-126.

Hodrick, Robert J., (1990), "Volatility in the Foreign Exchange and Stock
Markets: Is It Excessive?" American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
80:

Krasker, William S., (1980), "The Peso Problem in Testing the Efficiency of
Foward Exchange Markets," Journal of Monetary Economics, 6: 269-276.
Lewis, Karen K., (1989), "Changing Beliefs and Systematic Forecast Errors,"

Mrican Economic Review, 79: 621-636.
Lewis, Karen K., (1991), "Was There a 'Peso Problem in the U.S. Term Structure
of Interest Rates: 1979-1982?", International Economic Review, forthcoming.

29

Mankiw, N. Gregory, (1986), "The Term Structure of Interest Rates Revisited,"
rook1ngs Papers on Economic ActIvity, 61: 61-96.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Lawrence H. Summers, (1984), "Do Long-Term Interest Rates
Overreact to Short-Term Interest Rates?" Brookings Pagers on Economic Activity,

1: 223-242.
Melino, Angelo, (1986), "The Term Structure of Interest Rates: Evidence and
Theory," N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 1828.
Mishkin, Frederic, (1989), "Is the Fisher Effect for Real?" Mimeo, Columbia
University.
Pagan, Adrian R. and M.R. Wickens, "A Survey of Some Recent Econometric Methods,"

The Economic Journal, 99: 962-1025.
Phillips, Peter and Pierre Perron, (1987) "Testing for a unit root in a time
series regression," iornetrika, 74: 335-46.
Rogoff, Kenneth S., (1980) "Essays on Expectations and Exchange Rate Volatility."
Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Shiller, Robert J., (1987), "The Term Structure of Interest Rates," NB.E.R.
Working Paper No. 2341.

SMiler, Robert J., (1979), "The Volatility of Long-Term Interest Rates and
Expectations Models of the Term Structure," Journal of Political Economy, 87:
1190-19.
Shiller, Robert J. ,

John Y. Campbell, and Kermit L. Schoenhoitz, (1983), "Forward

Rates and Future Policy: Interpreting the Term Structure of Interest Rates,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 173-217.
Stock, James and Mark Watson, (1989) "A simple MLE of Cointegrating vectors in
higher order integrated systems," NBER Technical Working Paper No. 83.

West, Kenneth D., (1988), "Asymptotic Normality When Regressors Have a Unit
Root," Econometrica, pp. 1397-417.

30

Appendix
In this appendix, we describe the methods used in Section 4 to adjust for

simultaneous equation bias in the cointegrating regression (18).

For more

detailed and thorough discussions, see Hansen and Phillips (1989) and Stock and
Watson (1990). For notational simplicity, note that equation (18) may be written
as,

—

+
—

(Al)

u2,

(A2)

where u1 and u2 are stationary, yr

(k-l)R1, x — (k R -

R'),

and the

constant term is omitted for simplicity. We are interested in testing -y —

Since x is endogenous, it is likely that Cov(x,uj)

be biased in any finite sample.

1.

0. In this case, -y will

Therefore, test statistics on -y must take

account of this bias. This bias arises even though the estimate of -y remains
consistent with this simultaneity. We use two methods to adjust for the bias.

Below, we give the steps for estimating (Al) and (A2) using each of these

mehods.
A. Hansen and
(1)

Phillips

method

Estimate (Al) and (A2) to get the estimates of u and u and the OLS
estimate of -y.

For future reference, define the vector of residual

estimates as: u [ufl, u2j'
(2)

Calculate

Yt

—

where

i.e.,

''t

-

ti —

12 22

LIXt

[ç2J — T'EfUU + T

_lWftEt..r+1(UtUt..r + u.u')

is the Newey-West estimator of the variance-covariance matrix with
.2 lags of autocovariances and weights u.

31

(3)

Calculate the "bias-adjusted estimate of y
+

— [ E)'txt

where A —

(4)

T [I, - Q12Q221] [Afl, A22]

-

T'[Euu'

—

[A1

+

E1tE_+(u

Calculate a modified Wald statistic, known

— 1.

]

[Ex2J'

u_T')]
as

the C-statistic, to test

This C-statistic is:
—

(+

where
Note

as:

-

1)2

0 (E x2)1]'

[

-

fl112 —

that subscript

—

X2(1)

22 21

refers to the number of lags included in the

estimators ( and A.

Table 5 reports the results for . — 0 and £ — 6 in columns (2) and (3).

B. Stock and Watson Procedure
Rewrite equation (Al) according to,

—

+ y x + /3(L) Ax + u1

where /3(L) is a polynomial in the lag operator, L, i.e., /3(L) —

+L

+ 1

+

L'

+

. . . + L'

+

L).

(A3)

(L

+

+ .

The idea to rewriting (Al) in this form is

to include as many of leads and lags of Ax on the right-hand side of the equation

to make u independent of x. This implies that the asymptotic distribution of
the OLS estimator of y is normal. Intuitively, including the leads and lags of
on the right-hand side gets rid of the simultaneous equation bias problem.
Note that since u1 will be serially correlated in general, the Wald test of yl

from (A3) should also use the Newey-West estimator for the covariance matrix.
Column (4) of Table 5 reports the results when n—2 and .2—I. The results are not

sensitive to these choices.

Figure 1
Theoretical Yield Spreads
r'4

N

1968

1972

1976

1980

1964

1986

1992

Key: Dashed line denotes the yield spread between the 11 and 1-month bond under
standard expectations 16—li. Solid line denotes the same spread with ex post
biased expectations [5 > 1].

Table 1
Regression Tests Using Yield Spreads

Regression Coefficients:
Perfect Foresight
Change in
Spread
Long—Bond
(1)

(2)

a1

b1

Variances:
(Rk_Rl)

(Rk_Rl)/(k_1)

(3)

(4)

.10

.100

Regresor:
(Rk_RL)

fork—
2

3

42a
(.24)

(.12)

43a

•32a
(.19)

.15

.075

(.68)

39a
(.19)

.20

.066

(.61)

•36a
(.17)

.24

.060

127a

38a

.27

.054

(.72)

(.20)

.31

.051

(.79)

(.18)
.34

.047

(.83)

(.20)
.37

.046

(.79)

(.17)
.39

.043

(.86)

(.20)

40a
(.22)

.41

.041

(.88)

4

115a
(.68)

6

60a

7

41a

8

37a

9

10

39a

11

notes: a' indicates significantly less than one at the 95% confidence level.
Column (1) is the regression coefficient using
variable.

(k—1)(R.—R)

as dependent

k—i
Column (2) is the regression coefficient using (1/k E (k—i)
i—l
variable. Standard errors are corrected for an MA(k—1) error.

as dependent

Covariance matrix estimated using Hansen's (1982) sample moments method.

Table 2
Regression Coefficients of Excess Holding Returns on Yield Spreads

(Cov(h1, R—R)/Var(R—R)]
Re turn

Yield Spread Maturity

Maturity

(k)

(I)

Variance
3

4

5

.82
(.23)

.64
(.22)

1.44
(.54)

1.43

1.20
(.44)

1.06
(.39)

1.84
(.80)

1.82

1.70
(.61)

1.47

2

2

1.17
(.24)

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

(.48)

(.70)

10

hi

6

7

8

.54

.47

.31

.29

(.17)

(.16)

(.15)

.27
(.15)

.74

(.19)

.37
(.18)

.32

(.20)

.79
(.34)

.68
(.32)

.68
(.30)

.65
(.29)

.61
(.28)

2.32

(.37)

1.28
(.50)

1.08
(.47)

.92
(.44)

.95
(.41)

.91
(.40)

.85

5.09

(.54)

(.37)

.94

9

1.40
(.47)

8.95

1.76
(.56)

1.68

13.00

2.02
(.60)

1.92

2.28
(.70)

2.15

2.38
(1.08)

2.34
(.92)

2.20

2.15

1.92

(.68)

(.64)

1.67
(.59)

1.46
(.56)

1.51
(.51)

1.47

(.80)

2.72
(1.28)

2.65
(1.06)

2.47
(.92)

2.43

2.27

1.98

1.74

1.81

(.78)

(.72)

(.67)

(.63)

(.57)

2.91
2.86
(1.45) (1.18)

2.69

2.70

2.48

2.29

(.85)

(.79)

(.71)

1.99
(.68)

2.05

(1.02)

2.99

2.96
(.99)

(.61)

11

(.50)

(.53)

17.60

(.56)

22.72

2.26

2.33

(1.16)

2.71
(.92)

2.52

(1.64) (1.34)

(.83)

(.78)

(.72)

3.57
3.58
(1.85) (1.51)

3.36
3.38
3.10
(1.30) (1.10) (1.01)

2.89

2.57

2.72

(.91)

(.87)

(.79)

2.66
(.77)

2.52 30.66
(.73)

3.57
3.53
(2.05) (1.70)

3.37
3.49
3.21
3.01
(1.47) (1.22) (1.12) (1.01)

2.66
(.96)

2.82

2.89

2.73

(.88)

(.86)

(.81)

2.94
(.96)

2.99
(.94)

2.90

.37

.39

3.36

3.49

3.22

3.48

(2.25) (1.86)

2.75
3.29
3.56
3.29
3.11
(1.64) (1.34) (1.22) (1.11) (1.06)

(.67)

39.37

46:76

(.88)

Vat i a nc C

.10

.15

.20

.24

4otas: Standard •rrorz in parenthesis
method

.27

.31

.34

.39

.41

ars calculated using Hansens (1982) sample moments

Table 3
Regression Using Forward Premia

Regression Test:
Left—hand Side Variable

Right—hand
Side Variable

Excess Return

(k_1)R')_kR_R
08a

2

(.03)
78a

3

(.26)
4

7

40C

(.08)

88a

29C

(.39)

(.12)

95a

.30c

(.36)

(.16)

.27c

(.S8)

(.17)

(.52)

(.11)

151a
(.49)

(.12)

.22c

9
10

i.is

11

(.45)
Notes:

(.19)
(.19)

79

8

_02C
(.03)

.g6

(.28)

6

1—Ri

(.34)
105a

5

Ex Post
Short Rate

a signif. diff.
C

than 0 at 95% level
1 at 95% level

.18c

(.18)

Son.oo7 of
L.rt-H..nd

Point

U

Eetio.t.s

Exp.ctstions
Theory,

sOd.
Voriobi..

Toi,1.
R58r.seioo Test.

If
For.c.st Errors
Alon.

if
Risk Pr.ini.
Alon.,

A. Yield Spread:

Y. (R-k)

1.
0

(k-l)(RJ-R)

0,

— 1,

e —1

— 1.

b 1

Cov(#k,Y

-

I

0 j'

0 0

t

(l-(.i/k))i.R1

i—i

k-2 Cov(.Y)
—

5

1—0

k Ver(Y)

Cov(,Y) 0

— b,

0 b1,

— 1 +

Cl

2.

Cov(r1
(k_l){

>

Ii—i

k-i
1 +

b1

(k-i)

Cov(rtj_i,Yt)

k Vsr(Y

k(k_i)Cov(ck41,y) 0
I(k-i) Cov((+j_i,Y)

Oth.r N.cesser-y

Conditions;

Cov(#) 0

V.r(Y)

Var() 0

Vsr)1)

Sufficient Conditions;

0

V J

Var()

Vsr(R- R)

Vor(1)

Vor(R1-R

B. Forward Pormi. ZC (F•— R)
1

0cc1

:t

kl

R1t

a
1

01

c1° 1 -

Cooparisonof

c-S
1

d —

1

d1

1.

c — d1,

c- —-•—---—1

d1—

c

-

-

Var(Z)

V.r(Z)

di — 1
1—0

Vsr(Z)

Cov(#, Z) c

Cov4,-

Var(Z)

(k-1)ICov(+1,Zt)l 0

IC0V(.t+k_i,5t)I
Sofficient

Condition:

ICov(c'+xZ)I

0. tb.

Rot..1
—

u.k prmoiws or ho1din a k'month

bond for on. month b..innini

j months

from

now.

(R+1- Zt.thRt,), or h. error in for.c..tini • k-month bond j months from now b...d upon
n periods from now.

information

.929

.951

.956

.960

.967

.967

.962

3

4

5

6

7

8b

9

(4)

0.05
(.823)

0.01
(.999)
0.15
(.699)

0.25
(.617)
2.88
(.090)

0.33
(.566)

0.01
(.999)

(.764)

0.09

(.106)

2.62

(.051)

3.82

(.003)

8.84
1.64
(.203)

(1.000)

.957

(.978)
(.952)

.917

(1.000)
(1.000)

.869

(1.000)

(1.000)

.959

(.997)
(.991)

.958
(.999)
(.987)

.957
(.812)
(.738)

.957
(.407)
(.407)

.956
(.175)
(.236)

.919

.918
(1.000)
(1.000)

.917
(1.000)
(1.000)

(1.000)
(1.000)

.917

.916
(1.000)
(1.000)

(1.000)

.869
(1.000)
(1.000)

.868
(1.000)
(1.000)

(1.000)

(1.000)

.867

(1.000)
(1.000)

.867

.866
(1.000)
(1.000)

(1.000)
(1.000)
(.806)

.959

(.000)
(.003)

.919

(.941)

.869

.960

(.001)
(.017)

.920

(.544)
(.523)

(a1—.99)

Mc

(7)

.870

(ar.95)

MB

(6)

(1.000)
(.921)

(a1—.9)

MA

(5)

(Cont in u e d)

0.06
(.806)

0.03
(.862)

0.03
(.862)

0.93
(.335)

0.11
(.740)

0.26
(.610)

(.061)

(.002)

(.000)

3.51

9.35

32.51

5.21
(.022)

S-W

4.52
(0.34)

C6

(3)

15.43
(<.001)

Co

i
.921

(2)

(1)

2

k

Maturity

Table 5
Cointegration Results

(.029)
(.070)

.967

(.203)
(.295)

.969

.968
(.420)
(.429)

(.032)
(.084)

.967

(.009)
(.019)

.967

.966
(.001)
(.015)

(.000)
(.000)

.969

(.000)
(.003)

.970

(a1—l.0)

MD

(8)

Cr1

Notes:

(.999)

0.01
.868
(1.000)
(1.000)

2(1)

and MD
are regression coefficient

a1

— 1

the lower p-value assume conditional

using Monte

Cr0

— 0 for

+ Cr1(kR1
(utuck)

—

R1
all k

-

.958
(1.000)
(1.000)

>

+

Carlo simulations when

a1

—

.9,

from column

(1)

equal
The upper p-value is calculated assuming conditional heteroscedasticity whil

for the hypothesis that the point estimates

M
The numbers

.95, .99 and 1.0,

MA,

for t — 0 and

.968
(.537)
(.538)

.968
(.009)
(.044)

(a1—1.0)

MD

(8)

test statistic in Stock and Watson (1990).

for Coy

2(l)

1,

(k-l)R1

.918
(1.000)
(1.000)

(.940)
(.862)

.958

(cr1—.99)

Mc

(7)

heteroscedasticity from an ARCH(6) process (unless otherwise indicated).

.95, .99, and 1, respectively.

—

95)

.918
(1.000)
(1.000)

(Cr1—.

MB

(6)

in columns (2) and (3) are the marginal significance levels.

in parentheses in columns (5)-(8) are the p-values

the .9,

Cr,

using the

estimates, a1,

S-W is the test that

test statistics of the hypothesis that

respectively.

are

respectively. The numbers in parentheses

Mc,

— 6,

06

the parameter estimate in the cointegrating regression:

and

is

in ARCH process for heteroscedasticitycorrection — 5.

4.

cOrder

9)

.868
(1.000)
(1.000)

bOrder in ARCH process for heceroscedasticitycorrection —

0.06
(.806)

0.00
(1.00)

(Cr1—.

MA

(5)

3.

0.03
(.862)

0.12
(.729)

(4)

S-W

for heceroscedasticity correction —

0rder in ARCH process

.968

11

(.075)

3.16

06

00

.962

(3)

(2)

(1)

Cr1

10

k

Maturity

Table 5 (continued)
Cointegracion Results

•

0.05

-9.92
-9.48
-9.32

-9.17
-9.08

-17.95
-18.14
-18.13

-18.09
-17.91

13.63
13.86
13.66

13.31
14.15

7

8

9

10

i1

bDjkFll

unit root tests.

the

-0.51

-10.45

-18.09

12.98

6

aFirstorder autocorrelations of

-17.87

-0.43

-11.19

-18.09

12.62

Notes:

-18.11

-0.32

-11.79

-18.19

12.32

4

the excess holding returns multiplied by 100.

-0.01

-0.44

-0.12

-0.30

-18.08

-0.34

-12.13

-18.16

12.67

3

-18.20

-18.07

-18.12

-18.00

-18.07

-18.05

-17.90

-0.10

N/A

-18.01

— 1.0)

9.41

h,

h

Rout:

Aut:a
h

Aut:a
h
h

Unit

1st Order

Unit

(a1

Rot
R-R

Model D

Rout:

— .90)
1st Order

(a1
Unit

Model A

2

k

Maturity

Table 6
Monte Carlo Results

-9.29

-9.33

-9.49

-9.67

-10.05

-10.54

-11.15

.11.72

-11.97

N/A

Rot
R-R

Unit

