                          NBER WDBKNG PAPEI SFIUFS




                      TAL VAluE ND r VAlUE


                             William C. Brainard
                             Matthew D. Shapiro
                               John B. Shaven




                           Workir Paper No. 3452




                      NM'IONAL RJREAU OF N4IC RESEM1
                          1050 Nassadiusetts Avenue
                             can'bridge, Wt 02138
                               Septenter 1990




This paper was prepared for the nference in hotxr of James Tohin, New
Haven, CT, May 6 ani 7, 1988. We are grateful th William Nelson for
extremely valuable research assistance. This paper is part of NBER's
research prtgrant in Financial Markets an ?.bnetary Econcmdcs. ny cpinions
expressed are those of the authors ani not those of the National &reau of
Econctiic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #3452
                                              September 1990

                       FUNflTAL VUJE AND W'T VAlUE

                                   ABSTC
     Mud of Janus bin's professional life has been devoted to studying the
interrelationship between the goeds arx financial markets. His general
equilibrium açroathes stresses the interaction of the desiar1 for financial
assets with the decision to a<xuim.ilate preductive capital. His enp-asis on
q, the ratio of market value of assets to their replacement cost, has shaped
hc stedents of the aggrepte econc*uy uzerstard the link between the stcok
market ani fixed investment.
     This paper examines the empirical linkage between fundamental returns on
          cxrporate assets and market return on financial claii on those
assets. It defines the fundamental return as real cash flew divided by
replacement cost. It examines whether the market return on irdividual firms
respord mere to aggregate shocks to the fundamental return or to the market
return itself. It then examines whether aregate market risk or aggreqate
fundamental risk is priced. Although market risk is priced, the paper does
find that fundamental risk is an important factor in explaining risk premia.




William C. Bra inard       Matthew D. Shapiro          John B. Shaven
C1es FQjndation for        Department of Econattios    Department of Econcanics
Rsea2xh in Eananics        University of Michigan      Stanford University
Yale University            Ann, Arbor, MI 48109—1220   Stanford, CA 94305
New Haven, CT 06520—2125
          LT]he daily revaluations of the Stock Exchange, though
          they are primarily made to facilitate transfers of old
          investments between one individual and another,
          inevitably exert a decisive influence on the rate of
          current investment. For there is no sense in building
          up a new enterprise at a cost greater than that at which
          a similar existing enterprise can be purchased; whilst
          there is an inducement to spend on a new project what
          may seem an extravagant sum, if it can be floated off on
          the Stock Exchange at an immediate profit.

                                          General Theory, Ch. 12.




     This quotation from Keynes must be among Jim Tobin's favorites. Tobin

traces the origins of his own thinking about the importance of market

valuation for investment to Keynes. He also insists that as students we

read that rich and fertile discussion of the relation of long term

expectations and confidence to investment in Chapter 12. There Keynes

suggests that the market gives noisy signals about fundamentals. But in the

rest of the General Theory, rather than emphasize the required rate of

return on capital, Keynes instead focusses on th   rate   of interest. Most of

the profession followed him. Hence, for many of us it was reading Tobin's

"Money, Capital and Other Stores of Value" that provided the moment of

insight. It is one of those articles--simple, lucid and insightful--that

permanently shifts ones perspective. Before we read it we were dimly aware

that there was something unsatisfactory about treating financial claims and

physical capital as one and the same, with a single interest rate giving the

terms on which society would hold the stock of non-monetary wealth. After,
                                   -2-


it was obvious that the two differed in essential respects, that their

rates of return would not always move together, and that it was not even

self evident that increases in the stock of government debt were

contractionary

     No one has been more insistent than Tobin about the importance of the

stock and bond markets, markets for claims on physical assets, in providing

guides to investment and an indication of the incentives for capital

formation, nor has anyone contributed more to our understanding of the way

monetary policy and financial institutions affect those markets. But it is

also hard to find anyone who is more skeptical of those markets accurately

reflecting fundamental returns on capital and wealth owners' preferences.

Another of Tobin's favorite quotations is also from Chapter 12, where Keynes

likens the stock market to "newspaper competitions in which the competitors

have to pick out the six prettiest faces from a hundred photographs, the

prize being awarded to the competitor whose choice most nearly corresponds

to the average preferences of the competitors as a whole."

     Only Tobin knows when his interest in the distinction between the

returns on physical and financial assets first developed. From his writings

one would guess that the importance of the idea grew while he was on leave

in 1959. It plays a central motivating role in his manuscript, largely

written that year, in which he filled so much of Hicks's prescription for

monetary theory. In that manuscript, much of what was subsequently

published in a series of classic articles, he discusses systematically the

different characteristics of assets, their liquidity, reversibility,

maturities and nominal and real risks. He analyzes the importance of those

characteristics to the decisions of households, firms and financial
                                      -3-


institutions in making their allocation of wealth among different assets.

Tobin's belief in the need to distinguish among the returns on his "minimum

menu" of assets leads him, in the manuscript and in a succession of papers

written by himself and together with students and colleagues, to develop a

whole family of models of the balance sheet in which monetary events

influence, but are not the sole determinants of the terms on which society

is willing to hold its wealth.

     This logic led Tobin to be skeptical of ft    interest   rate as an

accurate measure of the required returns on the entire menu of diverse

assets populating the portfolios of private agents. This skepticism led him

to search for a more appropriate measure than the bond rate for calibrating

the stimulus to investment demand. In his theoretical work, he first

emphasized the required rate of return on capital, the marginal revenue

product of capital which would make wealth owners content to hold capital at

its replacement cost, and then   q ,   with   its several attractions.     Not

only can q be measured, it avoids the need to measure separately expected

profitability, risk premia and discount rates, and it can be used to measure

both incentive and wealth effects.1

     In spite of his skepticism about the efficiency of the stock market,

Tobin looks for explanations of the market value of firms, and hence q and

the required rate of return on capital, in terms of fundamental

characteristics--for example, the expected values and risks of firms'

earnings and measures of bankruptcy risk--rather than in terms of the

distribution of market returns themselves. This approach has several

     1       .            .
      The variable q was introduced into macroeconomic analysis by Brainard
and Tobin (1968) and Tobin (1969). Ciccolo (1975) and Brainard and Tobin
(1977) are early empirical implementations of the q-theory of investment.
                                   -4-


related advantages. It focusses on the social outcomes that are being

valued, it reduces the extent to which market adjustments to equilibrium

contaminate estimates of the expected returns and the distribution of

returns, and it provides the basis for estimating the extent to which market

adjustments themselves are an important component of what gets valued.

     In this paper, we examine the explanatory power of market and

fundamental factors for risk premia on marketed claims on physical capital.

For a panel of non-financial, non-extractive firms we examine the level and

distribution of the physical returns and compare them to the level and

variability of the financial returns on the marketed claims of the firm. In

Section 1, we discuss measurement of fundamental and market value of a

firm. We take the fundamental return on the firm to be the ratio of the net

cash flow to the replacement cost of its physical assets. In Section 2, we

compare this fundamental return to the return and risk faced by an investor

who holds the aggregate stocks and bonds of the firm.   We discuss how to

estimate the risk premia and risk free rate implied in the variation in

expected return across firms, assuming arbitrage pricing holds. In Section

3, we then estimate the risk-loading and the prices of risk for both market

and fundamental factors. Thus, in the spirit of the asset pricing

literature, we study the factors that explain rates of return. But in the

spirit of Tobin's work, our object is to examine the explanatory power of

fundamentals.
                                    -5-


1.   Replacement Cost. Market Value, and Fundamental Return

     In this section, we discuss estimates of replacement cost, market

value, and fundamental rates of return. These data allow us to compare

market and fundamental returns at the firm level.



A.   Data and Variables

     The calculations in this paper are based on accounting and financial

data for individual firms. Our data represent the 191 firms in non-

petroleum, non-extractive industries on the Compustat tape from 1962 through

1985. We required that the data for key variables not be missing for a firm
                                2
to be included in the sample.

     The firms report capital stocks, inventories, and debt at book value.

We now discuss how we adjust these data to measure replacement cost, market

value, and fundamental return.

     Physical Capital and Depreciation: Firms report nominal investment and

book value of depreciation. Based on these data, we estimate the age

composition of the capital stock by fitting the implied book depreciation to

that reported by firms subject to the constraint that investment less

retirements sum to the book value of the gross capital stock. To convert

current dollar capital stocks and depreciations into constant dollars, we

use the BEA's industry-specific capital stock price indexes.

      Inventory valuation: Firms report inventories at book value. We

estimate their replacement cost using two-digit output price deflators and

 the firms's accounting methods. Other aasets carried on the books at



      2More detail about variable construction is available in the conference
 draft of the paper.
                                    -6-


historical cost are treated like LIFO inventories. Because revaluation of

these assets has been such a major part of changes in value of petroleum and

other extractive companies, we have excluded firms in these industries in

the results reported here.

     Replacement Cost: Replacement cost is defined as the sum of the

capital stock and inventories and other assets.

     Market Value: The market value of the firm is the sum of the market

values of its preferred stock, common stock and debt, less net short term

financial assets valued at par. The market value of debt is estimated from

information about book values, interest payments and maturity structure.

In a procedure similar to the one we use for the capital stock, we fit our

estimated maturity structure of debt to the reported interest payments.

Market values for each vintage of debt are then computed using McCulloch's

(1990) bond prices.3

     Cash Flow: Cross cash flow is reported income plus interest payments

on long-term debt plus book depreciation minus the inventory valuation

adjustment. For net cash flow, we subtract economic depreciation.

     Fundamental Rate of Return: We define the fundamental rate of return

as the ratio of cash flow to replacement cost, either net or gross of

economic depreciation.



B.   Summary of Returns and Valuation Data

     Table 1 sulnnarjzes the fundamental rates of return, net and gross and




     3These are Treasury bond prices. Hence, our calculations presume that
there is a constant premium of Treasury over corporate bonds.
                                   -7.


before and after tax, for our sample of 191 firms.4 For comparison, we

include the net of corporate tax and depreciation rate of return series for

the aggregate corporate sector. The net rates of return are inherently

real. An economic depreciation allowance is deducted from cash flow; this

deduction is the amount of cash flow that must be reinvested just to

maintain thà capitaTstock.

    All of the series peak in 1965 through 1968 and in 1972 through 1974.

The before tax series for both gross and net rate of return fall more over

the sample than the after corporate income tax series, consistent with the

fact that the corporate tax wedge fell over the 1963 to 1985 period.5 For

example, the average of the net before tax real rate of return fell 1.2

percentage points more than the corresponding after tax rate. The average

net before tax rate was 13.3 percent for 1966 through 1970, increased

slightly to 13.6 percent for 1971 through 1975, fell to 12.4 for 1976

through 1980, and finally fell to 9.1 percent for 1981 through 1985. The

average of the net after tax rate fell from 7.7 percent for 1966 through

1970, to 6.3 percent in 1971 through 1975, to 5.3 percent in 1976 through

1980, and to 4.7 percent for 1981 through 1985. This decline was not as

noticeable in Erainard, Shoven, and Weiss (1980) where the calculations

ended in 1977 and is also not as dramatic in our estimates of the aggregate

net after tax rate of return show-n in the last column. For this series the


     41n the tables, the aggregates of our firm data are reported as
weighted averages where the weights are given by the fraction of the firms
net replacement cost in aggregate replacement cost. Consequently, the
reported returns are for holding the aggregate of claims on our sample of
firms. The standard deviation is the square root of the weighted squared
deviations from means. The weights are recalculated each year.

     5Most of the tax charges during this period relate to changes in the
treatment of depreciation, hence are likely to be reflected per unit of capital.
                                    -8-


decline appears to have taken place by the early 1970's. In part this

difference may reflect the fact that our sample excludes extractive

industries and financial firms, while the aggregate figures include them.

     The cross-sectional standard deviation of our rate of return series is

large and varies somewhat over the 23 years of our sample.6 The standard

deviation of the net after tax figures was nearly 80 percent of the

average for the sample as whole. The average of firms' standard deviation

of returns across time is reported in the last row of Table 1. For the net

after tax return a typical firm's net rate of return has a time-series

standard deviation of 3.2 percent, while the dispersion across firms in a

given year is typically around 5 percent. Hence, although a substantial

portion of the dispersion of returns across firms could reflect the large

dispersion of individual firm's returns around the firm's average,

differences in means across firms appear to be important. The increased

dispersion of returns across firms in the l980's suggests that firms'

fundamental returns have become more variable while their average

performance has worsened.

     Table 2 shows the weighted average and dispersion of q for our sample

of firms. The table also gives a reference series for q from the 1983

Economic Report of the President. Our q series corresponds   closely with
that of the Economic Report of the President. The q series suggests that

assets on average were selling as muth as 60 percent above replacement cost

in the mid-1960's, whereas by 1981 they were selling, for our sample, at

half price. Our figures indicate that by the end of 1985 average q had


     6The cross-sectional standard deviations are calculated by taking the
weighted average of the squared deviations from means for a given period.
The weights are the share in the denominator of the particular return.
                                   -9-


recovered to about 0.8. From calendar years 1985 to 1987, the New York

Stock Exchange composite index rose 50 percent. Assuming increases in

nominal replacement cost of between 5 and 10 percent per year over that

period would imply that q was between 1.1 and 1.2 during 1987.




2.   Market and Fundamental Rates of Return

     In this section of the paper we compare market returns on the financial

claims on the firms and the fundamental rate of return on their physical

assets. The market rate of return is measured by the stock return and the
                                                          V
total market return. We define the total market return (rj) as the return

to owning a share of the entire firm, that is, a leverage-weighted average

of a firm's stocks and bonds. If the Modigliani-Miller theorem holds, the

expectation of total market return corresponds to the required rate of

return relevant to a firm's investment decisions about projects with the

same expected returns as its existing projects. In those circumstances, the

distribution of returns and risks between stockholders and bondholders is of

no relevance to the investment decision or the total value of the firm, and

the required rates on stocks and bonds separately are not directly relevant

to the firm's decisions.

     Distributions of these market returns are contrasted with the

distribution of the fundamental returns on firms' capital. We define the

fundamental return (r) as the after tax net of depreciation cash flow of

the firm divided by the net replacement cost of its physical assets.

     Table 3 reports the market and fundamental returns for our panel of

firms and for the aggregate corporate sector. The first column in Table 3
                                   - 10   -




repeats from Table 1 the information on the distribution of the net rate of
return on capital after tax, our measure of the fundamental real rate of

return on the physical assets of the firm. The following columns report

distributional information on the market rates across firms and time.

Inspection of these series shows that fundamental return varies much less

over time and across firms than the various market rates. We return later

to an investigation of the extent to which market rates of return are

related to the fundamental.

     A firm considering expansion of its physical capital stock, or an

observer who wants to understand how markets value fundamentals, should

compare the firm's fundamental return with the return required by owners of

the firm's stock and long term debt. The expected value of the total market

return is a natural measure of the cost of funds relevant to the demand for

capital. To our knowledge no one has ever attempted to use directly an

estimate of that expected rate. In Table 3 we report estimates of the total

market return calculated as the sum of dividends (common and preferred),

interest, and capital gains or losses on a firm's stocks and bonds, as well

as the separate returns on stocks and bonds.

     The distribution of returns on total market value are noticeably

different from the distributions for the returns on stocks but at a very

broad level they do move together. For the entire time period arithmetic

averages of the real rate of return from ownership of all claims to a firm

is only about 0.2 percentage points lower than from holding only stock.

The returns on bonds during this period are only slightly less than on

stocks. The riskiness of holding the entire firm is also less than from

holding stocks alone. Redistributive changes which simply shift real
                                     - 11   -




returns   between stock holders and bond holders should affect stock and bond

returns, but not total return.

     The last row of Table 3 gives the average time-series standard

deviations of the returns series. These are the weighted average of the

firm-by-firm standard deviation of returns. The standard deviation of

individual firms' stock returns is 29 percent, which is greater that the 24

percent standard deviation of the total return.

     The mean real total return for our population of firms is approximately

one percentage point less than the total market return for the aggregate

shown in Table 3. Given the selection of our sample, it is not surprising

that the averages in our panel are below those of the aggregate; our sample

includes mature firms which may have relatively low return.

     Table 3 also reports the mean and standard deviation of the real

returns from holding the common stock of firms in our sample. This series

shows a high correlation with the comparable rate of return (real capital

gains plus dividends) for the Standard and Poor's Composite shown in the

sixth column; 1981 is unusual in that our sample of firms did much worse

than the aggregate. The mean of our sample of firms' returns and the

aggregate index both show large fluctuations year to year. While the

average stock returns for our sample of firms are similar to those for the

aggregate, both conceal an enormous amount of variation in the returns to

individual firms. In the typical year, approximately a third of the stocks

have real returns which are more than 25 percent above or below the average.

     The market rates of return are much more volatile than fundamentals.

The fundamental return varies a quarter to a third as much across firms as
                                       - 12   -




the   various market rates; the differences in the time-series variability of

returns is even more dramatic.

        Differences in the average fundamental and total market returns are

also of interest.        It was a conon view during the 1960's and 1970's, that

the productivity of physical capital, for the aggregate U.S. economy and for

the corporate sector was substantially in excess of the real returns

available on market claims to that capital. This also appears to be true

n       for   our sample, the average fundamental return is over three percent

higher than the corresponding average total market return.

        Table 4 compares book values with our estimates of economic or market

values used in our various calculations. Book profits are substantially in

excess of our estimates of economic profits, particularly during

inflationary periods. Again, primarily because of inflation, the book value

of net capital is substantially less than our estimates of its replacement

cost.

        The figures for the market and book value of bonds are not surprising.

They show that the market value was less than book for almost all of this

period, as interest rates were for the most part rising during these years.

The ratio of market to book reached its lowest levels in the period of high

nominal interest rates of 1980 and 1981.
                                   - 13   -




3.   Relation of Firm Returns to Apzregate Returns

A.   Market Risk and Fundamental Risk

     Although there has been an enormous amount of theoretical work on

portfolio choice and risk since Tobin wrote his seminal paper "Liquidity

Preference as Behavior Towards Risk, empirical attempts to estimate risk

premia on securities would be quite understandable to someone who had read

nothing since that classic article, Tobin's Separation Theorem lies at the

foundation of modern finance. The familiar Sharpe-Lintner capital-asset

pricing model (CAPM) simply recognizes the equilibrium implications of the

portfolio separation derived in Tobin's original article.

     That conventional CAPH relates risk premia on stock to undiversifiable

risk in the stock market itself. Our work takes a broader view of the

market. Risks that are priced should be undiversifiable, not just that

within the stock market, but in financial markets generally. As a first

step towards broadening the factor that is priced, we include aggregate

bonds together with aggregate stocks in a measure of the total market.7

Including the return on the sum of debt and equity as a factor is a minimal

step toward encompassing the market.

     At a theoretical level, the risk premium in financial markets should

reflect the correlation between asset returns and the marginal utility of

consumption. Under standard parametric assumptions on the utility function,

the appropriate measure of marginal utility is the growth in aggregate

consumption. An implementation of the CAPM based on aggregate consumption

data finds that consumption risk gets a much smaller price than does stock



     7This approach to addressing Roll's critique of the CAPH is also taken
by Stambaugh (1982).
                                   - 14   -




market risk, so we do not pursue that route here.8 Instead, we focus on
aggregate fundamental return as an alternative to aggregate market return as

a measure of risk. Variation in the fundamental return is indeed a

substantial component of the variation in economy-wide consumption

possibilities. Hence, this approach can be justified as an approximation to

a consumption-based pricing model. Indeed, the cash flows generated by

firms, our measure of fundamental return, might be better measures of the

consumption opportunities of their owners than is the NIPA consumption

data. These considerations of the appropriate measure of risk lead us to

compare the performance of financial and fundamental measures in explaining

the expected return on marketed assets. Alternatively, these variables

simply could be identified as priced factors in the arbitrage pricing
         9
model.

     We also depart from traditional implementations of the CAPH by

examining the risk premium on holding proportionately the firm's stocks and

bonds rather than just equity. While investigating the pricing of firm's

equity by itself is of inherent interest, it is not directly related to the

firm's decision to undertake a risky investment project. The firm should

discount the expected cash flows from these projects with a rate that takes

into account the price of bearing che riskiness of the cash flows)° The

conventional stock market beta does not provide the correct price of risk

for this calculation because the stock is not the claim on the project. The


     8See Hankiw and Shapiro (1986).

     9See Ross (1976). See Chen, Roll, and Ross (1986) fox an empirical
implementation.

     105ee Brainard, Shoven, and Weiss (1980) for an analysis of risk-
adjustment in evaluating the present discounted value of a firm's cash flow.
                                            - 15   -




stock   beta will, among other things, depend on leverage. If the investment

project has the same distribution of economic returns as the firm's existing

projects, the beta based on valuing the total market return of the firm

would give the appropriate measure of risk.

      In this section of the paper, we compare both the betas of individual

firms' stock and total market returns on aggregate market and aggregate

fundamental returns. In the next section, we examine how these betas affect

the average market returns of these firms.



B.      Market Beta and Fundamental Beta

        In this section, we specify the betas that we will use to study the

pricing of risk. We consider three measures of aggregate risk: stock

return, total market return (stocks plus bonds), and fundamental return.

One or more of these measures is used to explain either the firm-level stock

or total market return.

        The equations for defining the conventional stock betas are



(1)
               S
              nt —
                        S
                            + $55   S   +
                                               S




where          is the stock return on the individual stock,              is the aggregate

stock return,          is the idiosyncratic component to the stock return, and

and          are regression coefficients.              Analogously with the stock market

beta we define a total market beta based on the measure of total return on

the marketed claims on the firm we introduced in the previous sub-section as


        11                          .                   .    IJ
                                                  as the slope coefficient
        As a notationahconvention. we define fi.
 from regressing the i   company's I return on he aggregate J return where I
 return and J return are stock, total, or fundamental return.
                                               - 16      -




                S
                      —   a.S +      SV V +         S
(2)            r.                   fi.




where          is the aggregate total return for our sample of firms. The

-coefficients             or SV are measures of the riskiness of a firms equity

where the aggregate risk is either taken to come just from the stock market

or, more appropriately, from the total of marketed claims on firms.

        As discussed above, we also want to examine the risk of holding all the

marketed claims on a firm's assets, both its equity and debt. Consequently,

we examine the beta defined by



                V             V     VV V        V
(3)            nt — ai+                    +



where rY is the total market return of firm i.
          it
        In contrast with these market based measures of risk, we define

fundamental betas for both the firm-level stock and total market return.

These are



(Li)           r5
                 it
                      —   cri + PSFRF
                                 i  t
                                      +             it



and



                V     —       V       VF F     V
(5)            r.         a       + p.i Rt + c.it
                it            i




where          is the aggregate fundamental return.
                                      - 17   -




      When we turn in the next sections to examining the pricing of these

betas, we will want to relate jointly the market and fundamentals betas to

expected returns. To do this appropriately, the betas need to be defined

jointly as in



                                          SF2 F
(6)
            S
           r. —
                    S
                        +   SS2 S     +           + tit
                                                     S



            S       S
                        +   SV2   V
                                      +   SF2 F   +   S
(7)             —




and


            V       V
                        + fi.VV2RV    +
                                          VF2 F   + c.V
(8)        ri —


Unless the market returns are orthogonal to the fundamental returns, the

betas defined in the bivariate regression (6)-(8) will differ from those in

the univariate regression (l)-(5).

      The aggregate returns we uae in the empirical analysis are based an

aggregate data rather than averages of the firms in our sample. Use of

these aggregates is appropriate: the market should be measured as broadly

as possible. The aggregate stock return is the total return (dividend yield

plus capital gain) on Standard and Poor's composite. The aggregate bond

return is the coupon plus capital gain on ten-year Treasury bonds. This

measure captures interest rate risk, but not default riskJ2 The total

return is the weighted average of the stock and bond return using the



          is calculated using the real capital gain on McCulloch's zero-
coupon bond series.
                                    - 18   -




weights   reported in Table 3. The fundamental return is measured as

corporate profits from the NIPA (with the capital consumption and inventory

valuation adjustments divided the by total assets of the corporate sector

from the Flow of Funds Accounts. The stock and bond returns are deflated by

the rate of change of the GNP deflatorJ3

     Table S gives summary statistics for the aggregate returns. For the

sample period of 1963 through 1985, the average annual return for stocks was

5.1 percent and for fundamental was 5.4 percent. The total return on the

firm is somewhat lower because of the lower return on bonds. The

fundamental return is much less variable than either the stock or total

return.

     The correlations reported in Table 5 show that the fundamental return

is almost uncorrelated with either the stock or the total return.

Consequently, the univariate estimates of the betas for the fundamental

return and either the stock or total returns from equations (l)-(8) will

yield nearly numerically identical results to a regression where the

fundamental and one of the market factors were entered simultaneously. We

estimate the betas defined in equations (1)-(8) based on our sample of 191

firms with data from 1963 through 1985 and the aggregates just discussed.

The betas are estimated by ordinary least squares. A procedure that imposes

nonlinear, cross-equation restrictions is discussed below.




     13The means and standard deviation of the aggregate returns and the
weighted average of the corresponding returns for our firms are similar.
Additionally, the correlations aggregate and firm-average measures of return
are .94 for stock, .90 for total, and .85 for fundamental.
                                        - 19 -


C.    What Factors    are Priced?

      To study how risk and return are related, we examine the cross-section

relationship between average returns and the betas. The relationship has

been widely studied for the stock market, but analysis of the relationship

for the total market value and the fundamentals is new. Specifically, we

consider regressions of the form



               —
(9)
                     a0
                          +
                              a1a   +
                                        vi

where ri is the average return (either stock or total market) for company i

over the time period 1963 to 1985 and where the regressor is the estimated

betas. The slope coefficients are estimates of the price of bearing the

systenatic risk reflected in the betas. The intercept estimates the risk-

free rate. We also estimate an equation introducing both betas which allows

the regression to attribute expected return to either market or fundamental

factors.



D.    Econometric Issues

      The standard procedure for estimating a market-line regression such as

(9) is to first estimate the betas from time-series regressions for the

individual stocks (such as equations (l)-(8)) and then estimate the risk

premia by regressing average returns on the estimated betas. This procedure

ignores the cross equation restriction implied by the equality of the risk-

free rate and the price of risks across stocks. The two-step procedure is

therefore inefficient. Moreover, least squares estimates of the cross-

section regression will be biased because the betas are generated
                                                - 20   -




regressors.       Previous work uses an instrumental variables procedure to

address this problem)4 Here, we estimate the betas and their prices

simultaneously to attenuate the bias.

       The asset pricing model can be expressed as the nonlinear regression



                  —
(10)                  rf     + fli(R + A)' +



where i — 1           N indexes firms, t — 1                 T indexes time. The variables

are      —   firm's   return and           —   (lxx)   vector of aggregate factors, which

are understood to have zero mean. The parameters to be estimated are rf —

risk-free    rate, A —        (lxK)   vector of prices of risk, and        —   (la)   vector of

betas. The disturbances                  are mean zero and are serially and mutually

uncorrelated, but heteroskedastic. Note that the a. is equations (l)-(8) is

restricted by



(11)         0.   — rf   +       A,




which is just the expected return on asset i. In the cross-sectional

regression (9), a0 corresponds to rf and a1 corresponds to A.

       Mechanically applying nonlinear least squares is computationally

intractable because of the large number of parameters (N(K+l)+l). We employ

an iterative procedure as follows. We first estimate the betas by a linear

regression of the aggregate factors on the returns firm-by-firm.                      (This



     4Mankiw and Shapiro (1986) use betas estimated from one sub-sample as
instruments for betas estimated for another sub-sample. This procedure
does not work very well in practice because the estimated betas are very
unstable.
                                     - 21   -




step   solves the first-order conditions of NLLS for the parameters fi.)

These estimated betas are used to estimate the parameters rf and A where

the estimated betas are treated as fixed. (This step solves the first-order

conditions for the parameters rf and A). This procedure is iterated until

convergence. Since the converged estimates simultaneously solve the first-

order conditions, they are the NLLS estimatesJ5'16




3.     Results

       In this section, we report the OLS    and   NLLS estimates of the betas and

the prices that correspond to them.



A.     Estimated Betas

       Table 6A reports summary statistics for the betas estimated by ordinary

least squares. Table 6E reports the NLLS estimates. The tables contain the

average estimated beta and the average c-statistic for the estimated beta

for our panel of firms. The numbers is parenthesis are the sample standard

deviations of these cross-sectional estimates, not the standard errors of

the averages. They also report the correlation coefficients between the

various betas. The market betas ($ or                 of   course, have by


     15The weighting matrix E is initially estimated from the residual
variances -of the firm-by-firm regressions of    on a constant and the
factors. Once the iterative procedure just described converges, the
estimate of the weighting matrix is updated and the parameters are re-
estimated. This procedure is repeated until the coefficients converge.
This iteration is not required for efficiency of the estimation procedure,
but it may be preferable in finite sample to not iterating.

               (1982) uses a linearization that is equivalent to the
procedure discussed in this section. McElroy and Burmeister (1988) use the
same estimator that we consider to study the arbitrage pricing model.
                                    - 22   -




construction   a mean close to onej7 They are much less variable across

firms than are either of the fundamentals betas. Not surprisingly, the

correlation reported in Table 6 between the conventional stock market beta

and our total return beta is quite high because stock returns are the major

source of total return variation.

     The low t-statistics of the estimated betas for the fundamentals betas

equations compared to those for the market beta equations suggests that the

fundamental factor explains relatively little of individual firms' stock or

total market returns. In Table 68 the average t-statistic for the betas in

the regression of either stock or total returns on the aggregate stock or

total returns are above three. When the explanatory variable in the

aggregate fundamental, the t-statistics average only about one. Much of the

difficulty in getting the aggregate fundamental to enter significantly in

the regressions can be traced to its low variance. The fundamentals betas

are, on average, estimated quite imprecisely. Their ability to explain

cross-sectional average return will consequently be impaired. The low

explanatory power of the fundamental factor in the time series regression

does imply that fundamentals play little role in explaining year-to-year

movements in returns.

     There is some positive correlation between the market betas and the

fundamental betas. For example, the correlation of SS and SF is 0.34 when

we rely on the NLLS estimates. Given both the lack of correlation of the

aggregate market and fundamental factors and the imprecision of the

estimated fundamental betas, one might have expected less of relationship


          noted above, we use broader estimates of the aggregate return than
average of returns for our sample, so the market betas need not average to
one.
                                      - 23      -




between the betas. Since both factors are positively related to expected

returns, the univariate NLLS squares procedure induces correlation between

the univariately estimated betas because they are chosen to explain expected

returns. The OLS estimates imply a negligible correlation of this pair of

betas, but these estimates are less efficient.18 The N1LS estimates of the

two   factor   model show, however, a small correlation between the market and
                                                    SS2         SF2 is -
fundamental factor. The      correlation   of             and            .07.
      The lack of correlation between the aggregate market and fundamental

factors also implies that the univariate estimates of the betas should be

highly correlated with the bivarlate estimates. Indeed, these correlations

(between         and SV2 SF and SF2 etc.) are over 0.98 for both the NLLS

and OLS    estimates.
       Finally, the correlations of the betas across estimators are quite

high. They are .97 for SS .97 for SV and .94 for                          for   example.



B.     Estimated Risk Premia

       The results of our comparison of risk and return are given in Table 7.

For each equation, we present the estimates based on regressing the betas

from unrestricted time-series regression on average returns (OLS). We also

present estimates that impose the nonlinear constraint discussed in the

previous section (NLLS). For both estimators, the equations are estimated

with a heteroskedasticity correction proportional to the idiosyncratic risk

(specifically the firm-specific variance of the estimated residuals from the




     18The NLLS estimates roughly half the number of parameters to be
estimated. Thus those estimates of the betas are more reliable given that
the restriction we impose is not rejected.
                                    - 24   -




time-series   regression (11)). The heteroskedasticity arises because of the

sampling error in estimating expected returns.

     The R2 reported for NLLS give the fraction of the cross-sectional

variation in average return explained. Neither the explained or unexplained

sum-of-squares reflect the period-by-period variation in firms' returns.

Thus, the OLS and NLLS     are comparable. The     statistic is problematic

for regression with heteroskedasticity. The statistic is not well-defined

because of the heterogeneity in the variance. Yet, it still is useful as a

summary of goodness of fit. We report the }(2 based on the unweighted

variables. It thus summarizes how well our equation fits for a firm without

taking into account any knowledge about its idiosyncratic variance. Because

the residuals need not have zero mean, the R2 can be negative.

     The stock market premia scales the slope coefficients related to

market risk so they are comparable across equations. It gives the risk

premia for holding a portfolio perfectly correlated with the aggregate stock

market (namely with unit stock-market beta)J9 Because the correlation

between the aggregate stock market and the aggregate fundamental is

essentially zero, this adjustment implies, implausibly, that holding the

stock market is riskless when the measure of risk is the fundamentals beta.

In comparing the magnitudes of the coefficients of the market and

fundamentals beta it is important to keep in mind the differences in the

means of the variables. The market betas have means of between one and two,

while the fundamental betas have means from three to more than four.

Therefore, for equal values of their respective regression coefficients, the


     19This correction is calculated by multiplying the slope coefficient in
the market line regression by the beta obtained by regressing the aggregate
stock market return on the aggregate total return.
                                  - 25   -




fundamental beta contributes twice as much of the mean of expected returns
as the market beta.

     Lines 7.1 and 7.2 of Table 7 report the OLS and NLLS estimates of

regression of estimated expected returns on the stock-market betas. These

equations are analogous to the conventional empirical implementations of the

CAPM. The OLS estimates yield results quite similar to other

implementations of the CAPM. The point estimate of the risk-free rate is

about one percent although it is estimated imprecisely. The risk premia is

about five and one-half percent, which is also quite similar to other

estimates. The risk premium is estimated with about the same precision as

the risk-free rate. The standard error is small enough to overwhelming

reject zero, but the ninety-five percent confidence interval ranges from 2.7

to 7.9 percent, which is quite wide.

     Recall that the OLS estimates are biased downward because the betas are

estimated. The NLLS estimates ameliorate this problem by reducing the

sampling error in the estimated betas and by restricting the intercepts in

the time-series representation of the pricing equation. The NLLS estimates

do make the regression line steeper: the intercept is lower and the slope

coefficient higher than in the OLS estimates. This outcome is precisely

what one should expect given attenuation of errors in variables bias. The

estimated negative risk-free rate is not significantly different from zero,

although it is significantly different from one. The risk premium of 8.53

is somewhat higher than the usual estimates. The high risk premium is just

the flip side of the negative risk-free rate. The expected return on the
                                     - 26   -




market implied by the estimates in (7.2) is 6.0, compared with 6.4 in
        20
(7.1)

        Note that the NLLS estimates fit much better than the OLS ones. This

occurs in all the estimated equations, and is not a surprise. The NLLS

betas are chosen specifically to fit this equation well.

        Line (7.3) and (7.4) report the estimates for the betas based on the

total market return (stocks plus bonds). The difference between the OLS and

NLLS estimates mirrors thoae for the stock-beta based estimates. The slope

coefficient in line (7.4) of 4.95 implies a risk premia for holding the

aggregate stock market of 6.83, which is somewhat below the value of 8.53

where the stock market itself is used to summarize aggregate risk. Yet,

given the size of the confidence hands on the slope coefficient, it would be

a mistake to read too much into these estimated differences in the price of

risk.

        Lines (7.5) and (7.6) report the estimates that examine whether, taken

alone, the fundamental factor is priced. These results are also presented

in Figure 1. Note that the estimator jointly determines the slope of the

regression line and the betas, which are "explanatory variables" in the

cross-sectional representation of the regression. The NLLS procedure pulls

betas towards the regression line that are outliers in the OLS estimates.

The NLLS procedure thus ameliorates the errors-in-variables problem. The

figure clearly displays the steeper regression line and better fit for the

NLLS estimates.

        20                      .  .                    . .
          We can test the restriction (11) on the coefficients in the stock-
by-stock time series regressions. This restriction is not rejected. In
fact, the value of the test-statistic is very low. Given the imprecision of
the estimates of the firm-by-firm coefficients, this non-rejection should
not be taken as powerful support for the restriction.
                                    - 27


     The fundamentals beta contributes little to the mean of the cross-

sectional distribution of expected returns of stocks because the

coefficients of the betas are small. In the OLS estimates, the coefficient

of the fundamentals risk is significantly different from zero. In the NLLS

estimates, although the estimated coefficient increases from 0.41 to 0.66,

the standard error increases more than proportionately. Hence, in the NLLS

estimates, the fundamentals factor is insignificantly different from zero

based on conventional critical values.21 Even taking into account that the

mean of the fundamentals betas is larger than that of the market betas, the

fundamentals account for little of the mean of expected returns. Put

differently, the risk free rate implied by the fundamentals betas

regressions are implausibly high.

     The fundamentals betas explain less of the cross-sectional variation in

expected returns than do the market betas. Yet, at least in the NLLS

estimates reported in line 7.6, where the betas are chosen to improve the

fit, they do explain more than expected given how imprecisely they are

estimated. The R2 for that equation is 0.19, compared with 0.34 and 0.24

for the corresponding equations with the stock and total market betas. The

relatively high R2 for line (7.6) combined with its relatively low slope

coefficient is accounted for by the very high variability of fundamentals

betas.

     Line (7.7) and (7.8) report the results of including both the total




     21The NLLS procedure appropriately takes into account the joint
estimation of the betas and the prices of risk. The OLS standard errors are
conditional on the betas from the first stage.
                                   - 28   -




market and fundamentals betas in regressions on average returns.22 These
estimates of the market and fundamentals risk premia are somewhat lower than

in the respective univariate equations. There is enough sampling error that

the NLLS estimate of the market premia is insignificant. With the NLLS

estimate, the risk-free rate is estimated to be low, which means that the

risk premia associated with the betas are accounting for more of the average

expected returns. Overall, the patterns of the estimates from the

univariate estimates remains. Despite the small fundamental risk premium,

including the fundamentals beta raises the R2 from 0.24 in line (7.4) to

0.38 in line (7.8).

     Lines (7.9) through (7.14) repeat the estimates of the risk premia, but

for the total assets of the firm rather than just its equity. In contrast

to the expected stock returns, the aggregate fundamental explains more of

the cross-sectional variation in return than does the total market

aggregate. Still, the coefficient of the fundamental betas are small. They

are insignificant in the NLLS estimates where we take into account their

joint estimation with the betas.   In equation (7.14)) which includes hoth

the fundamental and market factors, more of the explanatory power does

however come from the fundamental factor. Given the imprecision of the

estimates of the fundamental betas, it is remarkable how much they do

explain in the NLLS estimates. In the OLS estimates, fundamentals are

highly significant despite the measurement error.



     22The regressions including the two factor are based on first-stage
regressions where both aggregate factors are included in the time-series
regressions. Given that the aggregate market factors are approximately
orthogonal to the aggregate fundamental factor (see Table 5), the betas from
the bivariate regressions are roughly equal to the ones estimated from the
univariate regressions.
                                   - 29   -




     Our finding that premia for holding financial claims are somewhat

better explained by market risks rather than fundamentals risks contrasts

with the finding that the consumption-risk also has a negligible price.

Mankiw and Shapiro (1986) compare risk premia estimated from market betas

and consumption betas. Notwithstanding theoretical arguments that imply

that aggregate consumption growth should mirror undiversifiable risk, they

find that consumption betas get very small coefficients in regressions.

While our results are weak in terms of conventional statistical

significance, Table 7 does show an important role for the fundamentals in

addition to market factors.




C.   Multi-year Returns

     The one-year horizon for returns used in the previous analysis is

arbitrary. Results using different horizons might differ for two reasons.

First, the relationship between the firm's asset returns and the aggregate

might differ for different horizons. Second, the pricing of risk at

different horizons might differ. Table 8 reports the results analogous to

those in Table 7, but where returns and the factors in the time-series

regressions are averaged over three years. The choice of three years is a

compromise between wanting to average over a long period and preserving

degrees of freedom.

     The results provide support for the view that fundamentals do better in

explaining expected returns over the longer horizon. Overall, the estimates

are nore precise than for the one-year horizon. Except in the NLLS

estimates in line (8.2) and (8.10), the market premis are much smaller in
                                   - 30   -




the long horizon estimates. On the other hand, the point estimates of the
fundamental risk premium are somewhat larger. That, combined with the

increase in the precision of the estimates, makes the fundamental factors

significant in the NLLS estimates as well as in the OLS ones. In each of

the stock and total return equations with both market and fundamental

factors ((8.8) or (8.14)), most of the explanatory power comes from the

fundamental betas.

     These results imply that over longer horizons fundamental risk is the

dominate factor in explaining expected returns om financial assets. The

results should not be over-emphasized. The estimates are unstable across

specifications and estimators; the total market beta seems to do

unexpectedly poorly with the averaging (its univariate estimates do not

converge).   Yet, the fundamentals betas do explain an important part of

the distribution of expected returns.



4.   Conclusions

     A central theme of Tobin's work is the role of financial and

fundamental risk in the valuation of and the demand for marketed claims on

physical capital. In this paper, we follow his work by estimating the

extent to which risk premia depend on market and fundamental factors. Our

results square well with Tobin's view that much of the risk to ownership of

physical capital derives from financial-market fluctuations, but that it

also depends on fundamental risks, particularly when measured over longer

horizons. We find that both the market betas and fundamental betas have

important roles in explaining cross-sectional variation in expected returns.

Our results based on the longer horizons suggest, in contrast with other
                                    - 31   -




studies,   that fundamental factors are more important in accounting for the

distribution of expected returns than are market factors.
                                     - 32   -




                                   REFERENCES




Brainard, William C., John B. Shoven, and Laurence Weiss, "The Financial

     Valuation of the Return to Capital," Brookings Payers on Economics

     Activity (2:1980) 453-502.



Brainard, William C. and James Tobin, "Pitfalls in Financial Model

     Building," American Economic Review Proceedings 58 (May 1968) 99-122.

     [Reprinted in Tobin's Essays, I, ch. 20.]



_______ and _______ , "Asset Markets and the Cost of Capital," in Economic
     Progress. Private Values and Public Policy: Essays is Honor of William

     Fellner," Richard Nelson and Bela Balassa, eds. Amsterdam: North-

     Holland, 1977. [Essays, III, ch. 4.]



Chen, Nai-Fu, Richard Roll, and Stephen A. Ross, "Economic Forces and the

     Stock Market," Journal of Business 59 (1986) 383-403.



Ciccolo, J. ,   "A Linkage between Product and Financial Markets--Investment

     and q," Essay III of unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Yale University,

     1975.




Fama, Eugene F. and J.D. MacBeth, "Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical

     Tests," Journal of Political Economy 81 (May/June 1973) 607-636.
                                          - 33   -




Gibbons,   Michael R. ,   "Multivariate   Tests of Financial Models: A New

     Approach," Journal of Financial Economics 10 (Mar. 1982) 3-27.




Marikiw, N, Gregory and Matthew IL Shapiro, Risk and Return: Consumption

     Beta versus Market Beta," Review of Economics and Statistics 68 (Aug.

     1986) 452-459.



McCulloch, J. Huston, "U.S. Term Structure Data, 1947-87," in J-landbook of

     Monetary Economics, Benjamin Friedman, ed. Amsterdam: North-Holland,

     1990.




McElroy, Marjorie B. and Edwin Burmeister, "Arbitrage Pricing Theory as a

     Restricted Nonlinear Multivariate Regress Model,' Journal of Business

     and Economic Statistics 6 (Jan. 1988) 29-42.



Ross, Stephen A., "The Arbitrage Theory of Capital Asset Pricing," Journal

     of Economic Theory 13 (1976) 341-360.



Stambaugh, Robert F.1" On the Exclusion of Assets from Tests of the Two-

     Parameter Model: A Sensitivity Analysis," Journal of Financial

     Economics 10 (1982) 237-268.



Tobin, James, "Honey, Capital, and Other Stores of Value," American Economic

     Review Proceedings 51 (May 1961) 26-37.         [Essays, I, ch. 13.]
                                  - 34   -




_______ "Liquidity   Preference as Behavior towards Risk," Review of

    Economic Studies 25 (Feb. 1957) 34-86.   [Essays, I, ch. 15.]




_______   "A General Equilibriun Approach to Monetary Theory," Journal of

    Money. Credit. and Bankinz 1 (Feb. 1969) 15-29. [Essays, I, ch. 18.]
</ref_section>
                                                 Table 1

                                Fundamental       Rates of Return
                                     Cross Section of Firms                             Aggregate

                     Before Tax                                  After Tax                 Net
                Cross               Net                    Cross              Net       pfter Tax

1964       13.9    ( 6.8)    14.6     ( 8.8)         10.0 ( 3.9)       8.5 ( 4.9)         6.9
1965       14.5    ( 7.0)    15.4     ( 9.0)         10.3 ( 4.0)       9.1 ( 5.0)         7.8
1966       14.5    ( 6.6)    15.1     ( 8.3)         10.4 ( 3.8)       8.9     ( 4.7)     7.9
1967       13.2    ( 6.8)    13.0     ( 8.8)          9.8 ( 4.2)       7.8     ( 5.4)     7.3
1968       14.5    ( 7.2)    14.6     ( 9.1)         10.3 ( 4.1)       8.3     ( 5.1)     6.5
1969       13.4    ( 6.4)    13.0     ( 8.2)          9.7 ( 3.7)       7.4     ( 4.6)     5.8
1970       12.0    ( 6.2)    10.9     ( 8.2)          8.8 ( 3.7)       6.2     ( 4.8)    4.8
1971       12.2    ( 5.8)    11.2     ( 7.7)          8.8 ( 3.5)       6.0     ( 4.5)     5.2
1972       12.8    ( 6.0)    12.2     ( 8.0)          8.9 ( 3.6)       6.6     ( 4.7)     5.6
1973       14.7    ( 6.1)    15.2     ( 8.2)          9.8 ( 3.6)       7.8     ( 4.6)     5.2
1974       16.5    ( 7.8)    17.5     (11.4)          9.4 ( 3.5)       6.9     ( 4.5)     3.9
1975       12.9    ( 6.7)    12.1     ( 9.7)          7.7 ( 3.4)       4.3     ( 4.5)    4.4
1976       13.2    ( 5.6)    12.7     ( 7.6)          8.4 ( 3.1)       5.7     ( 3.8)    4.6
1977       13.1    ( 6.4)    12.5     ( 8.7)          8.3 ( 3.5)       5.4     ( 4.6)     5.3
1978       13.2    ( 5.8)    12.6     ( 7.9)          8.5 ( 3.3)       5.5     ( 4.4)     5.3
1979       13.8    ( 6.6)    13.5     ( 9.2)          8.7 ( 3.7)       5.8     ( 5.0)    4.8
1980       11.9    ( 6.4)    10.6     ( 9.1)          7.6 ( 4.2)       4.2 ( 5.9)         3.9
1981       10.7    ( 4.9)     9.0     (   6.5)       7.4     ( 3.4)    4.1     ( 4.3)    4.3
1982        9.2    ( 5.9)     7.1     (   8.1)       6.7     ( 3.9)    3.4     ( 5.4)     3.5
1983       10.2 ( 6.0)        8.8     (   8.3)       7.4     ( 4.0)    4.6     ( 5.4)    4.6
1984       11.6    ( 6.3)    10.9     (   8.7)       8.3     ( 4.2)    6.0     ( 5.8)     5.4
1985       10.9    ( 6.8)     9.9     (   9.3)       7.9     ( 4.6)    5.3     ( 6.2)     5.4

geometric means
1963-     12.9        6.3)   12.4     (   8.6)       8.8 ( 3.8)        6.3 ( 4.9)         5.4
1985

1966-      13.5    ( 6.6)    13.3 ( 8.5)             9.8 ( 3.9)        7.7     ( 4.9)     6.5
1970

1971-      13.8 ( 6.5)       13.6     ( 9.0)         8.9 ( 3.5)        6.3 ( 4.5)        4.9
1975

1976-      13.0 ( 6.2)       12.4     (   8.5)       8.3 ( 3.6)        5.3 ( 4.7)        4.7
1980

1981-      10.5    ( 6.0)     9.1     ( 8.2)         7.5 ( 4.0)        4.7     ( 5.4)    4.7
1985

Addendun

  time-series
  standard      4.1                 5.8                    2.3               3.2
  error
                            Table 1 (continued)




     Note: Figures are mean returns for the sample of firms. Numbers in
parentheses are cross-sectional standard deviations. Cross-sectional
statistics are weighted by the share in the denominator of the respective
returns. Geometric means are for the indicated subsamples. The standard
errors given in the addendum are the weighted-average to the firm-by-firm
time-series standard errors.
                                           Table 2

                                              q

                           q                         q    (CEA)

 1963               1.55       (   1.14)                 1.42
 1964               1,66       ( 1.04)                   1.52
 1965               1.67       ( 1.22)                   1.62
 1966               1.33       (   1.12)                 1.47
 1967               1.56       (   1.52)                 1.48
 1968               1.55       (   1.28)                 1.52
 1969               1.30       (   1.37)                 1.35
 1970               1.20       (   1.09)                 1.09
 1971               1.24       (   1.17)                 1.18
 1972               1.36       ( 1.37)                   1.26
 1973               1.07       (   0.91)                 1.16
 1974               0.67       (   0.52)                  .83
 1975               0.74       ( 0.51)                    .81
 1976               0.82       (   0.50)                  .91
 1977               0.69       (   0.42)                  .80
 1978               0.64       (   0.42)                  .76
 1979               0.61       (   0.35)                  .71
 1980               0.61       ( 0.35)                    .67
 1981               0.48       (   0.29)                  .69
 1982               0.55       ( 0.42)                    .69
 1983               0.67       (   0.48)                  na
 1984               0.65       (   0.44)                  na
 1985               0.78       ( 054)

 geometric means:

 1963-1985          1.02       ( 0.80)                   1.10

 1966-1970          1.43       ( 127)                    1.38

 1971-1975          1.05       ( 0.93)                   1.05

 1976-1980          0.69       (   0.42)                  .77


  1981-1985         0.62       (   0.42)                  na




     Note: The variable q is the ratio of market value to replacement
costs. The first column report the average for our sample of firms with
cross-sectional standard deviations in parentheses. The last column gives
the value of q calculated from aggregate data by the Council of Economic
Advisers (source: Economic Report of the President).
                                                         Table 3
                                      Market And lkindamenral Rates of Return
                                            Cross-Section of Firm                                      Aggregate
            Rmdamental Total Market           Stock                  Bond              Laverage       Total     Stock
             Re turn     Return               Re turn              Return                             Return   Return


1964        85 ( 4.9)      12.8   (14.7)    13.8      (16.3)        2.4     ( 2.1)   0.07 (            11.8     14.8
1965        9.1 ( 5.0)      8.6   (20.3)     9.2   (22.1)           1.7     ( 2.6)   0.07 (0.08)        6.2      9.1
1966        8.9 (4.7)     -13.5   (16.4)   -14.3      (17.8)       -4.4     (2.5)    0.10(0.10)        -9.8
1967        7.8 (5.4)   25.9      (26.3) 29.2      (29.5)        1.4        (2.3) 0.10(0.09)          12.4
1968        8.3 C 5.1)   5.1      (17.3)   6.4     (20.8)       -4.8        C 2.5)   0.10                         8.7
1969        7.4 ( 4.6) -10.4      (18.3) -11.0     (20.7)       -5.7        ( 2.8)   0.11 ( 0.12)     -13.3     -16.0
1970        6.2 ( 4.8) -3.1       (17.8)  -3.1     (20.3)       -2.3        ( 3.1)   0.13 ( 0.13)      -0.8
1971        6.0 ( 4.5)     9.3    (17.0)   8.9     (20.0)       12.5        ( 2.3)   0.13 ( 0.13)      10.0      7.1
1972        6.4 (4.7)      15.3   (14.5)    17.6   (16.4)           2.2     (2.2)    0.12(0.13)        12.3
1973        7.8 (4.6)     -17.2   (19.4)   -19.0   (22.2)          -4.9     (2.2)    0.14(0.13)       -13.2     -22.8
1974        6.9 ( 4.5)    -29.4   (13.6)   -33.1   (14.8)       -7.5                 0.20 (
                                                                            ( 3.1)
1975    43 ( 4.5)         20.0    (18.7)   25.0    (24.4)          1.8      ( 3.5)   0.18 (   0.14)   17.6
1976    5.7 (3.8)         15.9    (13.9)    17.8                   7.7
                                                   (18.7)                   (2.8)                                15.8
1977    5.4 ( 4.6)         -9.6   (11.2)   -12.7   (13.8)          44       C 2.2)   0.20 (   0.15)    -4.2     -11.9
1978    5.5 ( 4.4)         -0.2   (10.8)    1.0    (13.4)       -4.6        C 2.1)   0.20 C           -2.6       0.0
1979    5.8      C 5.0)     5.8 (18.8)      8.6    (24.9)       -4.4        ( 3.3)   0.19 ( 0.13)      2.2       8.5
1980    4.2 (5.9)          14.2 (22.7)      20.2   (28.1)      -10.3        (4.5) 0.16(0.12)           7.8      18.2
1981    4.1 ( 4.3)        -31.0 (20.8)     -35.8   (24.1)       -5.7        ( 5.1)   0.19 C 0.14)     -2.8      -9.9
1982    3.6 ( 5.4)         15.7 (26.4)      14.8   (33.7)       19.7        ( 7.6)   0.20 ( 0.17)     14.9
1983    4.6 ( 5.4)         22.1 (14.0)      22.3   (17.8)      21.4         C 5.8)   0.18 ( 015)      17.8      18.7
1984    6.0 C 5.8)          1.3 (12.6)      0.7    (15.9)       4.0         ( 6.3)   0.21 C 0.19)     -1.1       1.2
1985    5.3 C 6,2)         24.4 (16,8)     26.0    (21.0)       18.5        ( 8.8)   0.20 C 0.16)     24.5      27.2
geometric means:
1963-   6.3 ( 4.9)         3.0    (17.2)    3.2    (20.5)          1.7      ( 3.5)                     3.9       3.8
1985

1966-   7.7 ( 4.9)        -0.1 (19.1)       0.3    (21.7)      -3.2         C 2.6)                    -16       -1.6
1970

1971-   6.3 ( 4.5)        -2.4 (16.6)      -2.8    (19.5)          0.5      C 2.7)                     1.0      -3.6
1975

1976-   5.3      ( 4.7)    4.8 (15.4)       6.3    (19.7)      -1.7         C 3.0)                     26        5.5
1980

1981-   4.7 C 5.4)         4.2 (18,0)       2,7                11.0                                   10.2       9.1
1985

addendum:

  time- series
 standard 3.2                 24.3             28.8                  11.6
 error

        See note to Table 1.
                                              Table 4
                                 Book Values versus Econanic Values

             Net Book Profits      Book Value of Bonds    Book Value of Capital      &oronsic
                     *                                                               Depreciation
           Net Economic Profits Market Value of Bonds Replaceaent Cost               Rate

1963         1.18    ( 0.92)          1.05    ( 0.01)        0.76      ( 0.11)     0.10     ( 0.01)
1964         1.52    (3.00)           1.06    (0.01)         0.76      (0.10)      0.10     (0.01)
1965         1.23    (0.55)           1.05    (0.02)         0.77      (0.10)      0.09     (0.01)
1966         1.18    (1.05)           1.08    (0.02)         0.76      (0.09)      0.09     (0.01)
1967         1.35    (1.43)           1.08    (0.02)         0.77      (0.09)      0.09     (0.01)
1968         0.45    ( 4.78)          1.10    ( 0.04)        0.76      ( 0.09)     0.09     ( 0.01)
1969         0.57    (10.70)          1.16    ( 0.04)        0.74      ( 0.09)     0.09     ( 0.01)
1970         0.93    (2.98)           1.18    (0.05)         0.72      (0.08)      0.09     (0.01)
1971         1.48    (3.55)           1.05    (0.04)         0.70      (0.08)      0.09     (0.01)
1972         4.99    (53.66)          1.05    ( 0.03)        0.68      ( 0.08)     0.09     ( 0.01)
1973         0.49    (8.63)           1.10    (0.03)         0.67      (0.08)      0.09     (0.01)
1974         2.67    (6.43)           1.14    (0.04)         0.64      (0.08)      0.09     (0.01)
1975         0.90    (4.73)           1.12    (0.06)         0.61      (0.07)      0.09     (0.01)
1976         2.01    (16.25)          1.06    ( 0.03)        0.62      ( 0.07)     0.09     ( 0.01)
1977         3.04    (11.98)          1.0'.   ( 0.03)        0.63      ( 0.07)     0.10     ( 0.01)
1978         1.77    ( 4.38)          1.09    ( 0.03)        0.63      ( 0.08)     0.10     ( 0.01)
1979         1.78    (7.49)           1.14    (0.04)         0.63      (0.08)      0.10     (0.01)
1980         5.79    (27.80)          1.27    ( 0.07)        0.63      ( 0.08)     0.10     ( 0.01)
1981         2.21    (12.94)          1.34    ( 0.12)        0.63      ( 0.06)     0.10     ( 0.01)
1982         237     ( 6.27)          1.19    ( 0.10)        0.65      ( 0.06)     0.10     ( 0.01)
1983         0.98    ( 4.66)          1.07    ( 0.08)        0.67      ( 0.06)     0.10     ( 0.01)
1984         1.46    ( 4.50)          1.09    ( 0,07)        0.70      C 0.07)     0.10     C 0.01)
1985         0.76    ( 5.61)          0.59    C 0,05)        0)2       ( 0.0/)     0.10     C 0,01)

geometric means:
1965-        1.79        8.87)        1.11    ( 0.04)        0,69      C 0.08)     0.09     C 0.01)
1985

1966-        0.90    ( 4.19)          1.12    ( 0.03)        0.75     •(   0.09)   0.09     (   0.01)
1970

1971-         2.11   (15.60)          1.09    ( 0.03)        0.66      (   0.08)   0.09     ( 0.01)
1975

1976-         2.88   (13.58)          1.12    (   0.04)      0.63      (   0.08)   0.10     (   0.01)
1980

1981-         1.56   (   6.76)        1.13    ( 0.08)        0.67      (   0.07)   0.10     (   0.01)
1985


        See note to Table 1.
                                          Table 5

                                Aggregate Returns

                                Summary Statistics




                         mean               standard deviation


fundamental              5.4                          1.2

total                    4.5                         11.2

stock                    5.1                         16.1

bond                     2.6                          8.4




                                    correlations


              fundamental           total      stock            bond

fundamental       1.00          -   .02        .05          -
                                                                .28
total                           i.oo           .96              .60

stock                                         1.00              .36

bond                                                        1.00
                                                         Table 6A
                                     Suninary of OLS Estimates of the Betas
               estimated        t-statistic of
              beta              estimated beta

              1.28   (0.52)     3.24 (1.20)

              1.75 (0.77)       3.03 (1.23)

SF            3.87 (6.70)       0.77 (0.70)

              1.46 (0.54)       3.44      (1.29)
              3.57 (5.53)       0.82 (0.74)

SV2           1.76   (0.77)     3.07 (1.22)

SF2           4.19   (6.69)     0.94 (0.81)

W2            1.47 (0.54)       3.49 (1.26)

VF2           3.84 (5.54)       1.03 (0.86)


                                          Correlation    of Estimated   Betas
       SS            SV         SF            VV                        SV2     SF2    W2     flVF2

       1.00
        .96          1.00

SF      .o           -    .10   1.00
        .86               .90   -   .04        1.00

VF      .08           -   .01       .95            .03      1.00

SV2                  1.00       -   .08            .90       .01        1.00

SF2     .00          -    .08   1.00           -   .02       .96         .06    1.00

flW2    .86               .90   -   .02       1.00           .06         .90     .00   1.00

VF2     .09               .01       .95            .05      1.00         .03     .95    .07   1.00
                                                   Table 68
                                Snnary of NLLS Estimates of the Betas
               estimated       t-statistic of
               beta            estimated beta

           1.30       (0.51)   3.76 (1.24)

           1.80 (0.76)         3.41 (1.21)

0SF        4.41 (6.17)         0.90 (0.75)

           1.50 (0.52)         3.96 (1.26)

VF         3.93 (5.18)         0.97 (0.80)

S1J2           1.78   (0.79)   3.30 (1.25)

SF2        4.42 (6.37)         1.05 (0.86)

W2             1.48 (0.54)     3.73 (1.30)

19vF2          3.98 (5.30)     1.15 (0.93)




                                      Correlation of Estimated Betas

                       SV      SF                     VF      SV2       SF2     W2     VF2
        1.00

         .97           1.00

SF       .34            .24    1.00

         .87            .90     .32       1.00

lIP      .37            .27     .97          .37      1.00

SV2      .94            .99     .10          .87       .13    1.00

SF2      .18            .08     .99          .17       .95      .07     1.00

         .84            .89     .12          .98       .17     .90      - .02   1.00

         .26            .16     .97          .24       .99      .01      .97     .04   1.00
                                              Table 7

                                 Market Line Regressions


                                     estimated equation                        stock
   estimator                                                                             2
                                                                               market R
                        intercept market            fundamental                premia
                                   risk                risk

                    —                          85
7.1. OLS                  .99 +                                      +
                1
                        (1.49)
                                       s.4op
                                      (1.26)
                                                                               5.40     0.14

                                               55
7.2. NLLS
                1
                    —   -2.53 +
                        (1.68)
                                       8.53
                                      (1.42)
                                                                     +e        8.53       .34


                    —                          SV
7.3. OLS                 2.38 +        2.94 p
                        (1.41)        (0.85)
                                                                     +
                                                                         e     4.06       .07


7.4. NLLS           —    -.73    +    4.95                           + e8  i
                                                                               6.83       .24
                        (1.60)        (0.98)

7.5. OLS            a    5.98                       + 041flSF        +                   .00
                        (0.55)                          (0.09)

7.6. NLLS                5.26                       + 06605F         +   e1
                                                                                             19
                        (2.88)                          (0.51)

7.7. OLS            —    1.49 +       2.82 SV2 +
                                      (0.85) 1
                                                         0.40 fl'2
                                                               1
                                                                     +   e 1
                                                                               3.92       .17
                        (1.41)                          (0.10)
7.8. NLLS           —   -0.66 +       3.88 SV2 +
                                      (3.68) 1
                                                         0.57 SF2
                                                               1
                                                                     +   e1
                                                                               5.39      .38
                        (6.19)                          (0.43)


7.9. OLS            —    0.74                  PY                    +   eY
                                                                          1
                                                                               4.70      .03
                        (1.15)       (0.85) 1

7.10. NLLS     21   —   -2.06 +       5.61                           +
                                                                          V
                                                                         e.1   7.74      .23
                        (1.30)       (0.96) 1

                                                                          V
7.11.   OLS         —    4.33                       + 0.49 VF        +   e.1             .10
                        (0.43)                          (0.09) 1

7.12. NLLS     21   —    3.85                       + 0.70           +
                                                                         e
                                                                          V
                                                                                         .30
                        (2.23)                          (0.48)

7.13. OLS           — 0.36                                                V
                                 +    2.99 vv2 +        0.46 vF2 +             4.15      .23
                                     (0.85) 1                 1
                        (1.15)                          (0.09)
               2 — -0.97                                                  V
7.14. NLLS                       +    3.78          +   0.60 vF2 +             5.25      .43
                                     (3.52) 1                 1
                        (4.79)                          (0.39)
                                  Table 7

                                (Continued)



     Note: The left-hand side variables are time-series averages of the
returns. The betas are as defined in the note to Table 6. See the text for
an explanation of the OLS and NLLS estimators. The     is the conventional
multiple correlation statistic based on the unweighted variables.
                                                 Table 8

                                Market Line Regressions
                          Data are three-year moving averages


                                       estimated equation                                 stock
   estimator                                                                                           2
                                                                                          market R
                         intercept market                 fundamental                     premia
                                    risk                     risk
               —s                Ss
8.1.   OLS     r — 3.41 + 2.41fi                                             +   e.S1     2.41     -.01
                   (0.50) (0.45)
               —s
               r                                   55
8.2.   NLLS          — -4.29 + 10.59             fi                          +   e.S1    10.59         .62
                          (1.37)        (1.35)

               r
               —s                                  5',
8.3.   OLS           —    5.13
                          (0.44)
                                   +    0.33
                                        (0.31)
                                                                             +
                                                                                 e   S
                                                                                          0.42         .09


8.4.   NLLS
               —S
                                            *                                +                         --
               r1                                                                e
               —S                                                       SF           S
8.5.           r1 —       4.53                            +    0.42p         +
                                                                                 e                     .02
                          (0.32)                              (0.05)
               —S
8.6.   NLLS    r — 3.53                                   + 0.71       0SF   +
                                                                                 ei
                                                                                     S
                                                                                                       .26
                                                              (0.27)
               —S
8.7.   OLS     r.    — 4.06        +    0.27 SV2 +             0.39          +   e.
                                                                                     S
                                                                                          0.66         .02
                1                                                                    1
                          (0.49)        (0.32)                (0.05) 1

               —S                                  SV 2
8.8.   NLLS    r          2.08 +        1 10              + 0.66       SF2 +              1.93         .27
                          (2.32)        (0125)                (0.24)


8.9.   OLS
               —v
               r     —    2.86     +    068vv                                +   e
                                                                                     V
                                                                                     i
                                                                                         0.86      -   .15
                          (0.41)        (0:33)

8.10. NLLS
               —V
               r.1                                                           +   e.V1      --          --

               —V    — 2.96                                                          V
8.11. OLS      r.
                1
                                                          +   0 51     VF    ÷   e
                                                                                     i
                                                                                                       .13
                          (0.24)                              (0105)
                                                                                     v
8.12.NLLS
               —V
               r.1 — 2.35                                 +   07 2fl'        +   e
                                                                                     i
                                                                                                       .36
                          (1.23)                              (0.25)
8.13. OLS
               —v
                     —    2.18 +        0   37
                                                  \1V2
                                                          +      -     VF2
                                                                             +   e.
                                                                                     V
                                                                                         0.87          .12
                                                                                   1
                          (0.43)       (0.34)                 (0.05)
               —V                                                                    V
8.14. NLLS     r.    — 1.33        +    0.59 VV2 +            0.72 VF2       +   e.       1.33         .36
                1
                          (1.89)       (1.45)                 (0.22) 1.
                                 Table S

                                (Continued)



     *These estimates did not converge after 100 iterations. Most others
converged in under 20 iterations.

    Note: The returns are three-year averages. See also note to Table 7.
                         Mean Stock Return                                                   Mean Stock Return
            10       0     5       10          15       20 25 30 35 40        --10       0       5       10          15       20 25            30 35 40
     LA                                                                       LA
     0                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                    a
     F's)
     0                                                                        0
z                                                                                                                                      a
                                                                         0
                                                                              0                      0
r
11               0I            a                             0
                                                                  0
                                                                         '1
                                                                         C
                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                          -n
C                                                                                                                         0
                 U                         U                             :3
                                                    0                    c0                                                           00
0
0                                                   U                    0           0
                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                  00
                                                                         (t                                                                               CD
:3                                                      00               :3
  o                            0                                           0
0                                                                        0                           0                                                    —S
                                       0            0
                                   0                                     03                                  0                    a
03                                 U                     0
                                                                                                         0                    U
(b
     0                                                                                                   0                0
0
     -                                          0
                                                                         0 0
                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                          0               0

     LA                                                                       LA
     0                                                                        0
                                                                 0

                                                                                                                                  I        I   _1
     0                                                                        0
