                           NBER DRKtNC PAPERS SERIES




                      fllE FOREIGN EXa-NGE RISK PREXWM IN
                       A TAIEI' ZONE WITh DEVALUATION RISK




                                Lars E.O.   Svensson




                              Working Paper No. 3466




                       NATIONAL JPEAU OF ECt)NCIC RESEARC-I
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  October 1990




I   thank Avinash Dixit, Bernard [Xmias, Jeffrey Frankel, Wi11iai PerraUdifl,
Peter Sellin arxl Ingrid Werner for ccrnts. Part of the paper was written
while I was a Visiting Scholar in the Research rparnt of the
International Monetary Furd. I thank the Research [partnnt for its
hospitality. Remaining errors arKi obscurities are my n. This paper is
part of NBER' s research prngram in International Studies. Any opinions
expressud are those of the author and not those of the National .ireau of
Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #3466
                                             October 1990




                    ThE RJREIQ'T EXGIANGE RISK MH1IUM IN
                     A TA1Fr ZONE WTflI DEVAUJATION RISK


                                   Bscr
    The   foreign exchange risk premium in an exchange rate target zone regime
with devaluation/realignment risks is deriv&L In contrast to previous
literature, the exchange rate's heteroscedasticity within the bard, as well
as a separate devaluation/realignment risk, is taken into account. The risk
premium is then the sum of two separate risk premia, arising from stochastic
exchange rate iivements within the bard and from stcxastic devaluations/
realignments when the band is shifted. Both real and nominal exchange rate
premia are cons idere:1. The real and nominal risk premia from nvements
within the band are very small for narr target zones and can therefore be
disregarded. The real and nominal risk premia from devaluations/realigrmntS
are larger but still relatively small propDrtions of the expected rate of
devaluation/realignment.




                                              Lars E .0. Svensson
                                              Institute for International
                                              Economic Studies
                                              University of Stockholm
                                              S—l06 91 Stockholm
                                              46—8—163070
                                              SWEDEN
                                              1




                                      1. Introduction


    The foreign exchange risk premium can be defined as the expected rate of return
differential between similar bonds or deposits denominated in home and foreign currencies.
(Real rate of return differentials give rise to real risk premia; nominal rate of return
differentials in a particular currency give rise to nominal risk premia expressed in that
currency.) This paper examines the foreign exchange risk premium in an exchange rate
target zone, with devaluation/realignment risks. It argues that both real and nominal risk
premia are likely to be small for narrow target zones. This is not surprising in the absence
of devaluation risks: The previous theoretical and empirical literature on risk premia in
floating exchange rate regimes have indeed generally concluded that the risk prenua are
likely to be small. In target zone regimes the risk premia should be even smaller, since
exchange rate uncertainty should be less. With devaluation risks, however, it is not
obvious what the magnitude of the risk prenua are. This paper argues that devaluation
risk prem.ia are larger than non-devaluation risk premia, but that the devaluation risk
premia are still relatively small proportions of expected rates of devaluation.
    The foreign exchange risk premium has been much discussed in the international
finance literature. It has in particular been discussed in the context of whether central
banks' sterilized foreign exchange interventions have any noticeable effect on exchange
rates. (Sterilized foreign exchange interventions change the relative outstanding stocks of
domestic and foreign currency denominated assets but do not affect the domestic
monetary base, whereas nonsterilized foreign exchange interventions do affect the
domestic monetary base.)
    With significant non-constant risk premia bonds denominated in home and foreign
currencies are imperfect substitutes. If risk premia do depend on the relative supply of
home and foreign currency bonds (and if agents are non-Ricardian), sterilized
interventions may have effects on exchange rates. This channel for the effect of foreign
                                               2



exchange interventions has been called the pot-folio effect. Another possible way for
sterilized interventions to affect exchange rates is as indicators of the intentions of central

banks and of forthcoming non-sterilized interventions or generally changes in monetary
policies, which would affect expectations of future exchange rates. This channel has been
called the expectations effect, or the signaling effect.
    The empirical literature generally rejects uncovered interest arbitrage, that is, it
rejects the hypothesis of zero risk premia. On the other hand, the empirical findings seem
to indicate rather small risk premia. The empirical literature hardly finds any effect on
risk premia of relative asset supplies. Different specific models of the determination of
risk premia are generally rejected. The dominating view seems to be that the portfolio
effect of sterilized intervention is insignificant, whereas there is some empirical support for

a significant signaling effect.'
    The discussion about risk prernia and sterilized interventions has mostly concerned
floating exchange rate regimes. For a credible, completely fixed, exchange rate regime
with free capital mobility, the foreign exchange risk premium should be zero. That is,
bonds denominated in home and foreign currency of the same maturity should (absent
default risk) be perfect substitutes since there is no exchange rate risk, and domestic and
foreign interest rates should be equal.
     However, real world fixed exchange rate regimes typically do not have completely

1    Obstfeld (1988) provides an extensive survey of thry, recent experience, and
empirical results regarding the effect of sterilized interventions. Dominguez and Frankel
(1990) distinguish between the portfolio and signaling channels. They find preliminary
evidence of small portfolio effects and seizable signaling effects. Edison (1990) provides an
annotated bibliography of research on foreign currency interventions.
    Hodrick (1987, chapter 5) and Horngren and Vredin (1988b) survey different models
of foreign exchange risk premia and corresponding empirical tests. Dooley and Isard
(1983), using a portfolio—balance approach, report a risk premium of about 2.5 percent per
year, but warn that their method may overestimate the risk premium. Frankel (1982,
1988), using a mean-variance approach, estimates variance-covariance matrices which,
with relative risk aversion equal to 2, imply risk prernia of about 1 percent per year for six
major currencies.
    Sibert (1989) and Engei (1990) emphasse the distinction between real and nominal
foreign exchange risk premia. Empirical estimates have generally been of the nominal risk
premium, whereas the real risk premium is more relevant.
                                               3


fixed exchange rate8, but are better described as narrow target zones. That is, there j8 a
narrow band within which the exchange rate is allowed to fluctuate. The exchange rate is
prevented from moving outside the band by foreign exchange interventions. This is so for
the Exchange R.ate Mechanism within the European Monetary System, where the
exchange rate bands are *2.25 percent (except 6 percent for Spain), and for the Nordic
countries outside EMS. Sweden, for instance, now has a target zone of *1.5 percent.
     Such target zones imply some remaining exchange rate uncertainty because of
movements inside the band and because of devaluation/realignment risks. They are also
characterized by non-zero and fluctuating interest rate differentials. That interest rate
differentials in a target zone are nonzero is not surprising, since the expected rate of
depreciation of a currency varies both with the exchange rate's position in the band and
with the probability and size of a devaluation/realignment. For instance, with a credible
band a currency which is at the strong edge of its band can only depreciate, which
contributes to a positive interest rate differential.
     The issue arises, however, whether the exchange rate uncertainty due to movements
within the band and to devaluations/realignments is sufficient to create a significant
foreign exchange risk premium. This issue is important for two reasons. First, some
target zones, for instance Sweden's and Norway's, are reported in official statements to be
defended mostly by sterilized interventions.2 If these sterilized interventions indeed have
effects, we may wonder through which channel the effects operate, in particular against
the discussion of sterilized interventions reported above. If it is through the portfolio
effect, significant risk premia are required. Second, it has frequently been argued that a


 2   The Swedish target zone is to a large extent defended by forward market
interventions. To purchase foreign currency on the forward foreign exchange market is
equivalent to buying a claim on future foreign currency and simultaneously selling a claim
on future domestic currency. This has no effect on current domestic liquidity and is hence
a sterilized intervention. For further discussion of this, see Franzén and Sardelis (1988).
     The Norwegian target zone is defended mostly by spot market interventions. These
interventions have in practice been sterilized at the end of each month via domestic
liquidity measures (see Norges Bank (1989)).
                                              4


target zone like the Swedish one allows the central bank some monetary autonomy, in the
sense that Swedish interest rates may differ from foreign interest rates, also with abolished
capital controls and high international capital mobility. This argument also seems to
presume a significant risk premium (see Vredin (1988, chapter 2) for a detailed discussion
of monetary autonomy and capital mobility).
    Understanding the risk premium in a target zone requires an explicit model of the
target zone. The frequently used target zone model first presented by Krugman (1990) is
formulated under the simplifying assumption of uncovered interest parity and hence a zero
foreign exchange risk premium. An alternative assumption is that the risk premium is
exogenous and follows a Brow-nian motion. This simplification allows a very neat closed
form solution for the exchange rate. The assumption of a zero or at least exogenous risk
premium is necessary also for a closed form solution to the interest rate differentials
(Svensson (1989, 1990)).
    The rigorous derivation of an endogenous risk premium in a target zone is a difficult
task, since the underlying exchange rate is a complicated nonlinear heteroscedastic
stochastic process.3 For the purpose of deriving an upper bound on the risk premium,
some simplifying approximations can be made, as we shall see. However, exchange rate
uncertainty in a target zone originates not only from exchange rate movements inside the
band but also from discrete shifts of the band, that is from devaluations/realignments.
Devaluations and realignments have indeed been a common experience of real world target
zones, in particular of the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the European Monetary System.
The effect on the risk premium of devaluations/realignments should therefore be
incorporated. A few papers present target zone models with realignments, for instance
Miller and Weller (1988, 1989a,b) and Bertola and Caballero (1989). The related problem

3  Dumas (1989) specifies a two-country general equilibrium model with physical capital
movements where the real exchange rate behavior is similar to the nominal exchange rate
behavior in the Krugman model. Dumas manages to derive a simple closed form
expression for a real risk premium, defined as the difference between the two countries'
own rates of interest less the expected relative price change.
                                              5



of a collapse of a target zone exchange rate regime to a free float, as well as other kinds of
regime switches, have been discussed by Krugman (1990), Froot and Obstfeld (1989),
Delgado and Dumas (1990) and Krugman and R.otemberg (1990). In all these papers,
realignments and regime switches by assumption occur only at the edges of the exchange
rate band. When the exchange rate is in the interior of the band, the probability of a
realignment or regime switch in the next instant is zero. Then there is no separate effect
of realignments and regime switches on interest rate differentials and risk premia in the
interior of the exchange rate band. Hence, within those models it is reasonable to
continue to disregard the risk premium, at least for narrow target zones, except possibly
at the edges of the band.4
    In the real world, devaluations and realignments seem to occur also when exchange
rates are in the interior of their bands.5 In addition, interest rate differentials seem to
reflect possible devaluation risks in the interior of exchange rate bands.6 Therefore it
indeed seems relevant to consider target zone models where devaluations/realignments can
occur inside the exchange rate band.        Svensson (1990) develops a simple model of
devaluations along these lines, where devaluations occur according to a Poisson process
regardless of where in the band the exchange rate is. It remains to be seen whether such
devaluation risks can cause a significant risk premium.
    Consequently, in this paper we shall establish an upper bound on the foreign exchange
risk premium in a target zone model with devaluation risk, where the devaluations are
modeled as a Poisson process. The analysis of the risk premium differs from that of the


     Even though there is no risk premium in the interior of the band in those models, the
actual determination of the exchange rate is affected by possible devaluations at the edge
of the band (see for instance Bertola and Caballero (1989)).
     For instance, when Sweden devalued in September 1981 and October 1982 the Krona's
value was above previous minimum values and away from the edges of its band. Most of
the realignments of the Lira against the Mark during the EMS period have occurred when
the Lira has been away from the edges of its band (see Bertola and Caballero (1989,
Figure 3b).
6  For an examination of Swedish data, see Svensson (1990).
                                               6


previous literature in two respects: (1) the    exchange   rate's variable standard deviation
(heteroscedasticity) inside the band is explicitly taken into account in the portfolio
problem, and (2) the devaluation risk's separate contribution to the risk premium is
specified.
    Section 2 lays out the model of a small open economy with a target zone. Section 3

specifies    the portfolio choice of a representative investor, and section 4 derives the real
and nominal risk premia. Section 5 presents some condusions. An appendix contains
some technical details.


                                         2. The Model


    The purpose of this paper is to derive generous upper bounds on the real and nominal
foreign exchange risk premia. This purpose influences the approach used, and allows some
considerable shortcuts to a very complicated problem. The approach used in the paper is
to specify the portfolio problem for an investor in an open economy in a particular way.
The investor consumes home and foreign goods and has access to bonds denominated in
home and foreign currency. Nominal goods prices, interest rates and exchange rates are
exogenous stochastic processes (some variables are even assumed constant) that are
functions of one single state variable, the exchange rate. Some known properties of the
stochastic process for the exchange rates in theoretical target zone models with
devaluation risks are exploited. Then a relation between the risk premia and the portfolio
shares of the investor are derived and examined.
     The simplifications of this approach are obvious. There could be other assets, and
there could be other state variables in addition to the exchange rate, like money supplies,
government bond supplies, etc. In particular, the stochastic processes for the domestic
interest rate, the exchange rate and domestic nominal goods prices should preferably be
part of a full general equilibrium.
                                              7



    Nevertheless, given the limited purpose of the paper, the simplifications seem
warranted. I cannot see that the simplifications would bias downwards the upper bounds
on the risk premia to be derived.
    The analysis builds on Merton's (1971) model of continuous-time portfolio choice with
state variables affecting assets' rates of return and rates of return being mixed Brow-nian
and Poisson processes. Nominal bonds, exchange rates and two consumption goods are
introduced as in Kouri's (1976) model of the determinants of the forward exchange
premium. Kouri's model and the recent model of a collapse of a fixed exchange rate
regime by Penati and Pennachi (1989) include rates of return being mixed Brownian and
Poisson processes but no state variables.7
    We consider a small open economy with free capital mobility. There are two goods,
home and foreign. The home currency price of the home good, h and the foreign
currency price of the foreign good,      ,   are   sticky, and for simplicity set constant and

equal to unity, h =         = 1. The home currency price of foreign goods, P1, is then

given by P1. = SPJ = S, where S is the exchange rate measured in home currency per
unit foreign currency. (The case with flexible and stochastic nominal goods prices is
examined in the appendix. The results are the same as with sticky prices.)
    There is a target zone exchange rate regime. Foreign exchange interventions keep the
exchange rate in a band of *loOb percent around a central parity. The central parity is
now and then shifted 1009 percent by devaluations/realignments. These devaluations
occur according to a Poisson process N(1) with intensity v > 0. Here the integer N(t)
denotes the number of devaluations up to and including time 1. The probability of a unit

jump in \(t), dN(1) = 1, during a short interval dt is equal to vdt + o(dt), whereas the


7    Adler and Dumas (1983) and Branson and Henderson (1985) provide useful surveys
of international portfolio-choice models, although without considering devaluation risks
and Poisson processes. Closed economy asset pricing and portfolio choice models with
jump processes have been developed by Ahn and Thompson (1988) and Jarrow and
Rosenfeld (1984).
                                                    8


probability of no jump in Mt), dMi) = 0, is equal to 1 - vd + o(dt).'
    After Mt) devaluations, the central parity is a(Mt)) =          o(1   + 9)Mt)M0), where a is
the central parity at time 0. The exchange rate 9t ;At)) is then restricted to the band
                              a.N(t))(1—b) < .t ;N(t))    <   a(Mt))(1+b).
    Inside the band the exchange rate is a stochastic process which follows the stochastic
differential equation
(2.la)                   dS/S = pS,N)dt + c5(S,i\I)dz + gdN,
where the drift p(S,V) is the home currency's expected rate of depreciation within the

band, dz is the increment of a Wiener process (that is, E[dz] =           0   and Va.r[dz] = dt), and
oS,N) is the instantaneous standard deviation of the rate of exchange rate depreciation
within the band. The last term is the jump of lOOg percent when a devaluation occurs.
    The exchange rate's drift and instantaneous standard deviation depend only on where
in the band the exchange rate is, that is, on s = S/a(4V). Let us call s the normalized
exchange rate. The normalized exchange rate will obey ds/s = dS/S - gdN, hence

(2.lb)                                  ds/s = p5(s)dt + (s)dz.
    There is a representative investor with preferences given by the expected discounted
utility

(2.2)                            E1J r)) exp[-S(r-t)]dr, b> 0,
where u(c) is a standard instantaneous utility function and c is real consumption. Real
consumption is in turn given by a Cobb-Douglas utility function of consumption of home
and foreign goods, ch and c1,
(2.3)                                        c=
                                                  chcf
where /3, 0   <   /3 <   1, is the consumption share of foreign goods.

    The Cobb-Douglas utility function results in the corresponding exact price index,

(2.4)                                   P Ph1(s1) S8,
    We let o(dt) denote terms of order higher than dl, that is, limdl O(dl)/dt              0.
                                                        9


which will be used to deflate nominal returns. Application of Ito's lemma and (2.la), with
special consideration of the Poisson component, gives the stochastic differential equation
for the price index,9

(2.5)          dP/P = [fl(s) -       fl - fl)o(s)/21d + /)o(s)dz + f(i+g) -        1]dN.
The last term in (2.5), the Poisson component, is the relative change in the price index

when a devaluation occurs.
      There are two assets, home and foreign currency short-term bonds. Let Bh and B).
denote the own-currency value of the two bonds. The own-currency nominal rates of
return on the two bonds are then, respectively,

(2.6a)                                        dBh /Bh = i(s)dl and
(2.6b)                                    dB*1./B*. =
where    the home interest rate i(s) in equilibrium will depend on where in the band the
exchange rate is, that is on the normalized exchange rate. The foreign currency interest
rate i'd' is taken to be constant.
      The real values of the two bonds are

(2.7)                       = Bh /P = BhS            and        = SBJIP =
                       bh

By Ito's lemma the real rates of return on the two bonds can then be written
                                              dt -
(2.8a)                      dbh 1h = ph( s)          3c5(s)dz +   [(1+g) - 1]dN, where
                             nh(S) = i(s) -   /p(s) + 1(3 +
and

(2.8b)                      db1/b1 = p1(s)dt + (1 - J3)a(s)dz + [O+g)1_ - lldN, where
                             nj(s) = + (1 - )ps)            -      - 4s)/2.
      Let Wj   be   the share of wealth the investor holds in foreign bonds, and let       =   I   -

be   the share of wealth held in home bonds. Real wealth W then follows the stochastic

   With stochastic processes that are mixed Ito and Poisson processes, Ito's lemma needs
to be modified. Let dr/i =  1s(r)dt + c(r)dz + gdN be a mixed Ito and Poisson process.
Then Ito's lemma can be written
        dI(z) = [f(r)p(r)x + f(z)c(x)2z2/2]dt + f(r)c(z)zdz + [J((1+g)z) -f(z)dN.
                                                      10




differential equation

(2.9)           dW= {WIph(s) + wJ(/If(s)_Ph(s))] - c}dt + wj-I3)oç(s)dz

                             + Wj(1+w1g)/(1+g) -           1]dN.

The first term on the right hand side follows since the expected change of real wealth
absent any devaluation can be written dW = IW(w,h + wj/Jj) - cldt =          +
          - c}dl, where we have used wh = 1 - The second term follows since the
wf(pf-ph)]                                                  w1.
Brownian component               of   the change in wealth can be written dW =
 wwh(_fl.7S)
                + w1(I-j1)cd: =           W(w1-/3)a5.dz. The third term is the relative change in
real wealth from a devaluation This term can be understood as follows. The norrs:noj
wealth after a devaluation is PWIWh + wj(1+g)]                     Pftl +   w1g).
                                                                                    The real wealth is

 P%1 + w1g)J1+g), since the price index jumps from P to 1+g). The relative
change in real wealth is therefore (1 + w1g)/(1+g) -               1.



                                             3. Portfolio choice



        The portfolio problem of the investor is then to choose the portfolio share of foreign
 bonds w1 and consumption c so as to maximize (22a) subject to the wealth equation
 (2.9), taking into account the dependence of Jh(s), ii1(s), and o(s) on the normalized
 exchange rate. This is a standard portfolio problem, except that the normalized exchange
 rate s is a state variable that affects the expectation and the instantaneous standard
 deviation of the assets' real rates of return. The resulting value function will then be a
 function of both wealth and the state variable, I( W,s)exp(-6t) (ci Merton (1971)).
        From the Bellman equation for this problems follows a first-order condition for the
 share of foreign bonds (see appendix for details). This first-order condition can be
 rewritten as the following equation for the equilibrium share of foreign bonds,

 (3.1)                  Wt   =        +           2
                                          W,s)Js           IW,s)(W,s)
                                               11



                                              111 ,9)/(1+9)fi,81       (19)fl
                                 +                                          2'
                                    1w(W,s)
where ( W,s) = - 'wiA W,s) W/iw( W,s) is the relative aversion to wealth risk.
   The equilibrium share of foreign bonds consists of the sum of four terms. Let us write
these four terms Wj =           + w2 + w'j + w. Accordingly, the equilibrium portfolio of
foreign and home bonds can be separated into four different portfolios. The first term on
the right hand side of (3.1),        = j3, corresponds to the share of foreign bonds in a global
minimum-variance portfolio, with the share of domestic bonds               =   1   - f. This is the
portfolio an infinitely risk-averse investor would choose (when            approaches infinity).
With the portfolio shares of foreign and home bonds equal to the consumption shares of
foreign and home goods, the variance of real wealth is minimized and equal to zero. The
other three terms correspond to "speculative" portfolios of zero value. The second term is
the foreign bonds' share of wealth           in a standard so-called tangency portfolio, with
domestic bonds' share of wealth         =   - w.    The third term is the foreign bonds' share
of wealth       in a so-called hedge-portfolio against movements in the state variable s,
with the domestic bonds' share of wealth            =    - wf.   The fourth and last term is the
foreign bonds' share in wealth         in a portfolio resulting from the devaluation risk, with
the domestic bonds' share of wealth         = -         •1O



    Next, we shall rewrite (3.1) in order to find an expression for the risk premium.


                          4. The Foreign Exchange Risk Premium


    Let us define the real foreign exchange risk premium, p, as the expected real rate of
return differential between home and foreign currency bonds. Then we have from (2.8)


10  If the utility function u(c) is logarithmic, u(c) = in c, we may guess (as in Merton
(1971)) that the value function is of the form I( W,s) = A in W + ms). Then 'Ws = 0 and
the hedge portfolio is zero. Furthermore, the relative aversion to wealth risk is unity,
r( W,s) = 1, and the portfolio in (3.1) has a very simple form.
                                                   12


                                          -
(4.1)                    p = EEdbh/b,I        E(dbj/b1)
                           =        + (1+g) - 111 -           +   (l+9)1 - '1)
                           =    -      + vg/(1+g).
Here    the the first two terms in the last line of (4.1) give the expected real rate of return
differential between home and foreign currency bonds due to exchange rate movements
inside the band in the absence of devaluations. The third term in the last line is the
expected real rate of return differential between home and foreign currency bonds due to
devaluations.
    It follows from (41) and (3.1) that the real risk premium can be written as the sum of
two terms,
(4.2a)                                        —         +
where the two terms are given by

(4.2b)                     =   [+                 - lDj] ( W,s)   4s) and
                                     w'j ( W,s)

                           =   IW(i+wg) / (1 g)fl,s] - IW,s)
(4.2c)                                                       vg/(1+g)
                                                  I(W, s)
Here w W,s) in (4.2b) is the foreign bonds' share of wealth in the state-variable hedge
portfolio, the third term in the right-hand side of (3.1).
       The real risk premiu.rn is hence the sum of two separate risk premia, b and     .   The
risk premium b is due to exchange rate uncertainty within the band. It is the product of
three factors. The first factor is the sum of the consumption share of foreign goods and
the share of foreign bonds in the hedge portfolio, less the total portfolio share of foreign
bonds. The second factor is the relative aversion to wealth risk, and the third is the
instantaneous variability of exchange rate depreciation within the band.
       The risk premium d is due to the exchange rate uncertainty caused by devaluations.
It is the product of two factors. The first factor is the relative jump in the marginal
utility of real wealth if a devaluation occurs. The second factor is the expected real rate
of return differential between home and foreign currency bonds due to devaluations.
                                             13



    Let US next define the nominal (home currency) foreign exchange risk premium, , as
the expected nominal (home currency) rate of return differential between home and
foreign currency bonds. That 38, the nominal risk premium equals the interest rate
differential less the expected rate of depredation of the home currency,

(4.3)
where p5(s) is the expected rate of depreciation of the home currency within the band,

and vg is the expected rate of depreciation due to devaluations (the expected devaluation

per unit time).
    It follows from (2.8), (3.1) and (4.2) that the nominal risk premium can also be
written as the sum of two terms,

(4.4a)                                  =         +
where the two terms are given by

(4.4b)                   =     - i3cs) and
(4.4c)                   —      +   [1 - 1/(1+g)}
                                                      g),sJ/(1+g) -   Iw(W,s)
                         = IW(i+w1g)/(i+

    The nominal risk premium also consists of two separate risk premia, one due to
exchange rate movements inside the band, and one due to exchange rate movements from
devaluations. The nominal risk premium            is in general the corresponding real risk
premium less the covariance between the rate of depreciation and the rate of inflation (see
appendix). The latter term, the famous "convexity term" due to Jensen's inequality, has
the simple form in (4.4b) since nominal home goods are assumed to be constant in the
price index (2.4). The nominal risk premium d due to devaluations can be interpreted as
the product of the jump in the marginal utility of nominal wealth from a devaluation and
the expected nominal rate of return differential due to devaluations. 1112


I' The nominal risk premium in (4.3) is, because of Siegel's paradox and the convexity
term, not invariant to the currency denomination. This is so since, because of Jensen's
                                             14



    Let u8 first look at the term b' the real risk premium due exchange rate uncertainty
within the band. We shall see that this risk premium should be very small in narrow
target zones. Since the risk premium is proportional to the instantaneous variance of the
rate of depreciation, let us estimate this variance, both theoretically and empirically. To
get a theoretical estimate, we use the Krugman (1990) model. There, the log of the
exchange rate is typically given by the function

(4.5)                      in s(f) =   f - sinh(Af)/[)co€h()t[)],
where ..\ =   J& /a, f (the "market fundamental") is a regulated Brownian motion with
zero drift, instantaneous standard deviation a and lower and upper bounds [, and a >        0

can be interpreted as the semi-elasticity of money demand with respect to the nominal
interest ratej3 The instantaneous standard deviation of the rate of exchange rate
depreciation is then by Ito's lemma given by
                     af) = a ôln s/of = a[l - cosh(.Af)/cosh(A[)1.
The instantaneous standard deviation is shown in Figure 1, plotted against In s. The
maximum of crs(f) results for the middle of the band and is given by a0) =
a/cosh()[). With the reasonable parameters a =          3   and a =   0.1   per year, an upper

inequality, the expected rate of depreciation of the foreign cirrency is not equal to the
negative of the expected rate of depreciation of the home currency: E[d(1/S)/(1/S)] =
E[dS/.5'] + VartdS/S1. The real risk premium in (4.2) is invariant to the currency
denomination. See for instance Adler and Dumas (1983, p. 955), Engel (1990), Frankel
(1982, Appendix) and Sibert (1989) for further discussion of this point.
1.2 In the absence of a state variable s affecting the rates of return of the state variable,
the hedge portfolio in (4.4b) is zero and the instantaneous standard deviation of the rate
of exchange rate depreciation is constant. If the utility function u(c) in (2.2) is assumed
to have constant relative risk aversion , the value function I( W) has the same constant
relative risk aversion, and expression (4.4b) simplifies to        =    ( -
                                                                              wj)a
Similar expressions for the foreign exchange risk premium has been derived in a
                                                                                     -
                                                                                       %Jo..

mean-variance framework by Dornbusch (1983) and Frankel (1982).
'3 We recall that the hyperbolic sine and cosine fulfill siiih(z) = [exp(z) — exp(—x)}/2 and
cosh(z) =. [exp(x) + exp(—x)1/2.
    The Krugman model is solved under the assumption that the foreign exchange risk
premium is either zero or exogenous. We only need the model to get a numerical estimate
of the instantaneous standard deviation of the rate of exchange rate depreciation, and
there is no reason to believe that that estimate would be very different if the assumption
was not fulfilled.
                                             15


bound I = 0.094 results in an exchange rate band of            percent, the Swedish target
zone. The corresponding theoretical standard deviation CS(O) is 2.4 percent per year,
hence the variance a(0) is about 5.8 10, that i8 5.8 basis point8 per year (0.05.3 percent
per year). Even with a relatively high risk aversion (W,s) 8 and with a relatively
large expression /3 +   W,s) -     = .5, the real risk premium b would be bounded by
23 basis points per year."
   To get the nomi,uil risk premium      due to exchange rate uncertainty inside the band,
the second term in the right-hand side of (4.4b) should be subtracted from the real risk
premium. With /3 less than 0.5, this second term is less than 2.9 basis points. This term
may be of same order of magnitude as a small real risk premium, making the nominal risk
premium very close to zero indeed. 15
   The empirical standard deviation for the Swedish exchange rate index is actually
smaller than the theoretical 5.8 basis points per year, which makes for an even smaller
risk premium b Horngren and Vredin (1988b) report a standard deviation of monthly
changes in the Swedish index for the period October 1982-May 1987 of 0.42 percent per
month, that is, a variance of about 0.l7•10 per month and 2.12.10k per year, or
2.1 basis points per year. I have computed the variance of daily exchange rate changes in
the Swedish index for the years 1986-88 and found it equal to 1.6 basis points per year.
For narrow target zones like the Swedish one, it seems that we can safely disregard both
the real and the nominal risk premium due to exchange rate movements inside the band.



'4 Note that additional state variables would have an effect on the risk premium only to
the extent that the size of the hedge portfolio share u/f is affected. This seems unlikely
to change the upper bound on the risk premium much.
   Even if the hedge portfolio share would be very large and above unity, there is
obviously a considerable margin before the risk premium would be sizeable.
' Engel (1990) emphasizes that many models used as thretical frameworks for
empirical studies of the foreign exchange risk premium include assumptions that (absent
devaluation risks) imply that the real risk premium is zero. This makes the nominal risk
premium simply identical to the negative of the covariance between the rate of
depreciation and the rate of inilation and completely unrelated to any risk aversion.
                                                  16



    Let u8 next look at the term d the real risk premium due to the devaluation risk.
Let us assume that the elasticity of the marginal utility of wealth, that i8, the relative
aversion to wealth risk, is fairly stable, and that it can be approximated by a constant

> 0, that is, ( W,s) = . Then I,( W,s) can be approximated by A(s)W                    and

be approximated by
                                         (1 + g )fl7
(4.6)
                                 =   [                  - 1] vg/(1+g)
                                         (1 +
    Let us look at the ratio of this risk premium to the expected rate of depreciation due
to devaluations,
                                            (1 + g )         - 1 ]/(1+g)
(4.7)                        d /vg = [
                                            (1 + w1g)7
    This ratio does not depend on v, the probability per unit time of a devaluation. It
depends on size of the devaluation g, the relative risk aversion , the consumption share of
foreign goods / and the total share of foreign bonds w1. The ratio is increasing in           (for

positive g and larger than unity) and decreasing in the share of foreign bonds (for
positive g). In order to get a generous upper bound for the ratio, let us use = .5 as a
very high consumption share of foreign goods, and Wj = .25 and 0 as a low and very low
share of foreign bonds.         The ratio d /vg        is   plotted in Figure 2 (for Wj = .25) and
 Figure 3 (for W1 =   0),   for devaluation sizes g between plus and minus 20 percent, and for
relative risk aversion 7 equal to 2, 4, arid 8.
    Consider a devaluation of 10 percent. We see in Figure 2 (with the more reasonable
    = .25) that then the ratio of the risk premium to the expected depreciation is
between 0.05 for relative risk aversion equal to 2 and about 0.2 for relative risk aversion
equal to 8. Suppose the probability of a devaluation is 100 percent per year, so the
expected rate of depreciation is 10 percent per year. Then the risk premium i8 between
 0.5 and 2 percent per year.
        Consider the more extreme case          = 0 in Figure 3. For a 10 percent devaluation the
                                             17



ratio of the ri8k premium to the expected depredation is between 0.1 for risk aversion
equal to 2 and 0.45 for risk aversion equal to 8. With an expected depreciation equal to
10 percent per year, the risk premium is between 1 and 4.5 percent per year.
    The ratio of the nominal risk premium due to devaluation risks to the expected rate of
devaluation 18 given by
                                          (1 +
(4.8)                                 =                       1.
                                          (1 +
This ratio is plotted in Figure L for the case with      =   0.25.   From a comparison with
Figure 2 it appears that the nominal risk premium due to devaluations is less in
magnitude than the corresponding real risk premium.
    Except for unlikely extreme cases, it seems that both real and nominal devaluation
risk premia should still be relatively small. For Sweden, with observed interest rate
differentials between 1 and 5 percent (possibly due to an expected positive rate of
devaluation), the devaluation risk premia are in all likelihood rather small, and it seems
that they could hardly exceed 1 percent.
    What about sudden exchange rate jumps within the band? Could expectations of such
jumps generate significant risk premia? Consider the Swedish band, *1.5 percent. If the
Krona is at its strong edge, there is room for a sudden one-time depredation of 3 percent
within the band.      Expectations of such an imminent depreciation could generate
considerable short term interest rate differentials: Suppose such a depreciation is expected
with 100 percent probability within one month. This corresponds to an interest rate
differential of 1.0312 - i = 43 percent per year for one-month interest rates, without any
risk premium. (The contribution to the welr-mnonth interest rate differential from this
expected one-time depreciation would only be 3 percent.) What would the risk premium
be? In order to use our framework, let us modify the experiment to involve repeated
Poisson devaluations of 3 percent size, with a probability of 100 percent per month, that
                                              18



is, a probability of 1200 percent per year.'6 Then the expected depredation is 36 percent
per year. In Figures 2 and 3 we can find the ratio of the risk premium to this expected
depreciation: For instance, in Figure 3 with the extreme case   = 0, for equal to 8 and

g equal to 3 percent, the ratio is about 0.12. Hence, of this large expected depreciation of
36 percent per year, only about 4.3 percent per year would constitute the risk premium. I
conclude that the risk premium should be small in relation to observed interest rate
differentials also for expected sudden depreciations within the band.'7


                                        5. Condusioas


      Using Merton's (1971) model of portfolio choice with rates of return depending upon
state variables and being mixed Brownian and Poisson processes, we have shown that risk
 premia arising from exchange rate movements inside narrow bands are insignificant. Risk
 prernia arising from devaluation risks may be considerably larger, but are stiil relatively
 small in comparison with the expected rate of devaluation.
      We immediately conclude that the practice in the new literature on target zones to
 rely on uncovered interest rate arbitrage and disregard the risk premium seems warranted,
 at least for narrow target zones.
      We also conclude that if sterilized interventions have effects in narrow target zones, it
 cannot be thiough the portfolio effect as modeled here. Any effects must be signaling
 effects on expectations, for instance as implicit threats of future nonsterilized
 interventions, or possibly portfolio effects modeled in some other way.
      We finally conclude that any monetary independence in narrow target zones cannot be
 explained by risk premia as modeled here, except possibly in connection with large

 16  Note that the jump probability per unit of time is a rate, hence nothing prevents it
 from being above 100 percent per unit of time.
 '7 Perraudin (1990) developes a model of a completely credible target zone, where the
 fundamental is a mixed reflected Brownian and jump process.
                                              19



expected rates of devaluation. Observed interest rate differentials must be interpreted as
normally arising wholly from expected currency depreciation, from exchange rate
movements inside the band and from devaluations. Alternatively, there may be ri8k
preinia that must be modeled in some other way than here.
     Could there be risk premia for other reasons than those modeled here? Market
imperfections, regulations, institutional practice, transactions costs and costs of
adjustment are of course possible candidates. 15        A   related possibility is that the
instantaneous portfolio stock equilibrium underlying the Merton (1971) model i8 a
misleading description of the foreign exchange market, and that actual foreign exchange
markets are better described as thinner markets in flows (cf. Kouri (1984)), where
sterilized interventions may have at least short run effects. The existence of specific
agents in foreign exchange markets with large positive foreign exchange positions would
contribute to larger risk prernia. Note that large negative foreign exchange positions
would contribute to negative risk premia, though. Non-standard preferences, for instance
giving large negative weights to home-currency measured losses on foreign investments,
have also been suggested as reasons for larger risk premia. Further both theoretical and
empirical research seems necessary in order to clarify these issues.




18
     For instance, specifics in corporations' and banks' accounting practices may reduce
the amount of interest arbitrage. See iledman (1986) for a report on some special aspects
of foreign exchange management by Swedish corporations.
1 It is interesting that non-standard choice theories can give rise to "first-order risk
aversion" rather than the standard "second-order risk aversion" (cI. Duffie and Epstein
(1990) and Epstein and Zin (1989)). In our context, first-order risk aversion would
presumably imply that the risk premium from exchange rate movements inside the band
would be proportional to the instantaneous standard deviation rather than the
instantaneous variance of the rate of depreciation, as in (4.2b). Recall that one empinca.1
estimate of the instantaneous variance of the Krona rate of depreciation was 1.6 basis
points per year. The corresponding standard deviation is about 1.3 percent per year, a
very different order of magnitude. As far as I know the treatment of portfolio choice
under these new non-standard choice theories has not yet advanced to the stage where the
foreign exchange risk premium can be rigorously derived.
                                               20


                                         Ap pen dii



A.1 The Bellman Equation
   The Bellman equation for the portfolio problem is

(Al)     0=       max        U(c) - 51(W,s) + 1WW,s) {WTj + wf(Pf-Ph)] - c}
                         {
                 (cwf)
                     + Iww ,s)W5 j)2/2 + 13(w,s)sp5 + 133(W,s)s24
                       Iws(W,j)s + {4W1+19)/(1+g),s] - I(W,s)} },
                         are functions of s.
where b'h
            p1, ji and

(A.2)               0=   I
   The first-order condition for the share of foreign bonds is

                               W,s) f-h)        - !W W,s)
                               + Ws W,s) R'sa + I
                                                                 cr3-wj)
                                                                               Wvg/(l+g).


A.2 Stochastic Own-Currency Goods Price8
    Suppose the own-currency prices of home and foreign goods follow geometric
Brownian motions,

(A3)                     dPh/Ph = Pp    dl + c dz and
                         d/= pdt +
    From Ito's lemma follows that the price index (2.4) obeys

(A.4a)          dP/P = p(s)dl + o,(s)dzp + [(i+9) - l]dN, where
(A.4b)          pp(s) = p5(s) + (i-fl) + 3Pps + lfl)[U(s) +                +

                                + /1-I3)aSp (s) + i2c7SF9(s) +                  and


(A.4c)          apdzp = /3a5dz + (1I3)apdzp +
Here aSp (s) denotes the instantaneous covariance between the rate of depreciation and
            h
the rate of change of the home currency price of home goods, etc.
                                                      21


     The real rates of return on borne and foreign bonds will be given by

 (A.5a)                       dbh/bh = ih(s)dt        + o(s)dzh + [(1+g) -   1]dN and
 (A.5b)                      db1/61 =   i(s)dt + c1(s)dz1 + [(1+g)1_ -        1]dN; where
 (A.6a)                        h(s) = s) -                 +
 (A.6b)                        iij(s) = 1* + p5(s) - ps) +
 (A.6c)                               =-             and
                                                  -
(A.6d)                      cj(z)dz =   c1(s)dz       op(s)dz.
     It foUows that the fourth term on the right-hand side of the Bellman equation (A.1)
will be replaced by
(A.7)
                                                               wa].
Here         is the instantaneous variance of the rate of inflation and      is the instantaneous
covariance between the rate of depreciation and the rate of inflation. They are given by
                        =
(A.8a)                      flas) + (3)2(72 +                  + 2Jl-fl)c7sp(s)
                                     + 217sp*(S) +                         and

(A.8b)                  =      s) +   (1)crsp (s) +
     The second term in the first-order condition (A.2) will be replaced by

(A.9)                            -
The only change in (3.1) is that the first term on the right-hand side, the consumption
share of foreign goods J, is replaced by the share of foreign bonds in the new global
minimum-variance portfolio,
(Ala)                                 w(s) = ass)Is).
    With this replacement, the real risk premium is still given by (4.2). The nominal risk

premium is still given by (4.4), except that the term 3o(s) in (4.4b) is replaced by
          the instantaneous covariance between the rate of depreciation and the rate of
inflation.
                                         22



                                     Referenc


Adler, Michael, and Bernard Dumas (1983), "International Portfolio Choice and
  Corporation Finance: A Synthesis," The Journal of Finance 3, 925-984.
Ahn, Chang M., and Howard E. Thompson (1988), "Jump-Diffusion Processes and the
  Term Structure of Interest Rates," Journal of Finance 43, 155-174.
Bertola, Giuseppe, and Ricardo J. Caballero (1989), "Target Zones and Realignments,"
  Working Paper, Princeton University.
Branson, William H., and Dale W. Henderson (1985) "The Specification and Influence of
   Asset Markets," in Ronald W. Jones and Peter B. Kenen, eds., Handbook of
   International Economics, Volume 2, Amsterdam: North Holland, 749-805.
Delgado, Francisco, and Bernard Dumas (1.990), "Monetary Contracting Between
   Central Banks and the Design of Sustainable Exchange Rate Zones," Working Paper,

   University of Pennsylvania.
Dominguer, Kathryn, and Jeffrey A. Frankel (1990), "Does Foreign Exchange
   Intervention Matter? Disentangling the Portfolio and Expectations Effect8 for the
   Mark," Working Paper No. 3299, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Dooley, Michael P., and Peter Isard (1983), "The Portfolio-Balance Mode! of Exchange
   Rates and Some Structural Estimates of the Risk Premium," IMP Staff Papers 30,
   683- 702.
Dornbusch, Rudiger (1983), "Exchange Rate Risk and the Macroeconomics of Exchange
   Rate Determination," in R. Hawkins, R. Levich and C. G. Wihlborg, eds., The
   Internationalization of Financial Markets and National Economic Policy, Volume 3,
   Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press, 3-27.
 Duffie, Darrel, and Larry G. Epstein (1990), "Stochastic Differential Utility and Asset
    Pricing," Working Paper, Stanford University.
 Dumas, Bernard (1989), "Pricing Physical Assets Internationally: A Non Linear
                                           23



  Heteroskedastic Process for Equilibrium Real Exchange Rates," Working Paper,
  University of Pennsylvania.
Edison, Hali J. (1990), "Foreign Currency Operations: An Annotated Bibliography,"
  Working Paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Engel, Charles (1990), "On the Foreign Exchange Risk Premium in a General
  Equilibrium Model," Working Paper, University of Virginia.
Epstein, Larry G. (1990), "Behaviour under Risk: Recent Developments in Theory and
  Application," Working Paper, University of Toronto.
Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley E. Zin (1989), " 'First-Order' Risk Aversion and the
  Equity Premium Puzzle," Working Paper, University of Toronto.
Flood, Robert E., and Peter M. Garber (1989), "The Linkage Between Speculative
   Attack and Target Zone Models of Exchange Rates," Working Paper No. 2918,
   National Bureau of Economic Research.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. (1982), "In Search of the Exchange Risk Premium: A Six-Currency
  Test Assuming Mean-Variance Optimization," Journal of Internatwnal Money and
   Finance 49, 379-93.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. (1988), "Recent Estimates of Time—Variation in the Conditional
  Variance and in the Exchange Risk Premium," Journal of International Money and
   Finance 7, 115—125.

Franzén, Thomas, and Christopher Sardelis (1988), "The Forward Market and Riksbank
  Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy," Svenges Riksbaith Quarterly Review 1988:2.
Froot, Kenneth A., and Maurice Obstfeld (1989), "Exchange-Rate Dynamics Under
  Stochastic Regime Shifts: A Unified Approach," Working Paper.
Iledman, Maim (1986), "Foreign Exchange Management in Some Swedish Corporations —
  an   Empirical Study January-October 1985" (in Swedish), Occasional Paper No. 3,
  Sveriges Riksbank.
                                          24



Hodrick, Robert J. (1987), The Empirical Evidence on the Efficiency of Forward and
  Futures Foreign Exchange Markets, London: Earwood.
Horngren, Lars, and Anders Vredin (1988a), The Foreign Exchange Risk Premium:
  A Review of Theory and Evidence," Chapter 3 in Vredin (1988).
Horngren, Lars, and Anders Vredin (1988b), "The Foreign Exchange Risk Premium in a
   Currency Basket System," Chapter 4 in Vredin (1988).
Jarrow, Robert A., and Eric R. Rosenfeld (1984), "Jump Risks and the Intertemporal
   Capital Asset Pricing Model," Journal of Business 57, 337-351.
Kouri, Pentti JK. (1976), "The Determinants of the Forward Premium," Seminar Paper
   No. 62, Institute for International Economic Studies.
Kouri, Pentti J.K. (1984), "Comment," in John F.O. Bilson and Richard C. Marston,
   eds., Exchange Rate Theory and Practice, Chicago: Chicago University Press, 67-72.
Krugman, Paul (1990), "Target Zones and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Quarterly Journal
   of Economics, forthcoming.
Krugman, Paul, and Julio Rotemberg (1990), "Target Zones with Limited Reserves,"
   Working Paper, M.I.T.
Merton, Robert C. (1971), "Optimal Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a Continuous
   Time Model," Journal of Economic Theory 3, 373-413.
 Miller, Marcus, and Paul Weller (1988), "Target Zones, Currency Options and Monetary
   Policy," Working Paper, University of Warwick.
 Miller, Marcus, and Paul Weller (1989a), "Exchange Rate Bands and Realignments in
   Stationary Stochastic Setting," Working Paper No. 299, Centre for Economic Policy
   Research.
 Miller, Marcus, and Paul Weller (1989b), "Exchange Rate Bands with Price Inertia,"
   Working Paper, University of Warwick.
                                          25


Norges Bank (1989), "Norwegian Credit Market8 — Norwegian Money and Credit Policy,"
   Norges Banks Skriftserie No. 17, Norges Bank.

Obstfeld, Maurice, (1988), "The Effectiveness of Foreign-Exchange Intervention: Recent
   Experience," Working Paper No. 2796, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Penati, Alessandro, and George Pennachi (1989), "Optimal Portfolio Choice and the
   Collapse of a Fixed-Exchange Rate Regime," Jouri&al of International Economics 27,
   1-24.
Perraudin, William R. M. (1990), "Exchange Rate Bands with Point Process
   Fundamentals," Working Paper, International Monetary Fund.
Sibert, Anne (1989), "The Risk Premium in the Foreign Exchange Market," Journal of
   Money, Credit and Banking 21, 49-65.
Svensson, Lars E. 0. (1989), "Target Zones and Interest Rate Variability," Seminar
   Paper No. 457, Institute for International Economic Studies.
Svensson, Lars E. 0. (1990), "The Term Structure of Interest Rate Differentials in a
   Target Zone: Theory and Swedish Data," Seminar Paper No. 466, Institute for
   International Economic Studies.
Vredin, Anders (1988), Macroeconomic Policies and the Balance of Payments,
   Stockholm: Stockholm School of Economics.
                              Figure 1


                                   c-s
    (N



    (N

0
     to




     0

     0
     0
     0          —1 2 —o 8 —O 4 —00 0.4           0.8        1.2    1.6
                                                            nSZ




                                  Figure 2


                             pd/pg
         0
         I0
    -o
         0
         0


         0


         0

         LL)
         0                                   8                16   20
                —16 —12 —8   —4      0                 12

               =.5 W25 =24,8
                         Figure 3


 0                   Pd/pc
 0

Vd
 0

 0
 0


 0


 0
        — —12 —8 —4        0    4       8   12     16      20
       =.5 w=O y=24.8                             gZ




                         Figure 4


                     pd/g
    0

c-o                                              -- y =8
0                                                  y=4
 0

 a--
 r'J
 0
 r)     -,
 a-
 0
         —16 —12 —8 —4      0       4   8   12     16      20
             w25
