                           NBER P1CNG PAPERS SERI




                                FISCAL PAB1DISE:
                   FOREIGN TAX HAVENS AND ArIERICAN JSINS




                               James R. Hines Jr.
                                  Eric   M. Rice




                            Workin Paper No. 3477




                     NATIONAL RJPEAU OF ECENCMIC RFSEARQ-I
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Caitridge,      02138
                                  October 1990




We are grateful to lawrence Katz, Alan Kruoger, tuglas Shackelford, and
Terrance Shevi in for helpful. conurerits, to Arnold Gilbert of BEA for producin
calculations basal on confidential Caitnerce parthnt survey data, and to
Princeton University's John M. olin Program for the Study of Economic
Orpnizat ion and ?±lic I-tlicy and the Harvard Institute of Economic Research
for financial support. This paper is part of NEER's research program in
Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National &ireau of Economic Research.
                                               flEER Working Paper 4t3477
                                               October 1990

                                 FISCAL PARADISE:
                     FOREIGN TAX HAVENS AND AMERICAN RJSINESS




     The offshore tax haven affiliates of Arerican corporations aint for
ixcre than a quarter of US foreign investnat, an nearly a third of the
foreign profits of US fins. This paper analyzes the origins of this tax
haven activity arti its iiuplicat ions for the US ard foreign governments.
Based on the behavior of US fins in 1982, it aççears that Anurican cniipanies
report extraordinarily hi profit rates on both their real ard their
financial investments in tax havens. We calculate fran this behavior that
the tax rate that maxinizes tax revenue for a typical haven is arcwd 6%.
The revenue i.nçlicat ions for the US are ucre ctrplicated, since tax havens
may ultimately enhance the ability of the US goverruient to tax the foreign
earnins of American conipanies.




James R. Hines Jr.                             Eric M. Rice
Wocdrow Wilson School                          Iparbnent of Economics
Robertson Hall                                 Littauer 200
Princeton University                           Harvard University
Princeton, NJ 08544                            Cairbridge,F 02138
         Introduction


         Competition in the global economy has two faces: whereas US multinationals must vie

with Foreign firms in worldwide markets, they often benefit from their ability to invest in foreign

locations. Eager for the revenue and employment that American firms can provide, many foreign

governments actively try to lure US business to their shores. In response. American firms now

locate a significant and growing part of their foreign operations in tax havens, a group of countries

with unusually tow tax rates that has been extremely successful at attracting US business.

         From the standpoint of US tax policy, the widespread use of tax havens threatens the

long-un sustainability of the US domestic tax base, since US multinational corporations may be

able to shift some of their domestic income to low-tax offshore jurisdictions. At the same time,

tax haven profits represent the richest possible foreign source of US tax revenue, since they

generate few foreign tax credits to offset US tax due upon repatriation. In order to assess net

impact of tax haven countries on US companies and the US government, we analyze the
incentives created by their low tax rates and the ways in which American firms respond to those

incentives.

         Specifically, we are concerned with Four issues involving tax havens. The first is whether

US firms report abnormally high profit rates in low-tax foreign jurisdictions. The second is the

extent to which the low tax rates available in tax havens explain the observed local levels of US

firms' operations and their total reported earnings. The third issue concerns the behavior of

governments: can we explain the decisions of tax havens to offer very low tax rates on the basis

of revenue maximization or other considerations? And the fourth issue is the impact of tax havens

on the US Treasury: what revenue does the US collect from American corporations in tax havens,

and what would be the likely consequences for the US if a tax haven were to raise its tax rate?
                                                   2

           We identify 41 countries and regions as tax havens for the purposes of US businesses.'

 Their combined population amounts to only 30 million (1.2% of the western world's population)

 and they produce only 3.0% or the West's GDP.2 Table 1 presents some characteristics of their

 economies, along with detail on local US corporate operations. In analyzing the tax haven

 operations of American business, we rely on US Commerce Department data for 1982!

           There are several ways to gauge the magnitude of business operations; by one measure,

 gross assets, havens account for over one-quarter ($359 billion) of the $1.35 trillion of corporate

activity conducted worldwide by the overseas affiliates of American firms (Table 1, Column 3).

This amount substantially exceeds American direct investment in all of (non-haven) continental

Europe. Since gross assets exclude liabilities, it is also enlightening to consider the stock of US

equity in tax havens (Table 1, Column 4). By the equity measure, the tax havens account for a

somewhat smaller share of foreign direct investment, 21 %.' Yet in terms or net income. tax haven

affiliates' share is larger than their asset share: 30.8% ($11.1 billion) of a worldwide total of $36.0
billion.

           Since assets, equity and income include purely financial transactions, they may not

provide a clear image of how much physical activity takes place in tax haven countries. An




    'Appendix A contains a complete listing and a description of our process of identifying tax
havens.

   2For our purposes, West' excludes Socialist countries, Sub-Saharan Africa (except
Southern Africa), and oil exporters.

    3Our calculations are based on data from the US Department of Commerce' 1982
comprehensive "Benchmark Survey' of us foreign direct investment, the most current available
source of data on the operations and tax liabilities of US firms. The companion publication US
Direct Investment Abroad (US Department of Commerce, 1985) contains only a small part of
the data which are essential for our analysis. However, the Department's Bureau of Economic
Analysis provided us with aggregate figures calculated from proprietary benchmark survey
data. A full description of the data and of variable definitions appears in Appendix A.
       It would, of course, be even more informative to follow the evolution of tax laws and
business responses over time, but detailed information or the type needed are simply not
available on anything like a consistent basis. Unfortunately, 1982 was a recession year around
the world and may in some instances suggest conclusions that are sensitive to business cycle
conditions.

   'Unfortunately, there exists rio measure of the 'equity" of banking affiliates, and this
omission is likely to understate the US-owned capital stock in offshore banking centers.
                                                   3

alternative is to consider the employment and 'property, plant, and equipment"5 ci US

corporations' foreign affiliates, According to these measures, US alfiliates' employment and
tangible capital in tax havens appear to be commensurate with the countries' share in world GDP.

Columns 6 and 7 ci Table 1 reveal that, out of 6.82 million overseas employees of US affiliates!

only 0.29 million (4.3%) work in tax haven affiliates. Similarly, while the property, plant, and

equipment of US foreign affiliates totals $227.9 billion worldwide, only $9.6 billion (4.2%) is located

in havens.

         The economies of the 41 tax havens differ considerably. For this reason, it is instructive

to distinguish the several relatively large tax havens from the many small havens. Together the

seven tax havens with populations in excess oil million (Hong Kong, Ireland, Liberia. Lebanon,

Panama, Singapore, and Switzerland) account for 80% ci total tax haven population and 89% of

tax haven GOP. They appear to be the locus ci most of the physical activity undertaken by US

haven affiliates, much ci it in the non-financial sectors.

         The remaining havens are tiny, their median 1982 population only 200,000 inhabitants.

Nonetheless, as Table 1 indicates, these dot-sized countries still account for about 60% ci the

assets, equity and net income in tax havens, We refer to these smaller havens as tots,' and to

the larger havens as the "Big-7."

         Table 2 describes the US business activity in the nine havens with largest number of US

affiliates and greatest amount of 1982 net income of US ioreign affiliates: among the Big-7

countries, Switzerland, Hong Kong, Singapore, Ireland, and Panama are included; four Dots also

appear: Bermuda, the Netherlands Antilles, the Bahamas, and the Cayman Islands. US firms in

each of these nine countries earned net income in 1982 between $600 million and $2 billion.

There was considerable variation in the physical presences of American lirrns: they employed more




      5U.S. data on overseas 'property, plant and equipment' are available only for non-bank
affiliates of non-bank parents. While this omission is unfortunate, it should be noted that even
in tax havens these affiliates account in aggregate Icr 98.5% of net income and 92.5% ci
employment.
                                                  4

than 25,000 people in each of the five Big-7 countries shown in Table 2, while US employment in

the Dots nowhere exceeded 8,500.

         The sketchy available evidence suggests that US firms have dramatically increased their

use of tax havens in recent years. The US Department of Commerce conducted earlier
benchmark surveys in 1966 and 1977. While the 1966 data are not sufficiently complete to allow

comparison, the 1977 data are fully comparable to data from 1982. Table 3 contrasts US direct

foreign investment in 1977 and 1982: as measured by assets, tax haven affiliates have more than

doubled their share of the US-owned stock of Foreign capital in these five years; and in the

smallest tax havens, affiliates' assets have expanded Four-fold,6 Yet their share of the overseas

employment of US affiliates has remained essentially constant.

         Section 2 of this paper explores in detail the means by which US multinational firms can

exploit tax havens to maximize their after-tax profits. Section 3 examines the behavior of US

multinationals in 1982, which appears to be consistent with predicted behavior: holding other

factors constant, their earnings are extremely sensitive to the low tax rates available in havens.

Section 4 then considers the tax rate policy decisions of foreign governments, finding that very

low rates (about 5%) represent revenue-maximizing choices for very small countries. Section 5

offers a brief analysis of US policy toward Foreign tax havens, raising the possibility that, despite

appearances, the presence of foreign tax havens enhances the US Treasury's ability to collect

revenue from US firms' Foreign-source income. Section 6 concludes.




    6This phenomenon is not unique to the US: among capital-exporting countries as a whole.
the very limited data seem to support the view that multinationals all over the world are rapidly
increasing their use of tax havens. OECD (1987) records aggregate foreigp direct investment
by industrial countries in all non-oil-exporting developing host countries. From these data, we
estimate the real growth rate of the stock of direct investment in developing countries to
average 1.3 percent per year during the decade of 1971 to 1981. In contrast, this growth rate
averages 7,8 percent per year for the Big-7 tax havens. Unfortunately, OECD (1987) does not
measure Fol in a manner consistent with the Benchmark Survey. These differences imply that
these data may be no more than suggestive of trends in total tax haven investment.
                                                    5

Ii.         US Firms and the Lure of Low Tax Rates


            US firms have many incentives to operate in tax havens, not the least of which are their

 refreshingly low tax rates. Since the rules concerning international taxation are quite complicated

and can in some cases vitiate the advantages of earning profits in low-tax foreign jurisdictions, It

is necessary to understand the mechanics of the tax system in order to appreciate the usefulness

of tax havens to American firms,



THE SYSTEM'



           The US taxes income on a "residence' basis, meaning that American corporations and

individuals owe taxes to the US government on all of their worldwide income, whether earned in

the US or not. Since foreign profits are usually taxed in host countries, US law provides a foreign

Lax credit for income taxes (and related taxes) paid to loreign governments in order to avoid
subjecung American multinationals to double taxation.            With the foreign tax credit, a US
corporation that earns $100 in a foreign country with a 15% tax rate (and a Foreign tax obligation

of $15) pays only $19 to the US government, since its US corporate tax liability of $34 (34% of

$100) is reduced to $19 by the foreign tax credit of $15. The foreign tax credit Is, however, limited

to US tax liability on foreign Income; if, in the example, the foreign tax rate were 50%, then the lirm

pays $50 to the foreign government but its US foreign tax credit is limited to $34. American

corporations calculate their foreign tax credits on a worldwide basis, so that all foreign income and

foreign taxes paid are added together in the computation of the foreign tax credit limit. Hence a

US firm receives a full tax credit for its foreign taxes paid only when it is in a "deficit credit"
position, i.e., when its average foreign tax rate is less than its tax rate on domestic operations.




      'This brief description of the tax system is excerpted from Hines (1989).
                                                    6

 A firm has "excess credits" if its available foreign tax credits exceed US tax liability on Its foreign

 income.B

            Deferral of US taxation of certain foreign earnings is another important feature ci the US

 international tax system. A US parent firm is taxed on its subsidiaries" Foreign income only when

 returned ("repatriated") to the parent corporation, and receives "indirect" Foreign tax credits

 ("deemed-paid credits') for foreign income taxes paid (by the subsidiaries) on income
 subsequently received as dividends. This type of deferral is available only to foreign operations

that are separately incorporated in foreign countries ("subsidiaries" oF the parent) and not to

consolidated ('branch") operations.9 The US government taxes branch proFits as they are earned,

just as it would profits earned within the United States Hence, choosing to organize a foreign

operation as a branch means that the parent US Urm forgoes the opportunity of deferring US taxes

on Foreign income."'

         The deferral of US taxation may create incentives For firms to delay repatriating dividends

from their foreign subsidiaries. In 1962. Congress enacted the 'Subpart F" provisions in part to

prevent indeFinite deferral of US tax liabiUty on income earned abroad that is continually reinvested

merely in order to escape US taxes. Subpart F rules apply to controlled foreign corporations

(CFCs), which are foreign corporations owned at least 50% by US persons holding stakes of at

least 10% each. The Subpart F rules treat a CFC's passive income (and income invested in US

property) as ii it were distributed to its American owners, and so it is subject to immediate US




    6Furthermore, income is broken into different functional 'baskets" in the calculation ci
applicable credits and limits. In order to qualify for the foreign tax credit, firms must own at
least 10 percent of a foreign affiliate and only those taxes that qualify as income taxes are
creditabla

    9The nomenclature is rather involved. All foreign operations lake place through affiliates;
those that are separately incorporated are subsidiaries. Majority ownership can be very
important From a legal, economic, and data reporting standpoint; much of the U.S. Department
of Commerce data on Foreign operations of U.S. multinationals is reported for majority-owned
foreign affiliates, without distinguishing branches from subsidiaries. Controlled foreign
corporations are the subset of subsidiaries that meet the ownership requirements described in
the text; they need not be (though they usually are) majority-owned by a single parent.
    "'On the other hand, organizing as a branch permits the investor to deduct foreign branch
losses from the firm's US income, and may (in some cases) reduce the burden of foreign
regulations
                                                  7

taxation.11 CFCs that reinvest their earnings in active foreign businesses avoid the Subpart F

restrictions and can continue to defer US tax liability on those earnings. The Tax Reform Act or

1986 further expands the coverage of Subpart F, and also makes currently taxable the income of

American investors in passive Foreign investment companies that do not qualify as CFCs because

they do not meet the 50% ownership rule.

         There are several ways in which subsidiaries repatriate their profits. Payment of dMdends

From a subsidiary to its shareholding parent is the most common, and offers the advantage that

the parent receives an indirect Foreign tax credit For the foreign taxes that were paid on the Income

that generated the dividend. For subsidiaries that borrow funds from their parent corporations,

the interest and principal payments represent Flows back to the United States. The repayment of

interest principle is untaxed; foreign interest earned by the parent is taxed, and is not eligible for

indirect credits, but has the advantage of deductibility in host countries. In addition, astute use

of transfer pricing by a multinational allows it to shift earnings From a subsidiary to the parent or

to other subsidiaries enjoying more advantageous tax treatments. Royalty payments to the parent

can serve a similar function. Foreign governments often impose moderate taxes on dividend,

interest, rent, and royalty payments from foreign affiliates to their American parents, and these

withholding taxes are fully creditable against foreign tax liabilities of the US taxpayer.



THE HAVENS



         Tax havens can offer two tax advantages to US corporate taxpayers. The first is that

earnings located in tax havens (as well as in other foreign countries) raise measured foreign

earnings for the purpose of calculating the foreign tax credit limitation. The second is that firms

with haven profits can ear', interesi on their residual US lax liability for as long as they defer




    11Note that Subpart F treatment differs From actual repatriation in that the former does not
result in taxation of the passively-invested principal, if that principal was itself earned by an
active investment.
                                                    B

 repatriations of those profits. Both possibilities can be attractive, although they are exclusive in

 that the first is triggered by repatriation, the second by deferral.

           The first advantage of tax havens is to exploit a US parent's excess foreign tax credits.

 The parent reduces its overall tax liability if it can attribute to a haven affiliate profits actually

 earned in a high-tax country; total taxes thereby decline by an amount equal to the difference

 between the two tax rates. In order to illustrate this effect, consider a case in which the haven

 profits are repatriated immediately to the US and the parent Firm's excess foreign tax credits are

 used to offset any US tax liability associated with the repatriation.

          Let 9 represent the present value of a foreign tax credit carried foiward into the next

 year,'2 and q the profit earned in the tax haven. Letting r denote the US tax rate, the lost after-

 tax US earnings of the one dollar investment is then (1 - r). The haven affiliate earns before-tax

 profits of q and pays r'q to the tax haven government (where / < r). In the absence of an
 excess foreign tax credit, the US tax obligation on the repatriated profits would then be (r - rq:

instead, the parent Firm uses its excess foreign tax credits to offset that obligation, in the process

losing the value of excess credit carryforwards equal to 9(r - r*)q. The Firm is just indifferent to
this action if:


                                      =
                         (1 -r)              q (1 -r)         - q (o(r.r*)]                       (1)
                      foregone               after-tax                foregone
                      after-tax             tax haven             foreign tax credit
                   domestic income           income                 carryforwards


       If the left side of (1) exceeds the right, then the firm has no incentive to engage in this

activity; if the right side exceeds the left then on net the action is profitable, 119 = 0 then there

is no cost to using foreign lax credits and the critical value of q is [(l-r)/(1-ri]: firms locate
investments on the basis of local after-tax profils. Alternatively, ii 0 = 1 then the critical value of

q is unity: there is no tax advantage to haven profits. One expects that the typical value of 9 lies




   12Excess foreign tax credits can be carded forward only five years. and at zero Intorost.
                                                      9

 somewhere between zero and one, but it obviously depends on many factors, including (possibly)

 the level of foreign investment induced by the firm's excess credit position.

        The second advantage of tax havens is to facilitate the deferral of US tax liability. Suppose

 that a haven subsidiary with profits to reinvest cannot find any active investments to make in the

 haven, but has the option of investing its profits in the world capital market, earning a rate or return

 r (possibly different from r, the US domestic interest rate). To rule out the boundary case in
which firms want to send all their profits abroad, assume that r* r.

        If r = r, the firm's optimal strategy is to defer repatriation of the untaxed portion of its

foreign profits.   Passive returns earned abroad and included as Subpart F income are not

subsequently taxed again when ultimately repatriated to the United States, and so the firm is not

penalized if it repatriates interest as earned.

        Suppose that the foreign subsidiary has after-foreign-tax earnings equal to M. The after-

US-tax present value of those earnings if immediately repatriated is M (1 - r)/(1 - r). If, instead,

the subsidiary repatriates interest as earned but not the principal, the parent receives an after-alt-

tax annual payment of M r(1 - r). The present value of this infinite stream, discounted at the
domestic alter-tax discount rate of r (1 - ,-), is:



                          IA       r* (1.r)                     M                                 (2)
                                 [1 + r (1 . r) ]J                   r


If r* = r, then this present value equals IA. Thus the subsidiary should never repatriate the

principle (M) it earns abroad, and the present value of those earnings is unaffected by the US tax
rate.

        It is perhaps more likely that r > r*, reflecting the greater variety of uses that US parents

have for funds than do their foreign subsidiaries.'3 At what value of r* is the incentive to defer




   '3Domestic firms may for example, be constrained in their use of credit markets, and so
encounter times at which the marginal productivity of an internal investment exceeds the
market rate of return. For a survey of recent suggestive evidence, see Fazzari et al (1988).
                                                       10

  repatriation Just offset by the greater (before-tax) return avaflable In the US? SettIng (1 -

  r) equal to r*/ r, the critical condition is equality of after-tax returns In the two countries:


                              r*(1 -r)         r(1   -r)                                              (3)


  If the left side of this equation exceeds the right, finns should defer
                                                                          repatriation of principal
 indefinitely. Otherwise, repatriation should be immediate, if the firm defers repatriation, then a

 higher r corresponds to a higher after-tax value of profits earned in a tax haven Jurisdiction.

        Foreign subsidiaries can dispose of their after-foreign-tax profits in three ways: repatriate

 profits immediately, invest them in passive assets, or (possibly) reinvest them abroad in active
 investments. The knife-edged decision rule Just derived looks very similar to the standard Hartman

 (1985) condition for a foreign subsidiary's active investments. Hartman demonstrates that foreign

 subsIdiaries choosing between paying dMdends and actively investing in a low-tax country should

 invest up to the point that 1(1 - r) = r(1 - r), in which I' Is the marginal product of the
 subsidiary's investment. The result In (3) Is analogous.

        Both the Hartrnan result and condition (3) describe the choice facing a firm with an

alternative of immediate repatriation, There is an additionai dichotomous choice: whether to make

an active or a passive reinvestment. Analyzing this choice is somewhat complicated by the

possibility that a firm making an active reinvestment might want to defer repatriating Its profits until

the infinite future, or the possibility that the marginal
                                                            profitability of reinvested profits might change
In the future. Assuming that neither of these conditions hold, the firm's problem can be analyzed

by comparing a passive investment today with the alternative of an active investment for one

period followed by passive investment of the returns along with the principle. Comparing the
two, the critical condition is:

                          Mr*         =        M (1 +f'(l-riJ r                                     (4)
                                                  (1 + r(I -r) J r
or:

                        r(1 -r)       =      f'(i _r*)                                              (5)
                                                   11




which is rather lamiliar from the Hariman finding: firms making active reinvestments raise their

values by the right side of (5): this comes at the cost of delaying whatever may be the alternative

uses of the stock of profits, a cost equal to the left side of (5).

       Combining these results, it appears that there is the Following hierarchy: if the right side of

(5) exceeds the left, then the subsidiary should use its after-tax earnings to make active
reinvestment& If not, then the subsidiary should consult (3) and make passive investments if the

left side exceeds the right." Otherwise, the firm repatriates its earnings as dividends.15 In
generat, one expects the returns to active investments in haven locations to diminish quickly,

leaving profitable multinationals with the choice between a passive investment and immediate

repatriation. If the world capital market is efficient, then a passive investment is likely to represent

the optimal choice. And in practice. tax haven subsidiaries of US corporations do seem to place

a significant fraction of their earnings in passive investments, despite the punishing implications
of Subpart F treatment.16



DEVICES FOR MOVING TAXABLE EARNINGS TO THE HAVENS



       Almost all US firms stand to benefit from earning their profits in havens rather than in the

US or a high-tax alternative. Firms with current or prospective excess foreign tax credits can use

them as described in (1): Ihose with deficit credits may be able to benelit from deferral, as



    "Readers of an earlier draft inform us that Scholes and Wolison (forthcoming) also draw
these conclusions, usin a similar setup. See Horst (1977) for alternative decision rules
derived from a model with additional financing constraints.

    "These calculations ignore the prior choice by the parent firm on the amount of debt
Finance to use for its subsidiary. This choice is quite likely to be affected by tax rates and
other tax-related considerations, See Hines (1939) for a more complete analysis.

    161n 1982 US controlled foreign corporations in the nine major tax havens listed In Table 2
had $1.6 billion in Subpart F income, out of a totat $8.9 billion in earnings and profits. Since
Subpart F encompasses a number of activities, most but not all of this income Is likely to
represent returns to passive investments. One way to gaue its significance is that Subpart F
income for those havens was two-thirds as large as were dividends paid to US parents and
their domestic subsidiaries ($2.2 billion).
                                                     12

 described in (3) and (5). In both cases firms choose foreign investment projects to maximize the

 alter-Foreign-tax profits. The implication is that they will locate more activity in tax havens than

 business conditions would warrant in the absence of tax differences, since firms are willing to

 accept lower marginal products of capital in tax havens than in high-tax countries. Another
 implication is that, to the extent they are able, Firms will use financial devices to attribute to havens

 their taxabte profits actually earned in high-tax locations. We identify three avenues for these

 moves: the use of debt contracts, manipulations of transfer prices, and conversion of US export

 income into tax haven income.


 Debt Contracts


        Firms have the ability to use debt contracts to adjust the locations of their tax burdens.

 Since interest costs represent deductions from taxable income, and these deductions are usually

 more valuable in higher tax countries, it generally makes sense to finance subsidiaries in high-

 tax countries with as much debt as possible, while financing tax haven subsidiaries with as little

 debt as possible. Several factors complicate this procedure, however: many countries tax cross-

 border interest flows to related parties and limit the deductible level of interest payments by local

subsidiaries, while start-up subsidiaries may find it difficult to borrow heavily From unrelated banks.

Furthermore, the US government makes it costly for subsidiaries in low-tax foreign countries to

adfust their debt levels, since interest received is subject to Subpart F treatment (while interest

paid does not reduce Subpart F liabilities). In general, the tax-minimizing debt level in a subsidiary

is a complicated function of ts history and of local taxes and regulations." OF course, once debt

is in place, parent companies prefer that their loans to tax hayen subsidiaries carry low interest

rates, and that those to heavily taxed subsidiaries carry high interest rates. Multinationals have

a certain amount of leeway in choosing the terms of their debt contracts, subject to the same rules

that govern intrafirm transactions of goods and services.




     ''Hines (1989) describes optimal tinancing choices over the lifetimes of Foreign subsidiaries
in low-tax locations.
                                                    13

 Transfer Pricing and its Opportunities


        The tax advantages of haven locations make it attractive to move taxable profits there, if

 necessary by expedients such as purchasing paper clips from a haven subsidiary at $10 million

each. Such a transaction reduces taxable US income by the amount of the purchase. Since the

US tax rate is higher than haven tax rates, the tax saving produced by the $10 million deduction

in the US exceeds the tax cost of $10 million of haven profits. Of course, governments with high

tax rates are aware that firms may try to perform such sham transactions, and do their best to
prevent them.

        US law contains numerous provisions concerning the location of income for tax purposes.

Section 452 of the Internal Revenue Code provides that international transfers of goods and

services between related parties (such as a parent corporation and one of its affiliates) must be

conducted at arm's length" prices -- that is, prices that unrelated firms would have used in an

identical transaction. Hence the IRS would disallow the sate of a paper clip for $10 million, since

unrelated parties would not buy one for that price. There are, however, many international

transactions for which arm's length prices do not exist. Take the case of a parent Firm that

licenses a unique patent to a foreign affiliate for production and sale: how much is the patent

worth? Since it is impossible to observe market prices for the license -- there is no market --

Congress stipulates that an equivalent price must be used: one based on the value or cost the

good or service transferred. In the Tax Reform Act of 1986, this notion of an appropriate transfer

price was refined to a price "commensurate with the income attributable to the intangible," But

this concept is difficult to apply in practice.18

       Section 482 and other rules governing international transfer pricing leave ample scope for

iS mulUnationals to benefit from Iransferring valuable assets, particularly intangible assets, to tax




   '8Nol to mention difficult to define in theory, See Hines (1988) For a proposed solution.
The IRS also requires firms to use 'arm's length" interest rates, but similar difficulties attend the
choice of appropriate interest rates for (possibly) risky intralirm debt contracts,
                                                   14

haven subsidiaries and subsequently deferring US taxation oF the profits earned abroad thereon.'9

The recent case of Bausch & Lomb. Inc.'s Irish subsidiary is a useful illustration.'0 In 1981,

Bausch & Lomb established a subsidiary in Ireland to manufacture contact lenses using a

technique developed in New York. The lenses manufactured in Ireland were sold to the American

parent company and to affiliates in other countries. In return, the subsidiary paid the American

parent a royalty equal to 5% of net Irish sales.

      The IRS challenged the legality of the 5% royalty rate, claiming that it was unreasonably low

and designed to permit the firm to shift profits to Ireland, where Bausch & Lomb operated under

a 10-year tax holiday, at the expense of the United States, a high-tax country. There is no doubt

that the Irish subsidiary was profitable: in 1982, its rate of return on investment was 106% per

annum. The court found that a 20% royalty was appropriate, on the premise that it permitted

Bausch & Lomb's Irish subsidiary an ample pre-tax annual rate of return of 27%, This is a very

generous rate of return, particularly for a firm that enjoys a tax holiday. In fact, the 27% rate was

calculated on the basis of pessimistic assumptions for the subsidiary,2' and suggests the lenient

kind of correction that a US firm might expect ii called to account for transferring intangibles to

a manufacturing subsidiary in a tax haven.




    '9until 1984 US firms were permitted one overt procedure to do so: lirms could transfer
intangible property developed in the US to tax haven affiliates without triggering US tax liability,
as long as the goods produced by the intangibles were sold outside the US. The Deficit
Reduction Act of 1984 rescinded this exemption.

-    205ee Frisch and Horsl (1909) for a detailed summary of the court case and its
interpretation in the light of the U.S. Treasury Department's recently proposed regulations, and
Bausch & Lomb, Inc. and Consolidated Subsidiaries v. Commissioner of Internal Revenue, 92
IC, No.33 (March 23, 1989). Other studies of transfer pricing, including Jenkins and Wright
(19?5), Kopits (1976), and Grubert and Mutti (forthcoming), draw similar conclusions about the
ability of US Firms to transfer profits away from high-tax locations.

     21Frisch and Horst (1989) argue that in fact the judge's calculations were Flawed and that
the true annual rate of return under a 20% royalty would be much higher than 27%. This
further complication illustrates some of the difficulty the government may have in enforcing
Section 482 and olher transfer-pricing rules in practice.
                                                 15

Factoring Income and Other Exports


       Foreign sales of goods produced in the US often create opportunities to shift taxable

income to tax havens. A common practice of US firms is to sell the receivable account to its

finance subsidiary incorporated in a tax haven. The finance subsidiary is the "factor;" the
difference between the sale price of the receivable account and the present value of the money

ultimately collected is factoring income.

       Until 1984, US courts held that international factoring income of controlled foreign

corporations was not includable income under Subpart F provisions. As a result, interest earned

by finance subsidiaries was untaxed by the US until repatriated (and in the meantime only

minimally taxed by tax havens). Furthermore, it seems likely that many of these receivable
accounts were sold to finance subsidiaries in havens at generous discounts, Congress changed

the law in 1984 to include related-party factoring income under Subpart F; the profits of foreign

finance subsidiaries are therefore currently taxable (and subject to special basket limitations in

addition). As an indicator of the magnitude of tax deferral through factoring, the Joint Committee

on Taxation (1984) estimated that including factor income under Subpart F would earn the

Treasury $673 million a year by 1989.

       Even after the passage of the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984, there are still numerous means

by which American Firms can transfer export income earned in the United States into tax haven

income. One method is to establish a foreign trading corporation as a joint venture with a foreign

partner to escape the 50% requirement for a controlled loreign corporation. Another is to establish

a haven subsidiary that performs some real service in the production of the final product, however

trivial its actual value added. In practice, it is difficult for the US government to enforce Subpart

F and Section 482 with precision. An important question is the limit to which lirms can push the

government: as the Bausch & Lomb case illustrates, a corporation's international transactions

must to some extent be defensible before the tax authorities.
                                                      16

III.   Evidence on Tax Havens and Tax Rates


       In this section, we test whether US firms locate income and physical operations in tax

havens and other low-tax venues to a much greater extent than normal business conditions

dictate. Recall that low tax rates attract foreign business and foreign profits in Iwo ways. The first

is that firms have incentives to transfer profits from high-tax locations where much of their

productive physical activity takes place to low-tax locations where, for lack of economic
opportunities, it does not. The second is that operations that would be unprofitable at normal tax

rates might become profitable at very low rates. We analyze these channels of tax rate influence

separately, starting wilh transfers.

       If it is costly for firms to transfer income berween a[filiates, reported income in country i

might look like:

                        =    p1
                                                           a()2
                                                           2



in which p represents the return to local factors and             the profits earned elsewhere but attributed

for tax purposes to local operations. Note that                < 0 for a country whose corporations transfer

some of their profits to other locations. The specification (6) indicates that there are positive costs

(a > 0) of transferring profits in either direction, which are assumed constant across all affiliates.

Consider a Firm's transfer decision, taking as fixed its simultaneous problem of allocating real

resources (pj:



       riiaxV         E(1-r)lr,               Sfl-r)                                                   (7)
                                                                             2   I!
                   subject to .        'ii,   <   0                                                    (8)



yielding the first-order condition


                        fi - a          v'1       =   ,             -t'i=t        n                    (9)
                                                             17




in which A is the Lagrange multiplier corresponding to constraint (8). Then (9) implies:


                                         =                               1
                                                                              —         —A
                                                                                                                        (10)
                                                                             a (1 - r)
Combining (10) and (6):
                                    =
                                                 p1        [14-                   I        -         A2         j       (11)
                                                                               2a                  2a(1 -rj'
Taking logs of both sides of (11) yields:22


                      log-ri         log (p)-4- log[1 +                               1-                  A2        ]   (12)
                                                                                  2a                  2a (1 -


       One way to evaluate the second term on the right side of (12) employs a second-order

Taylor series expansion in r1, around the tax rate tat which = 0 (and the bracketed term in (12)

is unity), yielding




              logT1            = log1)       -        A2(r1-t)       -            3A2(r.t)2                             (13)
                                                      a (1 — t)                       2a (1 -


Equation (9) implies that A2 = (1 - t)2 , so that (13) can be rewritten



   logar1    = log(p1) + t+t/2
                         _______ -                            (1+2!) +
                                                              ______                           a      3
                                                                                                    _______  -          (14)
                         a(1-t)2                                  a(1-t)2                           2a(1-t)2

       In order to evaluate the first term on the right side ol (14), it is necessary to specify a

production function. Suppose firms produce output 0, measured in dollars, with a Cobb-Oouglas

function 0 = cA' L° K e', in whith c is a constant term, A is the level or productivity in the local




    22The log operator is sensible only if p1 > 0 and (2a + 1) (1 - r32 > A2. This second
condition is the requirement that adjustment costs, a, be large enough that aftilistes not
transfer more than all o( their profits out of the highest tax location. In practice this does not
appear to happen.
                                                   18

 country (represented by per capita income)! L is labor input, K Is capital input, and u isa normally

 distributed stochastic term with mean zero. The local affiliate hires labor to maximize profits



              0 - wL                   (1 -a) cA1 LOKøeu.                                      (15)



 Assuming for the moment that the affiliate is not financed by debt, then (15) represents taxable

 returns (JJ) in the absence oF transfers . Combining (14) and (15) yields



                    4- SJogL, /toqK- fiJogA + $5r4 + fl6r12 + u,                              (16)



 inwhich$1 = [(t+ t2/2)/a(1 -t)2 + logc+ log(1 )]' $ =o, $ = $4 =c, $= -(I
 + 2t) / [a(1 - t)2j, and fl = 3 / 2a(1 . t)'.

       A second approximation to (12) yields a useful estimating equation that is similar to (16).

Taking a first-order Taylor expansion in (1 - rj around t, and using (15) yields



     log,r1= $ + fl,togL4+ fl,logK4+ $jogA+ $5(l-r1) + v,                                     (17)



inwhichfl1=[logc+log(10)) fl2=a, $ = $ =c,and $5=-f/2a.
       We estimate (16) and (17) using country-level aggregate data on US nonbank majority-

owned affiliates in 1982, treating all foreign affiliates in a country as if owned by a single taxable

parent. The sample consists of the countries listed in Appendix Table B: the seven "Big-7' tax

havens, twenty-six Dots, seventeen industrialized countries, and Fifty-eight developing countries."

In order to separate that pan of income represenhing returns From financial resources, we subtract




   Z3jn some cases, certain individual data cells were suppressed by the Commerce
Department for confidentiality reasons, which has the effect oF shrinking some regression
samples to as few as 59 countries. Appendix A discusses at length the construction of our
sample.
                                                    19

 from reported income interest received and add back interest paid.               Interest receipts are
 themselves analyzed separately below.

        Columns (1) - (4) oF Table 4 report OLS estimates of four variants or (16) and (17). Each

 regression controls For capital and labor inputs, and Finds the tax variable to exert a negative effect

 on reported nonFinancial profits. In addition, Column (3) reports a significant positive coefficient

 on (Tax)1, as predicted in (16). Similarly, the significant negative coefficient on (1 - Tax) reported

 in Column (4) is consistent with our alternative specification (17). The results of Columns (1) -(4)

 are consistent with the assumed decreasing returns to scale technology, since factor coefficients

 sum to about 0.8. The scaling factor for local productivity, log (GDF per capita), is unimportant

to the regression, and the results are virtually identical when log(GDF per capita) is replaced with

log (GO F)

       The curvature of the tax effect is noteworthy. Based on the coefficients reported in Column

(3), raising a tax haven's tax rate from zero to 1% would lower reported nonfinancial earnings by

7%, holding the returns to real factors (capital and labor) constant. The impact of a 1% rise is

smaller at higher tax rates, levelling off to zero (taking the quadratic approximation perhaps a bit

too literally) at a tax rate of 45%. Our model predicts that at lower tax rates an increasing fraction

of an affiliate's reported earnings represents profits earned elsewhere but locally attributed for tax

purposes; so it is not surprising that lightly-taxed profits are the most sensitive to tax rates.24

       There are many reasons to be wary of such literal interpretations of the tax coefficients.

These results aggregate many industries," firms, and activities together, all of them likely to be

in different economic and tax situations. Our measure of 'the' tax rate for a country represents




     24These regressions exploit the tax rate variation available in the whole sample, but do not
necessarily demonstrate that tax differences among havens affect reported earnings. In order
to confirm the existence of a tax effect among low-tax countries, all regressions reported in
Tables 4 - 6 were run using only the low-tax third of the sample (to avoid simultaneity bias, we
selected the subsample on the basis of population rather than their tax rates). The subsample
results were strikingly similar, and in no case were statistically significantly different from the
full-sample coefficients, although the tax coefficients and standard errors tended to be larger.

     23Commerce Department data suppressions make it impossible to run an econometric
analysis based on data disaggregated by industry. However, it would be interesting for Future
research to obtain data from the Department on manufacturing-affiliates-only, in order to re-run
this experiment on what would probably be a more homogenous sample.
                                                   20

an average annual rate for all affiliates, not a subtler index that might apply to the marginal dollar

of earnings transferred from abroad or earned by capital located within. In some countries, certain

new investments receive favorable tax treatment with accelerated depreciation allowances or tax

holidays for which older investments are no longer eligible,26 Our sample excludes countries with

so little US investment that confidentiality requirements prohibit the release of data; truncating the

dependent variable at the bottom end is likely to flatten the regression line and reduce the

estimated effect of taxes. We also do not account For the effect of non-tax attributes of tax havens

  such as bank secrecy laws and law auditing and reporting requirements -- on local financial

activity, in part because our data measure only the reported operations of US firms. The real

prices of capital and labor are likely to vary widely between countries and in ways that we cannot

measure; the available data capture simply US dollar values, translated at exchange rates that may

ignore currency controls. But since some of these reasons are likely to reduce the estimated

effect of taxes on profitability, it is striking that the tax effect appears as consistently large and
significant as in Table 4.

       There is an additional complication in the OLS estimation that concerns the host countries'

choice of tax rates, The OLS specifications in Table 4 assume the local tax rate on US firms to

be uncorrelated with the error term. If, instead, countries set their tax rates in response to the

unobservable variables captured in the residual -- for example. ii governments in locations with

large amounts of tax-insensitive US investment choose high tax rates in order to profit From this

investment -- then the OLS coefficients will be biased and the estimated tax effect is likely to

understate the true effect. On the other hand, ii tax obligations are to a certain degree

endogenousto firms' commitment of legal and accounting resources, then measured tax rates are

likely to be lower in profitable locations and our estimated tax coefficient overstates the true value,

       In order to reduce the bias possibly arising from tax rate endogeneity, we estimated

equations (16) and (17) by an instrumental variables technique, using the log of host country




    26Bond (1981) and Bond and Samuelson (1986) analyze some of the effects of tax
holidays. As we report in Appendix A, our results are not significantly different when we use
statutory tax rates instead of average tax ratea
                                                    21

  population as an instrument for its tax rate. The rationale for using this
                                                                               instrument is that small
  countries have little locally-provided capital and so face elastic capital supplies on the world

  market; the optimal tax rates for such countries are likely to be low and
                                                                              positively related to their
  population sizes.2' Note that this argument concerns the supply of world capital, not just that

  from the US. If the population of a country does not itself affect the rate of return, then population

  can itself be used as an instrument for the local lax rate.26

         Columns (5) - (8) of Table 8 contain the lv estimates. The IV specifications of Columns (5),

  (6) and (8) look quite similar to their OLS analogs. Note however that the IV procedure
 encounters a difficulty when the (Tax)2 term is included, as in Column
                                                                           (7): when [log Population)'
 instruments br (Tax)', it is nol powerful enough to provide reliable estimates; as a result, the

 standard errors are very large and the coefficients imprecisely estimated.         Hausman tests of
 equality between the estimated OLS parameters in Columns (1) - (4) and the corresponding IV

 estimates in Columns (5) - (8) fail to reject the OLS specification.



 THE SENS/TIVI7Y OF FINANCIAL EARNINGS




        The same tax advantages that impel firms to shift nonfinancial earnings into haven affiliates

are likely to affect their reported financial earnings in a similar way. Unlortunalely, available
financial data are not as comprehensive as data
                                                     concerning other operations; based on the
information we were able to assemble, US multinationals do appear to shift financial earnings into

affiliates in havens and other low-tax countries.




    27See Huizinga (1987) who hypothesizes that small countries face a highly elastic supply of
foreign capital and so maximize corporate tax revenue by levying at low corporate tax rates.
He confirms empirically that corporate tax rates are indeed positively associated with
(population) size.

     '81n a number of auxiliary regressions (not
                                                  reported), we examined the power of the
 population instrument in explaining tax rates and its exogeneity to the investment function. In
 simple regressions, lo9 population significantly outperformed log GOP, log GDP per capita,
and other aggregates in explaining tax rates. The coefficients on log poputation   when Included
as right-side regressors in all of the OLS regressions reported in Tables 4-6
                                                                               were insi9nilicant,
including respecifications of the OLS regressions in Tables 4-6 with log GOP broken into log
population and log GDP per capita.
                                                                22

         Under ordinary circumstances, investors in woild capital markets should expect to receive

 similar if not identical belore-tax rates of return on their financial investments. Since multinationals

 have a certain amount of discretion in choosing the terms of intralirm debt contracts, but can do

 so only at the cost of possible legal and regulatory action, expected financial returns in country
 i (R1) will be


                         A1         = E [r + S -                       ),                         (18)



 Fri which E1 represents net financial capital invested in country i, r is the world market interest rate,

 S is the amount by which the world rate is raised or lowered by the firm For tax reporting
 purposes in country i, and q influences the transaction cost of this adjustment. The firm chooses

 Ss to maximize after-tax returns:29




        maxV L1= EE1(r+S1- j (l-r)                                                               (19)
                                                          2r


                                    E 8L                 0.                                      (20)
                          L=1




       The maximization yields the first-order condition



                                -
                                           ]         (1—rj                  coEL foralli          (21)



in which w is the multiplier associated with (20). Combining (18) and (21):


                                                                   2
                  R1 = Er(i                    .2_   -
                                                                                                 (22)
                                               2rj            2n(1 - r)2


    291f the firm does not have excess foreign tax credits then there is no particular advantage
attached to interest receipts in tax havens, since they are treated immediately as Subpart F
Income and taxed at the US rate, The maximand (19) is therefore only an approximation of the
behavior of parents with and without excess credits.
                                                 23



which is anaio9ous to (11) In the case of non-financial eamin9s; the difference between (22) and

(11) being that E1 is more readily observable than is p1.

       To measure the effect of tax rates on reported Financial earnings, we estimate


                    I      =            +         E                                          (23)
                                                (1 - rj2

in which l is reported interest receipts minus int&est payments, fi1 = r(l + 217) / 2q, and fl2
= - rd / 2rj. The variable E1 is reported equity in affiliates of US parent firm located In country

I, minus the property plant and equipment of those affiliates; E1 therefore represents net
investment not tied up In physical assets.

       Columns (1) and (3) of TableS report OLS and IV estimates of (23). As predicted, both

regressions find p1 to be positive and significant and ft2 negative and significant: firms earn

positive interest on their financial earnings, and the (reported) interest rate is higher In counties

with lowertax rates. Since , > 0 ImplIes that ft1 > r, the OLS estimate of ft1 = 0.10 seems rather

low given the high interest rates in the early 198os, and the IV estimate of ft1 = 0.14 Is more

reassuring. A 1-lausman test rejects the OLS specification In Column (1) in favor of the IV
estimates in Column (3).

       The specification of (23) relies on the assumption that dollar-denominated market interest

rates are the same In every country. If instead we allow the interest rate In country ito Incorporate

a risk premium it might be more reasonable to specify the Interest rate as a decreasing (linear)

function of per capita GDP:



                   r1      =           + v2 GDP1 -                                          (24)



Then (22) becomes

                                                                 W
         R1 =E1[w1 + u2GDP1] [1 •41                    -                  j                  (25)
                                                  2r         2(1 -
                                                   24



 and (25) can be estimated by


               = $1E1÷ fl,E1GDP1+fl3               EL        +fl E1GDP1                        (26)
                                                (1 —
                                                                      (1 — r32


 inwhichfl1 = p1(1 + 2)/2Q fl2 = v2(t + 2q)/2q, fl = -v1w2/2and fi4 =
 / 2t . The specification (26) can also be used to test the restriction that fl1fl =

        Columns (2) and (4) in Table 5 present estimates of the unconstrained version oF (26).

 Again, a Hausman test rejects the OLS specification in Favor of the IV equation. All the parameters

 are significant and of expected sign, so that interest receipts are higher in low-tax countries (ft3

 c 0), and there is a negative effect of CDI' on reported interest (ft4 > 0). Indeed, one should

expect these two effects to be complementary: the presence of country-speciFic Factors in interest

rates eases the firm's job of choosing advantageous interest rates on intrafirm debt contracts since

heterogeneity adds noise to the regulators problem.



TAX RATES AND AGGREGATE EARNINGS




       From the viewpoint of tax haven governments, our results confirm the ability of US Firms

to report income in low-tax jurisdictions even when corresponding physical activity does not take

place there. But that is only the first pal of the story that interests governments. The regressions

reported in Tables 4 estimate the proFitability of local affiliates holding constant local inputs such

as labor and plant and equipment. In practice firms choose their physical inputs simultaneously

with choosing Ihe level of profits they declare. We suspect that these choices are very
simultaneous indeed: Firms that minimize taxes by shifting profits to havens might do well also to

establish signiFicant physical operations in the same havens. Hence there should be a significant

relationship between tax rates and levels of employed factors, a relationship we now explore.
                                                  25

       A foreign government can lure US business to its shores with a variety of attractions,

especially but not exclusively low tax rates. One of the best nontax inducements is a vibrant

economy in which lirms can make profits. Thus we assume that a foreign government chooses

its corporate income tax rate in part to stimulate greater foreign activity, conditional on the state

of its economy. One expects American firms to earn more aggregate profit in Germany than In

the Netherlands, despite the similarity of their tax rates arid their per capita GDPs, because the

German market is so much larger. The calculations presented in Appendix B derive from our

model the Following specification of the aggregate earnings equation, using a second-orderTaylor

approximation:



         log i- =        -- fl 1 + $3 r12 +               log GDP4- e .                        (27)



The model predicts that $ > 0, fl2 c 0, 03 > 0, and $ > 0.

       Table 6 presents the results of estimating (27); the OLS estimates in column 2 are

consistent with the predicted signs of our coefficients. The estimated ,9 and $2 again suggest that

there is significant curvature in the effect of tax rates on reported earnings: they imply that raising

the tax rate from zero to 1% lowers earnings by 20%, and that the marginal effect of taxes dies

down to zero as the tax rate reaches 43%. An estimate of the linear version of (27) appears in

Column (1); its negative coefficient on the tax rate variable is consistent with the result in Column

(2).

       Columns (3) and (4) of Table 6 report IV estimates corresponding to the OLS specifications.

As before, the linear version performs quite well with instrumental variables, and a Hausman test

rejects the OLS specification of the linear equation (Column (1)) in favor of the IV specification

(Column (3)). Unfortunately, the standard errors on tax and tax squared become quite large in

Column (4), reflecting the difficulty of identifying the two tax terms separately using our
instruments,
                                                  26

       The model presented in Equation (7) implies that the Factor demand equations take

particular lorrns; Appendix B derives second-order approximations to those equations. The

approximations imply that log KL and log L1 should be negative functions of tax rates and positive

lunctions of tax squared; further, log GDPL should enter with a positive coefficient. Table 7

presents estimates of these equations.

       As predicted, Columns (2) and (6) of TableT report significant negative coefficients on tax

variables in the labor and capital regressions, along with coefficients on tax squared that are

positive but not significant. As before, the IV regressions perform much better in the linear variants

of the estimating equations than in the versions that include tax squared; a Hausman test rejects

the OLS specification in Column (1) against the IV specification in Column (3), and nearly rejects

the OLS specification in Column (5) against the IV equation in Column (7). Log GDP1 is always

significant and its coefficient is estimated to be very close to unity. Hence it appears that tax

policy affects the location of productive factors,3° but not with the same kind of powerful

nonlinearity observed for reported earnings.



COMPANIES WITH TAY HAVEN OPERATIONS



       For two reasons it is valuable to supplement our regression results with a closer
examination of the behavior of haven affiliates: one, because data limitations have prevented us

from including banking affiliates in our regression sample, and two, in order to explore whether

firms in fact use the income-shifting channels available to them. Fully 40% of US companIes with

foreign affiliates had at least one affiliate in a tax haven venue (Table 8). And although tax haven

use is substantial iii every industrial grouping, there is significant variation among industries. For

instance, almost all US banking and international shipping corporations locate at least one affiliate




    30Columns (9)-(12) report estimates of the labor demand equation with total employment as
the dependent variable; the equations fit very poorly, particularly when compared to the
equations (reported in Columns (-(4)) that use employee compensation as the dependent
variable. This is consistent with -- though of course not a confirmation of -- our prior that
compensation better reflects labor input.
                                                   27

 in a tax haven country, as do a majority of petroleum companies, while only about a third of firms

 in other industries had one or more tax haven affiliates. An alternative perspective Is
                                                                                                similarly
 impressive: out of 18,339 US Foreign affiliates located throughout the world, almost one in six is

 located in a tax haven. Again, there is substantial variation across industries. Nearly all

 international shipping affiliates and almost 40% of banking affiliates are in tax havens, while firms

 in other industries cluster quite close to the "all industries' percentage3'

        It comes as no surprise that assets and equity in tax havens are relatively heavily weighted

toward the financial sector (Table 9). While the financ'iaJ sector constitutes 40 - 50% of US FDI

assets, it accounts for 64% of the assets of tax haven affiliates. Though gross assets may

exaggerate financial sector investments, especially in banking, the equity position of tax haven

affiliates32 is similarly skewed toward finance (63%, versus 14% in other industrial countries and

5% in other developing countries). in contrast, the sectoral distribution of employment in tax
haven affiliates is quite similar to that in other US foreign affiliates. The non-financial sectors are

overwhelmingly important as employers, although the small share of financial sector employment

is still much larger than its counterparts in non-haven countries,

       While banking and finance account for a majority of the corporate assets and equity in tax

havens, the primary users of havens are non-financial parent corporations. As Table 10 shows,

many financial affiliates belong to non-financial parent companies.33 In fact, only a minority

(28.7%) of the affiliates of non-financial parents is in the same industry as its parent. While few

non-banks own banking affiliates, many possess affiliates for shipping and wholesaling their
products and for handling the finances of the parent and its related network of affiliates. And of




    "In terms of the havens' share of worldwide US foreign direct investment, investment is
a9ain skewed across industries: Table 13 indicates that while more than 90% of US foreign
direct investment in shipping is located in tax havens, along with more than one third of
banking and non-bank financial investment, only 6.2% of US foreign industrial investment Is In
havens.

    32The Commerce Department does not collect data on bank equity.

    "One might prefer to use assets, rather than the number of affiliates, to measure the
pattern of tax haven affiliates owned by non-financial parent companies. This measure
produces similar results, presented in Appendix Table B, except that it is more heavily
weighted toward financial affiliates.
                                                         28

 course, the potential for tax reduction offers one of the best reasons to locate such operations

 in a tax haven.




 IV. The Interests of Tax Havens


          Tax havens are likely to be particularly sensitive to the revenue implications of their capital

 taxation policy. If the tax rate on foreign multinationals can be set independently of other lax

 rates, revenue maximization would imply unitary elasticity of the tax base with respect to the tax
 rate.    If the elasticity exceeds one, then lowering the tax rate would increase revenue, Small

 countries, particularly the Dots, may have elastic corporate tax bases at most positive vatues.3

 since taxable income in a haven depends on both the volume of profitable physical activity and

the level of profits earned elsewhere but claimed locally.

          The regressions described in Table 6 of Section 2 suggest that revenue maximizing tax

rates are very low, roughly on the order of actual rates in havens. Denote taxable income in

country i by Y (ri); tax revenue equals TL 't'L, which is maximized with respect to r1 when



                                        t         r1 dY1/dr1   0.                               (28)



In the quadratic specification (Column 2). dYj/drL equals fl V1 + $2 r V1. From (28), this
implies

                                   IYTL       •    282 r2 + I = 0.                              (29)
and solving for r:
                                          =            - (8 - 8fi2)"2
                                                                                                (30)




    3Kotlikoff and Summers (1987) infer from this observation that the burdens of their capital
taxes are likely to tall on local immobile actors and on world capital.
                                                  29



 which, evaluated at the parameter estimates in Column (2) olTable 6, yields a
                                                                                 revenue-maximizing
 tax rate of &72%,' Country-specific conditions no doubt affect local tax base elasticities, but the

 fact that many havens have tax rates close to this benchmark 6% suggests that their behavior is

 consistent with tax revenue maximization without local rate adjustments,

        Considerations other than corporate income tax revenue are likely to influence                a

 government's choice of tax rate. Even in zero-tax locations, governments often collect Iees from

 local corporations. Moreover, taxation of the labor income of local and expatriate workers, and

 of their consumption and imports, offers a potentially much larger source of revenue, In addition.

 local workers earn rents if employed by foreigners at wages that exceed reservation levels.

 Furthermore, foreign firms and workers may purchase local goods and services, thereby

 stimulating local economies, and may have beneficial spillovers through the diffusion of new

 technologies or production techniques. On the other side of the ledger, foreign business activity

 may also be associated with negative externalities, such as pollution, dissipative rent-seeking by

 local workers, and (from the point of view of local officials) undue political power concentrated

among foreign firms.

       Despite the attractiveness of US business for foreign governments and the magnitude of

US firms' foreign operations, US multinationals play only a small part in the economy of a typical

host country Table 11 presents median values of the fraction of countries' populations employed

by US Firms, along with other indicators oF their significance. US firms in 1982 employed 0.4% of

the population in the median industrialized country, and 0.04% in the median developing country.36




    35The second-order condition guarantees that this, the larger of the two roots ci (29).
represents the revenue-maximizing tax rate. Forumlly, the second-order condition is that the
deriv9tive c31 the left side of (28) with respect to r is npgative; this derivative is 2 (dYjdr ) +
r (d Yjd r1j. In the quadratic specification (d2t( Id i-1) =         + 2fl2) (dVL/drj + 212 Y1.
Since the first-order condition guarantees that dYjdrL = 0, and 'L and ,- are assumed to be
positive, the second-order condition imposes that fl C 0. From inspection oF (30) it us clear
that the smaller root of (29) is negative, a possibility we rule out by assumption.

    36These are country medians, so that, for example, the value 0.862% represents the
employment/ population ratio for the country with the fourth hiQhest ratio among the Big-7
group. Of course, these median calculations obscure large variations in employment eftects
across countries.
                                                 30

This contrasts with a much higher 0.9% for the median Big-7 country, but only 005% for the

median Do! (the latter being of comparable magnitude to thai for other developing countries).

      US firms do pay their employees relatively well, however, and in that way may exert more

(though still limited) influence over local economies. Median US employee compensation

represented about 1% of GOP in industrialized countries and again only 0.4% in developing

countries, while in havens compensation amounted to 2.5% of GOP in the Big-7 countries and 1%

in the Dots. Median US value added was 2.5% of GDP in developed countries, 1.5% of GOP in

developing countries, but 4% in the Dots and almost 5% among the Big-7. Tax haven
governments take only a small part of this value-added: median taxes paid by US firms was 1.2%

of GOP in developed countries and 0.7% in developing countries -- the equivalent in both groups

to about half of US affiliates' value added. Haven governments collected similar shares of their

GOP from taxation of local US affiliates --1.1% among the Big-7 and 0.6% In the Dots--but these

revenues constituted a burden of only 22% and 14% of the affiliates' value added, respectively.

       In order to judge how tax havens have fared in their arrangements with US firms, one must

speculate about how they would have done if they had not elected to be havens. For the major

Dots, the correct yardstick is probably the performance of non-haven developing countries. By

this standard, they have done well in terms of employment and value added, and comparably in

terms of tax revenue. However, it seems that the Big-7 tax havens may enjoy the largest rewards:

US firms employ more of their labor force and produce more of their economies' value added than

they do in each of the other country groupings; and this comes at littte apparent net cost in overall

tax revenue.
                                                  31

V.     Implications for the United States


AGGREGATE TAX REVENUES



       A capital-exporting country like the US prefers that its own firms locate domestically, since

their profits are then subject to home taxation and their operations may generate other positive

externalities, If firms do earn their profits abroad, then the US government benefits most from

profits earned In tax havens, since fewer foreign tax credits are available on haven profits than on

profits earned In high-tax foreign countries.

       Aggregate revenue figures confirm the importance of tax haven profits as sources of US

tax revenue, Table 12 presents tabulations of total taxable foreign income In 1982 from all sources

(including repatriated dividends, branch profits, interest income, Subpart F Income, and others).

Applying a 46% US corporate income tax rate to this income, the US government received total

net-of-tax-credit revenues of $7.94 billion, of which $2.99 billion, or 38%, was located In the sbcteen

most Important tax havens.

       This simple exercise of course Ignores the common practice of applying excess foi'elgn tax

credits against haven earnings. Reporting limitations make It Impossible to know by exactly how

much that device reduces US tax revenue from repatriated tax haven earnings; three reasons

suggest that its impact is small, however. The first is that there is nothing special about tax haven

profits Ironi the standpoint of firms with excess foreign tax credits making repatriation decisions;

what matters is the residual tax liability of the repatriated profits. Hence even If excess tax credits

carried forward from previous years significantly reduced US tax liabilities In 1982, tax havens

should still be expected to account for 38% of the remaining revenue. The second reason Is the

opportunity cost of using excess foreign tax credits: credits used this year cannot be carried

forward into next year. Tax havens that absorb excess credits this year lndirecUy contribute to tax

revenues next year. The third reason Is that, in practice, tax haven Income does not appear to

be washed out by excess foreign tax credits. Goodspeed and Frlsch (1989) report that In 1984
                                                   32

50% of US Foreign-source income was associated with parent corporations with excess foreign tax

credits; in their country breakdown only 32% of foreign-source income from identifiable tax havens

 (Ireland, Switzerland, Singapore. Hong Kong, Caribbean, and Central America) was received by

US parents with excess foreign tax credits.



REVENUE EFFECT OF FOREIGN TAX ChANGES



       The longstanding negotiating position of the US government is that it supports bilateral

agreements that reduce source-basis taxation of profits earned by multinationals. As a traditional

capital exporter, the US has been understandably eager to substitute residence For source-basis

taxation.3' The preceding argument suggests, however, that the US government may not always

benefit From reductions in foreign tax rates. Lower foreign tax rates may attract business abroad

that otherwise would be located in America. Furthermore, changes in one foreign country's tax

rate may affect firms' taxable incomes in other countries, thereby changing the revenue ultimately

collected by the US government when the income is repatriated.

       In order to analyze the issues involved, consider the case of a US Firm with deficit foreign

lax credits that organizes its foreign operations as wholly-owned subsidiaries. Suppose that this

firm's motivation to locate operations and profits in tax havens is their favorable tax rates, and that

it would get little return from reinvesting any of its haven earnings in plant and equipment. Plant

and equipment located there serves partly as &cover for transfer pricing, factoring, and other

activities designed to move profits to haven locations. If the haven subsidiaries have access to

world capital markets that offer the same pre-tax returns as those available in the US. then from

(3) and (5), 'it is clear that subsidiaries will passively reinvest all of their profits, and the present

value to the parent firm of these reinvested profits just equals M, the alter-foreign-tax earnings of

subsidiaries.




   "It remains to be seen whether this attitude persists in the changing international regime In
which the United States is now the world's largest capital importer.
                                                   33

        What tax revenue would the US government earn from these profits? Since the optimal

 strategy of lirms is to repatriate their (after-loreign-tax) passive income as earned, and firms are

 eligible for tax credits for Foreign tax obligations associated with this passive income, the US

 government receives a fraction (i-5 - r) of the (before-foreign-tax) passive foreign income. The

 annual flow of US tax revenue is (rus - r) r M , so if the government discounts at r, the present

value of US tax revenue is (5 - ri M, Since M represents after-tax foreign profits from active

 operations, the present value of US tax revenue equals:



                             = (r - r) yr (1 - r)                                            (31)



       All other things equal, the US government receives far more tax revenue from the before-

tax profits that US firms earn in low-tax countries than from the profits they earn in high-tax

countries. There are two avenues for this effect: the present value of repatriated foreign earnings

equals ,r(1r*), a negative function of the foreign tax rate; while the foreign tax credit earned by

those repatriations is a positive Function of the foreign tax rate.

       The second of these effects separates the interests of US firms from those of the US

government. Firms Following the passive-repatriation strategy maximize their after-foreign-tax

profits, r (1 - rt). From their point of view, the foreign tax rate per se is immaterial; what matters

is after-tax profitability. From the US government paint of view r is very important, since it greatly

influences the present discounted value of its tax revenues.

       Total US taxes paid by Ameriban multinationals depend in pad on the taxation of US

earnings. Domestic income of t, earns the US Treasury ruslrus in tax revenue immediately. If

US corporations then invest their altertax profits of (I . r)         at the interest rate r and pay tax

on the interest as earned, then the present value of tax receipts from reinvested earnings is r5

C - r) ir. Hence the presenl value of total tax revenues generated by domestic profits of ,r

equals Tus (2 - rug)
                                                34

      Consider American multinationals with subsidiaries in n foreign countries, earning active

foreign profits of r in each country I and earning r In the US. The present value of US tax
revenues produced by these profits, inclusive of taxes on future interest earnings, equals:




          PV,           (r- ,-j r1 (1 -      + rj (2_rut) r                                   (32)




The impact of a small change in the tax rate of country J Is:


  d(PVUS)     = S (TUS-r1)         (1-i1) - iij (1 +r5-2r3) + r5(2-r5)th'.                    (33)
    dr3                      dr                                                  th3




       In order to evaluate (33) It Is necessary to measure the eFfect of a change In J's tax rate on

profits in each country i. Under the best of circumstances this would be a daunting task; the

cross-sectional nature of the available data makes a complete evaluation Impossible, especially

insofar as in predicting the effect of a small change in     on the taxable domestic profits of US

Firms. Let 6 represent th05 / dr Suppose that a small change In r1 affects the location of

worldwide profits but not the aggregate vo1ume of profits. Then 6 + 51dr1/dr3 = 0. II dr1/dr

were known, and as a first approximation Ihe tax change shifts Income Into other locations In

proportion to their local profits, then dr/dr = r. with a = [- dr1/dr3 - 5] /               r J.
          Consider the impact of a tax change in a small tax haven with an initial tax rate of zero

and a very small fraction of US overseas business. The value of the summation                 rj
(1 - rj x in (33) is $3.6 billion, while total Foreign earnings were $30.9 billion; the estimate in
column 2 of Table 6 implies that dr3/dr equals - 0.20 r. The change in US tax revenue Is,

thereFore,




          d(PV,)     = (0.12) 1dr3 - 631 + rus dr3 -            (I +       + 6 (2- r) rU (34)
             dr                   dr3                dr3
                                                   35



 Applying the 1982 lax rate       = 0.46 and the estimated dr / dr = (-0.2)         then (34) becomes
 d(PV) / dr = (0.59) E - (1.58) lrj.
        For any reasonable parameter values, this expression is negative indicating that US tax

 receipts would be reduced by higher tax rates in the havens. Note in particular that even If         =

 - dr / dr. so that all of the profits that shifted out of the haven were shifted into the
                                                                                             US, dPVUS
 / dr = -1.4 1r. Hence a 1% increase in the haven tax rate reduces US tax revenues by 1.4% of

 haven income; since US revenues were 46% of haven income, this represents a 3% reduction in

 revenues. This result arises because income is not sufficiently mobile to Fully offset the
                                                                                                greater
 foreign tax credits generated by the new, higher tax rate in country j. And in the realistic case In

 which some haven income flows into high-tax foreign countries, the outcome is even worse for
 the US Treasury.

        These results illustrate the cost to the US of high foreign tax rates, though of course there

 is a limit to how far one can take this kind of exercise. The estimated behavioral responses from

 cross-section data are valid only for small changes within a rather static environment; in particular,

 it would not be consistent to draw inferences from the data about the likely response of all

countries to a US tax change that, for example, raised bilateral withholding tax rates with all of our

treaty partners. Furthermore, in response to large changes, firms are likely to find alternative tax-

avoiding practices within the United States.38




    38lnctuding expanded use of Puerto Rico, other US possessions, and 'on-shore' locations
and activities that receive favorable tax treatment, Many of the same issues discussed in this
paper also apply to the Puerto Rico case, though a number of the specifics differ. See US
Treasury (1989) for an analysis of US business operations in Puerto Rico and other
possessions covered by Section 936 of the Internal Revenue Code.
                                                  36

VI. Conclusion


        The evidence presented here offers a consistent view of the patlern or tax haven use by US

 multinational corporations. As measured by reported income, American companies locate a
 sizeable Fraction of their loreign activity in tax havens. It appears, however, that this fraction

 includes reported profits that would not normally be earned by the quantities of factors employed

 by US firms in the havens. This relationship between low tax rates and abnormally high profit rates

consists of the reported financial earnings of tax haven affiliates as well as their nonfinancial

earnings.

       The ability to shift reported earnings into haven affiliates raises the already significant

atlractiveness of haven locations for ordinary business operations; as a result. tax rates are

inversely r&ateci to local employment of capital and labor. The endogenous location of Factors

when combined with the ability to shift reported profits away from high-tax locations makes total

taxable earnings in a country quite sensitive to tax rates. This elasticity may partly explain the

behavior of tax haven governments: for a small country with a small indigenous tax base, a

corporate tax rate on the order of 6% represents a revenue-maximizing choice.

       It is undoubtedly true thai some American business operations are drawn away From the

mainland US by the lure of low tax rates in tax havens; nevertheless, on net the policies of tax

havens appear to enhance the US Treasurys ability to collect tax revenue from American

corporations. In the available data from 1982. 38% of the tax revenue due the US government

trorn foreign operations of US corporations is attributable to tax haven affiliates. Furthermore, our

regressions imply that higher tax rates on the part of havens would cost the US government tax

revenue by generating additional foreign tax credits.

      The future of American relations with the tax havens may, however, be changing, as foreign

direct investment into the United States increases in volume and seeks tax-minimizing channels

through the same tax havens that American firms have used For years. One indication of this

change may be the recent attention directed at perceived abusive tax practices by US affiliates
                                                37

of foreign parents. Current relations between the United States and the tax havens offer a deficate

balance or advantages and disadvantages, one that may well evolve with future economic
conditions and legislative reforms.
                                         REFERENCES
Beauchamp, A. (1983), Guide Mondial des Paradis Fiscau'x, Paris: Editions Grasset & Fasqualle.

Bond, E. (1981), "Tax Holidays and Investment Behavior," Review of Economics and Statistics, 63:
88-95.

Bond, F. and L. Samuelson (1986), "Tax Holidays as Signals," Amedcan Economic Review, 76:
820-826.

Carson, C. (1986), "Corporate Foreign Tax Credit, 1982: A Geographic Focus," in IRS Statistics of
Income Bulletin, vol. 6, no. 2., 21-48.

Comptroller General of the United States (1981) 'Report to the Chairman, House Committee on
Ways and Means: IRS Could Better Protect U.S. Tax Interests in Determining the Income of
Multinational Corporations," Washington, D.C.

Congress of the United States, Joint Committee on Taxation (1984), General Explanation of the
Revenue Provisions of the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office, p.369.

Doggarl, C. (1983) Tax Havens and Their Uses, London: Economist Intelligence Unit.

Fazzari, S., A. Hubbard and B. Peterson (1988), "Investment, Financing Decisions, and Tax Policy,"
American Economic Review, 78: 200-205.

Frisch D. and D. Hartman (1983), 'Taxation and the Location of U.S. Investment Abroad," NBER
Working Paper #1241.

Frisch, 0. and 1. Horst (1989), 'Bausch & Lomb and the White Paper," Tax Notes, May 8, 725-
34.

Glautier, M. and F. Bassinger (1987), A Reference Guide to International Taxation: Profiting from
Your international Operations, Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.

Goodspeed, T. and 0, Frisch (1989), 'U.S. Tax Policy and the Overseas Activities of U.S.
Multinational Corporations: A Quantitative Assessment," U.S. Treasury Department mimeo.

Gordon, H. (1981). Tax Havens and their Use by U.S. Taxpayers: An Overview, Washington. DC:
Internal Revenue Service.

Grubert, H. and J. Mutti (forthcoming), 'Taxes, Tariffs and Transfer Pricing in Multinational
Corporate Decision Making," Review of Economics and Statistics.

Hartman, D. (1985), Tax Policy and Foreign Direct Investment," Journal of Public Economics, 26:
107-121.

Hines, J. (1988), "Transfer Pricing and Its Tax Consequences: Where the Profits Are." Princeton
University mimeo,

           (1989). "Credit and Deferral as International Investment Incentives," Princeton University
mimeo.

Horst, T. (1977), "American Taxation of Multinational Firms, "American Economic Review, 67:376-
389.
 Huizinga, H. (1987), 'International Tax Competitiveness: The Advantage of Smallness,' Harvard
 University mimeo.

 International Monetary Fund (1987), Government Finance Statistics, Washington, DC: IMF.

                                 (1987), International Financial Statistics, Washington DC: IMF
 Jenkins, G, and B. Wright (1975). 'Taxation of Income of Multinational Corporations: The Case
 of the United Stales Petroleum Industry,' Review of Economics and Statistics, 57: 1-11.

 Kopits, G. (1976),      Intra-lirm Royalties Crossing Frontiers and Transfer-Pricing Behaviour,'
Economic Journal, 66: 791 -805.

Kotlikoff, L. and L. Summers (1967), 'Tax Incidence', in A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein Handbook
of Public Economics, Amsterdam: North-Holland 1043-1 092.

OECD (1 987), International Investment and Multinational Enterprises: Recent Trends in
International Direct Investment, Tables 111.7., 111.8., and 111.9., Paris.

Price Waterhouse (1963), Corporate Taxes: A Worldwide Summary, New York.

Scholes, M. and M. Wolfson (forthcoming), Taxes and Business Strategy: A Global Planning
Approach, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.

States, W. (1986-1987), 'Controlled Foreign Corporations, 1982: A Geographic Focus,' in Internal
Revenue Service, Statistics of Income Bulletin, vol. 6, no. 3, 49-80.

The Statesman's Year-book (1984), NY: St. Martins Press.

UNESCO (1984.1997) Statistical Yearbook, Paris: UNESCO.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis (1981 and 1985), U.S. Direct
Investment Abroad: 1982 Benchmark Suriey Data, Washington, D.C.: GPO.

U.S. Department of the Treasury (1989), The Operation and Effect of the Possessions Corporation
System of Taxation, 6th Report, Washington, D.C.: GPO.

U.S. Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs, Permanent Sub-Committee on Investigations
(1985), Crime & Secrecy: The Use of Offshore Banks and Companies. Washington, DC: GPO.
APPENDIX A: DATA AND VARIABLES



       Almost any country can serve as a tax haven to certain classes of investments under certain

circumstances. An often cited example of this truism is the ciassification of the US as a tax haven

for foreign flight capital since the US eliminated its withholding tax on dividends and interest paid

to foreigners. For this reason, any tax haven listing must necessarily be somewhat arbitrary.

       In general, tax havens are locations with low Lax rates, and as such they are attractive to

business. However! since rational Firms maximize after-tax profits -- which is not Lhe same thing

as minimizing taxes (thelatter for example satisfied by making losses) -- low tax rates alone do

not successful havens make. The business literature usually describes tax havens in terms of four

attributes that, taken together, make a location particularly desirable: (i) low corporate or personal

tax rates;   (ii)   legislation that supports banking and business secrecy; (iii) advanced
communications facilities; and (iv) sell-promotion as an offshore financial center.

       Thisvague characterization makes the process of classifying tax haven countries somewhat

arbitrary at the margin. We take as a point of departure the internal Revenue Manual's list ci 32

countries that it identifies as tax havens for purposes of US businesses.39 We then use data from

States (1985-7) to delete From our tax haven list countries in which foreign corporate taxes paid

by US companies is greater than 20% of pre-tax income (actually, the average tax rate is on the

order of 50% in each country eliminated).° These countries were presumably identiFied as havens

not because of low tax rates, but for other characteristics, such as bank or commercial secrecy,

an absence of exchange controls, or low personal income tax rates. We eliminate three countries

on this basis: Austria, Costa Rica and the Netherlands,

       Beauchamp's (1983) listing of tax havens (without specific reference to the US) includes all

ol the IRS-designated countries, plus 5 others. We also include these countries, but restrict them




    "Glautier and Bassinger (1987) suggests that this list should be treated as the guideline to
tax havens identified as such by the United States, although the IRS notes that the list should
not be considered exhaustive.

    °For countries whose average tax rate could not be obtained, we instead used corporate
statutory tax rates of less than Ia percent, as revealed in either Price-Waterhouse (1983) or
Doggart (1983).
 to countries in which the average tax rate was less than 10% for US companies. This list consists

 of Anguilla, Andorra, Jordan, Lebanon, Macao, Monaco, St. Martin. In addition, this same criterion

 was applied to havens discussed in the Economist Intelligence Unit's tax haven volume (Doggart,

 1983), resulting in the inclusion of Dorninica, Maidives, Malta, Marshall islands, and St. Lucia. By

 this method we identify 41 countries and regions as tax havens for the purposes of US businesses

 (see Appendbc Table A).

       Note that there are seven countries not classified as havens -- Argentina, Bangladesh,

 Ecuador, French islands (Pacific), South Korea, Taiwan and Uruguay — whose corporate tax rates

are comparable to those of the relatively high-tax havens. Recall that tax rates do not constitute

the only criterion of tax haven status. In particular, none of these seven countries is generally

recognized as a tax haven, nor do they so promote themselves. Further, nearly all of their US-

source direct investment is in manufacturing, with essentially no finance, wholesale trade or

international shipping sector& Finally, most of them have lacked other essential preconditions for

being a tax haven, such as freedom from capital controls and other regulations, an unfettered

domestic financial market, or an advanced system of international communications.

       Our analysis relies on the latest available data concerning foreign direct Investment,

gathered in the US Department of Commerce' 1982 comprehensive Benchmark Survey? The

Benchmark Survey is conducted on an irregular basis every several years, using a balance of

payments framework as its foundation. Firm participation in the survey Is obligatory and includes

all firms with affiliates whose assets exceed $3 million. The US Department of Commerce (1985)

publishes only a small part of the data which are essential for our analysis in Its US Direct

Investment Abroad. However, the Department's Bureau of Economic Analysis provided us with

aggregate figures calculated from proprietary benchmark survey data. (Variable means and

standard deviations are included as Appendix Table B)

       For conFidentiality reasons, substantial elements of the Benchmark Survey data are

unavailable to the public. These suppressed data were Included in the preparation of all of the

paper's non-econometric analysis, since this was presented In aggregated form. However, the

restriction on the use of suppressed data does limit our econometric analysis in some respects.
II does not constrain the samples of either "Big-7' tax havens or industrialized countries. Yet it

reduces the number or observations on "dots" to 17 from 34, and the observations on developing

countries to 41 from 5O." Moreover, even among the observations for which most data were

available, suppressions of certain individual data cells had the effect of shrinking the regression

samples in some cases to as few as 58 countries.

       The econometric analysis also required data on population and gross domestic product,

neither of which are contained in the benchmark survey data, For the most part, these could be

obtained from the IMF's International Financial Statistics and Government Finance Statistics.

However, these sources do not include several of the smallest countries; additional data were

obtained from either UNESCO's Statistical Yearbook or The Statesman's Year-book.

      The tax rates calculated for regressions are presented in Appendix Table C. Of course, no

single measure of the corporate income tax rate can accurately capture the precise differences

in tax burdens corporations face in different countries. For one thing, the complexity of tax codes

(including different provisions for tax deductions, depreciation rules, loss carryforwards and

carrybacks. and nonstandard income concepts) precludes the possibility of distilling a well-defined

ax rate for each country. In addition, a single tax rate cannot capture industry- and firm-specific

tax holidays or other features.'2

      We used two complementary sources to obtain these data, the benchmark survey itself and

Price.Waterhouse' (1983) Corporate Taxes: A Worldwide Summary. The benchmark survey data

provide a first approximation: corporate income taxes paid by all US affiliates in a country, divided

by their total pre-tax income, In principle, this has the advantage of reflecting the amount of taxes

that corporate affiliates actually pay. However, since many companies in some countries have

negative earnings, this measure tends to overstate the tax rate in those countries. In practice, this




   '1We also exclude from the sample three categories of countries on the grounds that the
nature of foreign investment in these groups is likely to be guided by unique or idiosyncratic
considerations, These are oil exporters. Sub-Saharan Africa (except Southern Africa), and
Socialist countries.

    '2Moreover, since some of each corporation's tax payments typically are returned in the
form of government-provided services and subsidies, a complete measure of the tax burden
would have to account for the burden of taxes net of subventions. Unfortunately, they are
impossible to measure in practice,
 calculation actually results in average tax rates for some countries substantially
                                                                                        exceeding top
 statutory marginal rates (including subnational taxes).

         Since we expect this lop tax rate to be an upper bound on corporations' actual Lax
 burdens! we define the average tax rate as the lesser of the benchmark survey tax rate and the

 statutory rate. In addition, tax rate data are unavailable from these two sources for some of the

smallest tax haven countries. For these countries, we obtain the tax rate from the Economist's
 Tax Havens and their Uses (Doggart, 1983).

        As a check of robustness we also ran each regression using only statutory tax rates
                                                                                                 (from
Price Waterhouse (1983) and Doggart (1983)) as an alternative tax measure. In no case did the

alternative lax coefficients differ significantly from the coefficients on our preferred tax variable.

This result is consistent with the findings of Grubert and Multi (forthcoming) using a different

specification run on a small extract of the same data set.

        Like the tax variable, the other measured variables represent aggregates for all US affiliates

located within each sample country.'3 'Plant, property, and equipment' serves as our measure

of physical capital employed by affiliates. The shortcoming of this variable, particularly for a study

of tax havens! is the fact that the Commerce Department does not collect this inFormation for the

banking industry. Unfortunately, neither does any banking regulatory agency, and no alternative

exits. While this problem is potentially important, it should also be noted that less than one quarter

of tax haven income derives from banking, and that the capital-output ratio is in any case relatively

low in the banking industry. Thus the Commerce Department variable 'plant, property, and

equipment' is probably reasonably accurate, even in tax havens that are known for financial
activities.

        'Plant, property, and equipment' is measured in dollar units. Similarly, the heterogeneity

of labor inputs argues br measuring them by their dollar value. For this reason, we proxy for the

independent variable 'Labor' using "Total Employee Compensation,' in order to better measure

efFiciency equivalent units of labor inputs. One restriction implied by the use of Compensation is




   "They do not include any income earned or factors employed outside the (Foreign)
country of the affiliate.
that employment and wages have the same impact on profitability.                 Accordingly, we also

disaggregated "Employment' and Wag& (the latter defined as Total Compensation / Employment)

in each of our tests. Unlike the coefficients on "Cornpensation, these coefficients do not lend

themselves to a straightforward interpretation as the labor share. Rather they enabled us to verily

that the sign, size, and significance are similar For the alternative measure.
 APPENDIX B: MATHEMATICAL DERIVATION



        This Appendix presents derivations of the reduced form earnings equations and factor

 demand equations, the estimates of which are presented in Tables 6 and r

        Return to the maximization problem (7) and (8), excluding as before the return to financial

 assets; for a firm allocating a fixed stock of capital and adjusting its transFer prices as in (10), its

 problem is:




             maxV = E (1 -r,) p(K.l { 1 ÷ 1                              -           A
                                                                                                                    (81)
                                                           2a                    2a(1 -


                               subjeci to E K,                 -c            K
                                                                                                                   (82)


yielding the first-order condition


                           (1-rJ            [1 •i    2a
                                                                     -               ,2
                                                                                 2a(1 r                = p.        (83)



in which p' is the marginal product of capital in country i, and p is the Lagrange multiplier

corresponding to constraint (82). From the production function (13), the marginal product of
capital is



                          = a ct(E tht A111t1                                                                      (84)



Combining (83) and (84). and imposing the condition that p,                                p.' K, / a yields


                 =                   / :-a-e/ ((1 - r.)                                     A
                                                          [1
                                                                    •-           -                   1(a/c1-Q-#)   (85)
                                                                         2a              2a(1-r1)2
Combining (85) with (10) produces the following expression for non-financial taxable income as

a function of local GDP and local tax rates:

                         (11 (t—a-Ø) (1 r) (2! ( 1-2—0) [1 +           - ____________                 (86)
                                                                    2a 2a(1-rj2
Taking logs:

      log rr =           [log (ci) + log A1] + a                    log (1 - rj
                 1-a-                                     (1-aM

                                                                                                      (67)
                                                                         A2
                                                  log [1 + _L-
                                       l-a-                    2a        2a(1-rj

Taking a second-order Taylor expansion around the point F at which (1 - t) = A,



      log ,r1    _j_, [log (c40p_a) + a log (1 - I) + a(2-t)                  + (l-4)(t +     12/2)
                  1-a—                                          2(1-t)              a(1-t)2

                                   log A1- ° + (1-)(1 +2)/a L + a/2 + 3(1-)/2a 72 (68)
                         1 —a—4'              (1 -a-)(1 -t)2                   (1 -a'4)(1-t)2



Hence nonfinancial earnings should be a negative function of local tax rates, a positive tax

squared and a positive function of local GDP.

       There remains the problem or taxable local Financial earnings. it is not always possible, or

even desirable, for Firms to separate real and financial decisions in the way we have modeled them

to do. The location of financial equity is likely to be a complicated matter, generally an inverse

function or the tax rate. As illustrated in Hines (1989), financial equity can be expected to

accumulate in locations where profits are earned by non-financial factors, particularly if those are

low-tax countries. Once financial equity is located, returns are governed by (24), also an inverse

Function of 7L As a result, we expect financial earnings to behave in the same way as non-

financial earnings do in our approximation (Ba). and so specify total revenues as a negative

function of i-1 and a positive function of r12.
 FACTOR DEMANDS



         It is also Straightforward to derive the demands for productive factors as Functions of tax

 rates and local GDP. Starting with capital, combine (83), (84) and the relation p1 = p1 K1/ a to
 obtain:




 K1 = (1/a) [ø/-1] 1/fl -a-Ø) A11' (1-q-Ø) {(1 - r1) [1 + 1                  A2            (1-0) ((1-Ø)
                                                                                                             (B9)
                                                                    2a 2a(1-rj2

 Taking logs:



  log (K1)       _____ log (cp1) - log a } + ______ log A1 +                                log (1-r1)
                                              1-a-
                 + j.log[1 + 1                          A2
                                                                                                          (810)
                                          2a        2a(1-rj2


Taking a second-order approximation to (810):


   log K1 =1 [log (ct') - (1-c-) log a +                        log(1-t) +             + (1-H1 +t2/2)
             (1 -a-s)                                                        2(1 -t)         a(1—t)'

                                                                                                          (B 11)

                        +           log A, -   (1-) (1 + 1/a + 2t/a)                    (1-)(1 + 3/a)
                                                                       r1          +
                            1 —a4                (I -o-) (1 - t)2                       2(1 -a-)(1 -t)2



The approximation (811) implies, therefore, that local property, plant and equipment (K1) should

be a negative function of local tax rates, a positive function of tax squared, and a positive (unction
of local CDI'.

       The demand For labor can be derived in a similar fashion. Recall that the constant shares

property of Cobb-Douglas production functions implies that L1                  (1 - a) p1; applying (B5) and
taking logs yields:
                                 1

      log L log (1-a) +                   [log (,4øpQ) + ______ log A1
                                                             i-a-                                 (B12)
                                 a                           a
                           + ______ log(1-rj t ______ log [I +
                               1 -a-                     1 -a-
                                                                                —
                                                                                I
                                                                                2a
                                                                                  -                A2

                                                                                               2a(1-rj2
Applying the usual second-order approximation yields:



                                                                      a (2-t)    ÷a(t + t2/2)
    log L1 = log (1-a) +             [log (0f5 + a log (1 - t) +
                                                                     2(1 —9          a(1—t)2

                                                                                                  (B13)

                    -+1logA1 - a(1 -+1/a+2t/a) .                     +    a(1 +3/a)
                                                                                           r12.
                      1 -a-i               (1 -a-) (1 — r)               2(1 -a-)(1 -t)2



in which local labor compensation (L1) Is a negative function of local tax rates, a positive function

of tax squared, and a positive function of local GDP.
                                                        TABLE I
                                                TAX HAVENS' 1982 SHARE5 OF:

                                                                            U.S. Corporations'     Foreign Affiliate:



                                      (I)           (2)         (3)             (4)         (5)            (6)            (7)
                                                                                                                         Plant,
                                     World       World                                      Net              Property &
                                   Population    GDP          Assets         Equityb      Incomec Employment Equipmentd
    Al! Havens                       1.2%        3.0%        26.0%            21.4%       30.6%             4.3%         4.2%

           Excluding
           Big-7                     0.3%        0.3%         16.9%           12.2%        17.4%            0.5%         0.6%

    In comparison:
          Continental
          Europe                     0.7%       34.5%        18.0%            19.4%        14.8%         27.7%          24.2%
          U.K.                       1.7%        6.3%        20.8%           12.4%        12,4%          12.6%           13.7%
          Canada                     1.0%        4.7%         8.9%           17.0%                       13.4%           18.5%
          Japan                      3.2%       112%          5.6%            3.8%         3.4%           4.5%           5.3%

          Developing,
          Countries                 62.2%       17.0%         8.7%           17.6%        11.6%          18.2%          10.8%
    Excludes Socialist econocejes, Sit-Saharan Africa (except Southern      Africa), and oil exporters (as well as the U.S.).
    "Equity" data are collected only for non-bank firms.
    Whether or not inccme was repatriated to parent corporation.
    Plant, property & equipalent data coLLected only for non-banks.    if one excludes bank eiçtoyment, to Irçrove the   cooparabitity
    of the tast 2 coluTns,   alt  changes are very small and none change any of the table's implications.
     Hong Kong, I relar,d, Liberia, Lebanon, Panama, Singapore, and Switzerland.
     Ectt4ing oil exporters and tax havens.
Source: u.s. Department of Cocnirce (1985).
                                             TABLE 2
                                   U.S. AFFILIATE OPERATIONS
                                  IN THE PRIMARY TAX HAVENS

                                 (1)               (2)            (3)             (4)               (5)

                                                                              Property,
                             Number of            Net                          Plant &
                                U.S.           Income'          Assets       Equipmentb Employment
                             Affiliates        ($millions)    ($millions)    (Smillions)  (000s)
      Switzerland              524             1,829          31,003           1,260             46.2
      Bermuda                  352             1,965          26,953             167              3.0

      Hong Kong                321               841          29,833          1,957              54.1

      Netherlands
      Antilles                 315             1,370          49,140            479               3.5

      Singapore                238               688          27,727          1,423              48.7
      Ireland                  215               758           6,025          1,197              38.9

      Panama                   193               678          18,124            550             25.4
      Bahamas                  178             1,245          91,004            402               8.5

      Cayman & other
      U.K. Islands             156             1,252          49,524              24              0.7
  Printary lax haven" rolors to the lax havens wilh the largesl number ci 1)5 Foreign altiliates and Iho
greatest amount of 1982 net income oF US loroign affiliates. These data excludes shJpping affiliates, which
for these purposes are not attributed to individual countries.
 "Whether or nor income was repatriated to parent corporation.
 'Plant, properly & equipment data are collected only or non—bank firms.
source: U.S. Department of Cortynerce (1985).




                                              TABLE 3
                                  TAX HAVENS IN 1977 AND 1982
                     (as a percentage of U.S. worldwide foreign direct investment)

                                          ASSETS                              EMPLOYMENT

                                       1977            1982                    1977           1982

           All
            Havens                     11.3%       26.0%                       4.0%          4.3%

                 Excluding
                 Big-7                 3.8%        16.9%                       0.6%          0.5%

        Source:   U.S. Depanrnent or Conynerce (1981 and 1985).
                                              TABLE 4
                     EFFECT OF TAX RATES ON LOCATION OF NON-FINANCIAL PROFITS

                                                   Dependent Variable:
                                        log (net pre—tax 'non—financial" income)

                            Ordinary Least Squares Estimation                        Instrumental Variable Estimation*

                              (I)      (2)       (3)        (4)                       (5)      (6)      (7)       (8)

      Constant               1.36     0.17      1.30       —0.72                     1.62     0.82    —0.41      0.60
                            (0.35)   (0.92)    (1.02)      (0.88)                   (0.4!)   (1.61)   (4.00)    (0.32)
      Tax                   —2.83    —2.25     -7.4!                                -3.65    —2.97    —24.92
                            (0.59)   (0.7!)    (2.4!)                               (0.88)   (1.63)   (24.28)
      (Tax)2                                    8.32                                                  49.73
                                               (3.72)                                                 (54.32)
     (I - Tax)2                                           -0.19                                                 -0.4!
                                                          (0.09)                                                (0.32)
     log (Plant, Property    0.4!     0.48      0.4!       0,56                      0.35     0.42     0.78
     & Equipment)                                                                                                0.43
                            (0.19)   (0.20)    (0.19)     (0.2!)                    (0.20)   (0.24)   (0.68)    (0.28)
     log (Compensation)      0.43    0.30       0.40       0.17                      0.49    0.39     -0.12      0.35
                            (0.19)   (0.2!)    (0.20)     (0.2!)                    (0.20)   (0.28)   (0.86)    (0.34)
     log (GDP per capita)            0.16       0.06       0.26                               0.09     0.34      0.15
                                     (0.! I)   (0.12)     (0.!!)                             (0.17)   (0.49)    (0.19)
     SEE,                    0.70    0.70      0,67        0.72                     0.72     0.70      1.65     0.77
     Adjusted R2             .87      .87       .88         .86
     11   = 59

* Instruments for Tax and Tax2 are
                                    Log Population      and (Log    Population)2,
Note:Standard errors appear in parentheses.
                                               TABLE S
                         EFFECF OF TAX RATES ON LOCATIONOF FINANCIAL PROFITh

                                                      Dependent Variable:
                                                net pre—tax interest income


                            Ordinary Least Squares Estimation               Instrumental Variable Estimation


                                      (I)         (2)                                (3)         (4)

Net Equity                           0.10        0.30                               0.14         0.47
                                    (0.01)      (0.06)                              (0.02)      (0.08)
Net Eouity                          -0.020      —0.17                              -0.048       —0.31
     —
(I       Tax)'                      (0.008)     (005)                              (0.010)      (0.06)
GDP per capita      Net Equity                —1.71   E—5                                    —3.10 E—5
                                              (0.56 E—5)                                     (0.70 E—5)
             Net Eouity                        1.31   E-5                                     2.42 E-5
GDP per
        caPlta(1 - Tax)2                      (0.41   E-5)                                   (0.52 E-5)

Adjusted R1                           .51         .56

SEE.                                197.25      214.40                             189.8!       199.59

# of Observations                                 82                                 80          880

*                                      —
     Instruments for ((Net Equity) / (I Tax)2] and [(GDP per capita) (Net Equity / (1 — Tax)2] are (Net Equity
     Log Population] (Net Equity (Log Population)2] (GDP per capita Net Equity Log Population] and
    (GDP per capita Net Equity . (Log Population)2].
Note:Standard errors appear in parentheses.
                                    TABLE 6
               EFFECT OF TAX RATES ON LOCATION OF TOTAL PROFITS

                                  Dependent Variable:
                             log (net pre-tax total income)


                         Ordinary Least Squares         Instrumental Variables
                                  Estimation                     Estimations


                            (I)            (2)                (3)          (4)


    Constant               4.52           5.61                5.94        4.88
                          (0.40)         (0.46)           (0.68)         (2.13)
    Tax                   -6.29         -20,17           —12.99           16,53
                          (1.27)         (3.89)           (2.76)        (43.81)
    Tax2                                 23,51                           —65.86
                                        (6.30)                          (96.85)
    log (GD?)              0.88           0.96                1.18        1.38
                          (0.10)         (0.09)           (0.16)         (0.45)
     Adjusted    R2         .56           .65

    SEE.                   1.24           1.37            3.56            1.68

    n=    59

•Instruments for Tax and Tax2 are Log Population and (Log Population)2.
Note: Standard errors appear in parentheses.
S
                                                                                                                               a
                                           a0             co   S.                      aS0                    i.          Cs

                                                                                                                                              c               ...       E                      .Z
                  n                              N                                               N                  N                                N        4     >        0           0     It
                  C                       C           —                                                                   —                              —                                     cA
                                                                                                                    N                                N              N
                                                                                                                                                                             2   C,,   = :&j   <
              —
               Noo      —9   Co           G\00                          -ce.                         —o                   —o                C0          —o              0-                00 2
                                                                             I                                   '
                                                                        .
                             oo                                                                                          0,                                                                    H
    r::
                                                                                                              O00N0Or4
                             ir—          e1o0       n-                                   NN   oi   '0—                  O'n                co0        r10                                     F-
               r—            .            fl         no                 rj
                                                                                          -
                                                                                              ooooudC#o                  no

                                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                            O'en   °Qfl rio              -                     U
                             o
                                   q,-a                                   *           —                                        cn     0
              C                                           2         -                                                                               O   —
                                     )g
                                   a'-                                         ....            :a                    C0        aa   °EU.J
      E   C         o        O
                                             HO
                                                 o- zC                       x-CH             U..O        6
                                                TABLE 8
                                    INDUSTRIES THAT USE TAX HAVENS

                                           Percent of
                                     Parents with             Number of                   Percent of
                                     Number of                Tax Haven                   Affiliates      Affiliates
     Parent Industry                Parent Firms              Affiliates                  Worldwide     in Tax Havens


        ALL INDUSTRIES                2,245                   40.6%                       18,339          158%


     Banking                            133                   970%                         1,061          38.5%
     Shipping                             12                  83.3%                           69          87.0%
     Petroleum                          143                   55.2%                        2,475          18.2%
     Non-Financial
              a
     Services                           160                   37.5%                          722          13.4%

     Manufacturing                    1,215                   35.8%                       11,240          12.3%
     Wholesale Trade                    168                   35.1%                          908          19.4%
     Non-Bank Financial                 234                   24.4%                        1,152          16.8%

       ExcLiing hoteLs
Source: U.S. Department of Coenerce (1985) and   SEA   tabuLations   fr, the   1982 Benchmark Survey.
                                     TABLE 9
                   SECTORAL AND GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION OF
                      U.S. FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT, 1982

                                             BY ASSETS
                                               ($billions)

                                     Tax                       Other              Other
                                    Haven                    Industrial         Developing
                                   Countries                 Countries          Countries

Banking                             $218.3                    $291.4               $72.5
                                    (60.8%)                   (37.1%)              (35.4%)

Non-Bank                             $84.2                     $90.1               $ 8.6
Financial                           (23.5%)                   (11.5%)              (4.2%)
Non-                                 $56.6                    $403.8                $123.9
Financial                           (15.8%)                   (51.4%)              (60.4%)



                                              BY EQUITY
                                               ($billions)

                                     Tax               .       Other              Other
                                    Haven                    Industrial         Developing
                                   Countries                 Countries          Countries

Non-bank                             $30.7                     $21.8                $2.2
Financial                           (62.5%)                   (13.7%)              (4.7%)
Non-                                 $18.4                    $137.7                $45.0
Financial                           (37.5%)                   (66.3%)              (95.3%)



                                        BY EMPLOYMENT
                                                 (000s)

                                     Tax                       Other              Other
                                    Raven                    Industrial         Developing
                                   Countries                 Countries          Countries

Banking                               20.3                     75.0                 59.7
                                     (7.2%)                   (1.7%)               (3.3%)

Non-bank                              9.0                      103.1                 16.0
Financial                            (3.2%)                   (2.4%)               (0.9%)

Non-                                 254.7                    4,110.7              1,715.0
Financial                           (89.7%)                   (95.8%)              (95.8%)

Note: The Coinnerco Dopannienfs Benchmark Survey does not ooilect the vatiable Equily For banks.
Source: u.s. Dopaxftrent ol Connico (1985), and SEA IabuI.ons 1mm the 1982 Benchmark Survey.
                                                TABLE 10
                                TAX HAVEN USE BY NON-FINANCIAL                     PAREN
                                           (by number of firms)

                             Number of Total
                            Parent FirmNumber of                     Percent of Tax Haven Affiliates in
                                with      Their                 Parent's
      Parent's               Tax HavenTax Haven                   Own                Wholesale Non—Bank
      Industry                Affiliates Affiliates             Industry Shipping      Trade     Financipl

ALL INDUSTRIES                   725        2,294               28,7%         8.2%b     191%b    344%b

                                                                                           b
     Wholesale   Trade            62           140              464%          14.3%              26.4%

     Manufacturing               435         1,378              25.5%          4.3%     28.8%    34.5%

     Petroleunf                   79           451              30.8%        20.8%       4.7%    33.7%

     Non—Financial
     Services                     60            97              54.6%          0.0%      7.2%    28.9%

      Exc tt.ing Petroleun tankers, pipelines, storage and gas stations.
       Parent's Own Industry" supercedes alt or part of this ceLl.
Source: BEA tabulations  frii the U.S. coqny,erce Department's 1982 aenchmark Survey.
                                       TABLE II
        SIGNIFICANCE OF US MULTINATIONALS TO HOST FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS, 1982


                                              Employee             Value             Income   Total
          Country        Employment         Compensation           Added             Taxes
           Group          Population             GD?                GD?               GD?     GD?


       Industrialized        0.370%              1.01%              2.45%            0.18%    1.16%

                             0.039%              0,35%              1.46%            0.11%    0.74%
       Developing
       Havens:

               7             0.862%              2.53%              4.94%            0.34%    1.08%
         Big

         Dots                0.046%              0.93%              4.00%            0.10%    0.57%



Note: Entries represent grotç medians.
Source: SEA tabuLations from the U.S. Coamerce Department's 1982 Benchmark Survey.
                         TABLE 12
     CORPORATE TAXABLE INCOME AND FOREIGN TAX CREDITS
                          (1982)


                                  Taxable                  Foreign
                                  Income                 Tax Credits
                                 ($biIIions               ($biIlions

        All Countries               56.6                    18.1

        16 Tax Havens               7.8                      0.6

source: Internal Revenue Service, Statistics ot Income
                             APPENDIX TABLE A
                           TAX HAVEN COUNTRIES


IRS-IDENTIFIED           BEAUCHAMP               DOGGART

ANTIGUA & BARBUDA        ANGUILLA                DOMINICA
BAHAMAS                  ANDORRA                 MALDIVES
BAHRAIN                  JORDAN                  MALTA
BARBADOS                 LEBANON                 MARSHALL ISLANDS
BELIZE                   MACAO                   ST. LUCIA
BERMUDA                  MONACO
BRITISH VIRGIN ISLANDS   St MARTIN
CAYMAN ISLANDS
THE CHANNEL ISLANDS
COOK ISLANDS
CYPRUS
GIBRALTAR
GRENADA
HONG KONG
IRELAND
ISLE OF MAN
LIBERIA
LIECHTENSTEIN
LUXEMBOURG
MO NTS ER RAT
NETHERLANDS ANTILLES
PANAMA
ST. KIlTS
ST. VINCENT
SINGAPORE
SWITZERLAND
TURKS & CAICOS
U.K CARIBBEAN ISLANDS
VA N U AT U
                  APPENDIX TABLE B
 MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF REGRESSION VARIABLES

                        (in $millions, except as noted)


                                                          Standard
                                                 Mean     Deviation

Non-financial Income                             508.1     (1354.1)
Financial Income                                   -3.7      (289.0)
Total Income                                     504.4     (1355.0)

Tax Rate                                         0.31          (0.18)
Plant, Property & Equipment                      1783         (5210)
Equity Investment                                2677         (6373)
   Net Equity                                    893.6     (2676.4)
Employee Compensation                             1067        (2885)
Employment (thousands)                            60.5       (142.0)

Population (millions)                            27.1         (83.5)
GDP ($ billion)                                  76.1       (169.2)
GOP per capita ($)                               4040        (41 44)
                                                                      APPENDIXTABLE C
                                                                         TAX RATES



            BIG 7                   DOTS                         INDUSTRIALIZED                                      DEVELOPING
                                                                   CGUNTRIES                                          CGUNTRIES


HONG KONG           .12   ANDORRA                     .00   AUSTRIA               .41   ARGENTINA                    .21     MEXICO             .42
IRELAND             .04   ANTIGUA & BARBUDA           .03   AUSTRALIA             .51   BANGLADESH                   .25     MOROCCO            .53
LEBANON             .22   BANANAS                     .00   BELGIUM               .45   BOLIVIA                      .30     NAIIIBIA           .46
LIBERIA             .21   BANRAIN                     .13   CANADA                .52   BOTSWANA                     .35     NICARAGUA          .44
PANAMA              .10   BARBADOS                    .29   DENMARK               .40   BRAZIL                       .35     PAKISTAN           .53
SINGAPORE           .21   BELIZE                      .00   FINLAND               .49   CHILE                        .49     PAPUA MEW GUINEA   .45
SWITZERLAND         .17   BERMLA                      .00   FRANCE                .50   COLGIBIA                     .40     PARAGUAY           .30
                          CAYMAN                            GERMANY               .48   COSTA RICA                   .50     PERU               .35
                              + OTHER      UK ISLES   .01   GREECE                .43   XNHINICAN REPUBLIC           .41     PHILIPPINES        .33
                          CYPRUS                      .14   ITALY                 .39   ECUADOR                      .22     PORTUGAL           .40
                          GIBRALTAR                   .00   JAPAN                 .52   EL SALVADOR                  .30     SEYCHELLES         N/A
                          GRENEDA                     .03   NETHERLANDS           .40   FIJI                         .35     SOL4ON ISLANDS     .35
                          KIRIBATI                    N/A   NEW ZEALAND           .45   FRENCH  ISLANDS, CARIBBEAN   N/A     SWTH KOREA         .24
                          LIECHTENSTEIN               .02   SPAIN                 .33   FRENCH ISLANDS, INDIAN       .09     SRI LANKA          .40
                          LUXEMB.IRG                  .18   SWEDEN                .60   FRENCH ISLANDS PACIFIC       .25     TAIWAN             .19
                          MACAD                       .16   SOJTH AFRICA          .46   GUATEMALA                    .58     THAILAND           .44
                          MALTA                       .15   UK                    .52   GUYANA                       .50     TDHIGA             .43
                          NAURU                       .00                               HAITI                        .45     TUNISIA            N/A
                          NETHERLANDS ANTILLES        .03                               HONDURAS                     .46     TURKEY             .40
                          OTHER CARIBBEAN             .00                               INDIA                        .52     URUGUAY            .25
                          ST. KITTS & NEVIS           .00                               ISRAEL                       .32     VENEZUELA          .39
                          ST. VINCENT                 .03                               JAMAICA                      .50     WESTERN SAHARA     N/A
                          VANUATU                     .00                               JORDAN                               WESTERN SAMOA      .42
                                                                                                                     N/A
                                                                                        LESOTKO                      N/A     ZAMBIA             .45
                                                                                        MALAWI                       .50     ZIMBABWE           .52
                                                                                        MALAYSIA                     .37
