NBER WORKING PAPFRS SE8IFS

LEARNING AND ThE VMIJE OF ThE Ffl4

Nobuhiro Kiyota]ci

Working Paper No. 3480

NATIONAL JREAU OF EN'1IC RFSEARC1
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, NA 02138
October 1990

This

paper originatnd with discussions with Andrew La and Craig MacKinlay,

and I am grateful for their helpful suggestions. I would also like to thank
the Institute for International Economic Studies in the University of

Stockholm for its hospitality, and Anat Admati, Margaret Bray, William Brock,
John Caspbell, Mark Gertler, Nils Gottfries, Ocnaid Hester, Blake LaBaron,

Kenneth Roff, Lars Svensson, vid Wehb, Ingrid Werner, Kenneth West,

Randall Wright and the participants of seminars at London Business School and
LEE. Financial support from NSF arid the LSE Financial Markets Group is

gratefully ac)cnciilndged. All remaining errors are niy n. This paper is

part of NBER's research prngram in Financial Markets and Monetary Ecornios.
Any opinions expressnd are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Workir Paper #3 480
Octbber 1990
LEARNING

AND •1 VALUE OF E FLRM

ABrRr
The paper studies under what conditions the value of the finn

occasionally increases for a while before it suddenly drops, like a "ly±ble".
We consider the environsent where the trend of net cash flq from a firm's
production depends on uncertain quality of a manager, and the manager is
occasionally replac.od by a new manager. People }cu whether the manager is

replacel, but they do not know the exact quality of the manager so that they

gradually learn about it. We show that, if the current manager is good, the

value of the fins tends to increase sore rapidly than the net cash flow
because people beccnne sore and sore optimistic about the current manager,

until the optimism disappears with sudden retire of the manager. The value
of the fins appears to contain a bubble because the value gradually deviates

from the present value of the current net cash flow until the deviation
disappears. We extend the basic so5.el to allow the firm to replaca
unsuccessful managers endogenously, and show that the value of the finn sore

freopently deviates upward from the present value of the current net cash
flow than downward.

Nobuhiro Kiyotaki
Peparthent of Economics, S479
LSE

Houghton Strest

London, WC2A 2AE

UNITED KING

I. Introduction

Stock prices appear to be very volatile, and some researchers suspect that

business psychology may play an important role.

One

candidate of such

extrinsic psychology is a speculative bubble, which pushes the stock price
above the fundamental value implied by expectations of future dividends until

the bubble crashes.

However, conditions for the existence of a rational

bubble are often very restrictive.

(See, for example, TIrole [1982). )

This

paper takes an alternative approach and asks under what conditions on the
fundamentals the value of the firm behaves like a bubble, that is. the value
of the firm tends to increase for a while before it suddenly drops.

In the environment we consider, the change of the net cash flow from a
firm's production depends on uncertain quality of a manager and noise, and the

manager is occasionally replaced by a new manager.

People know whether the

manager is replaced, but they, including the manager himself, do not know
exactly how good the manager is; they gradually learn about it by observing
the changes in net cash flow under the current manager. We can show that, if
the current manager Is good, people gradually become more and more optimistic

about the manager, and that the value of the firm tends to increase more
rapidly than the net cash flow, until the optimism disappears with sudden
retire of the manager.

The value of the firm appears to contain a bubble,

because the value gradually deviates from the present value of the current net

cash flow and then the deviation disappears. While this bubble—like deviation
of the value of the firm can be both upward and downward in the basic model.
we later allow the firm to replace the unsuccessful manager endogenously with

some fixed cost, in addition to the exogenous stochastic retirement (e.g..
sudden death) of the current manager. Then it can be shown that the downward
movement in the value of the firm will not last as long as upward movement on

2

average, because the firm will fire the current manager as soon as it finds

him not worth continuing.

The value of the firm more frequently deviates

upward from the present value of current net cash flow than downward, and that
the value of the firm tends to increase over time because of the truncation of
relatively inferior managers.

A similar story may be applied to replacement

of Investment projects rather than managers.1

There have been previous attempts to apply stochastic regime shifts and
learning to explain the abnormal behavior of asset prices. For example, Flood

and Garber [1980a] develop a model with a regime switch to explain the
movement of the price level; Flood and Garber [1980b[, Hamilton and Whiternan
[19851

and Flood and Hodrick

[19861

discuss identification and the

observational similarity between a bubble and fundamentals when the underlying

process of fundamentals may change in future.

Also, Wang [1989) develops a

continuous—time dynamic asset pricing model with informed investors,
uninformed investors and noise traders, showing that the uninformed investors'

learning about the gradually changing trend of the dividends increases
volatility and risk—premium of the stock returns, and Barsky and DeLong [1989]

empirically examines how much learning explains volatility of stock prices.
In the literature of foreign exchange rates, the peso problem is extensively
analyzed, where the seeming deviation of the exchange rate from fundamentals

can be explained by the anticipation of a regime shift in future.

Lewis

[1989a,b] and Tabellirii [19881, for example, use learning to explain the
apparent deviation and volatility.2 The value—added in the present paper is
analyzing the time series properties of the value of a firm under recurrent
shifts In the trend of the net cash flow rather than a once—and—for—all shift
and, also, to explain the shifts that are partly endogenous.
Section II develops the basic model where replacement of managers and shifts

in trend are exogenous.

Section III compares with the alternative

3

specifications one without learning and
are ignored.

the

other sisspecified so that shifts

Section IV extends the basic sodel to allow for endogenous

replacement of managers by the firs.

4

II. Model

Economy consists of s representative agent and many firms producing a
homogeneous product. Consider the net cash flow from the firms production

activity as sales of the product minus costs of employing factors of
production and purchasing investment goods. Suppose for now that the net cash

flow

follows the exogenous process

(1)

=

(2)

x =

y_ +
+

( t = (l—&t).zt
where

and

+

independently distributed over time.

zero mean and variances

and identically and

are mutually independent,

y

and

snd

are normally distributed with

The value of 6 is equal to 0 with
t

probability m and equal to 1 with probability l—m. For instance, imagtne that

the change in the net cash flow of the firm depends on uncertain quality of
the manager (trend component) p and noise
is good,

If

the quality of the manger

is positive and the net cash flow tends to increase, while the

cash flow tends to decrease with a bad manger.
previous manager stays

and

With probability a, the

is unchanged, while with probability I—it,

the manager is replaced 6=' and new random

is realized. Although later

we are going to analyze how the firm replaces unsuccessful managers, we assume

for now that the replacement of the manager is exogenous and that the

probability of the replacement is independent of the history of the
performance.

The representative agent is risk—neutral with a constant discount factor .

t

He observes the net cash flow and whether the manager Is replaced or not, but

does not observe the quality of managers nor the noise.

x

observes the history of

and

In other words, he

but not , nor c. In fact, we

assume the only information the agent has Is the history of y, x and &,

and

general knowledge about the structure of the economy. There is no tax and all
the values are measured in terms of the homogeneous product. Define the value

of the firm's productive capital as the sum of the value of equity and debt

net of the value of monetary assets held by the firm.
expectations, the value of the firm

(4a)

1'

(4b)

bt =

where

E[P1] =

at

Under rational

the beginning of period t satisfies

E[ 't+T ] + bt

Et(.] is the conditional expectations operator, conditional upon

Information at the period t, which includes the cash flow in period t,

and

The first term In the right hand side of

whether a shift occurs or not,

equation (4a) Is the expected present value of the future net cash flow which
is often called fundamentals.

The second term bt represents the effect of

extrinsic expectations about future value of the firm, called a speculative
bubble.

In order to concentrate on the fundamentals, we assume there Is no
speculative bubble:

(5)

bt = 0,

for all t.

Then, because Et(xt) =
we have

Et()

TE() and E(y1) =

(1-)

=

(6)
where

+

1T

(1—)(i—ir) mt'

The first term is the present value of the net cash flow

Et(,.Lt).

without the trend, and the second term is the effect of expected quality of
the manager.

In order to formulate expectations about the quality of the manager, we
assume the agent is a Bayesian learner.5

Suppose that the current manager

came to the firm at period s, while the current period is t, where s a t.
Since there was no replacement of the manager between period s and period t,

is the same as i,

which

and a means that the both sides are proportional.

The

the agent's prior probability density function of
Is also the same as c

(7)

exp [—(a/2)

(p)

where e = 1/cP

5

2
P

2

likelihood function f of the changes In the net cash flow under the current

manager (x,x+1,. -

(8) f(x,. -

xi)

.xtlPt)

is

exp {

- (a/2) nt(xt-pt)2
[

+

TS

It

where n t—s+1, a 1/c-2 and x = (1/n ) (Z x ).
t
t
t
rs

T

posterior

given

y

y

probability density function for

(x—x)2 I

}

then follows that the

the changes In the net

cash flow (x, •xt) is proportional to (7) times (8) as

,xt) =

- [(e+nte)/2]

exp
[

Therefore the posterior distribution of

—
[

(0tmXt)/(c-ta)

)2 ]

Is normal with mean m and variance

*

(a +n a )1, where

ty

tayxt)tay) =

E[)

(10)

and

Note that

ay(Yt_Yt_nt)/(ai.t+ntay).

are the only information necessary for the
and future net cash flow

distribution of manager's quality

conditional

on the information in period t.

This yields an explicit expression for the value of the firm at period t

(11)

Pt

=

ma
+

(1—s)

a )
(1-)(l-ir)(aL+nty

'ti't_n ).
t

The first term may be interpreted as the present value of an infinite stream
of the current net cash flow from production.
learning about the current manager.

value of the firm in this model.
manager is good and

The second term reflects the

Figure 1 illustrates the behavior of the

When the underlying unobserved quality of

is positive, not only the first term tends to Increase,

but also the second term tends to increase over time because the agent tends

to raise the assessment of the quality of the current manager with more
favorable observations.6 The second term appears to behave like a bubble,
because the absolute value of the second term tends to increase over time and

then suddenly crashes. Both terms of (11) are, however, fundamentals in the
sense that they come from intrinsic expectations of the future net cash flow
from production, rather than extrinsic beliefs about the value of the firm in
future.

We also know from (11) that the sensitivity of

a /a
y .z

02/a2 and it.
y

If

to ttn increases with

change in the net cash flow xt reflects more

managerial quality than noise, so that a/a is large, then

8

responds

substantially to a change in the net cash flow, because such changes are very

informative for guessing the underlying managerial quality.

If manager is

replaced Infrequently, so that m is close to unity, then the current manager

is more likely to stay and has more impact on the expected present value of
the future net cash flow.

III. Comparison to Two Alternatives

In order to evaluate the effects of learning, consider the case in which the

quality of manager

(12)

Pt =

is

(1—p)

directly observable.
1

Then the value of the firm is

___________
+ (l—)(l—m)

Since the second term is constant under the same manager, it does not look
like a bubble.

Recurring trend shifts with replacement of managers may

increase the volatility of the value of the firm, and the firm value will

deviate from the present value of current net cash flow.

The deviation,

however, will not tend to grow over time and then crash, unless we include
learning about the unknown managerial quality, as in (11).

(See Figure 2.)

The second alternative is when the true process of the unobserved quality of

the manager is (3), but a researcher misspecifies the managerial quality to
follow the AR(1) process:

(13)

=

Pt—i

+

c.
I

where

is distributed normally, independently, and identically with mean

zero and the variance (i—m2)c'2.

The variance and the auto—covariances of the

P

9

S

change in the net cash flow x are identical for the true systea (1.2.3) and
the misspecified system (1,2,13):

(14)

Var(x) =

However,

+ o, and Cov(xx+) = miti

e, for t s

0.

the Bayesian learning process for the unknown trend in the

miaspecified system is very different from that in the true system.

process of m =

(15)

E[z)

The

can be represented by Kalman filtering

m = it m1

+

z (xt

—

m1)

where (iT) satisfy v = Z/(Z+it2) and 2 = m2[))-v)22+i2it2]+U-m2)c'2.
think of 2 as the variance of

We can

conditional on time t—1 information, and

as

the weight of the unanticipated change in the net cash flow in revising the

expectation of the trend. Then the Implied process of the value of the firm
deviates systematically from the present value of current net cash flow, but

the deviation will not suddenly crash as in (11).

See Figure 3 for the

comparison. Therefore the researcher who specifies the trend to be AR(1) may

find it difficult to explain bubble—like volatile movements in the value of
the firs, since the variance-covariance of changes of net cash flow does not
reveal the true structure of the net cash flow.

If changes in the trend of

the net cash flow are not directly observable, the system might become
somewhat in between the basic model )ll) and the model (6,15), but this is a
topic for future investigation.

10

IV. Replacing

Managers.

One difficulty with our basic model is that it predicts both positive and
negative deviations of the firm value from the present value of the current
net cash flow.

But observations about the value of firms appear to suggest

more frequent upward deviations followed by crashes than downward deviations
followed by sudden upward jumps. Thus, we extend the basic model to allow the

firm to shift the trend of the net cash flow by replacing managers
endogenously8.

Suppose that the firm decides whether to keep the current manager or fire
him at the end of each period. Even if the firm decides to keep the manager,

the manager retires (or dies) with probability 1—s each period.

After the

manager either is fired or dies, the firm hires a new manager with a one—time

adjustment cost k in the beginning of the following period.

Here we assume

for simplicity that the adjustment cost does not depend on whether the
previous manager was fired or died.

All new managers look identical in cx

ante, but in cx post the trend of the net cash flow is different depending on

a match between his skill and the firm's environment9.

The net cash flow,

apart from the adjustment cost, is characterIzed by equations (1,2,3).

The

difference from the previous model is that the manager's quality changes
(t=1) when the previous manager Is fired in addition to a period he dies
exogenously. Also we assume all firms are free to replace managers but that
the adjustment cost of a firm increases with the number of firms who replace
managers in the economy.

In the steady state, the value of the firm depends on the number of periods
'I

the current manager has managed the firm (the age) n, the expected quality of

the current manager m1, and current net cash flow y. It satisfies Bellman's
equation

11

y

(16)

+

Max

{ Et(P(lmt+1,yt+i)Inew)_k.

ltEt[P(nt+l,mt+j,yt+j)IOld] +

(l_u)[Et[P(1.mt+jYt+i)Iflew]_k]

}

where Etixinewl means the expectation of x conditional on the information in
period t with a new manager, while Et(xlold] is the expectation conditional on

the current manager continuing. Equation (16) says that the value of the firm

at the beginning of period t is equal to the current net cash flow plus the

discounted maximized expected value of the firm in the next period with or
without replacement.

The first term in the braces Is the value with firing

the current manager and recruiting a new one.

The second term is without

firing the manager, where with probability a the current manager continues to
manage and gets older by one period, and with probability 1—it he dies and is
replaced exogenously.

= P(n,m,y)—(1—)y.

Define

It measures the deviation of the value of

the firm from the present value of the current net cash flow, when the manager
is n periods old and has the expected quality in.

Then the assumption of free

trial of new manager with the upward—sloping adjustment cost function implies

that the adjustment cost in equilibrium is equal to the value—added of
introducing a new manager

(17)

k

E U (a)]
I

where w =

yp

=

I

j

i

[(l+w) 1.'2
1

z] d(z)

and (z) Is the distribution function of the standard normal

distribution. The last equality comes from the learning equation (10) with
nt=l. Then Bellman's equation becomes

12

(18) J(m) =

Max{

0, s Et((1_)_lxt+1 +

= Hax{ 0,

mr[u_s)_lm +

J

Jn+i(mt+i)Iold]

J1[m

+

}

vchw+n)(w+n+fl)
wz]dt(z)J }

The second equality comes from the fact that when there is no change in the

manager, m+1 =

m+

ay(xt+i_et)/[a+(nt+l)e] by (10).

The value of the firm in period t with an n periods
expected quality m and current net cash flow

(19)

Pt =

P(ntmy)

=

(i-)1y

+

old

manager with

s
J(rs).

From (18), we know J(m) is a non—decreasing continuous function of m, and
non—negative because the firm always has a choice Of replacement. 10 Thus the

value of the fire is never below the present value of the current net cash
flow.

Also, from (17), the value of the firm immediately after the

replacement of the project is higher than the present value of the current net

cash flow by the ssgnitude k on average. 11

Therefore, the magnitudes of

upward jumps in the value of the fire tends to be smaller than downward
crashes caused by the exogenous death of a previously successful manager.

Figure 4 illustrates the value of the firs with endogenous replacement of
managers. When the net cash flow tends to be increasins with a good manager,
the value of the firs tends to increase sore rapidly than the present value of

the current •net cash flow with the appreciation of the manager.

The firs

chooses to keep his until he dies, and the death of the successful manager
causes a drop in the value of the firs. When the net cash flow is decreasing

with either a bad manager or a bad luck, the firs will keep the manager as
long as the option value

of the current manager is still positive.

13

But when

the evidence becomes

unfavorable enough so

that the option value

becomes no longer positive, the firm will decide to replace him for a new
manager. Since bad managers are more frequently fired before die than good
managers, good managers tend to stay longer than bad ones, and the value of
the firm tends to increase over time.

14

VI. Conclusion

In this paper we study theoretically conditions under which the value of the

firm is not only volatile, but also sometimes increases more rapidly than the
underlying net cash flow from production for a while then crashes.

We found

that the value of the firm appears to contain a bubble when the trend in net
cash flow occasionally shifta but is not directly observable so that an agent
learns only gradually.

One obvious question is how much this type of model

can explain empirically aspects of data which are difficult to explain with
existing models. We have to overcome a number of problems for such empirical
implementations. First, here, we study the relationship between the value of

the firm and the net cash flow from production, because our environment
incorporates the Modigliani—Miller theorem, which implies the dividend process
and the debt—equity ratio are indeterminate.

But data on the net cash flows

and the value of the firm are inferior relative to data on dividends and
equity prices. Second, we should study the relation between the aggregate and
the individual values of firms in order to explain fluctuations and growth of

the aggregate value of firms. Our hope Is that the results in this paper may
convince the reader that models like this and its potential generalizations
are worth pursuing.

15

1. Rogoff [1990] independently develops a similar model to analyze political
business cycle, i.e., replacement of manager of a country.

2. Froot and Obstfeld [1989] study a model where a stock price bubble depends
I,

on the dividend in a nonlinear way.

Although our model has similar aspects,

it explains where the deviation comes from and how it is related to learning.
Also. Hamilton [1988,89] develops an econometric model when researchers do not
directly observe the shifts in trend of aggregate variables.

3. In some literature,
and
call

trend includes all of y, i.e., the effects of both

But here, we call only

'trend or 'quality of manager", and

"noise".

4. This relationship is independent of the debt—equity ratio and dividend
policy by the Hodigliani-Miller theorem, and can be explained as follows.

Assume that the firm issues one type of equity and a one-period riskless
discounted bonds. The value of the firm at the beginning of the period is
=

where

and St are the price and amount of equity at the

beginning of period t, and

is the value of the firm's net bond position

(i.e., the value of the firm's bonds minus bonds of other agents that it

The net cash flow from production y is related to financial

holds).

transactions as follows
—

dtSt

+

st_dt)tst+it)

+

Bt8t+1

where dt is the dividend per share and

—

8t

=

0,

is the price of the one-period

discount bond which pays one unit of output at the beginning of period t+1.
This equation says that the excess of dividend payments over the net cash flow

16

from production is finanoed by either new equity issues at the post—dividend
price (the third term) and bond issues net of the bond repayment (the fourth
term). Expected utility maximization of the risk—neutral agent under rational
expectations implies

=

dt+Et[Psti[

and

=

. Applying

these and the

definition of the value of the firs to the cssh flow constraint, we get the
expression in the text. An unfortunate feature of our model, shared with some

other literature, is that the value of the firm is negative with positive
probability.

But we ignore this for now until Section III, where the

endogenous replacement virtually overcomes this probiem.

5. See DeCroot [1970) for a detailed discussion on Bayesian learning.

6. When the underlying trend .i

is

positive from period t—n+1 the term

on average grows proportionally with

while the denominator grows

less than proportionally with n.

7. Equation (11) might provide a rational to technical analysis, although
usually shifts in trend are not direotiy observable in technical analysis.

B. See .Jovanovio [1982] and Pakes—Ericson (1988) for the relationship between

learning and exits of firms.

The subsequent analysis builds from their

formulation.

9. Although a good match between a manager and a firs say provide bargaining
power to the good manager, we ignore the effect of the manager' s compensation
on the net cash flow.

10. The firs's choice of whether to continue or intentionally replace the

17

current manager, can be characterized by the reservation m strategy: continue
an n periods old manager if m a m(n), and fire the manager if m <

m(n), where

m(n) solves

0 =

(l—)

+J

n+i + /((w+n)(w+n+l))

We hope to show that J Cm) a J

n

n+l

z)d(z)

Cm) and m(n) a mCn+l) a 0.

In other words,

the option value of the current manager is an Increasing function of the
conditional variance of the expected quality, and thus a decreasing function

of the age of the manager.

Therefore, the reservation value of m for

replacing the manager is non-decreasing with the age of the manager. Another
issue of interest is how the slope of the adjustment cost function affects the

growth in the long run.

If the economy has a limited capacity to adjust so

that the adjustment cost quickly becomes large even when a small number of
firms replacing the managers, then only a small number of firms replace the
managers in equilibrium and average growth will be low.

11. With endogenous replacement of managers, the average increase in the value

of the firm is k, but the average equity price change is zero.

This is

because the value of an additional issue of bonds or equities is equal to the

adjustment cost by the cash flow constraint. For example, if the firm issues

debts to finance the adjustment cost k, the value of the firm (debts and
equities) will increase by k on average, while the equity price will not.

18

References

1. Barsky, R., and B. DeLong, 'Why
paper (1989).
2. DeGroot, H. ,
company (1970),

have stock prices fluctuated?" NB working

Optimal Statistical Decisions, New York, NY: McGrow—Hill book

3. Flood, 8. and P. Garber, 'An economic theory of monetary reform," Journal
of Political Economy, 88 (1980a), 24—58.

Market fundamentals versus price—level bubbles:
4. _________ and _________,
the first test,' Journal of Political Economy, 88 (l980b), 745—770.
5. ________ and 8. Hodrick, "Asset price volatility, bubbles, and process
switching," Journal of Finance, 41 (1986), 831—842.

and H. Obstfeld, "Intrinsic bubbles: the case of stock prices,"
NB working paper 3091 (1989).
6. Froot, K. ,

7. Hamilton, J. , "Rational—expectations econometric analysis of changes in
regime," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 12 (1988), 385—423.

8. ____________, "A new approach to the economic analysis of nonstationary
time series and the business cycle," Econometrica, 57 (1989), 357—384.
observable
of
and
C.
'The
Whiteman,
implications
__________,
self—fulfilling expectations," Journal of Monetary Economics, 16 (1985),
9.

353—373.
10. Jovanovic, B. ,
(1982), 537—551.

"Selection

and the evolution of Industry," Econometrica, 50

11. Lewis, K. , "Can learning affect exchange—rate behavior?" Journal of
Monetary Economics, 23 (1989), 79—100.
12. ___________, "Changing beliefs and systematic rational forecast errors with
evidence from foreign exchange," American Economic Review, 79 (1989), 621—636.

13. Fakes, A. , and 8. Ericson, "Empirical implications of alternative models
of firm dynamics," SSRI working paper (1988), University of Wisconsin—Madison.

14. Rogoff, K.," How often should elections be held?" mimeo (1990), University
of California, Berkeley.
15. Tabellini, 0. ,
Inquiry, (1988).

"Learning and the volatility of exchange rates," Economic

"On the possibility of speculation under
J. .
Tirole,
expectations," Econometrica 50 (1982), 1163—81.
16.

rational

"Asset prices, stock returns, price volatility, risk premium,
and trading strategies under asymmetric information," mimeo (1989), University
of Pennsylvania.
17. Wang, J. ,

19

LL

Q-)

L
U-

4, -

I

\\ \'\

4. —

-p

U4-

Q)

U-

I

