NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

ThE SU(XESS OF AOUISITIONS:
EVIDENCE F14 DIVSTIURFS

Steven Kaplan
Michael S. Weisbach

Workirg Paper No. 3484

NATIONAL JREAU OF EODNONIC RFSEARQ-t
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

October 1990

are grateful to Michael Barclay, Gene Fama, Paul Healy, Krishna Palepu,
Peter Pashigian, Ar1rei Shleifer, Robert Vishny, Jerry Zirman an seminar
participants at thicago, LSE, Rochester, an.i the SEC for helpful mnents.
Hick Reed provided excellent research assistance. We thank the Center for
Research in Security Prices (Kaplan), MERC ard the Jobn M. Olin Fairdation
(Weisbach) for financial support. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Financial Morkets and Monetary Ecencznics. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National &ireau of Econanic
We

Research.

NR Workin Paper 3484

tther 1990

ID F DIVI1DR

ThE SU(XES OF ACXUISITIONs:

ABSTRC

This paper sties a sanpie of large acquisitions ccmpleted between 1971

arid 1982. By the end of 1989, aouirers have divestal aiiist 44% of the

target caipanies. Usirg the accounting gain or loss reccqnizo by the
acquirer, press reports, and the sale price, we characterize the ex ncst
success of the divested acxiuisitjons and consider only 34% to 50% of

classified divestjtures as unsuccessful. cr.uirer returns arid total
(acquirer arid target) returns at the acquisition announcextnt are

significantly lower for unsuccessful acquisitions than for divestitures not
classified as unsuccessful arid for acquisitions not divested. These results
suggest that market reactions to acquisition annouricemants reflect

expectations of future profits and that unprofitable acquisitions are
reccqnized as such when initiated. Diversifying acquisitions are airrost four
times liore likely to be divested than related acquisitions. However, we do
not find Strong evidence that diversifying acquisitions were less successful
than related ones.

Steven Kaplan
Graduate School of Eusiness

University of Qiicago
1101 East 58th Street

iicago, IL 60637

Michael Weisbath
Siiron School

University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627

Introduction

1.

Acquirers often buy other companies only to sell them afterwards. Grimm's
Mergerstat Review reports that divestitures make-up at least 35% of mergers and acquisitions

transactions in the 1980s.1 In a more systematic study, Ravenscraft and Scherer (1987)
estimate that 33% of acquisitions in the 1960s and 1970s were later divested, while Porter
(1987) finds that over 50% of the acquisitions made by 33 conglomerate acquirers in "new"

or unrelated industries were later divested. These authors interpret the divestiture rates as
evidence that acquisition strategies, particularly diversifying ones failed to increase and

probably destroyed value. In light of such high divestiture rates, they question the typical

event-study results that the combined stock market return to acquirer and target
shareholders is positive [see Bradley, Desai and Kim (1988) and Jensen and Ruback (1983)].
In fact, Scherer (1988) concludes that " ... the implications of event studies have been
contradicted by historical evidence (p. 71)."
This view of divestitures (and acquisitions) as failures, however, is not the only

explanation consistent with high divestiture rates. Weston (1989) argues that acquirers sell

targets for a number of reasons which do not involve poor performance. For example, an
acquirer may sell a business it has improved or a business that once had synergies with the

acquirer's core business but no longer does. In these cases, both the original acquisition and
the sale could have increased shareholder value. In addition, relaxed antitrust enforcement
and financial innovations made in the 1980s made possible some business combinations that

were not viable previously. Some acquisitions that led to a relatively efficient allocation of
resources in the 1970s may no longer have been efficient in the 1980s when sales to related
buyers or leveraged buyouts became feasible [see Shleifer and Vishny (1990)].

1

See

Weston (1989) and W.T. Grimm's Mergersta: Review, 1989.
1

In this paper, we evaluate the extent to which divestitures in the 1980s represent
unsuccessful or failed acquisitions. Beginning with a sample of 271 large acquisitions
completed between 1971 and 1982, we follow the acquisitions and determine which are

subsequently divested. We find that 43.9% of the acquisitions have been divested by the end
of 1989. Whenever possible, we categorize divestitures as successful or unsuccessful

acquisitions using accounting data on the gain or loss on sale from the divestiture, divestiture
sale price, and the Wall Street Journal or business press article describing the divestiture.

The results suggest that many divestitures are not failures, expost. For example, of the

divestitures with a reported gain or loss on sale, 42% report a gain on sale; 44% report a
loss; and 14% report that the gain or loss is immaterial. Based on accounting results as well
as comments by reporters and managers, we classify only 34% of the divested acquisitions as
unsuccessful - that is, the reason for the divestiture appears to be performance-related.

Furthermore, in transactions that report a comparable sale price, targets are divested at
192% of their purchase price, which when adjusted for the increase in the S&P 500 index

over the same time period equals 90% of their purchase price and 143% of their market
value before the initial takeover announcement.
The view of divested acquisitions as failures questions the use of the stock market

reaction to the initial acquisition announcement as a measure of an acquisition's value. The
results for gain on sale and sale price, however, are generally consistent with the event-study

results that bidder returns are slightly negative, while combined returns to bidder and target

are positive. Targets appear to be worth less than the bidders pay, but more than the target
is worth before the takeover occurs. We note, however, that because our sample is limited
to one time period, our evidence is also consistent with the alternative explanation that
sellers of assets received fortuitously high prices for those assets in the 1980s thanks to

relaxed antitrust, financial innovation or some other reason not known at the time of the
acquisitions.

2

Accordingly, we further test the information content of the stock market reaction
to acquisition announcements by comparing the announcement period abnormal returns for
divestitures we categorize as unsuccessful with those we do not categorize as unsuccessful.

We find that acquirer returns and combined (acquirer and target) returns at the acquisition
announcement are significantly lower for unsuccessful acquisitions than the corresponding

returns for successful divestitures and for acquisitions that are not divested.

This last result has two important implications. First it provides some evidence
that the market evaluates managerial decisions in a sensible way based on their effect on
fundamental value. This distinction occurs in a situation where the nature of the news
revealed to all market participants is not obvious. Second, the result is consistent with
managers making acquisitions for non-value maximizing reasons. When they complete
acquisitions with large negative acquirer returns, managers ignore signals that the acquisitions
decrease acquirer shareholder value.2

As noted above, previous researchers have found higher divestiture rates for

diversifying acquisitions than for related acquisitions. In light of this evidence, they argue
that diversifying acquisitions were particularly bad investments. We consider this possibility
by distinguishing between related and diversifying acquisitions. We find large differences in

divestiture rates between diversifying and related acquisitions. Divestitures are almost four

times more likely when targets are not in businesses highly related to those of the acquirer

(i.e., the four most important lines of business of the acquirer and target do not have at least
one three-digit SIC code industry in common). Over 58% of these diversifying acquisitions

are divested compared to fewer than 16% of highly related acquisitions. Furthermore, 80%
of the divested units are sold to related (new) acquirers, sold to management groups, or spun

2

For more discussion of managerial motivation of firm decisions, see Marris (1963),
Demsetz (1983), Jensen (1988), Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1990), and Shleifer and Vishny
(1989).
3

off to shareholders. Only 20% of the targets divested are sold to (new) acquirers in
businesses not highly related to the divested unit.

The evidence on the success of diversifying versus related acquisitions is mixed.

We classify two of fifteen (13%) related acquisitions as unsuccessful compared to 35 of 93

(38%) diversifying acquisitions. This difference is significant at the 10% level. However, we
also find that 43% of diversifying and 40% of related divestitures register a gain on sale.
Finally, the stock market reactions to the announcements of diversifying and related
acquisitions are not significantly different.
This evidence seems only weakly supportive of arguments that diversification

programs decreased value, cx ante. In view of the small difference in the success rates of
diversifying and related acquisitions, we are more sympathetic towards alternative

explanations for the large difference in divestiture rates. If there is greater uncertainty about
potential synergies for diversifying acquisitions than for related ones, or if there is a real and
unrecoverable cost of integrating related acquisitions, divestiture rates would naturally be

higher for diversifying acquisitions than for related ones. The relaxation in antitrust policy
that occurred during the 1980s may also explain part of the difference in divestiture rates -diversifying acquisitions that were value-increasing in the 1970s could have become

dominated by newly-permitted related combinations in the 1980s.

Our results complement recent work on the cross-sectional determinants of stock
market reactions to acquisition announcements. Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1990) find that
acquirers in diversifying mergers have negative abnormal returns in the 1980s but not in the

1970s. The high divestiture rate of unrelated acquisitions to related buyers in the 1980s
suggests that by the mid-1980s, unrelated acquisitions were more likely to be pursued for the

benefit of managers, not shareholders. Asquith, Bruner and Mullins (1987) and Eckbo and
Langohr (1989) find that negative acquirer returns are associated with stock financing but

not with cash financing. In our sample, acquirer returns are negatively related to the use of

4

stock financing, but this relation is independent of acquisition success. This is consistent
with the argument that the form of financing in an acquisition provides a signal about the

value of the acquirer. It is also consistent with tax benefits (through interest deductions and
asset write-ups) as a source of value in acquisitions.

Our paper also complements several recent studies on post-acquisition

performance. Bhagat, Shleifer and Vishny (1990) find that hostile targets in the 1984 -1986

period are often broken up and sold to companies in related businesses. Healy, Palepu and
Ruback (1989) use accounting data to measure post-acquisition performance in 50 large

acquisitions in the period 1979 to 1983. They find an increase in industry-adjusted operating
cash flow return on assets (operating income as a fraction of assets) that is caused primarily
by an increase in asset turnover. The increase in return on assets is positively correlated

with the total excess return in the acquisition. Mitchell and Lehn (1990) examine a sample
of companies which made large acquisitions between 1982 and 1986. They find that firms
which receive hostile takeover bids are more likely to have made acquisitions to which the

market reacted negatively. They also find that acquisitions that are subsequently divested are
associated with negative acquirer abnormal returns.

Our comparisons of announcement returns to post-acquisition outcomes are
closest in spirit to, although somewhat different from those of Ravenscraft and Pascoe
(1989). They find that acquisitions with lower changes in operating margins and acquisitions
ultimately divested have significantly lower target abnormal returns, similar acquirer returns,

and slightly, but not significantly, lower combined returns. There are two potential reasons
our results differ from theirs. First, they do not impose a relative size criterion which
increases the noise in their abnormal return measures. Second, they do not explicitly
consider the ultimate success of divested acquisitions. Operating margins may not accurately
reflect the value of a company's assets.

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes our sample design and data

5

set. Section 3 presents our results on acquisition success. Section 4 explores the differences
between related and diversifying acquisitions. Section 5 summarizes and discusses the
results.

2.

Sample Design and Description
2.1. Sample Selection
Our initial sample of acquisitions comes from Mergers and Acquisitions magazine.

Beginning in 1971, Mergers and Acquisitions lists the largest completed deals of the year.

The number reported varies from 10 in 1971 to 100 in 1987.
We use several criteria to obtain the acquisitions in our sample. To restrict
ourselves to larger transactions whose post-acquisition histoiy is easier to follow, we

eliminate those transactions valued at less than $100 million in 1982 dollars. Second, we

require the acquiring company to have stock return data available on the CRSP tapes so that
we can measure the market reaction to the acquisition announcement. This eliminates
acquisitions by foreign and private buyers. Third, we eliminate acquisitions by insurance

companies, banks and railroads because they are regulated. Fourth, to improve the
likelihood that the stock market reaction to the acquisition announcement is not affected by

random noise, we require the purchase price of the target equity to exceed 5% of the market
value of acquirer equity twenty trading days before the first acquisition announcement. Fifth,
we consider only those acquisitions completed by 1982. This gives an acquiret at least seven

years to divest an acquisition. To the extent that some acquirers still own targets that they
will subsequently divest, our results underestimate the extent of divestitures. Such
measurement error will also bias our cross-sectional tests toward finding no relation between

In some of the data descriptions below, we report that some deals took place in 1969 and

1970. These deals made it into the Mergers and Acquisitions sample because they were
completed after the beginning of 1971 even though they were announced before 1971.

6

divestiture and announcement returns. Finally, we eliminate deals if the acquirer did not
obtain complete ownership of the target. Our selection criteria yield 282acquisitions.

2.2. Divestiture Information
For each acquisition, we examine Moody's Industrial Handbook, the Wall Street

Journal, annual reports and 10-K's to determine the subsequent history of the acquisition.
We determine whether the target is subsequently divested. We classify an acquisition as a
divestiture only if the acquirer divests all recognizable assets and product lines of the target.
Therefore, we do not classify the 17 observations in which targets are only partially divested

to be divestitures. If the acquirer still owns the target, but is subsequently acquired itself, we
follow the original acquisition under the new owner. The original acquisition is considered a

divestiture if the new owner separates the assets of the original target from the original

acquirer. When the acquirer spins-off all or part of the target to its public shareholders, we
classify the spin-off or carve-out as a divestiture, even if the acquirer maintains an equity

stake in the target. For each divestiture, we collect the Wall Street Journal article describing
the divestiture, and determine, if possible, the gain or loss on sale from the divestiture, the
selling price of the target, and the operating income of the divested unit.
In eleven cases, we cannot determine whether the acquirer still owned the target.
We excluded these acquisitions from our sample, leaving us with a final sample of 271

acquisitions. The first two columns of Table 1 list the number of acquisitions and the
relative size of the targets to acquirers by year. The table shows that the acquisitions in our
sample are concentrated between 1975 and 1982. Consistent with our sampling method of
using the largest transactions from the annual Mergers and Acquisitions magazine lists, the

median relative target size (the ratio of final target value or purchase price to preannouncement acquirer market value of equity) is 25.6%.

7

3.

Results
3.1

Frequency of Divestitures

Table 1 also documents that 43.9% of the acquisitions in our sample are divested

by 1989. Because we measure divestitures only through the end of 1989, this clearly

represents a lower bound on the total number that will eventually be divested. However, the
percentage of acquisitions divested varies only slightly with age: 47% of the acquisitions

before 1978, 44% of the acquisitions between 1978 and 1979, and 40% of the acquisitions
from 1980 to 1982 have been divested. This pattern suggests that additional acquisitions will
be divested, particularly those completed in the early 1980s, but the number probably will

not be large. The overall divestiture rate of at least 43.9% is somewhat higher than the 33%
estimated by Ravenscraft and Scherer (1987).

3.2. Measuring Divestiture Success

As we noted earlier, the high divestiture rate is certainly consistent with the view

that acquisitions are mistakes and do not increase value. However, the high ratemight occur
for any of several reasons. In this section, we attempt to determine the extent to which the
high divestiture rate indicates that the original acquisitions turned out to be poor
investments. We use two methods to classify whether divestitures were unsuccessful

acquisitions. First, we examine the reasons stated by the corporation and by the business
press at the time of the divestiture. We classify acquisitions for which the stated reason is
unsatisfactory performance as unsuccessful. Second, we use accounting data on the gain or
loss on sale of the asset when it is available. We consider acquisitions divested at a loss as
unsuccessful. These two measures enable us to classify 108 of the 119 divestitures.

We recognize there are several reasons that these measures may be flawed. First,
we do not have reasons or accounting measures for all divestitures in the sample --we tend
not to have reasons for smaller, less visible divestitures and accounting measures for

8

acquisitions that are sold in pieces. Second, firms can manipulate accounting numbers and
they may have tax and political incentives to do so. Finally, firms have a tendency to

understate and disguise mistakes they have made. For example, econometric evidence
indicates that firms regularly dismiss CEOs for poor performance, yet the firms rarely

announce publicly that they are doing so. [See Warner, Watts, and Wruck (1988) or
Weisbach (1988).J We proceed with these potential biases in mind.
The reasons announced by the press (usually the Wall Street Journal) for 103 of

the 119 divestitures are presented in Table 2. In those cases in which the firm gives a
different reason (usually change of focus or strategy) than the reporter (usually performancerelated), we rely on the reporter's judgment. Similarly, in the few cases the reporter gives
more than one reason including performance, we consider the divestiture to be performancerelated.4

The most common reason, used in 42%, or 43 of the 103 cases, is to change
corporate focus or strategy. Some of these undoubtedly are actually performance-related.
The second most common reason, used in 28% of the divestitures, is to finance subsequent

acquisitions or leveraged buyouts. In 21% of the cases, units are sold for performance-

related reasons. The four remaining reasons - antitrust, needing cash, defending against a
takeover, and receiving a good price - are infrequent, representing fewer than 9% of the
divest itures.

In many divestitures, the acquirer reports an accounting gain or loss on the sale of

the target. This provides a crude measure of the target sale price relative to the purchase

We stress that we rely primarily on the reason mentioned in the article, not on additional
data the article may provide. For example, if the article says, "XYZ Corp. will divest ABC
division at a loss on sale of $ 50 million. James Smith, a spokesman for the company, indicated
the divestiture was part of a plan to change the corporate strategy...," we count this as a change
in focus or strategy, not as poor performance. We count the reason as poor performance if the
article says, "Because of the poor earnings at ABC division, XYZ Corp. decided to sell ABC to
UVW Inc. XYZ said it would recognize a loss of $ 50 million on the sale."
9

price. A loss on the sale of a target signifies that the acquirer has sold the target for less
than the net book value of the target. In most cases, the net book value of the target will
reflect the purchase price of the target adjusted by subsequent investment in and
depreciation of target company assets. This is true as long as the original acquirer uses
purchase accounting for the acquisition and the original acquirer divests the target.
Accordingly, we record accounting gain or loss on sale only for those targets divested by the
original acquirer, and not for the cases in which the original acquirer is itself acquired.5

When an acquirer sells the target as the primary part of a package of assets, we record
whether the package is sold at a gain or loss.
We acknowledge that the accounting measure is imperfect because it does not

measure the value of the investment in the target precisely. Ills possible to recognize an
accounting gain on sale many years after an acquisition, yet have had negative operating

profits for a long time. In favor of the gain or loss on sale measure, we feel it is very
unlikely that acquisitions divested with a loss on sale are successful. A loss on sale indicates

that the acquirer has sold the target for less than its historical cost which does not control
for any expected appreciation over time. Furthermore, to the extent that it measures
divestiture price relative to original acquisition price, both market based measures,
accounting gain or loss on sale is superior to accounting measures of income which may be
affected by corporate transfer pricing and may not reflect market values.

We present the accounting measures in Panel 1 of Table 3. The divestitures are
roughly split -- 28 have a gain on sale while 29 have a loss on sale. In 9 cases, the selling

firms announced that it would not recognize a gain or loss on the sale. The results are
similar when the divestitures are divided between those accounted for as purchases and those

Overall, of the 119 divestitures, 82 are divested by the original acquirer, 8 by the original
acquirer after a leveraged restructuring; and 27, by the new owners of the acquirer and target.
In two cases, we cannot determine whether a new owner or the original acquirer completes the
divestiture.
10

accounted for as pooling of interests. Panel 1 of Table 3 also shows that the average pre-tax
accounting gain or loss is 12% of the purchase price. The averages are calculated from
fewer observations than the percent positive because we exclude divestitures that report only

the sign of the gain or loss and that include operations in addition to those of the original
acquisition. For divestitures that report only an after-tax result, we estimate the pretax gain
or loss as the after-tax gain or loss divided by one less the (U.S.) corporate tax rate in the
divestiture year.

The accounting measures suggest that approximately half of the divestitures were

performing poorly. This figure exceeds the 22% of divestitures which the press reports as

performance-related. The two measures may disagree for three reasons. First, as noted
above, firms tend to disguise poor performance (which should also show up in accounting

numbers, but to a lesser extent because of FASB requirements). Second, the press does not
always identify divestitures with a loss on sale as performance-related. Third, a number of
targets are not divested by the original acquirer making it impossible to use accounting gain

or loss on sale. This subsample of divestitures has a disproportionately small number of
poorly-performing acquisitions, because many of these divestitures occur shortly after

takeovers or buyouts and are sold to retire takeover related debt. We classify only two
takeover-related divestitures as performance-based.

When available, we also recorded the operating income or net income of the

divested unit reported by the press or the seller. For 69 divestitures, we could record

operating income (52 cases) or net income (17 cases). In 55 of the 69 cases, the measure of
income is positive. This suggests, again, that the divested units are not disasters. This
finding contrasts with Ravenscraft and Scherer (1987) who find that divested units have
negative operating income on average.

Panel 2 of Table 3 compares the sale value of the divestiture to the original
purchase price. This comparison includes targets that are divested by companies that have

11

acquired the original acquirer. Most of the units increase in value -- 44 of the 58 divestitures

with a sale value are sold for more than their purchase price. The mean return (increase of
sale value over purchase price) is 92% and the median is 52%.

Although the sale value relative to purchase price provides a rough benchmark of
the success of these acquisitions as investments, it is clearly flawed. As with accounting gain

or loss, sale value to purchase price does not include the interim cash flows paid from the

target to the acquirer. Unlike accounting gain or loss, the sale value to purchase price will
overstate the importance of additional investments made by the acquirer in the target. Sale
value includes these investments, while the purchase price does not. Similarly, the sale value

may not be directly comparable to the purchase price if the sale price does includes the
assumption of target debt.

In addition, the return measure using sale price is a nominal return. An
investment in the stock market over most of this period would have increased in value as

well. As a benchmark, we use the return an acquirer would have received if it had invested
in the S&P 500 (excluding dividends) instead of purchasing the target. This benchmark,
therefore, approximates the capital gain portion of an investment in the value-weighted index.

The returns relative to this benchmark are presented in Panel 3 of Table 3. Thispanel
indicates that the mean market-adjusted return is -11%; the median, -23%. This suggests
that the divested acquisitions are not, on average, superior investments; firms would have

done better if they had invested their money in the S&P 500 (excluding dividends). At the
same time, the divested acquisitions do not seem to be unmitigated disasters for the
acquirers.

Finally, if we are interested in measuring the improvement in the value of the
assets due to the acquisition, we should not include the value of the premium into our
calculations, since this premium reflects the market's expectation of the improvement. Panel
4 of Table 3 compares the sale value of the divestiture to the equity value of the target 20

12

days before the acquisition announcement. As in Panel 3, the sale price is deflated by the
return on the S&P 500 from the acquisition announcement until the divestiture. Panel 4

indicates that the mean market-adjusted return is 43%; the median, 7%. Acknowledging
again the crude nature of this comparison, the results are consistent with positive combined
returns for these acquisition.
Overall, the results in this section appear consistent with previous studies of the

returns to acquirer and target shareholders at acquisition announcements. These studies
(including our results that we report later) find that on average acquirer shareholders suffer

a small loss, target shareholders earn a positive return, while acquirer and target
shareholders combined earn a positive return when acquisitions are announced (during the
1970s and early 1980s).

We note that our evidence is also consistent with the alternative explanation that
market reactions did not reflect expectations of future improvements given information
available at that time, but that sellers of assets fortuitously received high prices for those
assets in the 1980s thanks to relaxed antitrust, financial innovation or some other reason.

3.3. Market Expectations and Acquisition Success
To this point, we have documented the performance of divested acquisitions. We
have argued that this casts a more favorable light on previous event-study results of the

average shareholder reaction to acquisition announcements. In this section, we test whether
acquisition success is related to acquirer and target shareholder returns when the acquisitions
are announced. A positive correlation would give additional support to the view that

announcement period returns measure are related to changes in underlying fundamental
values. In contrast, a negative or zero correlation would put this view into doubt.

3.3.1.

Methodology

13

To determine the market reaction to the acquisition announcements, we estimate
market model parameters using the period from -300 to -61 trading days before the first
acquisition announcement in the Wall Street Journal. We compute daily (percentage)

abnormal returns for both acquirer and target shareholders over the event period using these
parameters. We cumulate the daily abnormal returns to obtain cumulative abnormal returns
(CARs). For acquirers, we cumulate abnormal returns from five trading days before the
acquirer's first acquisition announcement through five trading days after the announcement

of the final bid. For targets (when available), we cumulate abnormal returns from five
trading days before the announcement of any bid on the target, again until five trading days

after the announcement of the final bid. This procedure follows the method used by
Bradley, Desai and Kim (1988), and Lang, Stulz and Walkling (1989).

Combined returns to target and acquirer shareholders are calculated as the sum of
the total dollar CARs for the acquirer and the target divided by the sum of the market value
of equity of the acquirer and the target twenty trading days before the first acquisition
announcement. Total dollar CARs are calculated by multiplying the acquirer and target
CARs by, respectively, the market value of the acquirer and target equity twenty trading days
before the first acquisition announcement.
We conduct our significance tests using (cross-sectional) announcement period

returns and standard errors. This tends to yield larger standard errors than those obtained
using estimation period returns as suggested by Patell (1976). Our decision to report twotailed significance levels is similarly conservative. We also note that we generally obtain

similar results when we use a shorter event window, when we eliminate firms that make other
announcements during the event window, and when we exclude acquisitions in which the

target purchase price is less than 10% of the market value of acquirer equity twenty trading
days before the first acquisition announcement.

14

3.3.2.

Non-Divestitures versus Divestitures

Table 4 presents CARs for the entire sample and for the divested and nondivested

subsamples. The first row presents the CARs. The acquirer CARs are negative, with a
mean of -1.49% and median -1.75%. The average CAR of -1.49% is significant at the 1%
level. The average CAR for the divestitures of -1.99% is lower than the -1.11% CAR of the
nondivestitures. The 0.88% difference, however, is moderate in magnitude and not
significantly different from zero ((-statistic =

1.0,

p=.31). Rows two and three present the

target CARs and combined CARs. Again, both of these measures are lower for divestitures
than for nondivestitures, but the differences are not significant. We note that the combined
CARs are significantly positive. This is consistent with previous event-study results that the
total returns to acquisitions are positive.

Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1990) argue that a more appropriate benchmark for

scaling acquirer returns is the size of the target, rather than the size of the acquirer, since
large acquisitions will have a greater impact on an acquiring firm's profits than small

acquisitions. Accordingly, we report the dollar value of acquirer CARs as a fraction of the
final purchase price of the target. This provides an estimate of the market's evaluation of
the present value of the acquisition to acquirer shareholders as a fraction of the acquisition

price. We also report the dollar value of combined acquirer and target CARs as a fraction
of the target value twenty days before the first acquisition announcement. This provides an
estimate of the total present value added by the acquisition.
We find that the average change in bidder value as a fraction of target value is
higher for divestitures than for nondivestitures, while the median is lower. This higher

average value is caused by a few outliers. The differences are not significant. Both the
means and the medians of the combined CARs as a fraction of target value are lower for
divestitures than for nondivestitures. Again, none of these differences are significantly

different from zero. Overall, our results show that divested operations have CARs that are

15

lower than, but not significantly different from those of nondivested acquisitions.

3.3.3,

Successful versus Unsuccessful Divestitures

As we have argued above, acquisitions are divested for a number of reasons, only

one of which is poor performance. In addition, acquirers may decide to keep some

acquisitions which are not successful. The appropriate test of the stock market's ability to
predict an acquisition's ultimate success is not to compare returns for divestitures to nondivestitures, but to compare returns to acquisitions that are considered unsuccessful expost
with those of other acquisitions.
In this section, we classify divestitures as unsuccessful if either the acquirer reports

a loss on the sale of the divestiture or the business press reports that the acquisition was a
mistake (at the time of the divestiture). We classify divestitures in the "no reason" category

if the acquirer does not report a usable accounting number for the divestiture and the
business press does not report the divestiture. All other divestitures are classified as "not
unsuccessful." We can classify 108 divestitures using this definition. We consider

approximately 34% (37 of 108) of these as unsuccessful. We recognize that this
classification system is imperfect. However, measurement error should lead to a bias against
finding any differences.

Table 4 also presents CARs for divestitures categorized as unsuccessful, not

unsuccessful, and no reason available. The results strongly suggest that the stock market can
differentiate unsuccessful and not unsuccessful acquisitions when they are announced. The
mean acquirer return is -4.42% for divested acquisitions classified as unsuccessful, compared
to -0.64% for divested acquisitions not classified as unsuccessful, and -1.11% for acquisitions

not divested. The mean acquirer returns are significantly lower for the unsuccessful

16

acquisitions than for the other two groups.6
The mean target CARs for the unsuccessful acquisitions are not significantly
different from those for acquisitions not considered unsuccessful and acquisitions not

divested. This is consistent with target returns being determined in a competitive market for
corporate control.7 The combined CARS are significantly lower for unsuccessful
acquisitions (0.83%) than for acquisitions not considered unsuccessful (4.59%) and
acquisitions not divested (4.13%). Again, the combined CARs for unsuccessful acquisitions

are significantly lower than those for the other two groups. In fact, the combined CARs for
the acquisitions labeled unsuccessful are not significantly different from zero.

Finally, Table 4 shows that the market reaction is similar for divested acquisitions

not classified as unsuccessful and for acquisitions that are not divested. Bidder, target and
combined returns of these two groups are not significantly different.

One potential objection to the results in TaNe 4 is that we arbitrarily interpret the
reasons for a divestiture given in the business press. We also compare excess returns for
divestitures classified according to the accounting definition of profitability. The results are
similar to the results in Table 4. Acquisitions sold at a loss have significantly lower acquirer

and combined CARs than acquisitions sold for a gain. CARs for divestitures sold for a gain
average 0.79% compared to CARs of -3.35% for acquisitions sold at a loss. Combined
CARs are 4.77% for gains, only 1.43% for losses. Again, these results suggest that the
market has some ability to forecast the future success of an acquisition.
We obtain qualitatively similar results using two additional classification schemes.

These classify divested acquisitions as unsuccessful, respectively, if: (1) the business press

6

These results and those which follow are qualitatively similar when we use median returns
instead of mean returns.

This result is somewhat different from the finding in Ravenscraft and Pascoe (1989) that
target returns are correlated with post-acquisition changes in profit margins.
17

notes that the divested acquisition is unprofitable or a mistake; and (2) the divested unit is
sold at a loss, or the business press identifies the divested acquisition as a mistake, or the
divested unit is sold for less than the purchase price.

3.3.4.

Multivariate Results

The results in Table 4 are univariate results. They do not control for other
potential determinants of abnormal returns. In Table 5, we control for two potential
determinants in regressions of announcement period returns against divestiture success. Our
cumulative abnormal return variables serve as the dependent variables in these regressions.

We include two dummy variables to measure the divestiture status of the acquisition. The
first (Divested-Unsuccessful) equals 1 if we classify a divested acquisition as unsuccessful and

0 otherwise. The second (Divested-Not-Unsuccessful) equals 1 if we classify a divested

acquisition as not unsuccessful. We do not include the 11 divested acquisitions we could not
classify.

Asquith, Bruner and Mullins (1987) and Eckbo and Langohr (1989) have shown

that announcement period returns to acquirers in mergers are significantly more negative for
acquisitions financed with stock than those financed with cash. Accordingly, the regressions
include a dummy variable, Stock, that equals 1 if some part of the acquisition is financed by
acquiring firm equity; the variable equals 0 if the acquisition is financed by cash and debt
only.

Bradley, Desai and Kim (1988) find that announcement period returns to
acquirers in tender offers are negatively related to the presence of multiple bidders; returns
to targets are positively related to their presence. Accordingly, the regressions include a
dummy variable, Multiple Bidders, that equals 1 if multiple bidders compete for the target
and 0 otherwise.

Regression AJ of Table 5 shows that acquirer CARs are 3.85% lower as a

18

percentage of acquirer value for acquisitions of targets classified as unsuccessful divestitures

(t=3.O) than for acquisitions that are not divested. This is significant at the 1% level. CARs
to acquirers in divestitures not classified as unsuccessful are 0.24% (t=0.2), but
insignificantly higher than CARs for acquisitions not divested. This is consistent with the

results in Table 4.
At the same time, there is a significant relation between the acquirer CARs and

the Stock and Multiple Bidder variables. Acquirer returns are 3.52% lower (t=4.0) for
acquisitions financed by acquirer stock than those financed solely by cash and debt. The

stock variable is unrelated to our measure of the success of the acquisition. This is
consistent with the form of financing in an acquisition as a negative signal of the acquirer's

value, rather than a negative signal about the acquisition. The negative coefficient on the
stock value may also reflect the absence of interest tax shields and asset write-ups.

Consistent with previous work, we also find that acquirer returns are 2.49% lower (t=2.3)
when multiple bidders are present.
Finally, it is worth noting that the constant term in regression A.1 is positive. This
implies that acquirers earn positive returns for uncontested acquisitions financed with cash or
debt and not classified as divested unsuccessful. Because only 20% of the acquisitions
involve multiple bidders, acquirer returns are still positive, at 1.07%, for cash and debt
acquisitions that are not divested unsuccessfully.

Regression A2 presents a similar regression using the target CARs. Target CARs
are negatively, but not significantly related to the two divestiture dummies. Like acquirer

CARs, target CARs are significantly negatively related to the Stock variable (-5.01%, t1.7).
Target CARs are positively and significantly related to the presence of multiple bidders

(12.25%, t=3.7).

Regression A.3 presents results for the combined acquirer and target returns as a
percentage of acquirer and target value. The results are similar to those in regression 1.

19

The combined returns to divestitures classified as "unsuccessful" are significantly lower, by

3.61% (t=2.2), than those of acquisitions not divested. CARs to acquirers in "Not
unsuccessful" acquisitions are again insignificantly higher than CARs for acquisitions not

divested (0.31, t=0.4). Stock acquisitions are associated with lower combined returns while
acquisitions involving multiple bidders are associated with higher combined returns.

Regressions A.4 and A.5 repeat the analysis of regressions A.1 and A.3 using the

acquirer and combined CARs as a percentage of target value. The results are qualitatively
similar for the divestiture success variables, but insignificant. Acquirer returns are 5.28%
lower (as a percentage of target value) in divested-unsuccessful acquisitions (t=0.9) than in
acquisitions not divested; combined returns are 9.41% lower (t=0.8).
In both regressions A.4 and A.S, the coefficient on the divested-unsuccessful

variable is affected by a few large acquirer stock price movements on the announcement of

relatively small acquisitions. To account for this, Panel B of Table 5 restricts the sample to

targets with an equity market value at least 10% of acquirer market value. The results in
regressions B.1 - B.3 are similar to those in A.1 - A.3. However, regression B.4 shows that a

divested-unsuccessful acquisition is associated with a return of -9.98% (t=1.9) to acquirer

shareholders (as a percentage of target value) not -5.28%. Similarly, in regression B.5 a
divested-unsuccessful acquisition is associated with a combined return of -14.67% (t=1.5)
not -9.41%.

Overall, the regression results in Table 5 are consistent with our earlier results.

The market returns to acquirer shareholders and the combined returns to acquirer and target
shareholders are significantly related to our classification of the success of the acquisition.

3.3.5. Implications of the Cross-Sectional Results

The results in Tables 4 and S suggest that stock price movements at the time of an

acquisition announcement are related to the acquisition's ultimate success or failure. In this

20

section, we examine the relation between the initial market reaction and the success of the

acquisition. For this test, we restrict the sample to those divested acquisitions we can
categorize as successful or not unsuccessful and estimate the following equation:
Probability ( Divested Unsuccessful) =

0.31

(6.6)

- 1.82 • Acquirer CAR
(2.8)

The estimated coefficient of -1.82 indicates that a 5% drop in the stock price on the
announcement of the acquisition is associated with a 9.1% increase in the probability that a
divestiture is unsuccessful rather than successful.
Considering the measurement error in our variables, the -1.82 coefficient is likely

to have been underestimated. To place an upper bound on the coefficient, we run a reverse
regression of the acquirer CAR on the divestiture success variable and obtain a coefficient of
-0.035 on the divestiture success variable. Inverting this, we obtain an upper bound of -28.6

for the sensitivity of the acquirer return to the probability of an unsuccessful divestiture. In
this case, a 5% drop would be associated with a 143% increase in the probability that a
divestiture is unsuccessful rather than successful.

The true predictive power of the information available to the market as estimated
by the coefficient for the acquirer CAR (regressed against acquisition success) lies

somewhere between -1.82 and -28.6. At the upper end of this range, the size of the
coefficient implies that the market had an impressive ability to forecast the ultimate success

of an acquisition. At the lower end, the market still had a non-trivial forecasting ability.
If the market had this information, the managers of the acquiring companies most

likely had it also. The costs of gathering the information probably would not have been

large. If managers thought the market had better information than they did, the managers
could have asked analysts or investment banks their opinion of the acquisition. (Analysts
following the acquiring company probably have some influence on the stock market

movements around these announcements.) In all likelihood, the managers have at least as
good information about their companies as the market.
21

Accordingly, one can make a strong argument that the managers knowingly made
negative net present value investments when they acquired companies that were subsequently

unsuccessful divestitures. This suggests the managers had other motivations for the
investment. These motivations are described by the managerial model of the firm originally
proposed by Marris (1963) and further developed by Demsetz (1983) and Shleifer and

Vishny (1989). We view our result that the market can predict the unsuccessful divestitures
as evidence in support of this managerial view of the firm.

4. Related versus Diversifying Acquisitions

Other authors (Porter (1987), Ravenscraft and Scherer (1987), and Morck,
Shleifer, and Vishny (1990)) have argued that diversifying acquisitions are more likely to be

managerially motivated than related acquisitions. Porter (1987) and Ravenscraft and Scherer
(1987) find evidence that divestiture rates are particularly high for diversifying acquisitions
and argue that this evidence implies that diversifying acquisitions were worse investments

than related acquisitions.
To examine this view, we classify each of our acquisitions as either related or

diversifying. To measure the relatedness of an acquisition, we use a rule based on the SIC
codes listed in Dun and Bradstreet's Million Dollar Directory. For each firm, the Million

Dollar Directoiy lists the SIC codes of the firm's businesses in the order of their importance

(as measured by sales). We focus on the SIC codes of the four most important businesses of

the target and acquirer. Ai acquisition is related at the four-digit level if one of the four
most important businesses of both the acquirer and target are in the same four-digit SIC
code industry. Similarly, acquisitions are related at the three- or two-digit levels if the
acquirer and target are in the same three- and two-digit SIC code industries, respectively.

Acquisitions are considered unrelated if none of the four most important businesses of the
acquirer and target share a two-digit SIC code. These definitions are similar to Morck,

22

Shleifer, and Vishny (1990) who consider firms to be related if they share a four-digit SIC

Code in one of the three most important four-digit SIC codes businesses.8 We refer to
acquisitions as highly related if the acquirer and target are related at the three- or four-digit

level and as diversiting if the acquirer and target are not related only at the three- or fourdigit level.

The divestiture rate differs dramatically and monotonically by our relatedness

measure. Table 6 shows that 60.2% of the acquisitions in which the acquirer and target do
not share a primary two-digit SIC code are divested; 55.6% in which they share a two-digit

SIC code; 26.3% in which they share a three-digit SIC code; and, only 13.3% in which they

share a four-digit SIC code. The divestiture rates of the unrelated and two-digit acquisitions
are significantly different from the rates of the three- and four-digit acquisitions at the 1%
level.9 The divestiture rates of unrelated and two-digit acquisitions are not significantly

different from one another at conventional levels; nor are the divestiture rates of the threeand four-digit acquisitions.

Because more of the acquisitions in 1981 and 1982 are related -- 52% versus 69%
for acquisitions before 1981 -- it is possible that the difference in divestiture rates by

relatedness occurs only because a shorter time has elapsed since the highly related
acquisitions were completed. To test this possibility, we estimate a linear probability model
in which the dependent variable equals one if the acquisition is divested, zero otherwise.10

As independent variables, we include variables (1) Diverse, that equals one if the acquisition

8 We obtain similar results when we classify acquisition relatedness using Standard and
Poor's Register of Corporations which lists all SIC codes in which a firm produces. [The Million
Dollar Dfrectoi'y only lists the six most important SIC codes.] This rule classifies acquisitions as
diversifying when the target and acquirer do not share any two-digit SIC codes.

Significance levels are calculated using chi-square tests with one degree of freedom.

10 The results are qualitatively identical using a logit specification. We present the linear
probability model for ease of interpretation.
23

is diversifying (two-digit or no-digit match), zero otherwise; (2) D1977, that equals one if
the acquisition occurs before 1978, zero otherwise; and (3) D1980, that equals one if the
acquisition occurs between 1978 and 1980, zero otherwise:

Prob (Divest) =

Constant Diverse

0.14
(2.2)

Coeff.

(t-stat)

D1977

D1980

+ 0.42

+ 0.04 + 0.03

(7.1)

(0.7)

R2 =

0.17

(0.8)

These estimates imply that acquisition relatedness rather than age is the primaiy determinant
of whether an acquisition is divested. Diversifying acquisitions are 42% more likely to be

divested than related acquisitions (significant at 1% level). In contrast, both variables for
acquisition completion date are small and insignificant.

While the overall divestiture rate in our sample of 43.9% is slightly higher than the
33% estimated by Ravenscraft and Scherer (1987), the relative frequency of divestitures of
diversifying (versus related) acquisitions in our sample appears to be much higher.

Ravenscraft and Scherer (1987, p. 180) estimate that divestitures of conglomerate
acquisitions (no two-digit match) are only 12% more likely than those of highly related

horizontal acquisitions (four-digit match). Our results for unrelated acquisitions appear to
be more in line with those of Porter (1987) who finds that approximately 53% of the
acquisitions in "new industries" and 74% of the acquisitions in "unrelated new fields by 33

conglomerate acquirers are later divested. Because Porter's definition of "unrelated new
field" or "new industry," is different from ours, we cannot compare our results directly to his.

4.1

Purchasers of Divested Units

The strong relation between divestiture rate and relatedness in our sample is
consistent with an increase in relatedness and a deconglomeration in the 1980s. However,

this is true only if the divested units are not resold to unrelated acquirers. Table 7 addresses
this possibility by classifying the buyers of the divested divisions in our sample. Only 21 of

105, or 20%, of the divestitures we can classify are sold to buyers that are not highly related
24

to the divested units.11 In contrast, 43% of the divestitures are sold to highly related

acquirers, 22% are sold to management groups, 12% are spun off, and 3% are liquidated.
The results in Tables 6 and 7 are consistent with an undiversifying or
deconglomeration of American corporations in the 1980s. Table 6 shows that 104 of the 177
(59%) diversifying or not highly related acquisitions are divested by 1989. In the 92 cases we
can identify, only 21, or 23%, of the diversifyingacquisitions that are divested are sold to

companies that do not share a three- or four-digi SIC code with the unit. If this is typical,
45% of the diversifying acquisitions in our sample are no longer in diversified corporations
by 1989. (This calculation ignores cases where the unit is kept and possibly expanded while

other units in the corporation are sold, again undiversifying the corporation.) These
calculations support the view that there has been a shift in the structure of American
corporations towards increased relatedness since 1980.

4.2

Success of Diversifying and Related Acquisitions

There are several potential explanations for the large difference in the divestiture

rate between acquisitions that are related and those that are not. First, if diversifying
acquisitions are more likely to be bad acquisitions than related ones, diversifying acquisitions

will be divested more often for performance reasons. Alternatively, if there is a real and
irrecoverable cost to integrating related mergers (such as changing product names or
integrating functional areas) that is incurred immediately after the acquisition, divestitures of

related units will be less likely. Third, before 1981 and the Reagan Administration, related
acquisitions were strongly discouraged. Acquirers of unrelated businesses may have hoped to
increase value by improving management, improving systems, improving access to capital

markets, etc. In the 1980s, with relaxed antitrust as well as more accessible and innovative

In 14 divestitures, we could not determine the primary business (or the identity) of the
buyer.
25

capital markets, assets are worth less under the control of unrelated owners than under
related or specialized owners.
The evidence on the success of diversifying versus related acquisitions is mixed.

Among the acquisition we classify, we consider two of fifteen (13%) related acquisitions as
unsuccessful compared to 35 of 93 (38%) diversifying acquisitions. This difference is

significant at the 10% level (chi-square test). At the same time, two of five (40%) and 26 of
61(43%), respectively, of diversifying and related divestitures register a gain on sale. This
difference is not significant.

To measure whether expected future profits were different for diversifying and

related acquisitions, we also compare the excess returns at the acquisition announcements.
Acquirer returns at the acquisition announcement are -1.46% for all diversifying acquisitions;

-1.56% for related acquisitions. Combined acquirer and target returns are 3.53% and 4.33%,
respectively. The differences are not significant. Among divested acquisitions, acquirer
announcement returns are -2.07% for diversifying acquisitions; -1.42% for related

acquisitions. Combined acquirer and target returns are 3.24% and 4.25%, respectively.
Again, the differences are not significant. The results for median returns are qualitatively
similar.

We do not find large differences in the average performance of diversifying and

related acquisitions. While some of the less successful acquisitions in our sample are
diversifying (United Technologies and Mostek, or Armco and NN Corporation), so are some

of the more successful ones (IC Industries and Midas, or Westinghouse and Teleprompter).
This evidence provides surprisingly weak support for arguments that diversifying acquisitions

decreased value, cx ante. Iii view of the small difference in the success rates of diversifying
and related acquisitions, we are more sympathetic towards non-performance based
explanations for the large difference in divestiture rates.

26

5. Summary and Discussion
This paper documents that a substantial fraction, almost 44%, of a sample of large
acquisitions completed in the 1970s and early 1980s have been divested in the 1980s. Given
the commonly held view that divestitures represent failure, the high frequency of divestitures

appears to contradict event-study evidence that finds positive combined acquirer and target
returns in acquisitions. Our results, however, suggest that many divested acquisitions were

not failures. Only 44% of the acquirers who report an accounting result for the divestiture
report a loss on sale. The remaining 56% report a gain or no loss. Similarly, when we can
compare a sale price to a purchase price for a divested unit, we find that most units are sold
for more than they cost. Deflated by the S&P 500, the average sale price of these divested
units is 90% of the purchase price - negative, but apparently not the failure suggested by

previous work. Furthermore, the sale price (deflated by the S&P 500) averages 143% of the
target's pre-takeover market value. Targets appear to be worth less than the bidders pay, but

more than the target is worth before the takeover occurs. The results for gain and loss on
sale as well as the sale price, therefore, are consistent with event-study findings of small

negative returns to acquirers and positive combined returns to acquirers and targets.
Because our sample is limited to one time period, however, this evidence is also consistent
with the alternative explanation that sellers of assets received fortuitously high prices for

those assets in the 1980s thanks to relaxed antitrust, financial innovation or some other
reason not known at the time of the acquisitions.
Our cross-sectional results further reconcik the high divestiture rates with the

event-study evidence. Acquirer returns and combined (acquirer and target) returns at the
acquisition announcement are significantly lower for divestitures we classify as unsuccessful

than the corresponding returns for divestitures we do not classify as unsuccessful and for

acquisitions that are not divested. This last result has two implications. First, in a setting
where the nature of the news being revealed is not initially obvious, our results suggest that

27

stock market prices do react to fundamentals. Second, it suggests that acquisitions that
ultimately prove unsuccessful are considered poor investments by the market when they are

announced. If management has at least as good information as the market about their own
companies, then they made these poor investments despite knowing their poor quality.

Diversifying acquisitions are divested much more often than related ones. Almost
60% of those acquisitions in which the acquirer and target are not highly related have been
divested. In contrast, fewer than 20% of the highly related acquisitions have been divested
over the same time period. The evidence on the success of diversifying versus related
acquisitions, however, is mixed. We classify two of fifteen (13%) related acquisitions as

unsuccessful compared to 35 of 93 (38%) diversifying acquisitions. At the same time, we
find that 43% of diversifying and 40% of related divestitures register a gain on sale. Finally,
the stock market reactions to the announcements of diversifying and related acquisitions are
not significantly different.

These results suggest that diversifying acquisitions in the 1970s (and early 1980s)

increased the combined value of the target and acquirer relative to their next most highly

valued use. Possible sources of that value would include tax benefits, reduced corporate
overhead, improved management systems, and undervaluation. In view of the small
difference in the success rates of diversifying and related acquisitions, we are more
sympathetic towards non-performance-based explanations for the large difference in

divestiture rates. In the 1980s, with relaxed antitrust enforcement, improved information
systems, and more active capital markets, a related acquirer arguably brings more value to
(or pay more for) a target than a diversifying one.

28

Refesaxxz
Alexander, G., P. G. Benson, and J. Kampmeyer (1984), "Investigating the Valuation Effects
of Announcements of Voluntary Corporate Selloffs," Journal of Finance, 503-517.

Asquith, P., R. Bruner and D. Mullins (1987), "Merger Returns and the Form of Financing,"
working paper, Harvard Business School.
Bhagat, S., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1990) "Hostile Takeovers in the 1980s: The Return
to Corporate Specialization," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity:
Microeconomics, 1 -72.

Bradley, M., A. Desai, and E. Kim (1988), "Synergistic Gains from Corporate Acquisitions
and their Division between the Shareholders of Target and Acquiring Firms,"
Journal of Financial Economics, 21, 3-40.

Demsetz, H. (1983), "The Structure of Ownership and the Theoiy of the Firm," Journal of
Law and Economics, 26, 375-393.
Eckbo, E. and H. Langohr (1989), "Information Disclosure, Method of Payment, and
Takeover Premiums: Public and Private Tender Offers in France," Journal of
Financial Economics, 24, 363-404.
Heaty, P., K. Palepu and R. Ruback (1990), "Do Mergers Improve Corporate Performance?"
working paper, Sloan School, M.I.T.
Jam, P. (1985), "The Effect of Voluntary Sell-off Announcements on Shareholder Wealth,"
Journal of Finance, 209-224.

Jarrell, G., J. Brickley, and J. Netter (1988), "The Market for Corporate Control: The
Empirical Evidence Since 1980," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2, 49-68.
Jensen, M. (1988), 'Takeovers: Their Causes and Consequences," Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 2, 21-48.

Jensen, M. and R. Ruback (1983), 'The Market for Corporate Control: The Scientific
Evidence," Journal of Financial Economics, 11, 5-50.
Klein, A. (1986) 'The Timing and Substance of Divestiture Announcements: Individual,
Simultaneous, and Cumulative Effects," Journal of Finance, 685-97.
Lang, L., R. Stulz and R. Walkling (1989), "Managerial Performance, Tobin's q, and the
Gains from Successful Tender Offers," Journal of Financial Economics, 24, 137154.

Lichtenberg, F. (1990), "Industrial Dc-diversification and its Consequences for
Productivity," working paper, Columbia University Graduate School of Business.
Marris, R. (1963), "A Model of the Managerial Enterprise," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
77, 110-120.

29

Mitchell, M. and K. Lehn (1990), "Do Bad Bidders Become Good Targets?" Journal of
Political Economy, 98, 372-398.
Morck, R., A. Shleifer and R. Vishny (1990), "Do Managerial Motives Drive Bad
Acquisitions?" Journal of Finance, 45, 31-48.

Patell, J., "Corporate Forecasts of earnings per share and stock price behavior Empirical
Tests," Journal of Accounting Research, 14, 246-276.
Porter, M. (1987), "From Competitive Advantage to Corporate Strategy," Harvard Business
Review, 43-59.

Ravenscraft, D. and G. Pascoe (1989), "Can the Stock Market Predict Merger Success?"
working paper, University of North Carolina.
Ravenscraft, D. and F. M. Scherer (1987), Mergers, Selloffs and Economic Efficiency,
Washington: Brookings Institution.
Ravenscraft, D. and F. M. Scherer (1988), "Divisional Sell-off: A Hazard Function Analysis,"
working paper, University of North Carolina.

Scherer, F. M. (1988), "Corporate Takeovers: The Efficiency Arguments," Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 2, 69-82.
Servaes, H. (1988), "Tobin's q, Agency Costs, and Corporate Control: An Empirical Analysis
of Firm-Specific Parameters," working paper, Purdue University.
Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny (1988), "Value Maximization and the Acquisition Process," Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 2, 7-20.

Shleifer, A and R. Vishny (1989), "Managerial Entrenchment: The Case of Firm-Specific
Assets," Journal of Financial Economics, 25, 123-139.
Shleifer, A and R. Vishny (1990), "Takeovers in the 1980s: The Return to Specialization,"
forthcoming, Science.

Warner, J., R. Watts, and K Wruck (1988) "Stock Prices and Top Management Changes,"
Journal of Financial Economics, 20, 461-492.
Weisbach, M. (1988) "Outside Directors and CEO Turnover," Journal of Financial
Economics, 20, 431-460.

Weston, J. F. (1989), "Divestitures: Mistakes or Learning," Journal of Applied Corporate
Finance, 2, 68-76.

30

Table 1

Number of acquisitions', relative sizes of acquirer and target, and number and percentage of subsequent
divestitures byyear of acquisition completion. Sample consists of 271 Acquisitions of at least 100 million 1982
dollars.

Year

Number of
Acquisitions

Average Target
Value as Percentage
of Acquirer Value

Number
Divested

Percentage
Divested

1971

8

35.6%

5

62.5%

1972

4

28.9

1

25.0

1973

9

22.3

7

77.8

1974

7

19.6

2

28.6

1975

7

34.1

4

57.1

1976

16

19.8

8

50.0

1977

30

26.1

12

40.0

1978

39

28.0

16

41.0

1979

45

28.1

23

51.1

1980

30

25.7

12

40.0

1981

34

28.4

17

50.0

1982

42

24.6

12

28.6

Total

271

25.6

119

43.9

• Acquisition sample is taken from Mergers and Acquisitions magazine lists of the largest completed deals of
the year from 1971 - 1982. Excludes foreign company, insurance company, bank, and railroad acquirers. All
acquirers have stock returns available from CRSP. Value of transaction exceeds 5% of the equity market value
of the acquirer twenty trading days before the initial acquisition announcement.

Acquisitions are considered diversi'ing or not highly related if one of the four most important business of
the acquirer and target are not in the same three-digit or four-digit SIC codes industry according to Dun and
Bradstreet's Million Dollar Directory.

Target value is the final purchase price of the target. Acquirer value is the equity market value of the
acquirer twenty trading days before the initial acquisition announcement.

Table 2
REASONS FOR DIVESTITURES
Announced reasons for 101 divestitures of acquisitions of at least 100 million 1982 dollars acquired between
1971 and 1982.

Reason

Number of
Divestitures

Change focus or corporate strategy

43

Unit unprofitable or mistake

22

Saic to Financc Acquisition or
Leveraged Restructuring

29

Antitrust

2

Need cash

3

To defend against takeover
Good Price
Divestitures with reasons

3
103

The reasons are either announced publicly by the corporation or inferred by reporters from the Wall Street
Journal, Fortune, or Business Week. When a firm's announcement differs from the reporter's assessment, we
use the reporter's assessment.

Table 3
ACCOUNTING GAIN AND LOSS, AND SALE VALUE RELATIVE TO PURCHASE AND PRICE
Divestitures by accounting gain or loss on sale, and by relation of sale value to purchase price and pre-takeover
price for divcstiturcs from a sample of 271 acquisitions of at least 100 million 1982 dollars completed between
1971 and 1982.

>0

=0

<0

N

Mean

Accounting gain or loss on sale as a
percentage of purchase price

28

9

29

66

12%

a. Purchase Acquisitions"

22

7

21

50

b. Pooling Acquisitions"

6

2

8

44

0

a. Loss on Sale

5

b. Gain on Sale

Median

N

0%

58

9%

0%

44

16

22%

0%

14

14

58

92%

52%

58

0

7

12

-5%

-19%

12

22

0

2

24

146%

107%

24

19

0

39

58

-11%

-23%

58

a. Loss on Sale

1

0

11

12

-43%

-51%

12

b. Gain on Sale

12

0

12

24

16%

5%

24

27

0

22

49

43%

7%

49

2

0

10

12

-30%

-36%

12

14

0

5

19

110%

405

19

J

1.

2. Percentage change in sale value of
divestiture relative to purchase_priccc

3. Percentage change in sale value of
divestiture deflated by S&P 500 relative
to purchase priced

4. Percentage change in sale value of
divestiture deflated by S&P 500 relative
to purchase priced

a. Loss on Sale

b. Gain on Sale

Accounting gain or loss on sale is gain or loss reported when ortginal acquirer divests a target. Includes targets divested in several pieces
or combined with other assets as long as gain or loss on sate is reported. Means and medians are calculated using pretax gain or loss on
sale. If pretax gain is not reported, pretax gain is estimated as the after-tax gain divided by one minus the corporate tax rate in effect the
year of the divestiture.

Purchase acquisitions are acquisitions accounted for as purchases. Pooling acquisitions are accounted for using pooling of interests
accounting.

Measures the reported sale or divestiture price of a target relative to the acquisition price. A target sate price is included only if the
target is sold at one time and in one piece.
Measures the reported sale or divestiture price of a target deflated by the S&P 500, relative to the acquisition price. A target sale price
is included only if the target is sold at one time and in one piece.

Measures the reported sale or divestiture price of a target deflated by the S&P 500, relative to the target equity value 20 days before
the lit-st acquisition announcement. A target sale price is included only if the target is sold atone time and in one piece.

Table 4

+
Target

209

N:'

2.21

209

Median:

N:

Median:
N:

Mean:
SId. Error

Median:
N:

209

12.24
4.47
13.36
15.27
113

5.40

14.19

-4.48
152

-5.69
271

2.84

-9.03

96

9.94
7.40
10.72

ItO

-7.35
3.15
-6.90

96

186

2.58
113

0.78

334

96

2108

0.87

4.13

27.83
1.80
26.08
113

2.11

-829

039

Mean:
Std. Error

3.77

Mean:

Std. Error

Median:

26.90
1.40
24.76

Mean:

SId. Error

152

-1.77

25.81
2.21

-2.65
37

-173
119

-1.75
271

Median:
N:

11

22.76
56

669

8.60
433
30

19.04

936

71

10

-39.18
54.58
- 4.58

It

1570
-16.48

380
-1.42

-18.43

-2.75

-0.65
10

3.88
3.87

30.81
10

5.77

34.50

5.23
.987
37

56

4.59
104
5.06

23.54
2.90
19.86
56

71

-2.48%
2.03
-4.18

No reason

-12.90

30

083
0.82
103

19.22
34)

410

26.13

-125

-0.64%
0.71

L28

442%

-1.99%
0.63

0.61

-1.11%

-1.49%
0.44

Mean:
Sld. Error

Divested Acquisitions

Not unsuccessful

Acquisitions

Acquisitions

Acquisilions
Unsuccessful

All Divested

All Non-Divested

All

'The number of observations
fete

mws requiring changes in target values is smaller than the rest of the sample because some targets were not traded publicly.

Acquisitions are clasailted as 'Unsuccessful" if either the acquirer reports a loss on the sale of the acquisition or ii the business press reports that the acquisition was eXpOSS a mistake.
for
Acquisitions in the "Not Unsuccessful" categoryare divested acquisitions that either have a gain or no loss on sale, or arc not referred to as mistakes by the business press. Acquisitions
which we have no information on gain or loss on sale, and no business press description of the divestitureare classified as 'no reason."

sir

• Cumulativeabnormal returns are calculated from live
trading days before the day of the inilial Wall StreetJournal announcementof the acquisition until live trading days after the titsal bid.
Relurns
computed using parametersfrom a market model estimated from 300 to 61 trading days before the initial annotinccmenl. Median cumulative abnormal returns are in brackets
and the number of observationsper categoryis in parentheses.

Target Value

Ch. Acquirer

Target Value

Ch. Acquirer Value

Ch. Acquirer

+ Target
Acquirer + Target

Target Value

Ch. Target Value

Acquirer Value

Ch. Acquirer Value

CumulativeAbnormal
Return

Mean and median cumulativeabnormal returns' at announcementof original acquisition by diveatiLure status and divestituresuccesabfor 271 Acquisitions of at least II)) million 1982 dollars
completed 1971-1982.

CUMULATIVE ABNORMALRETURNS BY DIVESTITURE STATUS AN!) SUCCESS

Table 5

REGRESSIONS OF CUMULATIVE ABNORMAL RETURNS ON ACQUISITION AND DIVESTITURE CI-IARACFERISTJCS
Regressions of cumulative abnormal returns on acquisition and divestiture characterislies including whether acquisition is described as
unsuccessful, whether acquisition is divested, form of payment in original acquisition, and whether original acquisition attracted multiple
bidders for a sample of 271 acquisitions of least 100 million 1982 dollars completed between 1971 and 1982. (t.statistics arc in
parentheses.)
Cumulative
Abnormal

Constant

Return

Divested
Divested
Stock
Unsuccessfult Nol
Unsuccessfulc

Multiple
Bidders"

R-Squarc

N

A. Target market value is at least 5% of acquirer market value.

1. Ch. Acquirer Value
Acquirer Value

2. Ch. Target Value
Target Value

3. Os. Acquirer+Target
Acquirer+Target

1.57

-3.85

0.24

-3.52

-2.49

(1.9)10

(30)'

(0.2)

(4.0)'

(2.3)'

260

.10

199

.09

199

-266
(0.5)

.04

260

0.68
(0.1)

04

199

.11

224

.15

174

.12

174

28.34

-0.75

-4.54

-5.01

12.25

(9.4)'

(0.2)

(1.4)

(1.7)t0

(37)'

5.29

-3.61

0.31

-2.90

3.61

(4.3)'

(22)

(0.2)

(2.3)'

(2.7)'

4. Cl. Acquirer Value

-0.91

.523

5.51

Target Value

(0.2)

(0.9)

(1.1)

29.78
(3.6)1

-9.41

3.79

(0.8)

(0.4)

(2.7)'

5. Ch. Acquirer+Target
Target Value

.10

-12.37

(2.9)'
-22.26

B. Target market value is at least 10% of acquirer market value.

1. Ch. Acquirer Value

1.90

-4.45

0.16

-3.88

-2.39

Acquirer Value

(2.O)t0

(3.1)'

(0.1)

(3.9)'

(2.0)

29.41

-1.68
(0.4)

-2.65
(0.8)

-7.34

15.22

(9.4)1

(2.3)

(4.4)t

0.33
(0.2)

-3.26

4.56

(2.4)

(3.1)'

2.12
(0.5)

-11.04

0.39
(0.1)

.06

224

(3.0)'

6.20
(0.8)

-2312
(3.2)'

10.84
(1.4)

.09

174

2. Ch. Target Value
Target Value

3. Ch. Acquirer+Target
Acquircr+Target

5.92

-4.32

(4.4)1

(2.4)

4. Ch. Acquirer Value
Target Value

1.18

-9.98

(0.3)

5. Ch. Acquirer+Target
Target Value

30.92
(4.3)1

(1.9)10

-14.67

(1.5)

Cumulative abnormal returns are calculated from five trading days before the day of the mit ial Wall Street Jownal announcement ol the
acquisition until five trading days after the final bid. Returns are computed using parameters from a market model estimated from 300
to 61 trading days before the initial announcemertl. Median cumulative abnormal returns are in brackets and the number of obaeriations
per category is in parentheses.

b Acquisitions are classified as "Unsuccessful if they are divested and either the acquirer reports a loss on the sate of the acquisition or
the business press reports that the acquisition was crpasr a mistake. This variable equals 1 if an acquisition is classified as unsuccessful,
0 otherwise.
Acquisitions are classified as "Not Unsuccessful" if they are divested and either have a gain or no toss on sale, or are not referred to as
mistakes by the business press. This variable equals I if an acquisition is divested and classified as "Not Unsuccessful;" 0 otherwise.
Variable equals one if part of the payment for the acquistion is an equity security of the acquirer. The variable equals 0 if the payment
consists of cash and debt only.

"Variable equals one if multiple bidders compete for the target.
Two-tailed tests; Significant at the 1% level;
Significant at the 5% level;

tO Significant at the 10% level.

Table 6
DIVESTITURES BY RELATEDNESS OF ACQUISITION
Acquisitions divested and kept as of December 31, 1989 for 271 acquisitions of at least 100 million 1982
dollars completed between 1971 and 1982. Target market value is at least 5%of acquirer market value.

Total
Number
Acquisitions

I.

Percentage

Percentage

(Number)
Acquisitions
Divested
As of 1989

(Number)
Acquisitions
Not Divested
As of 1989

13.3%

86.7%

(10)

(65)

Acquircr and Target share
four-digit SIC Codes

75

2. Acquirer and Target share
three-digit SIC Coder'

19

26.3%
(5)

73.7%
(14)

3. Acquirer and Target share
two-digit SIC Code'

54

55.6%

44.4%
(24)

4. Acquirer and Target do not share
any SIC Code

123

All Acquisitions

(30)

271

60.2%

(74)

39.8%
(49)

43.9%
(119)

56.1%
(152)

Acquisitions are in this category if acquirer and target share one of the four principal four-digit SIC codes
listed in Dun and Bradstreet's Million Dollar Directory.
Acquisitions are in this category if acquirer and target share one of the four principal three-digit SIC codes
but not one of the four principal four-digit SIC codes.

Acquisitions are in this category if acquirer and target share one of the four principal two-digit SIC codes
but not one of the four principal three-digit SIC codes.
Acquisitions are in this category if acquirer and target do not share any of the four principal two-digit SIC
codes.

Table 7
DIVESTITURES CLASSIFIED BY PURCUASER
Divestitures classified by purchaser of divested unit for divestitures from a sample of 271 acquisitions of at
least 100 million 1982 dollars completed between 1971 and 1982.

All

Acquirer and Target
do not share
primary 3 or 4
digit SIC Code'

Acquirer and Target
share primary
3 or 4 digit
SIC Codeb

1.

Divcstcd unit sold to
management group

23

21

2

2.

Divested unit sold to
buyer that shares primary
3 or 4 digit SIC code.

45

36

9

3.

Divested unit sold to
buyer that does not share
primary 3 or 4 digit SIC code."

21

21

0

Divested unit is part of

13

11

2

3

3

0

4.

spin off.
5.

Divested unit is liquidated.

6.

Buyer could not be classified.

14

J2

.2

Total

119

104

15

'Acquisitions are in this category if acquirer and target do not share one of the four principal three- or fourdigit SIC codes listed in Dun and Bradstreet's Million Dollar Directory.

Acquisitions are in this category if acquirer and target share one of the four principal three- or four-digit
SIC codes listed in Dun and Bradstreet's Million Dollar Directory.
Divestitures are in this category if the target is sold to a purchaser that shares one of the four principal threeor four-digit SIC codes listed in Dun and Bradstreet's Million Dollar Directory.

Divestitures are in this category if the target is sold to a purchaser that does not share one of the four
principal three- or four-digit SIC codes listed in Dun and Bradstreet's Million Dollar Directory.

