a flE EDICIVE I OF flhI'2ES1 Ra's
AND flIIP RE SEAES

n

Bexanke

Workini Paper No. 3486

WTIEAL JREJIJ OF EOtlIC RSFA1{
1050 Massacthusetts Averp.e

Ca]*,rice, W 02138
Octd,er 1990

This paper is part of N's reseazth pxogi in Ecuiiic Fluctuations ar
Finarcia]. Markets ar Minetary Eunics. Any cpthicris expressal are those
of the author arxl rct those of the National B.ireau of Ecutiic Pesearcth.

NB Workixx Paper #3486
October 1990
C4 ThE EDICIVE ER OF I EREST RATES
AND INTEREST PATE SEN
ABsTRAC'r

A number of interest rates ard interest rate spreads have been fourd to

be useful in predictir the cxxirse of the eoonany. We oatpare the predictive

pcer of sai of these suested interest rate variables for nine irdicators
of real activity ard the inflation rate. ()ir results are oonsistent with
those of Stock ard Watson (1989) ard Friethian aid Kuttner (1989), who fourxl

that the spread between the caTTercial paper rate aix3. the Treasury bill rate

has been a particularly good predictor. We present eviderxe that this spread
is inforsative not so much because it is a muasure of default risk (which has

been the usual presumption), but because it is an indicator of the stance of
nK)netary policy; for example, durir the "credit crunches" of the l960s aid

the 1970s, the ccarcial paper—Treasury bill spread typically rose
significantly. We also shc that, possibly because of charges in inetary

policy cçeratin procedures aid in financial markets, this spread appears r
to be a less reliable predictor than it used to be.

Ben Bernanke
Woodrci Wilson School

Princeton University
Princeton, NY 08544

1

Economists have long understood that financial market variables
contain considerable information about the future of the economy. Stock
prices, in particular, have always been a popular leading indicator.
Recently, though, a number of researchers have pointed out that interest
rates and interest rate spreads--that is, differences between interest
rates on alternative financial assets- -can be effective predictors of
the economy.

Probably the most striking results along these lines have been
obtained by James Stock and Mark Watson1, who examined the information
contained in a wide variety of economic variables in an attempt to

construct a new index of leading indicators. Stock and Watson found
that two interest rate spreads- - the difference between the six-month

commercial paper rate and the six-month Treasury bill rate, and the
difference between the ten-year and one-year Treasury bond rates- -

outperformed nearly every other variable as forecasters of the business
cycle. The two Stock and Watson variables are not the only candidates
that have been advanced, however: A number of alternative interest
rates and spreads have been suggested by various authors, as we will
discuss further below.

The finding that interest rates and spreads contain a great deal
of information is interesting, but it raises a number of questions.
Possibly the most important of these is the question of

interest

rates and spreads predict the course of the economy so well. In this
article we try to make some progress on this issue.
To do this, a necessary first step is to determine which interest
rate variable (or variables) is the most informative about the future
"New Indexes of Coincident and Leading Economic Indicators",
NEER Macroeconomics Annual, MIT Press, 1989.

2

course of the economy. Section I of this paper runs a "horse race'
between a number of suggested predictors. We test the ability of the
alternative interest rate variables to predict nine different monthly
measures of real macroeconomic activity, as well as the inflation rate.
While many interest rate variables have been excellent predictors of the
economy during the period that we consider, we find that the best single
variable is the spread between the commercial paper rate and the
Treasury bill rate- -one of the two Stock and Watson variables.2 An
additional finding is that, unfortunately, the predictive power of this
variable (as well as of the other interest rate variables) appears to
have weakened in the last decade; this poses a potential problem for the

use of this variable in the new index of leading indicators proposed by
Stock and Watson.
Given the superiority of the commercial paper- -Treasury bill

spread documented in Section I, in Section II we narrow our focus to
inquire why this particular spread has historically been so informative

about the economy. We consider two principal hypotheses: The first is
that the commercial paper--Treasury bill spread is informative because,

as the difference between a risky return and a safe return on assets of
the same maturity, it is a measure of perceived default risk. Suppose
that, for whatever reason, investors expect the economy to turn down

the

in

near future; because this will increase the riskiness of privately

issued debt, the current spread between private and safe public debt

will be bid up. The commercial paper--Treasury bill spread forecasts

L

Actually, the predictive power of this particular spread was
first noticed not by Stock and Watson but by Benjamin Friedman and
Kenneth Kuttner, as discussed below.

3

the future, according to this explanation, because it embodies whatever
information the market may have about the likelihood of a recession.
The second hypothesis discussed here is that the commercial paper-Treasury bill spread predicts the economy because it measures the

stance of monetary policy, which in turn

is

an important determinant of

future economic activity, We discuss two variants of the monetary
policy hypothesis, both of which require the assumption that cormnercial.

paper and Treasury bills are imperfect substitutes in the portfolios of

investors. The general idea underlying both variants is that monetary
policy affects the spread between commercial paper and Treasury bills by
changing the composition of assets available in the economy; because of
imperfect substitutability, interest rate spreads must

to

adjust in order

make investors willing to hold the new mix of assets. A more

detailed discussion of this hypothesis is deferred until Section II
below.
It seems clear that the commercial paper- -Treasury bill spread

must reflect default risk to some degree (the first hypothesis), so much
of Section II is devoted to asking whether the spread also measures the

stance of monetary policy (the second hypothesis). Using several
alternative measures of monetary policy, we find evidence that it does.
Indeed, to a degree that we found surprising, the commercial paper- -

Treasury

bill spread seems more closely related to conventional

indicators of monetary policy (such as the Federal funds rate) than to
alternative measures of default risk.

The paper's tentative conclusion--tentative, because of the
surprisingly weak association of the spread with other measures of
default risk- -is that the spread between commercial paper and Treasury

bill rates has historically been a good predictor because it combines
information about both monetary and non-monetary factors affecting the
economy, and because it does this more accurately than alternative

interest rate-based measures. However, because this spread has become
over rime a less perfect indicator of monetary policy, it may be a Less
useful predictor of economic fluctuations in the future.

I. A Comparison of the Predictive Power of Alternative Interest
Rates and Soreads
In this section we review some recent literature on the predictive

power of interest rates and spreads. We then compare the forecasting
power of a number of the variables that have been suggested by various
authors.

Much of the recent attention to the predictive power of interest
rates can be traced back to a provocative 1980 paper by Christopher A.

Sims.3 At the time, Sims was interested in interpreting his own earlier
finding that the growth rate of the money stock helped forecast output4;

in particular, he wanted to know if this earlier finding could be taken
as evidence that monetary policy can be used to affect the real economy.

In the 1980 paper Sims showed, in a vector autoregression (VAR) system
including postwar data on industrial production, wholesale prices, and
the Ml money stock, that Ml was an important predictor of production;
indeed, in this VAR, disturbances to Ml were found to explain 37% of the
forecast variance of industrial production at a horizon of 48 months.

This predictive power for money was in line with the earlier results of

"Comparison of Interwar and Postwar Cycles: Monetarism
Reconsidered", American Economic Review 70, May 1980, 250-7.
See Sims, "Money, Income, and Causality", American Economic
Review 62, September 1972, 540-52.

5

Sims and others. However, in his paper Sims also showed that, when the
commercial paper rate was added to the VAR, nearly all of money's

predictive power for output was "absorbed" by the interest rate: In the
expanded VAR, the commercial paper rate explained 30% of the forecast

variance of industrial production at the 48-month horizon, while money
accounted for only 4%-.

Similar results were later obtained, but for the

Treasury bill rate rather than the commercial paper race, by Robert B.

Litterman and Laurence Weiss.5
From the finding that money did not predict output when interest
rates were also in the forecasting equations, both Sims and Litterman
and Weiss concluded that monetary policy does not in fact affect real

output. This interpretation was disputed by Bennett McCallum, who
pointed out that in practice interest races might be a better indicator
of monetary policy than money growth rates; hence the predictive power
of interest rates was not necessarily evidence against the effectiveness

of monetary policy.6 A paper by Ben Bernanke and Alan Blinder concurred
with McCalluin's view, pointing out that the Federal funds rate--the
interest rate most closely associated with monetary policy- -was in fact

unusually informative about the future of the real economy.7 We present
some evidence which bears on the debate about monetary policy in Section
II; for the time being, though, let us just note that the literature
following Sims' contribution demonstrated the forecasting power of
several alternative interest rates.

"Money, Real Interest Rates, and Output: A Reinterpretation of
Postwaç U.S. Data", Econometrica 53, January 1985, 129-56.
o
"A Reconsideration of Sims' Evidence Concerning

McCallum,

Monetaism", Economics Letters 13, 1983, 167-71.
'
Bernanke and Blinder, "The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels
of Monetary Transmission", unpublished paper, Princeton University,
September 1989.

6

The research that followed Sims suggested that it was the level of

interest rates that was important for forecasting the economy. However,
a number of papers written during the 'eighties showed that spreads
between different interest rates could also be extremely informative.
For example, in a study of financial crises during the Great Depression,
Bernanke showed that the spread between the rates on Baa-rated corporate
bonds and Treasury bonds was a leading indicator of output during the

interwar period.8 Arturo Estrella and Gikas A. Hardouvelis demonstrated
the forecasting power of the difference between short-term and long-cern
Treasury rates9; the "tilt" of the term structure, as this spread is

sometimes referred to, is in fact a popular forecasting variable in

financial circles, as Estrella and Hardouvelis mentioned. In a paper
cited above, Bernanke and Blinder suggested that the spread between the
Federal funds rate and the long-term government bond rate- -which they
interpreted as an indicator of monetary policy- -would be a useful

predictor; similar conclusions were drawn by Robert D. Laurent.1° The
high information content of the spread between the commercial paper race
and the T-bill rate was first documented in an important paper by

Benjamin M. Friedman and Kenneth N. Kuttner.11 Finally, as discussed in
the introduction, Stock and Watson's comparison of a wide variety of
potential leading indicators gave high marks to the commercial paper- -

Bernanke, "Non-monetary Aspects of the Financial Crisis in the
Propagation of the Great Depression", American Economic Review 73, June
1983, Z57-76.
"The Term Structure as a Predictor of Real Economic Activity,
Federaj Reserve Bank of New York, research paper no. 8907, May 1989.
0 See Laurent, "An Interest Rate-Based Indicator of Monetary
Policy", Economic Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,
January/February 1988, 3-14; and "Testing the 'Spread'", ibid.,

Ju1y/Aust 1989, 22-34.
"Money, Income and Prices After the 1980s", NBER working paper
no. 2852, February 1989.

7

Treasury bill spread and the spread between short-term and long-term
Treasury rates (the tilt of the term

structure).

Cpmvarisons of univariate forecasting tower

Given the variety of interest rate-based predictors that have been
suggested, it is important to try to determine more precisely which of

the candidate variables contain the most information. A preliminary
examination of eight proposed forecasting variables, taken one at a time
(i.e., in univariate fashion), is reported in Tables 2 and 3.
(Definitions of the alternative interest rates and spreads used in this

paper are given in Table 1.) Here we consider four interest rates and
four interest rate spreads. The four interest rates include the

funds

Federal

rate (RFF), the three-month Treasury bill rate (RT3MO), and the

six-month commercial paper rate (RCP6MO), all of which have been used in

previous studies of the forecasting power of interest rates. We also
bring in at this stage the ten-year Treasury bond rate (RT1O), both
because Stock and Watson include the first difference of this variable
in their experimental index of leading indicators and because we wanted

to have a representative long-term rate. The four interest rate spreads
examined are 1) the commercial paper- -Treasury bill spread (at six

months' maturity), which we call SHORT because Stock and Watson refer to

it as the short-term public-private spread; 2) the spread between the
long-term corporate bond rate (Baa rating) and the ten-year government

bond rate, or LONG; 3) the difference between the one-year Treasury
bill rate and the ten-year Treasury bond rate, called TILT because it
measures the tilt of the term structure; and 4) the spread between the

8

Federal funds rate and the ten-year Treasury bond rate, referred to here
as FUNDS.

We examined the ability of each of the eight forecasting variables
to predict ten macroeconomic variables (nine indicators of real
activity, plus the CPI inflation rate); the chosen macro variables are

listed down the left-hand side of Tables 2 and 3. The ten macroeconomic
variables are essentially the same as those used by Bernanke and Blinder
in their paper, with the addition of nonagricultural employment and
personal consumption expenditures; all of these variables are closely-

watched measures of the economy, which also meet the criterion of being

available on a monthly basis. We tested the predictive power of the
interest rate variables for a number of different economic series,
instead of just (say) industrial production, as a check on the

robustness of the relationships that we find)2
We evaluated the univariate forecasting power of the individual

interest rates and spreads, as follows: For each macro variable and
each interest rate variable (rate or spread), we estimated three insample, one-month-ahead prediction equations, using monthly data for

1961.89.13 In the first of the three prediction equations, the macro
variable being forecasted was regressed on a constant, a trend, six lags
Obviously the ten macroeconomic variables are not independent,
since they are all related to the aggregate business cycle; thus, we
should not overstate the advantage of looking at a number of different
variables. On the other hand, the ten variables do reflect different
measurement techniques, different sectors, and different cyclical
dynamics; thus a finding that an interest rate variable predicts many of
the macro variables is less likely to be spurious than a finding that an
intere rate variable predicts a single macro variable.
The start date is determined by data availability. Using onemonth rather than longer forecasting horizons gets at the main issue of
information content while avoiding technical problems arising from
overlapping forecast errors. We present some evidence from six-monthahead forecasts below which suggest that our main results are robust to
the choice of forecast horizon.

9

of itself, and six lags of the interest rate variable. The second
prediction equation augmented the first equation by adding six lags of
CPI inflation and six lags of real M2 growth to the right-hand side of

the equation)4 The third equation augmented the first equation by
adding six lags of the growth rate of the index of leading indicators to
the right-hand side.15

Given these estimated forecasting equations, each containing the
interest rate variable and other predictors, we tested the hypothesis
that all lags of the interest rate variable could be excluded from the

equation (that is, that the interest rate variable had no marginal

predictive power). The results are given in Table 2 (for interest
rates) and Table 3 (for interest rate spreads). For each macro variable
and each interest rate variable, the tables give three numbers; these
correspond to the probability that the interest rate variable can be
excluded from the first, second, or third prediction equation,

respectively. Low values imply strong marginal predictive power; thus,
a value of .0001 means that there is only one chance in 10,000 that the
interest rate variable does not belong in that particular prediction
equation.

The two tables show that interest rates and spreads clearly
contain information about the future of the economy that is not included
£4 Stock
and Watson used a similar procedure. Only real money
growth was added in the prediction equation for inflation, since lags of
inflation were already included in the first equation. Deflation of M2
was by he CPI.
This is the traditional index, not to be confused with the
Stock and Watson experimental index. The traditional index of leading
indicators is a weighted average of twelve macroeconomic time series
that have been found historically to be quite useful for forecasting
real activity. The available leading indicator series includes
revisions that were not available at the time of actual forecasts; since
interest rates are rarely revised, this introduces a bias against
finding marginal predictive power for interest rate variables.

10

even in the index of leading indicators. For example, the Federal funds
race (RFF in Table 2) predicts each of the macro variables at the .0001.

level

of significance when only lags of the forecasted variable are

included; it predicts all of the macro variables at the .05 level or

better when inflation and real money growth are added; and it predicts
seven of the ten variables at close to the .01 level or better even in
the presence of the index of leading indicators.

Which interest rate variables are the best predictors of the

economy? Direct comparisons are undertaken in the next sub-section of
the paper. However, as a simple and informal way of quantifying the
impressions given by the univariate results in Tables 2 and 3, suppose
that we assign "points" to each interest race variable as follows:

5

points for each entry in Table 2 or 3 which is less than .001; 4 points
for entries between .001 and .01;

3 points for entries between .01 and

.05; 2 points for entries between .05 and .10; and 1 point for entries

between .10 and .20. The scores arrived at in this way are as follows:

Federal funds rate (RPT)
3-month T-bill rate (RT3MO)
Commercial paper rate (RCP6MO)
10-year T-bond rate (RT1O)

119 points
96 points

119 points
85 points

SHORT spread (RCP6MO - RT6MO)

109 points

LONG spread (RBAA - aTlO)

105 points

TILT spread (RT1 - RT1O)
FUNDS spread (RFF - RT1O)

89 points
106 points

11

On a univariace basis, and by this informal scoring measure, the

Federal

funds rate and the commercial paper rate do better than the

Treasury bill race and the long-term bond rate. Of the spreads, the
TILT variable seems weaker than the others, which are more or less
equal.

Multivariate comparisons
All the interest rate variables we have looked at appear to have

significant forecasting power. Is this because all interest rates
capture basically the same

information

about the future? Or does each

interest rate or spread have separate information about the evolution of

the economy? To try to answer these questions, and to make more direct
comparisons between the different interest rate variables, a
multivariate analysis is necessary.
In the previous section, we found that the Federal funds rate and
the commercial paper rate seemed to be better predictors than the

Treasury bill rate and the long-term Treasury bond rate. Since this has
also been indicated by previous research, we drop the two Treasury rates
from the comparison.16 This leaves six interest rate variables- -two

interest rates and four interest rate spreads--to be comparedJ7 The
historical behavior of these variables is shown in Figures 1-6; vertical
lines in those figures indicate the dates of business cycle peaks.

Lb The short-term Treasury rate is still implicitly included,
since it is a linear combination of the commercial paper race and the
commerçal paper rate- -Treasury bill spread.
We retain the spread between short-term and long-term Treasury
bonds (TILT) because, even though it did relatively poorly in the
univariate comparison, it has been strongly advocated as a forecasting
variable.

12

To see which of these variables are the best predictors, and to
try to determine the "dimensionality" of the information in interest
rates, we proceeded again by estimating in-sample forecast equations for

each of the macro variables. Each forecast equation contained a
constant, a trend, six monthly lags of the forecasted variable, and six

lags each of from between one and four interest rate variables. We
refer to a forecasting equation containing k different interest rate

variables on the right hand side (along with the constant, trend, and
lagged values of the dependent variable) as a model of size k.
We estimated all possible models of size k for each macro variable
and for k —

1.2,3,4.

Since there were six interest variables to choose

from, this means that for each forecasted variable we estimated six
models of size one, fifteen models of size two, twenty models of size

three, and fifteen models of size four. The best-fitting (highest R2)
models for each forecasted variable and for each model size are listed

in Table 4. The best overall fits (regardless of model size) are
indicated by superscripts in the table: Superscript r indicates the
model that fir best by the adjusted a2

criterion,

superscript a the

model that is best by the Akaike information criterion, and superscript

s the model that is best by the Schwarz criterion)8
Putting aside for a moment the question of which model size
produces the overall best equations, let us consider first how our
alternative interest rate variables compare in this head-to-head

See for example M.B. Priestly, Soectral Analysis and Time
Series, London: Academic Press, 1981, pp. 372-6. The best equation by
each of these criteria is the one that minimizes the log of the sum of
squared residuals plus a penalty term that is increasing in the number
of right-hand side variables. The Schwarz criterion assesses the
haviest penalty for adding extra independent variables, the adjusted
R criterion the lightest.

13

forecasting competition. Obviously, the answer depends on which macro
variable we are considering; but, generally, the SHORT variable- -the
spread between the commercial paper rate and the Treasury bill rate- -

appears to be the best predictor. When only one interest rate variable
is allowed (i.e., in the models of size one), SHORT gives the best fit
in six of the ten cases; it also appears in seven of the best size two
models.

To see the size of SHORT's advantage as a predictor, as before let
us try to summarize the results of Table 4 by an informal point system.
Suppose we award 5 points to each interest rate or spread variable for

each time it appears in the best size-one model; 3 points for each
appearance in the best size-two model; 2 points for each time in the
best size-three model; and 1 point for each appearance in the best size-

four model. The point totals this time are:

Federal funds rate (RFF)

27 points

Commercial paper rate (RCP6MO)

35 points

SHORT spread (RCP6MO - RT6MO)

69 points

LONG spread (RZAA - RT1O)

38 points

TILT spread (RT1
FUNDS

spread

RT1O)

(RFF - RT1O)

4 points
37 points

These totals point fairly clearly to SHORT as the best overall of

the six interest rate predictors; this is in line with the previous

finding of Friedman and Kuttner and of Stock and Watson. At the other
end of the scale, TILT (the difference between the one-year T-bill rate
and the ten-year Treasury bond rate) appears to add little when the

14

ocher variables are included.19

The ocher four interest rates and

spreads embody intermediate amounts of independent information. Of
these four, perhaps the most interesting is LONG, the spread between the

Baa corporate bond rate and the long-term bond race. LONG is not the
best variable in arty of the size-one models, but it appears in four of

the size-two models, eight of the size-three models, and all ten of the

size-four models. Since the correlation of LONG with the ocher interest
rate variables is low, our interpretation is that this variable, while

not containing the most "essential" information which is present in
interest rates, does contain useful additional information.

The comparison among forecasting variables that we have just drawn
ignored the issue of the optimal size of the forecasting models (which
is closely related to the issue of the "dimensionality" of the

information in interest rates). Unfortunately, our conclusions on this
count are somewhat ambiguous.

Of the three criteria used to compare

models of different sizes, the one which puts the stiffest penalty on
extra parameters (the

Schwarz criterion) always indicated that the model

of size one was best, while the criterion with the

smallest

penalty on

extra parameters (adjusted R2) chose models of size three or (usually)

size four. (See Table 4.) The Akaike criterion, which gives art
intermediate penalty for increased model size, indicated in two cases
that the best model was of size one but in the other eight cases that
the best size was either three or four.

In many cases the models chosen by the stringent criteria are

nested in the larger models chosen by the alternative criteria. When a
This poor showing for TILT was not due to the inclusion in the
analysis of another term structure variable, the spread between the
Federal funds rate and the long-term bond rate (FUNDS). Exclusion of
FUNDS from the analysis gave approximately the same results for TILT.

1.5

larger model nests a smaller one, the hypothesis that the smaller model
is to be preferred can be directly tested by testing the hypothesis that

the additional forecasting variables can be excluded. We usually found
in these cases that the larger model was statistically preferred at

conventional significance levels. The fact that larger models are
typically preferred is weak evidence for the view that there are several
different types of independent information in interest rate variables,

which cannot be completely captured by using a single interest rate or
spread in a forecasting equation.

Qut-of-samle forecasting
While in-sample fit is one criterion for judging prediction
equations, the ultimate test of an equation is the ability to forecast

out of sample. Our experiments along this line suggested that,
unfortunately, the strong predictive power of interest rates that has
been noted is most apparent for the period before (approximately) 1980;
since that time the forecasting power of interest rates has deteriorated

significantly.20
As a simple illustration of this point, we present results here
for only three key macro variables (industrial production, the
unemployment rate, and inflation) and for models including only one

interest rate variable. What we wanted to determine was whether the use
of an interest rate variable could improve out-of-sample forecasting for
the key macro variables, given the inclusion in the equation of lagged

values of the macro variable and of the index of leading indicators. In

This is also true in sample. For example, if the prediction
equations reported in Tables 2-4 are re-estimated for 1961-79, the
results remain strong; if they are re-estimated for 1980-89, there is a
substantial reduction in fit.

contrast to the prediction equations in the previous section, which
focused on one-month-ahead forecasts, we consider here six-month-ahead
forecast equations.

For each of the three macro variables, we estimated prediction
equations for samples beginning in January 1961 and ending in December

of 1971, 1974, 1977, 1980, 1983, or 1986. The dependent variable in
each case was the cumulative growth rate of the forecasted macro

variable over the previous six months. Each prediction equation
included a constant, a trend, and the seventh through twelfth lags of
the monthly growth rate of the forecasted variable, of the growth rate
of the index of leading indicators, and of one of the candidate interest

rate variables. For each forecasted variable and sample period we chose
the prediction equation that fit best in-sample. The "winning" interest
rate variable in each case is shown in Table 5; just below the name of
each interest rate variable is the probability that all lags of that
variable could be excluded from the associated prediction equation.
Using the best prediction equations for each sample period, we

made out-of-sample forecasts for each subsequent three-year period. The
forecast periods were non-overlapping; so, for example, using the
equation estimated through December 1971, we made forecasts of the six-

month growth rates beginning in January or July of 1972, 1973, and l97.
The accuracy of these forecasts was compared to what could have been
obtained if the interest rate variable had been omitted, and the
forecasting equation had been estimated using only lagged values of the

forecasted variable and the index of leading indicators. The second
entry below each variable name in Table 5 gives the ratio of the average
absolute forecasting error obtained when the interest rate variable is

17

included to the average absolute error obtained without the interest

rate variable. Similarly, the third entry below each variable name

gives the ratio of average squared forecast errors. Entries less than
one indicate that using the interest rate variable improves the out of

sample forecast, relative to an equation which uses only the lagged
forecast variable and the index of leading indicators.
Table 5 shows once again that SHORT is the best interest rate

variable for predicting real activity (thus this finding appears to be

independent of the forecast horizon). Although the spread between the
Federal funds rate and the long-term bond rate (FUNDS) is best for
forecasting the nominal variable (inflation), for the two real variables

(industrial production and the unemployment rate), SHORT fits best in

ten of twelve cases. Table 5 also shows that, up through 1980, the use
of interest rate variables would have consistently improved out-ofsample forecasts.

After 1980, however, the story is different. Although the use of
SHORT would have helped to forecast real variables in 1984-86, in 198183 and 1987-89 an equation using SHORT would have performed considerably

worse. Further, the inflation prediction equation deteriorates in all
sub-periods of the 1980s.

The "reason" for the poor performance of SHORT in the 198Os is
that, first, this variable, like all interest rate variables, was very
volatile in 1979-83 (compare Figure 3); although there was of course a
severe recession during this time, the real economy did not exhibit

volatility proportional to that in interest races. Second, SHORT rose
in the last third of the l980s, indicating (based on previous
experience) that the economy should have gone into a mild recession; but

18

no recession occurred. To understand at a deeper level why the
forecasting power of SHORT has weakened, we riced to explain why this

variable seemed to contain so much information in the first place. To
this issue we now turn.

II. Why Does the Cornnercipl Paoer--Treasury Bill Spread Predict
the Economy?

The first main section of the paper showed that, while many
interest rates and spreads are informative about the economy, the best
single interest rate indicator among those we examined is probably the
spread between the commercial paper rate and the Treasury bill rate, or

SHORT. At this point we narrow the focus of the paper to consider
specifically why this variable seems to contain so much information

about the future of the economy. Though for concreteness we focus on
SHORT, much of the discussion to follow would apply to several of the
other interest rate indicators as well.
As discussed in the introduction, the simplest explanation of why

SHORT forecasts the economy is that it measures the amount of default

risk perceived by the market. As such, this spread may be useful
because it summarizes available information about the likelihood of a
recession.

A difficulty with this explanation is that SHORT would seem to be

a poorer measure of general default risk than several other available

interest rate spreads. Defaults on prime nonfinancial commercial paper
are extremely rare (much too infrequent, in our view, to plausibly
account for the 300 basis point swings in this spread that have been
observed); if obtaining an objective measure of default risk were

19

important, a variable such as the Baa corporate bond- -Treasury bond

spread ought to do a better job in forecasting than SHORT. Indeed, the
correlation of SHORT with other indicators of default risk is remarkably

low: For example, the correlation of monthly changes in SHORT with
monthly changes in the spread between Baa corporate bonds and Treasury
bonds (LONG) is just .09 over the 1961-89 period; when the Aaa rate is
used instead of the Baa rate, the correlation is still .09, and when the
Baa- -Aaa rate differential is used, the correlation in changes with

SHORT is less than .04. James C. Van Home has shown that the
correlation between the commercial paper spread and the long-term
corporate bond spread is low even when measured company by company.21
Although the correlation of SHORT with other default measures is
low, its correlation with various measures of monetary policy is higher;

for example, the correlation of monthly changes in SHORT with monthly

changes in the Federal funds rate over 1961-89 is .46. While of course
not necessarily proof of anything, this correlation does motivate
consideration of the possibility that SHORT is a good forecaster because

it contains information about monetary policy. We will call this
general proposition the monetary policy hypothesis. We consider two
different versions of this hypothesis; the common element of both, as
mentioned in the introduction, is that it is assumed that commercial
paper and Treasury bills are imperfect substitutes in investors'
portfolios.

The first version of the monetary policy hypothesis might be
called the "credit crunch" story, and is due principally to Timothy Q.

"Behavior of Default Risk Premiums for Corporate Bonds and
Commercial Paper", Journal of Business Research, December 1979, 301-13.

20

Cook.22

Cook's argument is that, prior to institutional changes in

1978, monetary policy affected SHORT (and other money market spreads) by

inducing disintermediation from the banking system. Because of
Regulation Q-imposed deposit interest rate ceilings, during the latter
part of the 1960s and in the 1970s monetary tightening and the
associated increase in interest rates periodically led to large outflows

of deposits from banks. Depositors were motivated to withdraw, of
course, in order to obtain higher open-market yields. However, because
private money market instruments such as commercial paper could be
purchased only in large minimum denominations, during these episodes

disintermediated deposits flowed primarily into T-bills. Cook argued
that, during these credit crunch episodes, the large switches from
deposits to T-bills in private portfolios lowered the yield on T-bills

relative to commercial paper (and other money market instruments). Thus
tight money was reflected in an increase in the commercial paper- -

Treasury bill spread. The increase in this spread during the credit
crunches of 1966, 1969, and 1973-4 can easily be seen in Figure 3•23
Why didn't the increase in the spread cause banks or other
investors not constrained by the minimum denomination restriction to
sell off their Treasury bills and buy commercial paper, thus offsetting

the switch by depositors? This did happen to some extent. But as
Cook's article explains in detail, Treasury bills are valuable to banks
ZZ

"Determinants of the Spread Between Treasury Bill Rates and
Private Sector Money Market Rates", Journal of Economics and Business,
Springummer 1981, 177-87.
'

It

is also the case that credit crunches, because they reduced
the funds available for bank lending, led to large increases in the
issuance of commercial paper by nonfinancial firms. This would also
tend to raise the yield on commercial paper relative to Treasury
securities. See Timothy D. Rowe, "Commercial Paper" in Timothy Q. Cook
and Rowe, editors, Instruments of the Money Market, Federal Reserve Bank
of Richmond, 1986.

21

and other investors for reasons beside their direct yield. For example,
T-bills can be used for posting margin, for collateralizing overnight
repurchase agreements, and for satisfying bank capital adequacy
requirements; commercial paper generally cannot fulfill these functions.
Thus it is reasonable that the demand for Treasury bills will be less
than perfectly elastic as the commercial paper- -Treasury bill spread

widens; that is, Treasury bills and commercial paper are imperfect
substitutes.

Given Cook's explanation of why credit crunches caused the spread
SHORT to increase, then as long as the monetary actions which caused the

credit crunches also tended to induce recessions, SHORT should help

predict the economy. A nice feature of this explanation is that it
suggests that SHORT should no longer be strongly related to monetary
policy after the institutional changes (such as the introduction of
money market mutual funds and the removal of deposit rate ceilings)
which eliminated credit crunches; this is consistent with the finding
that SHORT is no longer a good predictor after 1980.

The credit crunch story implies that SHORT will be related to
monetary policy only during periods when deposit rate ceilings are

binding. An alternative form of the monetary hypothesis, which lacking
a better name we call the "simple imperfect substitutability"
hypothesis, suggests that SHORT will respond to monetary policy whenever
the Federal funds rate (or some other short-term interest rate) is used

as an intermediate target.24 This story goes as follows: Suppose that,
in the process of tightening the stance of monetary policy, the Federal
For a formal model related to the following discussion, see
John P. Judd and John L. Scadding, "Liability Management. Bank Loans and
Deposit 'Market' Disequilibrium", Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank
of San Francisco, Summer 1981. 21-44.

22

Reserve induces a rise in the Federal funds rate. This directly
increases the cost of funds to banks. However, banks have several
principal alternatives to borrowing Federal funds:

1) They can issue

CDs or other managed liabilities; 2) they can sell some of their
holdings of Treasury securities; or 3) they can cut back on credit to
their loan customers (or raise loan interest rates).
If Treasury bills and other assets are imperfect substitutes, then

either action (1) or action (3) by banks would tend to increase the
open-market commercial paper rate relative to the Treasury bill rate.

To sell additional CDs. the banks would have to raise the rate they
offer on that instrument; since commercial paper is a very close
substitute for CDs in investor portfolios, this would lead the

commercial paper rate to rise as well.25 If banks respond to the higher
cost of funds instead by raising the cost of credit to business loan
customers, firms that are able to do so will borrow directly from the
public by issuing additional commercial paper; this too will raise the
commercial paper rate.

If banks sell off Treasury securities (option (2)). on the other
hand, the tendency for the spread to increase will be arrested; however,
following Cook's argument above, banks will not sell off their T-bills

in response to a modest increase in the yield differential. Thus, an
increased commercial paper- -Treasury bill spread will be associated with

tight monetary policy, which would help explain why this spread is a

useful forecaster. The decline in SHORT's forecasting power after 1980
would in this case be explained by the observations that 1) because of

The correlation of monthly changes in the commercial paper- bill spread and the CD- -Treasury bill spread is .88 over 197089, the period for which data were available.

Treasury

23

changing Federal Reserve procedures, interest rates in general have been
much less reliable indicators of monetary policy since the October 1979

policy shift, and 2) financial innovation, deregulation, and
internationalization over the last decade may have increased the

substitutability among alternative short-term assets. Another
possibility is that monetary policy has simply been relatively less

important in recent years.26 Note that, relative to the credit crunch
hypothesis, this alternative view would predict a more gradual reduction
in the sensitivity of SHORT to monetary policy after 1978.
Like the credit crunch version of the monetary policy hypothesis,
the simple imperfect substitutability version is sensitive to the
possibility that there are investors in the economy, outside of banks,
for whom commercial paper and Treasury bills are (nearly) perfect

substitutes; if these investors exist, their arbitrage activity will
cause the spread between these two assets to reflect only differences in

after-tax expected yields. Rather than discuss in the abstract whether
such arbitrage is likely to exist, however, we turn to some empirical
evidence on the relationship of interest rate spreads to Fed policy.

The Resvonse of Interest Rate Soreads to Changes in ionetarv
Policy
We now consider how some key interest rate spreads, including

SHORT, respond to changes in monetary policy. As will be shown, the

Zb It may be that monetary policy has appeared less important in
recent years because the Federal Reserve has acted aggressively to
forestall any increase in inflationary expectations; with inflation
under control, there has been no need for the Fed to administer the
strong contraccionary medicine (with the resulting effects on real
I thank Timothy Cook
activity) that it did in some previous episodes.
for this suggestion.

24

evidence is consistent with the general view that SHORT is if anything
more closely related to indicators of monetary policy than to the
economy-wide level of default risk.
Precise dates of changes in monetary policy are, of course, not

available. Instead, we rely on two very different studies that tried to
measure shifts in Federal Reserve policy:
The first of these studies is by Christina D. Romer and David H.

Romer.27 By a reading of Federal Reserve records, Romer and Romer
identified dates in the postwar era at which monetary policy shifted to

a tighter, anti-inflationary mode. Four of these dates (December 1968,
April 1974, August 1978, and October 1979) fall within our 1961-89

sample period. Table 6 shows the behavior of the Federal funds rate
(RFF), the commercial paper--Treasury bill spread (SHORT), the spread
between Baa and Aaa corporate bond rates (which we will call DEFAULT),
and the difference between the one-year and ten-year Treasury bond rates
(TILT) for the period from two months before until twelve months after

each Romer and Romer date. We introduce DEFAULT here in as a measure of
the behavior of perceived default risk in the economy. DEFAULT is
probably superior to LONG as a measure of default risk (although the two
spreads are highly correlated), since changes in LONG may also be
affected by changes in the value of the call option attached to most
corporate bonds.28

The most important observation to make from Table 6 is that SHORT
and DEFAULT respond rather differently to increasing monetary tightness,

as measured by the Romer and Romer dating. Generally, SHORT rises and

"Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New Test in the Spirit of
Friedman and Schwartz" in O.J. Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, eds., !M
Annual, MIT Press, 1989.
Macroeç9nomics
'°
I thank Richard Kopcke for pointing this out.

25

falls sympathetically with the Federal funds race RFF during the
contractionary episodes; in this sense, its behavior is similar to the

term structure spread TILT, which also moves with the funds rate. In
contrast, DEFAULT typically responds only with a lag, usually not rising

until after RFF and SHORT have fallen back.29 This is a bit of evidence
for the view that SHORT responds more to monetary policy than to

changing perceptions of default risk. The fact that SHORT still appears
to respond to the funds rate in 1979, when credit crunches were no

longer a possibility, seems to favor the alternative "simple imperfect
substitutability" version of the monetary policy hypothesis.3°
The second study of monetary policy we utilize is by Cook and

Hahn.31 Using Wall Street Journal reports, Cook and Hahn determined the
dates of approximately 75 changes in the Federal funds rate target which

occurred between September 1974 and September 1979. (This period was
chosen because, according to the authors, during this time the Federal

funds rate was a very precise indicator of monetary policy.) Using
daily data, Cook and Hahn showed that changes in the Federal funds
target caused changes in Treasury bill and bond interest rates; this
implies that the target changes conveyed new information and were not
simply passive adjustments to the existing level of rates.

For a similar result, compare the cyclical behavior of the
Federal funds rate, the commercial paper--Treasury spread, and the
spread between Baa and government bonds (an alternative default measure)
in Figures 1, 3, and 4. RFF and SHORT tend to lead the cycle, while
LONG clearly lags. It is odd though that changes in default premia
appear to be forecastable, since if true this would imply potential
profit Rpportunities.
A caveat is that, because of tax considerations, SHORT should
respond to the level of interest rates in general. This is analyzed

furthe 1below.
Timothy Cook and Thomas Hahn, "The Effect of Changes in the
Federal Funds Rate Target on Market Interest Rates in the 1970s",
Journal of Monetary Economics, 1989, 331-51.

26

Table 7 reports the results of regressing changes in the Federal

funds rate (RFF), the commercial paper- -Treasury bill spread (SHORT),

the Baa bond--Aaa bond spread (DEFAULT), and the term structure spread
(TILT) against changes in the Federal funds target, as identified by
Cook and Hahn. Since the Federal funds rate did not seem always to
respond contemporaneously to the target change (which implied that there
may have been market uncertainty about the size and timing of the
change), we used weekly data and regressed changes itt the interest rare

variables against the current and lagged change in the Federal funds
target.32

Table 7 shows that, first, the actual Federal funds rate responded
strongly to changes in the target during this period, with the
coefficients over the week of the change and the subsequent week adding

up approximately to one. The term structure variable also responded
strongly to target changes, and with high statistical significance; this
suggests that the tilt of the term structure is in fact largely driven

by monetary policy. Most interesting, though, is that the responses of
SHORT and DEFAULT to a change in the funds target are found to have been
in opposite directions during this period; with a one week lag, SHORT
responded positively and with high statistical significance to an
increase in the funds target, while DEFAULT, somewhat surprisingly,

actually fell. (The decline in DEFAULT is small but quite statistically
significant.)

The rather different responses of these two variables

are consistent with the previous observation, based on the Rower and

iL Reported results are for the whole sample, which contains many
weeks in which the change in the Federal funds target was zero.
Regressions restricted to weeks of non-zero change in targets gave
essentially the same results.

27

Romer dates, that SHORT is more closely related to monetary policy
indicators than to general default risk.

An estimated ecuation for the commercial paoer- -Treasury bill

spread
To get at the determinants of SHORT more directly, we specified
and estimated some simple regressions in monthly data.
A first consideration in modelling SHORT empirically is that some

account must be taken of tax effects. Unlike commercial paper returns,
Treasury bill yields are not taxable at the state and local level. On
this account the before-tax yields to the two instruments must be
related by RCP6MO —

t RT6MO, where t > 1 is a factor measuring the tax

advantage of T-bills. This relationship implies that RCP6MO - RT6MO —

(t

-

1) RT6MO, i.e., the spread increases proportionally to the level of

the bill yield. In contrast, the ratio RCP6MO/RT6MO —

t should be

independent of the level of bill yields. We followed previous work and
used as our dependent variable the ratio RCP6MO/RT6MO rather than the
spread RCP6MO - RT6M033; however, estimated equations using the spread

as the dependent variable and including the Treasury bill yield on the
right-hand side gave similar results.

The previous discussion suggests that the ratio RCPGMO/RT6MO
should depend on perceived default risk and the stance of monetary
policy. We used the Baa- -Aaa spread (DEFAULT) as a measure of default
risk and the Federal funds- -Treasury bond spread (FUNDS) as an indicator

See Timothy Q. Cook and Thomas A. Lawler, "The Behavior of the
Spread Between Treasury Bill Rates and Private Money Market Rates Since
1978", Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond,
November/December 1983, 3-15.

28

of monetary policy.34 Regressions of RCP6MO/RT6MO against these two
variables yielded significant coefficients with the right sign, but the

equations exhibited high serial correlation. After correction for
first-order serial correlation, we obtained

1) for January 1961- -June 1978 (the credit crunch" period):

RCP6MO/RT6MO —

1.10 + .0215 DEFAULT ÷ .0347 FUNDS
(46.8) (0.87)

rho—.84

(6.49)

R2—.743

2) and for August 1978--December 1989:

RCP6MO/RT6MO —

1.06 + .0077 DEFAULT + .0084
(51.9) (0.66)

rho— .84

FUNDS

(4.02)

R2-. .709

where rho is the estimated first-order serial correlation
coefficient and t-statistics are in parentheses.35
These results show that the ratio of commercial paper and Treasury
bill yields is positively related to default risk, as the theory

suggests, but that the relationship is rather weak.36 The relationship
We use the spread variable FUNDS rather than the Federal funds
rate itself in order to be sure that we are not attributing to monetary
policy possible effects (such as tax effects) arising from changes in
the general level of nominal interest rates. However, for the record,
replacing FUNDS with the Federal funds rate RFF led to essentially the

same rults.
The relatively high serial correlation suggested
alternative of doing the estimation in first differences.
about e same results as in the reported equations.
Higher t-statistics for DEFAULT were obtained in
alternative specification with SHORT on the left-hand side
of the Treasury bill rate on the right-hand side.

the
This gave
the
and the level

29

to monetary policy, as measured by FUNDS, is statistically much
stronger, and in the earlier period is economically significant as well.
(For example, if the Treasury bill rate is 8%, and the Federal funds

rate spread rises by one percentage point, the equation for the earlier
period implies an increase in the commercial paper- -Treasury bill spread

of about 28 basis points). In contrast, after 1978 the effect of the
Federal funds rate spread on the commercial paper- -Treasury bill spread
is only about one-fourth as large as before.
That the relationship of SHORT to monetary policy weakens but does

not disappear after 1978 is more consistent with the simple imperfect
substitutes version of the monetary hypothesis than with the credit

crunch version. In order to make a more direct comparison of the two
versions of the monetary hypothesis, we examined the effects of adding
to the equation for RCP6MO/RT6MO a variable equal to the spread between
the six-month Treasury bill rate and the deposit rate ceiling imposed by
Regulation Q, whenever that difference was positive.37 This new

variable, called CRUNCH, is supposed to capture episodes of
dis intermediation.

When CRUNCH and DEFAULT were included together in the equation for
RCP6MO/RT6MO, for the sample period January 1961--June 1978, CRUNCH
entered significantly and with the right sign in the OLS estimates.
However, with correction for serial correlation, CRUNCH entered with the

wrong sign. When both CRUNCH and FUNDS were included in the equation,
with correction made for serial correlation, the result was

The ceiling rate we used was the one corresponding to time
deposits of six months to one year.

30

RCP6MO/RT6MO — 1.15 + .0112 DEFAULT + .0499 FUNDS
(42.2) (0.43)
-

(8.24)

.0539 CRUNCH

(5.86)

rho— .82

R2— .779

In this equation FUNDS enters much as before but CRUNCH has the

wrong sign. Although these results should be taken oniy as suggestive,
they do tend to support the simple imperfect substitutes version of the
monetary hypothesis over the credit crunch version.

The Information Content of SHORT
At this point, we may return to the question of why SHORT is such

a good predictor. Some part of the reason appears to be that this
spread combines information about both monetary policy (and the state of

the money market) and expected default risk.38 As a test of this
answer, we ran one more experiment: We estimated prediction equations
for each of the ten macro variables used in Section 1, over the entire
sample period 1961-89.

Each equation included a constant, a trend, six

lags of the forecasted variable, six lags of DEFAULT (as a measure of
default risk), six lags of FUNDS (as a measure of monetary policy), and

six lags of SHORT. If SHORT is a good forecaster because it contains

The reader will have noticed that, based on the statistical
evidence we have reported, the relationship of SHORT to default risk
looks rather weak. We don't want to push that conclusion too far:
There are periods, such as 1970 (following the Penn Central bankruptcy)
and the spring and summer of 1982 (following the collapse of Drysdale
Securities and Penn Square) in which SHORT seems to respond strongly to
fears about possible defaults.

31

information about both default risk and monetary policy, in the presence
of DEFAULT and FUNDS its predictive power should be much weakened.

The results are in Table 8. For each prediction equation we give
the probabilities 1) that

DEFAULT and FUNDS should be excluded from

the equation (leaving only SHORT) and 2) that SHORT should be excluded

from the equation. The results are mildly supportive of the view that
information about default and monetary policy is important for

forecasting: In nine of the ten cases, the probability that both
DEFAULT and FUNDS can be excluded from the equation is lower than the

probability that SHORT can be excluded. On the other hand, SHORT
retains significance at conventional levels in a number of the

equations, despite the presence of the other two variables. It must be
either that SHORT somehow measures default risk and monetary policy more
accurately than do DEFAULT and FUNDS, or that this variable also
contains other kinds of information.39

III. Conclusion
This paper began by comparing the predictive power of a number of

different interest rates and spreads. While several of these variables
were found to contain a great deal of information about the future
evolution of the economy, the spread between the commercial paper rate
and the Treasury bill rate appears to be the best predictor- -

although

this predictive power has weakened recently.

We also considered whether SHORT remains informative when the
CD--Treasury bill spread is included in the forecasting equations; under
the imperfect substitutes story, the two spreads should contain similar
information. In this case SHORT can almost always be excluded. These
two spreads move so similarly that it doesn't appear to matter whLch is
used for forecasting.

32

We have made some progress toward explaining why this interest

rate spread is so informative. Besides containing information about
default risk, which is the natural first hypothesis, this spread seems

also to be a measure of monetary policy. (Indeed, if anything, the
relationship between the commercial paper- -Treasury bill spread and

monetary policy has historically been more clearcut than the spread's

relationship with default risk.) The commercial paper--Treasury bill
spread predicts well because it registers developments in both the nonmonetary and monetary sectors of the economy.

There are at least two possible explanations for why the
predictive power of the commercial paper- -Treasury bill was lower in the

1980's than previously. First, a number of changes in Federal Reserve
operating procedures during the decade reduced the reliability of
interest rates in general as indicators of the stance of monetary

policy. Second, financial innovation, deregulation, and international
integration may have increased the substitutability among various money
market instruments; all else equal, this would act to reduce the
sensitivity of interest rate spreads to monetary policy.
Whether the commercial paper- -Treasury bill spread will be as

useful a predictor in the future as it was in the past depends very much

on which of the two explanations just given is the more important. If
the first is correct, then to the extent that the Federal Reserve
returns to its earlier emphasis on interest rates as targets or
indicators, the predictive power of the spread (and of other interest

rate variables) should return. If the second explanation is the right
one, and commercial paper and Treasury bills have become effectively
perfect substitutes, then the spread should not be a useful predictor in

33

the future. Unforturately, it is too soon to tell which of these
explanations should be given the greater weight.

34

Data appendix
All the data used are from Data Resources, Inc. Full variable
definitions and DRI code names are listed below:

Monthly variables
Industrial production index- -

total

(JQIND)

Unemployment rate- -civilian (RUC)
Capacity utilization- -manufacturing- -

total

(UCAPFRBM)

Employed persons- -nonagricultural establishments (EEA)
Housing starts- -private, including farms (HUSTS)
Retail sales- -1982 dollars (STR82)
Personal income- -1982 dollars (YP82)

New orders, manufacturing durables goods--l982 dollars (0MD82)
Personal consumption expenditures (C)
Consumer price index (CPIU)
M2 money supply (MNY2)
Leading indicators- -composite index (JLEAD)

Effective rate on Federal funds (RNFEDFUNDNS)
Average market yield on 3-month government bills (RMGBS3NS) and 6month government bills (RMCBS6NS)
Rate on prime commercial paper- -6 months (RMCML6NS)
Rate on prime certificates of deposit, secondary market- -6 months
(RNCD6SECNS)

Yield on Treasury securities at constant maturity of 1 year
(RMCFCM@1NS) and 10 years (RMGFCM@1ONS)

Yield on Moody's

corporate bonds (RNMBCAAANS)

corporate bonds (RMM3CBAANS)

and

BAA

35

Weekly variables
Federal funds rate- -effective (FFYW)

Commercial paper rate, industrial--6 months (FIP18OYW)
Treasury bill rate- -6 months (FBL6YW)

Treasury bond rate, constant maturities- -l year (FCN1YYW) and 10
years (FCN1OYYW)

Seasoned corporate bond rate (Moody's Baa and Aaa), weekly
averages of daily figures (CAVBAA and CAVAAA)

Table 1.

Interest rates and spreads used in this study

Mnemonic

Definition

RAAA

Long-term corporate bond rate,
Aaa credit rating

RBAA

Long-term corporate bond rate,
Baa credit rating

RCP6MO

Commercial paper rate, highest
quality, six months' maturity

RFF

Federal funds rate, overnight

RT3MO

Treasury bill rate, 3 months

RT6MO

Treasury bill rate, 6 months

RT1

Treasury bill race, 1 year

RT1O

Treasury bond rate, 10 years

SHORT

RCP6MO - RT6MO

LONG

RBAA - RT1O

TILT

RT]. -

FUNDS

RFF - RT1O

DEFAULT

RBAA - RAAA

RT1O

Table 2. The information content of interest rates

Interest rates
Predicted
variable

RFF

RT3MO

RCP6MO

RT1O

Industrial
production

.0000
.0236
.1227

.0000
.0204
.1084

.0000
.0008
.0163

.0021
.0169
.0828

Unemployment
rate

.0000
.0089
.0133

.0001
.0220
.2232

.0000
.0043
.1446

.0001
.0113
.1197

Capacity
utilization

.0000
.0224
.1012

.0000
.0217
.0921

.0000
.0005
.0085

.0001
.0145
.1080

Employment

.0000
.0379
.4147

.0000
.0419
.2843

.0000
.0057
.1497

.0079
.0547
.2240

Housing

.0000
.0000

.0000
.0001
.0001

.0000
.0000
.0000

.0000
.0006
.0001

.0001
.0396
.0019

.0157
.7010

.0017
.3566

.0795
.6718

.1383

.0464

.3168

.0005
.0192
.0107

.0109
.1275
.1439

.0007
.0183
.0148

.2211
.2880
.2173

Durables
orders

.0000
.0038
.0031

.0005
.0720
.0942

.0000
.0189
.0286

.0059
.0329
.0269

Consumption

.0000
.0046
.0000

.0000
.0621
.0000

.0000
.0183
.0000

.0001
.1012
.0003

Inflation

.0000
.0000
.0001

.0000
.0000

.0000
.0000

.0003

.0002

.0004

.0021

starts

.0000
Retail
sales

Personal
incoae

.0001

Note: For definitions of interest rate variables, see Table 1.
Entries give
the probability that the interest rate variable can be excluded from a prediction
equation for the macro variable, for each of three specifications of the prediction
equation. Data are monthly, 1961-89.

Table 3. The information content of interest rate spreads

Interest rate spreads

Predicted
variable

SHORT

LONG

TILT

FUNDS

Industrial
production

.0000
.0001
.0014

.0000
.0000
.0012

.0000
.0707
.4144

.0000
.3004
.6166

Unemploytnent
rate

.0000
.0003
.0121

.0032
.0008
.0314

.0053
.4488
.6963

.0002
.1443
.0262

Capacity
utilization

.0000
.0000
.0003

.0000
.0000
.0032

.0001
.0738
.1378

.0001
.1197
.1063

Employment

.0000
.0015
.3816

.0000
.0003
.0511

.0001
.3691
.9062

.0002
.5683
.9818

Housing
starts

.0002
.0261
.0104

.0006
.0300
.0087

.0000
.0000
.0000

.0000
.0004
.0001

Retail
sales

.0012
.2607
.2026

.0199
.3630
.7911

.0000
.2502
.0087

.0000
.0087
.0002

Personal
income

.0000
.0000
.0000

.1117
.0075
.0461

.0015
.0400

.0964

.0001
.0082
.0138

Durables
orders

.0000
.0060
.0545

.0007
.0018
.0173

.0001
.2673
.3345

.0000
.0467
.0442

Consumption

.0000
.0006
.0002

.0348
.1664
.4888

.0000
.0207
.0000

.0000
.0017
.0000

Inflation

.1814
.1305
.2123

.0006
.0006
.0040

.0002
.0000
.0011

.0001
.0000
.0004

Note: For definitions of interest rate variables, see Table 1. For
explanation of the table, see notes to Table 2 and text.

Table 4. Best-fitting prediction equations
Model size (number of exiñanatory variables)

Predicted
variable
Industrial
production

1

2

SHORTS

SHORT
LONG

3

RCp6MOa
SHORT
LONG

4
RCp6MOr
SHORT
LONG
FUNDS

Unemployment

SHORTS

SHORT
LONG

RCP6MO
LONG
FUNDS

RCP6MOar
SHORT
LONG
FUNDS

SHORTS

RCP6MO
SHORT

RCp6MOa
SHORT
LONG

RCp6MOr
SHORT

rate

Capacity
utilization

LONG

FUNDS

Employment

SHORTS

RCP6MO
SHORT

RCP6MOar
SHORT
LONG

RFF
SHORT
LONG

TILT

Housing
starts

RCP6MO5

Retail

FUNDSSa

sales

RCP6MO
FUNDS

RFFa
LONG
FUNDS

RFFr

LONG
FUNDS

RFFr
LONG

RFF

FUNDS

LONG

SHORT
LONG
FUNDS

RCP6MO
FUNDS

Personal
income

SHORTSa

RCP6MO
SHORT

RCp6MOr
SHORT
TILT

RCP6MO
SHORT
LONG
TILT

Durables
orders

SHORTS

RFF
SHORT

RFFa
SHORT
LONG

RFFr
SHORT
LONG
FUNDS

Consumption

FUNDSS

RFF

RFF

SHORT

LONG
FUNDS

RFFar
SHORT
LONG
FUNDS

Table 4. (continued)
Modal size (number of exolanatorv variables)

Predicted
variable
Inflation

I
RFF5

2

3

4

LONG

RFFa

FUNDS

RCP6MO

RIFt
RCP6MO

FUNDS

LONG

FUNDS

Note: For each macro variable, the table lists the interest rate variables
included in the best prediction equation of the specified size. Data are monthly
and cover 1961.89. All equations include a constant, a trend, and six monthly lags
of the predicted variable. For definitions of interest rate variables, see Table 1.
Superscript (s) indicates best model by Schvarz criterion
(a) indicates best model by Akaike crierion
(r) indicates best model by adjusted R criterion

Table S. Marginal forecasting power of intereit rates and spreads for
industrial production, the unealployTnent rate, and inflation at six-month horizons

Forecasted variable

Period

1972.74

1975-77

Industrial
production

Unemployment
rate

Inflation

SHORT
(.0011)
.7704
.5997

RFF

RFF

(.0003)
.8743
.7542

(.0000)
.8965
.8S38

RCP6MO

SHORT
(.0000)
.6582
.7497

FUNDS
(.0000)
.5445
.2150

(.0000)

SHORT
(.0000)

.7069
.5372

.7692
.5435

FUNDS
(.0000)
.6387
.4169

(.0000)
.8907
.9532

1978-80

1981-83

1984.86

SHORT

SHORT

SHORT

(.0000)

(.0000)

1.5456
1.7403

1.3887
1.9950

SHORT

FUNDS

.9233
.6846

SHORT
(.0000)
.6605
.6346

SHORT
(.0000)
1.4480
1.6922

SHORT
(.0000)
1.2751
1.4578

TILT

(.0000)

1987-89

FUNDS
(.0000)
1.9002
2.6509

(.0000)

1.5382
1.8680

(.0000)
1.2782
1.9667

Note: For each variable and forecasting period, the interest rate variable
named is the one that fit best using data prior to the forecasting period.
(Variable names are defined in Table 1.) The number in parentheses is the
probability that all lags of the named interest rate variable could be excluded from
the prediction equation. The next two numbers are the ratios of (respectively) the
average absolute forecasting errors and the average squared forecasting errors
between equations with and without the interest rate variable, as discussed in the
text.

Table 6. Behavior of the Federal funds tate and interest rate spreads
in the periods around the Romer and Romer dates

Episode 1 (December 1968)

RIP
1968 0

H
1969 J

F

H
A
H
J
.1

A
S
0
N
D

5.92
5.81
6.02
6.30
6.64
6.79
7.41
8.67
8.90
8.61
9.19
9.15
9.00
8.85
8.97

SHORT

DEFAULT

TILT
.01
.05
.16
.30
.22

.39
.33
.12
.25

.75

.32
.66

.64
.66

.91.

.65

.09

.73
.72
.76
.89
.91
.89
.90

.10

1.20
1.48
1.42
1.14
1.17
1.27
.84
.95

.82
.78
.73

.04

.47

.88
.85
.66
.54
.75
.52

.93

Episode 2 (April 1974)

RYF
1974 F

K
A*
H
J
J

A
S

0
N
D
1975 J

F

K
A

8.97
9.35
10.51
11.31
11.93
12.92
12.01
11.34
10.06
9.45
8.53
7.13

6.24
5.54
5.49

SHORT
.87

.59

1.47
2.22
2.84
3.78
2.54
2.70
1.62
1.29
1.87
.94
.71
.44
.15

DEFAULT

TILT

.68
.61
.62
.68
.80
.76
.77
.94
1.21
1.71

-

1.74
1.98

-

2.03
1.81
1.63

-1.41
-1.62
-1.33

.08
.55
1.11.

1.20
1.13
.99

1.32
.83
.15
.02

.12
.67

Table 6. (continued)

Episode 3 (August 1978)
RFF
1978 J

J
S
0
N
D
1979 J

F
14

A
14

J
J
A

7.60
7.81
8.04
8.45
8.96
9.76
10.03
10.07
10.06
10.09

10.01
10.24
10.29
10.47
10.94

SHORT
.40
.47
.53
.45
.48
.99

1.07
.85

.60
.49
.38
.44
.65
.58
.90

DEFAULT

TILT
-

.72
.79
.73
.70
.80
.78
.88
.82
.89
.95

-

.37
.25
.10

.84

-

.22

.50
1.20
1.29
1.31

1.14
1.13
.94
.87
.66
.69
.95

.97
1.09
1.09
1.12

Episode 4 (October 1979)

RFF
1979 A
S

0*

N
D
1980 .7

F
14

A
14
.7

.7

A
S

0

10.94
11.43
13.77
13.18
13.78
13.82

14.13
17.19
17.61
10.98
9.47
9.03
9.61
10.87
12.81

SHORT
.90

1.40
1.57
1.44
.96
.82
.74

1.47
2.05
.64
.73

.23

.20
.47
.69

DEFAULT

TILT

1.12
1.10
1.27

1.23
1.32
1.33
1.19
1.49
2.15
2.18
2.13
1.58
1.51
1.68
1.92

.95

1.51
2.14
1.74
1.59

1.26
1.51
3.07
1.83
-

.79

-1.62
-1.60
.86
.01

.74

Note: The dates defining the four episodes were determined by Romer and Romer to be
dates at which monetary policy was tightened in order to fight inflation. Variable
names are defined in Table 1.

Table 7. Relation of changes in interest rate variables to changes in the Federal
funds

target

TARGET

TARGET1

.488
(4.72)

.668
(6.46)

-.0047
(.500)

-.063

.252
(3.45)

.0011
(.616)

-.043
(3.04)

-

.322
(6.87)

.350
(7.48)

Dependent

constant

RFF

- .0063

variable

(.468)

SH0RT

DEFAULT

TLLT

-

.0041

(.689)

the

(.863)

.020

(1.45)

sample period is September 1974 until September
the changes in the Federal funds target, in the
current and previous week respectively, as identified by Cook and Hahn. Other
variable names are defined in Table 1. t-statistics are in parentheses.

Note: Data are weekly and

1979. TARGET

and TARGET1 are

Table 8. The warginal forecasting power of the coercial paper rate-containing alternative variables

Treasury bill rate spread in equations

Marginal significance levels

All

H0:
lags of

FUNDS, DEFAULT
equal zero

H0:

All lags of
SHORT equal

equal zero

Forecasted

variable

.0000

.0004

.0048

.0133

Capacity

.0001

.0076

Employment

.0007

.2615

Housing
starts

.0000

.0022

Retail
sales

.0080

9680

Personal

.2534

.0171

Durables

.0156

.0530

Consumption

.0002

.0959

Inflation

.0000

.1211

Industrial

production
Unemployment
rate

utilization

income

orders

Notes: Entries are the probabilities that the given Set of forecasting
can be excluded from a prediction equation which includes six lags each of
the forecasted variable, FUNDS, DEFAULT, and SHORT. The daa are monthly and the
sample period is 1961-89. Variable names are defined in Table 1.

variables

C•)

N

LU

(I)

z=

LU

C)
NN-

-J

=

Lfl
N-

LU
LU

LU

C)

=
=
L()

C)
LI)

2

9

6

8

10

12

19

16

18

61

63

65
67

69

FIGURE

71

2

73

75

77

73

@1

83

C0I1MEFC1AL PAPER RATE

85

B7

89

C•)

NU)

rfl

=

z—

-

N.

N-

LU

a(U

LU

=

-

U-

La

NCD

Lr)

La

I

C)

I

(N

I

0

2.

3

II

53
61

63
65

67

IGUR[
U

63

71

Bflfl

73

77

7

81

83

55

MINUS 1-BOND ADTE

75

RflTE

87

89

LU

If)

IU)

z

NNN-

LU

U.)

-J
-J

>-

0.)

(U
N(U

U)

Li)

LU

C)

I

I

I

Cj

U-

If,

t)

z

C)
Cr)

=
Lfl

U-

t)
cf)

D

=
U-

C)
CD

CD

CD

U-

=

CD

cii

CD

(U

:r

