NBER RKt PM' SIES

ThE XD SiNRD, zmM'Ict, AND FDCThL
Q.ISIS IN

E7*T SIc*:

AN fl1ThTIL PARISON

Ben Benke
Harold Jans

Workiri Paper No. 3488

1IC EA1

NiTItThL aJREiIJ OF
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

ca±ridge,

02138

tcber 1990

This paper is part of NBR's research prcran in Ecxinic Fluctuations an

Finanoial Markets ard !'kDnetaxy Ecxranics. riy cpinions express1 are those
of the authors ard not those of the National Rireau of Ecx,iunic Research.

NB Workir Paper #3488
Cctcber 1990

ThE QDID SI7NDPD, DEFLATIC, AND FNCIkL QISIS Dl

1SIctl: AN INIHThTIctL 14PARISN

EAT

ABSTR

Pnt research has providel stron circntantial evidence for the
prcçositici that sustainI deflation—the result of a mismanaged
international gold starxard—was a major cause of the Great Depression of the

1930s. Less clear is the itcthanism by 'which deflation led to depression. In

this paper cnsider several channels, I luflr effects cperatir thrcuh
real wages anl thrgh interest rates. CXr foo.s, however, is on the
disruptive effect of deflation on the financial system, partiQllarly the
bankirq system. Thecry su3gests that fan ir prices, by reducixxj the net
worth of banks arri borrowers, cn affect flows of credit ard thus real

activity. Usir annual data for twenty-four cxxintries, we confirm that
cxxmtries 'which (for historical or institutional reasons) were nre
vulnerable to severe banJd.n panics also suffered iaidi worse depressions, as

did intries which reained on the gold stardard. We also fird that there
may have been a feedback locp thrh which bankIrx panics, partioularly
those in the United States, intensified the worldwide deflation.

Ben Bernanke
Woedrow Wilson School

Harold JanEs

Princeton University
Princeton, HI 08544

Priieton University

Departrent of History
Princeton, NY 08544

I

The Gold Standard, Deflation, and Financial Crisis in the Great
Depression: An International Comparison

Ben Bernanke
Harold James

I.

Introduction

Recent research on the causes of the Great Depression has laid
much of the blame for that catastrophe on the doorstep of the

international gold standard. In his new book, Temin (1989) argues that
structural flaws of the interwar gold standard, in conjunction with
policy responses dictated by the gold standard's "rules of the game",
made an international monetary contraction and deflation almost

inevitable. Eichengreen and Sachs (1985) have presented evidence that
countries which abandoned the gold standard and the associated
contractionary monetary policies recovered from Depression more quickly

than countries that remained on gold. Research by Hamilton (1987,1988)
supports the propositions that contractionary monetary policies in
France and the U.S. initiated the Great Slide, and that the defense of
gold standard parities added to the deflationary pressure.'
The gold standard-based explanation of the Depression (which we

will elaborate in Section 2) is in most respects compelling. The length
and depth of the deflation during the late 1920s and early l930s
strongly suggest a monetary origin, and the close correspondence (across
both space and time) between deflation and nations' adherence to the
gold standard shows the power of that system to transmit contractionary

monetary shocks. There is also a high correlation in the data between
deflation (falling prices) and depression (falling output), as the
previous authors have noted and we will demonstrate again below.

2

If the argument as it has been made so far has a weak link,

however, it is probably the explanation of how the deflation induced by
the malfunctioning gold standard caused depression; that is, what was

the source of this massive monetary non-neutrality?2 The goal of our
paper is to try to understand better the mechanisms by which deflation

may have induced depression in the 1930s. We consider several channels
suggested by earlier work, in particular effects operating through real

wages and through interest rates. Our focus, however,is on a channel
of transmission that has been largely ignored by the recent gold
standard literature; namely,

the

disruptive effect of deflation on the

financial system.

Deflation (and the constraints on central bank policy imposed by
the gold standard) was an important cause of banking panics, which

occurred in a number of countries in the early 1930s. As discussed for
the case of the U.S. by Bernanke (1983), to the extent that bank panics
interfere with normal flows of credit, they may affect the performance
of the real economy; indeed, it is possible that economic performance
may be affected even without major panics, if the banking system is

sufficiently weakened. Because severe banking panics are the form

financial

of

crisis most easily identified empirically, we will focus on

their effects in this paper. However, we don't want to lose sight of a
second potential effect of falling prices on the financial sector, which
is "debt-deflation" (Fisher 1933, Bernanke 1983, Bernanke and Gertler

1990). By increasing the real value of nominal debts and promoting
insolvency of borrowers, deflation creates an environment of financial
distress in which the incentives of borrowers are distorted, and in

3

which it is difficult to extend new credit. Again, this provides a
means by which falling prices can have real effects.

To examine these links between deflation and depression, we take a

comparative approach (as did Eichengreen and Sachs). Using an annual
data set covering twenty-four countries, we try to measure the

differences between (for example) countries on and off the gold
standard, or between countries experiencing banking panics and those

that did not. A weakness of our approach is that, lacking objective
indicators of the seriousness of financial problems, we are forced to

rely on dummy variables to indicate periods of crisis. Despite this
problem, we generally do find an important role for financial crises- -

particularly

banking panics- - in explaining the link between falling

prices and falling output. Countries in which, for institutional or
historical reasons, deflation led to panics or other severe banking
problems had significantly worse depressions than countries in which

banking was more stable. In addition, there may have been a feedback
loop through which banking panics, particularly those in the United

States, intensified the severity of the worldwide deflation. Because of
data problems, we do not provide direct evidence for the debt-deflation

mechanism; however, we do find that much of the apparent impact of
deflation on output is unaccounted for by the mechanisms we explicitly
consider, leaving open the possibility that debt-deflation was
important.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly
recapitulates the basic case against the interwar gold standard as a
source of deflation and depression, and provides some new evidence

consistent with this view. Section 3 takes a preliminary look at some

4

mechanisms by which deflation may have been transmitted to depression.
In Section 4 we provide an overview of the financial crises that

occurred during the interwar period. Section 5 presents and discusses
our main empirical results on the effects of financial crisis in the
l930s, and Section 6 concludes.

2.

The Gold

Standard and Deflation

In this section we discuss, and provide some new evidence for, the
claim that a mismanaged interwar gold standard was responsible for the
worldwide deflation of the late 1920s and early 1930s.
The gold standard- -generally viewed at the time as an essential

source of the relative prosperity of the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries--was suspended at the outbreak of World War I.
Wartime suspension of the gold standard was not in itself unusual;
indeed, Bordo and Kydland (1990) have argued that wartime suspension- -

followed

by a return to gold at pre-war parities as soon as possible- -

should be considered part of the gold standard's normal operation.
Bordo and Kydland pointed out that a reputation for returning to gold at
the pre-var parity, and thus at something close to the pre-war price
level, would have made it easier for a government to sell nominal bonds

and would have increased attainable seiguorage. A credible commitment
to the gold standard thus would have had the effect of allowing war
spending to be financed at a lower total cost.

Possibly for these reputational reasons, and certainly because of
widespread unhappiness with the chaotic monetary and financial
conditions that followed the war (there were hyperinflations in central
Europe and more moderate but still serious inflations elsewhere), the

5

desire to return to gold in the early 1920s was strong. Of much concern
however was the perception that there was not enough gold available to

satisfy world money demands without deflation. The 1922 Economic and
Monetary Conference at Genoa addressed this issue by recommending the

adoption of a gold exchange standard, in which convertible foreign
exchange reserves (principally dollars and pounds) as well as gold would
be used to back national money supplies, thus "economizing" on gold.

Although "key currencies" had been used as reserves before the war, the
Genoa recommendations led to a more widespread and officially sanctioned
use

of

this practice (Lindert 1969; Eichengreen 1987).

During the 1920s the vast majority of the major countries

succeeded in returning to gold. (The first column of Table 1 gives the
dates of return for the countries in our data set.) Britain returned at
the pre-var parity in 1925, despite Keynes' argument that at the old

parity the pound would be overvalued. By the end of 1925, out of a list
of 48 currencies given by the League of Nations, 28 had been pegged to

gold (Memorandum on Currency and Central Banks). France returned to
gold gradually, following the Poincare' stabilization, although at a new

parity widely believed to undervalue the franc. By the end of 1928,
except for China and a few small countries on the silver standard, only
Spain, Portugal, Rumania, and Japan had not been brought back into the

gold standard system. Rumania went back on gold in 1929, Portugal did
so in practice also in 1929 (although not officially until 1931), and

Japan in December 1930. In the same month the Bank for International
Settlements gave Spain a stabilization loan, but the operation was
frustrated by a revolution in April 1931, carried out by republicans
who- -as one of the most attractive features of their program- - oppposed

6

the foreign stabilization credits. Spain thus did not join the
otherwise nearly universal membership of the gold standard club.
[Table I about herel

The classical gold standard of the pre-war period functioned
reasonably smoothly and without a major convertibility crisis for more

than thirty years. In contrast, the interwar gold standard, established
between 1925 and 1928, had substantially broken down by 1931 and

disappeared by 1936. An extensive literature has analyzed the
differences between the classical and interwar gold standards. This
literature has focused, with varying degrees of emphasis, both on
fundamental economic problems that complicated trade and monetary

adjustment in the interwar period and on technical problems of the
interwar gold standard itself.
In terms of "fundamentals", Temin (1989) has emphasized the
effects of the Great War, arguing that, ultimately, the war itself was

the shock that initiated the Depression. The legacy of the war
included- -besides physical destruction, which was relatively quickly
repaired- -new political borders drawn apparently without economic

rationale; substantial overcapacity in some sectors (such as agriculture
and heavy industry) and undercapacity in others, relative to long-run
equilibriun; and reparations claims and international war debts that

generated fiscal burdens and fiscal uncertainty. Some writers (notably
Charles Kindleberger) have also pointed to the fact that the pre-war
gold standard was a hegemonic system, with Great Britain the

unquestioned center. In contrast, in the interwar period the relative
decline of Britain, the inexperience and insularity of the new potential

7

hegemon (the United States), and ineffective cooperation among central
banks left no one able to take responsibility for the system as a whole.
The technical problems of the interwar gold standard included:

1) The asymmetry between surplus and deficit countries in the
required monetary response to gold flows. Temin suggests, correctly we
believe, that this was the most important structural flaw of the gold

standard. In theory, under the rules of the game", central banks of
countries experiencing gold inflows were supposed to assist the pricespecie flow mechanism by expanding domestic money supplies and
inflating, while deficit countries were supposed to reduce money

supplies and deflate. In practice, the need to avoid a complete loss of
reserves and an end to convertibility forced deficit countries to comply
with this rule; but, in contrast, no sanction prevented surplus
countries from sterilizing gold inflows and accumulating reserves

indefinitely, if domestic objectives made that desirable. Thus there
was a potential deflationary bias in the gold standard's operation.

This asymmetry between surplus and deficit countries also existed
in the pre-war period, but with the important difference that the prewar gold standard centered around the operations of the Bank of England.
The Bank of England of course had to hold enough gold to ensure

convertibility, but as a profit-making institution it also had a strong
incentive not to hold large stocks of barren gold (as opposed to

interest-paying assets). Thus the Bank managed the gold standard (with
the assistance of other central banks) so as to avoid both sustained
inflows and sustained outflows of gold; and, indeed, it helped ensure

continuous convertibility with a surprisingly low level of gold

reserves. In contrast, the two major gold surplus countries of the

8

interwar period, the U.S. and France, had central banks with little or
no incentive to avoid accumulation of gold.

The deflationary bias of the asymmetry in required adjustments was
magnified by statutory fractional reserve requirements imposed on many

central banks, especially the new central banks, after the war. While
Britain, Norway, Finland, and Sweden had a fiduciary issue- -a fixed note

supply backed only by domestic government securities, above which 100%
gold backing was required- -most countries required instead that minimum

gold holdings equal a fixed fraction (usually close to the Federal

Reserve's 40%) of central bank liabilities. These rules had two
potentially harmful effects:
First, just as required "reserves" for modern commercial banks are

not really available for use as true reserves, a large portion of
central bank gold holdings were immobilized by the reserve requirements

and could not be used to settle temporary payments imbalances. For
example, in 1929, according to the League of Nations, for 41 countries
with a total gold reserve of $9,378 million, only $2,178 million

were

"surplus" reserves, with the rest required as cover. (League of Nations

1944, 12). In fact, this overstates the quantity of truly free
reserves, because markets and central banks became very worried when

reserves fell within 10% of the minimum. The upshot of this is that
deficit countries could lose very little gold before being forced to
reduce their domestic money supplies; while, as we have noted, the
absence of any maximum reserve limit allowed surplus countries to

accept

gold inflows without inflating.

The second and related effect of the fractional reserve
requirement has to do with the relationship between gold outflows and

9

domestic monetary contraction. With fractional reserves, the
relationship between gold outflow and the reduction in the money supply
was not one-for-one; with a 40% reserve requirement, for example, the
impact on the money supply of a gold outflow was 2.5 times the external

loss. So again, loss of gold could lead to an immediate and sharp
deflationary impact, not balanced by inflation elsewhere.
2)

The pyramiding of reserves. As we have noted, under the

interwar gold-exchange standard, countries other than those with reserve
currencies were encouraged to hold convertible foreign exchange reserves
as a partial (or in some cases, as a nearly complete) substitute for

gold. ut these convertible reserves were in turn usually only
fractionally backed by gold. Thus, just as a shift by the public from
fractionally backed deposits to currency would lower the total domestic
money supply, the gold-exchange system opened up the possibility that a
shift of central banks from foreign exchange reserves to gold might
lower the world money supply, adding another deflationary bias to the

system. Central banks did abandon foreign exchange reserves en masse in
the early 1930s, when the threat of devaluation made foreign exchange

assets quite risky. According to Eichengreen (1987), however, the
statistical evidence is not very clear on whether central banks after
selling their foreign exchange simply lowered their cover ratios- -which
would have had no direct effect on money supplies- -or shifted into gold
-

-which would have been contractionary. Even if the central banks

responded only by lowering cover ratios, however, this would have
increased the sensitivity of their money supplies to any subsequent
outflow of reserves.

10

3) InsufficIent powers of central banks. An important
institutional feature of the interwar gold standard is that, for a

majority of the important continental European central banks, open

market operations were not permitted or were severely restricted. This
limitation on central bank powers was usually the result of the

stabilization programs of the early and mid-1920s: By prohibiting
central banks from holding or dealing in significant quantities of
government securities, and thus making monetization of deficits more
difficult, the architects of the stabilizations hoped to prevent future

inflation. This forced the central banks to rely on discount policy
(the terms at which they would make loans to commercial banks) as the

principal means of affecting the domestic money supply. However, in a
number of countries the major commercial banks borrowed very
infrequently from the central banks, implying that except in crisis
periods the central bank's control over the money supply might be quite
weak.

The loosening of the link between the domestic money supply and
central bank reserves may have been beneficial in some cases during the
1930s, if it moderated the monetary effect of reserve outflows.
However, in at least one very important case the inability of a central
bank to conduct open market operations may have been quite

destabilizing: As discussed by Eichengreen (1986), the Bank of France,
which was the recipient of massive gold inflows until 1932, was one of
the banks that was prohibited from conducting open market operations.

This severely limited the ability of the Bank to translate its gold
inflows into monetary expansion, as should have been done in obedience

to the rules of the game. The failure of France to inflate meant that

11

it continued to attract reserves, thus imposing deflation on the rest of
the world.3

Given both the fundamental economic problems of the international

economy and the structural flaws of the gold standard system, even a
relatively minor deflationary impulse might have had significant

repercussions. As it happened, both of the two major gold surplus
countries--France and the U.S., who at the time together held close to
60% of the world's monetary gold- -took deflationary paths in 1928-29
(Hamilton 1987).

In the French case, as we have already noted, the deflationary

shock took the form of a largely sterilized gold inflow. For several
reasons- - including a successful stabilization with attendant high real

interest rates, a possibly undervalued franc, the lifting of exchange

controls, and the perception that France was a safe haven' for capital
-

-beginning

in early 1928 gold flooded into that country,

an

inflow that

was to last until 1932. In 1928, France controlled about 15% of the
total of monetary gold held by the twenty-four countries in our data set
(Board of Governors 1943); this share, already disproportionate to
France's economic importance, increased to 18% in 1929, 22% in 1930, 28%

in 1931, and 32% in 1932. Since the U.S. share of monetary gold
remained stable at something greater than 40% of the total, the inflow
to France implied significant losses of gold by countries such as
Germany, Japan, and the U.K.

With its accumulation of gold, France should have been expected to
inflate; but in part because of the restrictions on open market
operations discussed above and in part because of deliberate policy

12

choices, the impact of the gold inflow on French prices was minimal.
The French monetary base did increase with the inflow of reserves, but
because economic growth led the demand for francs to expand even more

quickly, the country actually experienced a wholesale price deflation of
almost 11% between January 1929 and January 1930.
Hamilton (1987) also documents the monetary tightening in the U.S.
in 1928, a contraction motivated in part by the desire to avoid losing
gold to the French but perhaps even more by the Federal Reserve's

determination to slow down stock market speculation. The U.S. price
level fell about 4% over the course of 1929. A business cycle peak was
reached in the U.S. in August 1929, and the stock market crashed in
October.

The initial contractions in the U.S. and France were largely selfinflicted wounds;

no

binding external constraint forced the U.S. to

deflate in 1929, and it would certainly have been possible for the
French government to grant the Bank of France the power to conduct

expansionary open market operations. However Temin argues that, once
these destabilizing policy measures had been taken, little could be done
to avert deflation and depression, given'-the commitment of central banks

to maintenance of the gold standard. Once the deflationary process had
begun, central banks engaged in competitive deflation and a scramble for
gold, hoping by raising cover ratios to protect their currencies against

speculative attack. Attempts by any individual central bank to reflare
were met by immediate gold outflows, which forced the central bank to

raise its discount rate and deflate once again. According to Temin,
even the U.S., with its large gold reserves, faced this constraint.
Thus Temin disagrees with the suggestion of Friedman and Schwartz (1963)

13

that the Federal Reserve's failure to protect the U.S. money supply was
due to misunderstanding of the problem or a lack of leadership; instead,
he claims, given the commitment to the gold standard (and, presunably,
the absence of effective central bank cooperation), the Fed had little

choice but to let the banks fail and the money supply fall.
For our purposes here it does not matter much to what extent

central bank choices could have been other than what they were. For the
positive question of what caused the Depression, we need only note that
a monetary contraction began in the U.S. and France and was propagated
throughout the world by the international monetary standard.4
If monetary contraction propagated by the gold standard was the
source of the worldwide deflation and depression, then countries

abandoning the gold standard (or never adopting it) should have avoided
much of the deflationary pressure. This seems to have been the case.
In an important paper, Choudhri and Kochin (1980) documented that Spain,

which never restored the gold standard and allowed its exchange rate to
float, avoided the declines in prices and output that affected other

European countries. Choudhri and Kochin also showed that the
Scandinavian countries, which left gold along with the U.K. in 1931,
recovered from Depression much more quickly than other small European

countries that remained longer on the gold standard. Much of this had
been anticipated in an insightful essay by Haberler (1976).
Eichengreen and Sachs (1985) similarly focused on the beneficial

effects of currency depreciation (i.e., abandonment of the gold standard

or devaluation). For a sample of ten European countries, they showed
that depreciating countries enjoyed faster growth of exports and
industrial production than countries which did not depreciate.

14

Depreciating countries also experienced lower real wages and greater
profitability, which presumably helped to increase production.
Eichengreen and Sachs argued that depreciation, in this context, should
not necessarily be thought of as a "beggar-thy-neighbor" policy; because
they reduced constraints on the growth of world money supplies,
depreciations may have conferred benefits abroad as well as at home
(although a coordinated depreciation presumably would have been better
than the uncoordinated sequence of depreciations that in fact took

place).5
Some additional evidence of the effects of maintaining or leaving
the gold standard, much in the spirit of Eichengreen and Sachs but using
data from a larger set of•countries, is given in our Tables 2 through 4.
These tables summarize the relationships between the decision to adhere
to the gold standard and some key macroeconomic variables, including
wholesale price inflation (Table 2), some indicators of national
monetary policies (Table 3), and industrial production growth (Table 4).
To construct these tables, we divided our sample of 24 countries6 into

four categories: 1) countries not on the gold standard at all (Spain)
or leaving prior to 1931 (Australia and New Zealand); 2) countries
abandoning the full gold standard in 1931 (14 countries); 3) countries
abandoning the gold standard between 1932 and 1935 (Rumania in 1932, the
U.S. in 1933, Italy in 1934, and Belgium in 1935); and 4) countries
still on the full gold standard as of 1936 (France, Netherlands,

Poland).7

Tables 2 and 4 give the data for each country, as well as

averages for the large cohort of countries abandoning gold in 1931, for
the remnant of the gold bloc still on gold in 1936, and (for 1932-35,
when there were a significant number of countries in each category) for

15

all gold standard and non-gold standard countries. Since Table 3
reports data on four different variables, in order to save space only
the averages are given in that table.8

The link between deflation and adherence to the gold standard,

shown in Table 2, seems quite clear. As noted by Choudhri and Kochin,
Spain's abstention from the gold standard insulated that country from
the general deflation; New Zealand and Australia, presumably because
they retained links to sterling despite early abandonment of the strict

gold standard, did however experience some deflation. Among countries
on the gold standard as of 1931, there is a rather uniform experience of

about a 13% deflation in both 1930 and 1931. But after 1931 there is a
sharp divergence between those countries on and those off the gold

standard. Price levels in countries off the gold standard have
stabilized by 1933 (with one or two exceptions), and these countries

experience mild inflations in 1934-36. In contrast, the gold standard
countries continue to deflate- -although at a slower rate- -until the gold

standard's dissolution in 1936.
[Table 2 about here]

With such clearly divergent price behavior between countries on
and off gold, one would expect to see similarly divergent behavior in

monetary policy. Table 3 compares the average behavior of the growth
rates of three monetary aggregates, called for short MO, Ml, and M2, and

of changes in the central bank discount rate. MO corresponds to money
and notes in circulation, Ml is the sum of MO and commercial bank

deposits, and M2 is the sum of Ml and savings bank deposits.9 The
expected differences in the monetary policies of the gold and non-gold
countries seem to be in the data, although somewhat less clearly than we

16

had anticipated: In particular, despite the twelve percentage point
difference in rates of deflation between gold and non-gold countries in
1932, the differences in average money growth in that year between the
two classes of countries are minor; possibly, higher inflation

expectations in the countries abandoning gold reduced money demand and

thus became self-confirming. In 1933 through 1935, however, the various
monetary indicators are more consistent with the conclusion stressed by
Eichengreen and Sachs, that leaving the gold standard afforded countries
more latitude to expand their money supplies and thus to escape
deflation.

(Table 3 about here
The basic proposition of the gold standard-based explanation of
the Depression is that, because of its deflationary impact, adherence to

the gold standard had very adverse consequences for real activity. The
validity of this proposition is shown rather clearly by Table 4, which
gives growth rates of industrial production for the countries in our

sample. While the countries which were to abandon the gold standard in
1931 did slightly worse in 1930 and 1931 than the nations of the Gold
Bloc, subsequent to leaving gold these countries performed much better.
Between 1932 and 1935, growth of industrial production in countries not
on gold averaged about seven percentage points a year better than
countries remaining on gold- -a very substantial effect.

(Table 4 about here]

In summary, data from our sample of twenty-four countries support
the view that there was a strong link between adherence to the gold

standard and the severity of both deflation and depression. The data
are also consistent with the hypothesis that increased freedom to engage

17

in

monetary expansion was a reason for the better performance of

countries leaving the gold standard early in the 1930s, although the
evidence in this case is a bit less clearcut.

3. The Link Between Deflation and Depression
Given the above discussion and evidence, it seems reasonable to
accept the idea that the worldwide deflation of the early 1930s was the
result of a monetary contraction transmitted through the international

gold standard. But this raises the more difficult question of what
precisely were the channels linking deflation (falling prices) and

depression (falling output); This section takes a preliminary look at
some suggested mechanisms. We first introduce here two principal
channels emphasized in recent research, then discuss the alternative of
induced financial crisis.

1) Real wages. If wages possess some degree of nominal rigidity,
then falling output prices will raise real wages and lower labor demand.

Downward stickiness of wages (or of other input costs) will also lower

profitability, potentially reducing investment. This channel is
stressed by Eichengreen-Sachs (see in particular their 1986 paper) and
has also been emphasized by Newell and Syinons (1988).

Some evidence on the behavior of real wages during the Depression
is presented in our Table 5, which is similar in format to Tables 2-4.

Note that Table S uses the wholesale price index (the most widely

available price index) as the wage deflator, According to this table,
there were indeed large real wage increases in most countries in 1930

and 1931. After 1931 countries leaving the gold standard experienced a
mild decline in real wages, while real wages in gold standard countries

18

exhibited a mild increase. These findings are similar to those of
Eichengreen and Sachs (1985).
(Table 5 about herej

The reliance on nominal wage stickiness to explain the real
effects of the deflation is consistent with the Keynesian tradition, but

is nevertheless somewhat troubling in this context. Given 1) the
severity of the unemployment that was experienced during that time, 2)
the relative absence of long-term contracts and the weakness of unions,
and 3) the presumption that the general public was aware that prices and

hence the cost of living were failing, it is hard to understand how

nominal wages could have been so unresponsive. Wages had fallen quickly
in many countries in the contraction of 1921-22. In the U.S., nominal
wages were maintained until the fall of 1931 (possibly by an agreement
among large corporations; see O'Brien 1989), but fell sharply after
that; in Germany, the government actually tried to depress wages early

in the Depression. Why then do we see these large real wage increases
in the data?

One

possibility

is measurement problems. There are a number of

issues, such as changes in skill and industrial composition, that make
measuring the cyclical movement in real wages difficult even today.
Bernanke (1986) has argued, in the U.S. context, that because of

sharp

reductions in workweeks and the presence of hoarded labor, the measured
real wage may have been a poor measure of the marginal cost of labor.
Also in the category of measurement issues, Eichengreen and Hacton
(1987) correctly point out that nominal wages should be deflated by the

relevant product prices, not a general price index. Their table of
product wage indices (nominal wages relative to manufacturing prices) is

19

reproduced for 1929-38 and for the five countries for which data are

available as our Table 6. Like Table 5, this table also shows real
wages increasing in the early l930s, but overall the correlation of real

wage increases and depression doesnt appear particularly good. Note
that Germany. which had probably the worst unemployment problem of any

major country, has almost no increase in real wages10; the UK. which
began to recover in 1932. has real wages increasing on a fairly steady
trend during its recovery period; and the US has only a small dip in
real wages at the beginning of its recovery, followed by more real wage

growth. The case for nominal wage stickiness as a transmission
mechanism thus seems, at this point, somewhat mixed.
[Table 6 about here]

2) Real interest rates. In a standard IS-LM macro model, a
monetary contraction depresses output by shifting the Ut curve

leftwards,

raising real interest rates, and thus reducing spending.

However, as Temin (1976) pointed out in his original critique of
Friedman and Schwartz, it is real rather than nominal money balances
that affect the Ut curve; and since prices were falling sharply, real
money balances fell little or even rose during the contraction.
Even if real money balances are essentially unchanged, however,
there is another means by which deflation can raise ex ante real

interest rates: Since cash pays zero nominal interest, in equilibrium
no asset can bear a nominal interest rate that is lower than its

liquidity and risk premia relative to cash. Thus an expected deflation
of ten per cent will impose a real rate of at least ten per cent on the

economy, even with perfectly flexible prices and wages. In an IS-Ut
diagram drawn with the nominal interest rate on the vertical axis, an

20

increase in expected deflation amounts to a leftward shift of the IS
curve.

Whether the deflation of the early 1930s was anticipated has been

extensively debated (although almost entirely in the U.S. context). We
will add here two points in favor of the view that the extent of the
worldwide deflation was less than fully anticipated.
First, there is the question of whether the nominal interest rate
floor was in fact binding in the deflating countries (as it should have

been if this mechanism is to operate). Although interest rates on
government debt in the U.S. often approximated zero in the 1930s, it is

less clear that this was true for other countries. The yield on French
treasury bills, for example, rose from a low of 0.75% in 1932 to 2.06%
in 1933, 2.25% in 1934, and 3.38% in 1935; during 1933-35 the nominal
yield on French treasury bills exceeded that of British treasury bills

by several hundred basis points on average)1
Second, the view that deflation was largely anticipated must
contend with the fact that nominal returns on safe assets were very

similar in countries abandoning and staying on gold. If continuing
deflation was anticipated in the gold standard countries, while
inflation was expected in countries leaving gold, the similarity of
nominal returns would have implied large expected differences in real

returns. Such differences are possible in equilibrium, if they are
counterbalanced by expected real exchange rate changes; nevertheless

differences in expected real returns between countries on and off gold
on the order of 11-12% (the realized difference in returns between the

two

blocs

in 1932) seem unlikely)2

21

3. Financial crisis. A third mechanism by which deflation can
induce depression, not considered in the recent literature, works
through deflation's effect on the operation of the financial system.
The source of the non-neutrality is simply that debt instruments

(including deposits) are typically set in money terms. Deflation thus
weakens the financial positions of borrowers, both nonfinancial firms
and financial intermediaries.

Consider first the case of intermediaries (banks).13 Bank
liabilities (primarily deposits) are almost entirely fixed in nominal

terms. On the asset side, depending on the type of banking system (see
below), banks hold either primarily debt instruments, or combinations of

debt and equity. Ownership of debt and equity is essentially equivalent
to direct ownership of capital; in this case, therefore, the bank's
liabilities are nominal and its assets are real, so that an
unanticipated deflation begins to squeeze the bank's capital position

immediately. When only debt is held as an asset, the effect of
deflation is for a while neutral or mildly beneficial to the bank.
However, when borrowers' equity cushions are exhausted, the bank becomes
the owner of its borrowers' real assets, so subsequently this type of
bank will also be squeezed by deflation.
As pressure on the bank's capital grows, according to this
argument, its normal functioning will be impeded; for example, it may

have to call in loans or refuse new ones. Eventually, impending
exhaustion of bank capital leads to a depositors' run, which eliminates

the bank or drastically curtails its operation. The final result is

usually a government takeover of the intermediation process. For
example, a common scenario during the Depression was for the government

22

to finance an acquisition of failing banks by issuing its own debt; this
debt was held (directly or indirectly) by consumers, in lieu of

(vanishing) commercial bank deposits. Thus, effectively, government
agencies became part of the intermediation chain.14

Although the problems of the banks were perhaps the more dramatic
in the Depression, the same type of non-neutrality potentially affects

nonfinancial firms and other borrowers. The process of "debt
deflation", i.e., the increase in the real value of nominal debt
obligations brought about by falling prices, erodes the net worth

position of borrowers. A weakening financial position both affects the
borrower's actions (e.g.. the firm may try to conserve financial capital
by laying off workers or cutting back on investment) and also, by
worsening the agency problems in the borrower-lender relationship.

impairs access to new credit. Thus, as discussed in detail in Bernanke
and Certler (1990), "financial distress" (such as that induced by debt-

deflation) can in principle impose deadweight losses on an economy, even
if firms do not undergo liquidation.
Before trying to assess the quantitative impact of these and other
channels on output, we briefly discuss the international incidence of
financial crisis during the Depression.

4. Interwar Banking and Financial Crises
Financial crises were of course a prominent feature of the

interwar period. We focus in this section on the problems of the
banking sector, and to a lesser extent on the problems of domestic

debtors in general, as suggested by the discussion above. Stock market

23

crashes and defaults on external debt were also important, of course,
but for the sake of space will take a subsidiary role here.
Table 7 gives a chronology of some important interwar banking

crises. The episodes listed actually cover a considerable range in
terms of severity, as the capsule descriptions should make clear.

However the chronology should also make the points that 1) quite a few
different countries experienced significant banking problems during the
interwar period, and 2) these problems reached a very sharp peak between
the spring and fall of 1931, following the Creditanstalt crisis in May
1931 as well as the intensification of banking problems in Germany.
[Table 7 about here)

A statistical indicator of banking problems, emphasized by
Friedman and Schwartz (1963), is the deposit-currency ratio. Data on
the changes in the commercial bank deposit-currency ratio for our panel

of countries is presented in Table 8. It is interesting to compare this
table with the chronology in Table 7. Most but not all of the major
banking crises were associated with sharp drops in the deposit-currency
ratio; the most important exception is in 1931 in Italy, where the
government was able to keep secret much of the banking system's problems

until a government takeover was effected. On the other hand, there were
also significant drops in the deposit-currency ratio that are not
associated with panics; restructurings of the banking system and
exchange rate difficulties account for some of these episodes.

What caused the banking panics? At one level, the panics were an
endogenous response to deflation and the operation of the gold standard

regime. When the peak of the world banking crisis came in 1931, there
had already been almost two years of deflation, and accompanying

24

depression. Consistent with the analysis at the end of the last
section, falling prices lowered the nominal value of bank assets, but

not the nominal value of bank liabilities. In addition, the rules of
the gold standard severely limited the ability of central banks to
ameliorate panics by acting as a lender of last resort; indeed, since

banking panics often coincided with exchange crises (as we discuss
further below), in order to maintain convertibility central banks
typically tightened monetary policy in the face of panics.

Supporting

the connection of banking problems with deflation and "rules of the
game" constraints is the observation that there were virtually no

serious banking panics in any country after abandonment of the gold
standard- -although it is also true that by time the gold standard was

abandoned, strong financial reform measures had also been taken in most
countries.

However, while deflation and adherence to the gold standard were
necessary conditiona for panics, they were not sufficient; a number of
countries made it through the interwar period without significant bank
rums or failures, despite being subject to deflationary shocks similar
to those experienced by the countries with banking problems)5 Several
factors help to explain which countries were the ones to suffer panics:

1) Banking structure. The organization of the banking system was
an important factor in determining vulnerability

to panics. First,

countries with 'unit banking', i.e., with a large number of small and
relatively undiversified banks, suffered icore severe banking panics.

The leading example is of course the U.S., where concentration in
banking was very low, but a high incidence of failures among small banks
was also seen in other countries (e.g., France).

Canada, with branch

25

banking, suffered no bank failures during the Depression (although many

branches were closed). Sweden and the U.K. also benefited from a
greater dispersion of risk through branch systems.16
Second, where "universal" or "mixed" banking on the German or
Belgian model was the norm, it appears that vulnerability to deflation

was greater. In contrast to the Anglo-Saxon model of banking, where at
least in theory lending was short-term and the relationship between
banks and corporations had an arm's-length character, universal banks
took long-term and sometimes dominant ownership positions in client

firms. Universal bank assets included both long-term securities and
equity participations; the former tended to become illiquid during a
crisis, while the latter exposed universal banks (unlike Anglo-Saxon

banks, which held mainly debt instruments) to the effects of stock

market crashes. The most extreme case was probably Austria: By 1931,
after a series of mergers, the infamous Creditanstalt was better thought
of as a vast holding company rather than a bank; at the time of its
failure in May 1931, the Creditanstalt owned 64 companies, amounting to
65% of Austria's nominal capital (Kindleberger 1984).

2) Reliance of banks on short-term foreign

liabilities.

Some of

the most serious banking problems were experienced in countries in which

a substantial fraction of deposits were foreign-owned. The so-called
"hot money" was more sensitive to adverse financial developments than

were domestic deposits. Runs by foreign depositors represented not only
a loss to the banking system but also, typically, a loss of reserves; as
we have noted, this additional external threat restricted to the ability

of the central bank to respond to the banking situation. Thus, banking
crises and exchange rate crises became intertwined.17

The resolution

26

of a number of the central European banking crises required so-called
"standstill agreements", under which withdrawals by foreign creditors
were blocked pending future negotiation.

International linkages were important on the asset side of bank

balance sheets as well. Many continental banks were severely affected
by the crises in Austria and Germany, in particular.

3) Financial and economic experience of the 1920s. It should not
be particularly surprising that countries which emerged from the 1920s
in relatively weaker condition were more vulnerable to panics. Austria,
Germany, Hungary, and Poland all suffered hyperinflatiori and economic

dislocation in the 1920s, and all suffered severe banking panics in

1931. While space constraints do not permit a full discussion of the
point here, it does seem clear that the origins of the European
financial crisis were at least partly independent of American
developments- -which argues against a purely American-centered
explanation of the origins of the Depression.

It should also be emphasized, though, that not just the existence
of financial difficulties during the 1920s but also the policy response

to those difficulties was important. Austria is probably the most
extreme case of nagging banking problems being repeatedly "papered

over". That country had banking problems throughout the

l920s, which

were handled Principally by merging failing banks into still-solvent

banks. An enforced merger of the Austrian Bodencreditanstalt with two
failing banks in 1927 weakened that institution, which was part of the
reason that the Bodencreditanstalt in turn had to be forceably merged

with the Credjtanstalt in 1929. The insolvency of the Creditanstalt,
finally revealed when a director refused to sign an "optimistic"

27

financial statement in May 1931, sparked the most intense phase of the
European crisis.

In contrast, when banking troubles during the earlier part of the

l920s were met with fundamental reform, performance of the banking
sector during the Depression was better. Examples were Sweden. Japan,
and the Netherlands, all of which had significant banking problems

during the l920s but which responded by fundamental restructurings and
assistance to place banks on a sound footing (and to close the weakest

banks). Possibly because of these earlier events, these three countries
had limited problems in the 1930s: A large Swedish bank (Skandinaviska
Kreditaktiebolaget) suffered heavy losses after the collapse of the
Kreuger financial empire, and a medium-sized Dutch bank (Amstelbank)

failed because of its connection to the Creditanstalt; but there were no
widespread panics, only isolated failures.

A particularly interesting comparison in this regard is between
the Netherlands and neighboring Belgium, where banking problems
persisted from 1931 to 1935, and where the ultimate devaluation of the
Belgian france was the result of an attempt to protect banks from

further drains. Both countries were heavily dependent on foreign trade
and both remained on gold, yet the Netherlands did much better than

Belgium in the early part of the Depression (see Table 4). This is a
bit of evidence for the relevance of banking difficulties to output.
Overall, while banking crises were surely an endogenous response
to depression, the incidence of crisis across countries reflected a

variety of institutional factors and other preconditions. Thus it will
be of interest to compare the real effects of deflation between
countries with and without severe banking difficulties.

28

On "debt-deflation", i.e., the problems of nonfinancial borrowers,
much less has been written than on the banking crises.

Only for the

U.S. has the debt problem in the 1930s been fairly well documented
the summary in Bernanke 1983 and the references

(see

therein). In that

country large corporations avoided serious difficulties, but most other
sectors--small business, farmers, mortgage borrowers, state and local
governments- -were severely affected, with usually something close to

half of outstanding debts being in default. A substantial portion of
New

Deal reforms consisted of various forms of debt adjustment and

relief.
For other countries, there are plenty of anecdotes but not much
systematic

data. Aggregate data on bankruptcies and defaults are

difficult to interpret because increasing financial distress forced
changes in bankruptcy practices and procedures; when the League of
Nations' Monthly Bulletin of Statistics dropped its table on
bankruptcies in December 1932, for example, the reason given was that
"the numerous forms of agreement by which open bankruptcies are now
avoided have seriously diminished the value of the table".

Perhaps the

most extreme case of a change in rules was Rumania's April 1932 Law on
Conversion of Debts, which essentially eliminated the right of creditors

to force bankruptcy. Changes in the treatment of bankruptcy no doubt
ameliorated the effects of debt default, but the fact that these changes
occurred indicates that the perceived problem must have been severe.
More detailed country-by.coumtry

study of the effects of deflation on

firm balance sheets, and the relation of financial condition to firm

investment production, and employment decisions--where the data permit-

29

-would be extremely valuable. A similar comment applies to external
debt problems, although here interesting recent work by Eichengreen and
Portes (1989) and others gives us a much better base of knowledge to
build on then is available for the case of domestic debts.

. Reression

Results

In this section we present empirical results based on our panel

data set. The principal question of interest is the relative importance
of various transmission mechanisms of deflation to output. We also
address the question, so far not discussed, of whether banking crises
could have intensified the deflation process itself.
The basic set of results is contained in Table 9, which relates
the log-differences in industrial production for our set of countries to

various combinations of explanatory variables. The definitions of the
right-hand side variables are as follows:

lnPW: log-difference of the wholesale price index

lnEX:

log-difference

lnW:

log-difference of nominal wage

DISC:

central bank discount rate, measured relative to its 1929

of nominal exports

value (a government bond rate is used for Canada; since no 1929 interest
rate could be found for New Zealand, that country is excluded in
regressions including DISC)

PANIC: a dummy variable, set equal to the number of months during
the year that the country experienced serious banking problems (see
below)

tlnMO: log-difference of money and notes in circulation

30

Exports are included to control for trade effects on growth,
including the benefits of competitive devaluation discussed by
Eichengreen and Sachs; and the wage is included to test for the real

wage channel of transmission from deflation to depression. Of course,
theory says that both of these variables should enter in real rather
than in nominal terms; unfortunately, in practice the theoretically

suggested deflator is not always available (as we noted in our

discussion of the real wage above). We resolve this problem as follows:
Suppose that the true equation is, for example,

0 lnIP — (lnEX

-

+ fl(lnW -

AlnP)

+ error

where P and P, the optimal deflators, are not available. Let
the projections of log-changes in the unobserved deflators on the logchange in the wholesale price deflator be given by

(2) lnPi jAlnPW + Uj

1. —

where the Uj are uncorrelated with A1nPW and presumably the

are

positive. Then (1) becomes

(3) lnIP — -

+ PeM1

+ fllnW + new error

This suggests allowing lnPW and the nominal growth rates of
exports and wages to enter the equation separately, which is how we

proceed.18 Putting A1nPW in the equation separately has the additional

31

advantage of allowing us to account for any additional effect of
deflation (such as debt-deflation) not explicitly captured by the other
independent variables.

The discount rate DISC is included to allow for the interest rate

channel, and as an additional proxy for monetary policy. Since lnPW is
included in every equation, inclusion of the nominal interest rate DISC
is equivalent to including the actual cx post real interest rate, i.e.,

we are effectively assuming that deflation was fully anticipated; this
should give the real interest rate hypothesis its best chance.

In an attempt to control for fiscal policy, we also included
measures of central government expenditure in our first estimated

equations. Since the estimated coefficients were always negative (the
wrong sign), small, and statistically insignificant, the government
expenditure variable is excluded from the results reported here.

Construction of the dummy variable PANIC required us to make a
judgment about which countries' banking crises were most serious, which

we did from our reading of primary and secondary sources. We dated
periods of crisis as starting from the first severe banking problems; if
there was some clear demarcation point (such as the U.S. bank holiday of
1933), we used that as the ending date of the crisis, otherwise we
arbitrarily assumed that the crisis's effects would last for one year

from its most intense point. The exact list of banking crises included
in the dummy is as follows (see also Table 7):

1. Austria (May 1931--January 1933). From the Creditaristalt
crisis to the date of official settlement of the Creditanstalt's foreign
debt.

32

2. Belgium (May 1931--April 1932; March l934--February 1935).
For one year after the initial Belgian crisis, following Creditanstalt,

and for one year after the failure of Banque Beige de Travail led to a
general crisis.

3. Estonia (September l931--August 1932). For one year after the
general banking crisis.

4. France (November 1930- -October 1932) For one year following
each of the two peaks of the French banking crises, in November 1930 and
October 1931 (see Bouvier 1984).

5. Germany (May 1931- -December 1932) From the beginning of the
major German banking crisis until the creation of state institutes for
the liquidation of bad bank debts.

6. Hungary (July 1931--June 1932) For one year following the
runs in Budapest and the bank holiday.
7.

Italy (April 1931--December 1932) From the onset of the

banking panic until the takeover of bank assets by the IRI.

8. Latvia (July 1931--June 1932) For one year following the
onset of the banking crisis.

9. Poland (June 1931- -May 1932) For one year following the onset
of the banking crisis.

10. Rumania (July 1931- -September 1932) From the onset of the
crisis until one year after its peak in October 1931.

11. United States (December 1930- -March 1933) From the failure
of the Bank of the U.S. until the bank
The inclusion of Austria,

holiday.

Belgium,Germarty, Hungary, Latvia,

Poland, Rumania, or the U.S. in the above list cannot be controversial;
each of these countries suffered serious panics.

(One might quibble on

33

the margin about the exact dating given--for example, Temin (1989) and
others have argued that the U.S. banking crisis did not really begin
until mid-1931- -but we doubt very much that changes of a few months on

these dates would affect the results.) The inclusion of France and
Italy is more controversial: For example, Bouvier (1984) argues that
the French banking crisis was not as serious as some others, since
although there were runs and many banks failed, the very biggest banks

survived; also, according to Bouvier, French banks were not as closely

tied in to industry as other banking systems on the Continent. For
Italy, as we have noted, early and massive government intervention
reduced the incidence of panic (see Ciocca and Toniolo 1984); however,
the banks were in very poor condition and (as noted above) eventually
signed over most of their industrial assets to a massive new state
holding company, the Istituto por le Riconstruzione Iridustriale (IRI).

To check the sensitivity of our results, we re-estimated the key
equations omitting from the PANIC variable first only the French crisis,

then the French and Italian crises. Leaving out France had a minor
effect (lowering the coefficient on PANIC and its t-statistic about 5%
in a typical equation); the additional exclusion of the Italian crisis
had essentially no effect.19

As a further check, we also re-estimated our key equations
omitting, in separate runs, 1) the U.S.; 2) Germany and Austria; 3) all

Eastern European countries. In none of these equations were our basic
results substantially weakened, which indicates that no single country
or small group of countries is driving our findings.
(Table 9 about here]

34

The first seven equations in Table 9 are not derived from any
single model, but instead attempt to nest various suggested explanations

of the link between deflation an depression. Estimation was by OLS,
which opens up the possibility of simultaneity bias; however, given our
maintained view that the deflation was imposed by exogenous monetary
forces, a case can be made for treating the right-hand side variables as
exogenous or predetermined.

The principal inferences to be drawn from the first seven lines of

Table 9 are as follovs20
(1) Export growth consistently enters the equation for output
growth strongly, with a plausible coefficient and a high level of
statistical significance.

(2) When wage growth is included in the output equation along
with only wholesale price and export growth (line 5), it enters with the

wrong sign. Only when the PANIC variable is included also does nominal
wage growth have the right (negative) sign--see lines 6 and 7. In the
equation encompassing all the various channels, equation 7, the
estimated coefficient on wage growth is of the right sign and a
reasonable magnitude, but it is not statistically significant.

(3) The discount rate enters the encompassing equation (line 7)
with the right sign and a high significance level. A 100 basis point
increase in the discount rate is estimated to reduce the growth rate of
industrial production by 3.6 percentage points.

(4) The effect of banking panics on output is large (a year of
panic is estimated in equation 7 to reduce output growth by 12 x .0138,
or more than 16 percentage points) and highly statistically significant

(t-statistjcs of 4.0 or better). The measured effect of the PANIC

35

variable does not seem to depend much on what other variables are
included in the equation.

(5) There may be some residual effect of deflation on output not
accounted for by any of these effects. To see this, note that in
principle the coefficient on D1nPW in equation (7) of Table 9 should be

equal and opposite the weighted sum of the coefficients on lnEX, 1nW,
and DISC (where the weights are the projection coefficients of the

respective "true" deflators on lnPW). Suppose for the sake of
illustration that each of the projection coefficients equals one (that

is, the wholesale price index is the correct deflator). Then the
expected value of the coefficient on lnPW should be approximately .052;

the actual value is .296, with a standard error of .123. Thus there may
be other channels relating deflation to depression than the ones

explicitly accounted for here. One possibility is that we are simply
picking up the effects of a simultaneity bias (a reverse causation from

output to prices). Alternatively, it is possible that an additional
factor such as debt-deflation should be considered.

As an alternative to the procedure of nesting alternative channels
in a single equation, in equation (8) of Table 9 we report the results
of estimating the reduced form of a simple aggregate demand- -

aggregate

supply system. Under conventional assumptions, in an AD-AS model output
growth should depend on money growth and autonomous spending growth
(represented here by growth in real exports21), which shift the AD

curve; and on nominal wage growth, which shifts the AS curve. In
addition, we allow PANIC to enter the system, since banking panics could

in principle affect both aggregate demand and aggregate supply. The
results indicate large and statistically significant effects on output

36

growth for real export growth, money growth, and banking panics.

Nominal wage growth enters with the correct sign but the coefficient is
very small and statistically insignificant.

We have so far focused on the effects of banking panics (and other

variables) on output. There is an additional issue that warrants some
discussion here; namely, the possibility that banking panics might have
themselves worsened the deflationary process.

Some care must be taken with this argument. Banking panics
undoubtedly had large effects on the composition of national money

supplies, money multipliers, and money demand. Nevertheless, as has
been stressed by Temin (1989), under a gold standard small country price
levels are determined by international monetary conditions, to which

domestic money supplies and demands must ultimately adjust. Thus
banking panics cannot intensify deflation in a small country.22 Indeed,
a regression (not reported) of changes in wholesale prices against the
PANIC variable and time dummies (in order to isolate purely cross-

sectional effects) confirms that there is very little relationship
between the two variables.
The proposition that bank panics should not affect the price level
does not necessarily hold for a large country, however. In econometric
language, under a gold standard the price level of a large country must

be cointegrated with world prices; but while this means that domestic
prices must eventually adjust to shocks emanating from abroad, it also
allows for the possibility that domestic shocks will influence the world

price level. Notice that if banking panics led to deflationary shocks
in a large country, and these shocks were transmitted around the world

37

by the gold standard, a cross-sectional comparison would find no link
between panics and the price level.
The discussion of the gold standard and deflation in Section 2
cited Hamilton's (1987) view that the initial deflationary impulses in
1928-29 came from France and the U.S. --both "big" countries, in terms of

economic importance and because of their large gold reserves. This
early deflation obviously cannot be blamed on banking panics, since

these did not begin until at least the end of 1930. But it would not be
in any way inconsistent with the theory of the gold standard to
hypothesize that banking panics in France and the U.S. contributed to
world deflation during 1931.32.23
Empirical evidence bearing on this question is presented in Table

10. We estimated equations for wholesale price inflation in the U.S.

and France, using monthly data for the five-year period 1928-32. We
included an error-correction term in both equations to allow for
cointegration between the U.S. and French price levels, as would be

implied by the gold standard. This error-correction term is the
difference between the log-levels of U.S. and French wholesale prices in
period t-l; if U.S. and French prices are in fact cointegrated, then the
growth rate of U.S. prices should respond negatively to the difference
between the U.S. price and the French price, and the French growth rate

of prices should respond positively. Also included in the equations are
lagged inflation rates (to capture transitory price dynamics), current
and lagged base money growth, and current and lagged values of the
deposits of failing banks (for the U.S. only, due to data availability).
(Table 10 about here]

38

The results are interesting. First, there is evidence for
cointegration: The error-correction terms have the right signs and
reasonable magnitudes, although only the U.S. term is statistically

significant. Thus we may infer that shocks hitting either French or
U.S. prices ultimately affected both price levels. Second, both U.S.
base money growth and bank failures are important determinants of the

U.S. (and by extension, the French) deflation rates; these two variables
enter the U.S. price equation with the right sign and marginal
significance levels of .0005.

With respect to the effect of banking panics on the price level,
then, the appropriate conclusion appears to be that countries with
banking panics did not suffer worse deflation than those without
panics24; however, it is possible that U.S. banking panics in particular
were an important source of world deflation during 1931-32, and thus, by
extension, of world depression.

6. Conclusion
Monetary and financial arrangements in the interwar period were
badly flawed and were a major source of the fall in real output.
Banking panics were one mechanism through which deflation had its
effects on real output, and panics in the U.S. may have contributed to
the severity of the world deflation.
In this empirical study, we have focused on the effects of severe

banking panics. We believe it likely, however, that the effects of
deflation on the financial system were not confined to these more

extreme episodes. Even in countries without panics banks were
financially weakened and contracted their operations. Domestic debt

39

deflation was probably a factor, to a greater or lesser degree, in every

country. And we have not addressed at all the effect of deflation on
the burden of external debt, which was important for a nuniber of

countries. As we have already suggested, more careful study of these
issues is clearly desirable.

40

Ben Bernanke
Harold James
References

Bernanke, Ben. 1983. Non-monetary effects of the financial
crisis in the propagation of the Great Depression. American Economic
Review 73: 257-76.

______

1986.

Employment, hours, and earnings in the Depression:

An analysis of eight manufacturing industries. American Economic Review

76: 82-109.

______ and Mark Gertler. 1990. Financial fragility and economic
performance. Quarterly Journal of Economics 105: 87-114.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 1943. Banking
and

monetary

statistics, 1919-41. Washington: GPO.

Borchardt, Knut. 1979. Zwangslagen und Handlungsspielraume in
der grossen Wirtschaftskrise der fruhen dreissiger Jahren: Zur Revision

des uberlieferten Geschichtesbildes. Munich: Bayerische Akademie der
Wissenschaf ten 87-132.

Bordo, Michael and Finn Kydland. 1990. The gold standard as a
rule.

Working paper (Rutgers University and Carnegie-Mellon

University).

41

Bouviet-, Jean. 1984. The French banks, inflation and the
economic crisis, 1919-1939. Journal of European Economic History 13:
29-80.

Campa, Jose Manuel. Forthcoming. Exchange rates and economic
recovery in the 1930s: An extension to Latin America. Journal of
Economic History.

Choudhri, Ebsan U. and Levis A. Kochin. 1980. The exchange rate
and the international transmission of bu.siness cycle disturbances: Some

evidence from the Great Depression. Journal of Money, Credit, and
Banking 12: 565-74.

Ciocca, Pierluigi and Gianni Toniolo. 1984. Industry and finance
in Italy, 1918-40. Journal of European Economic History 13: 113-36.

Eichengreen, Barry. 1986. The Bank of France and the
sterilization of gold, 1926-1932. Explorations in Economic History 23:
56-84.

______

1987.

The gold-exchange standard and the Great

Depression. NEER vorking paper no. 2198 (March).

______ and T.J. Hatton. 1987. Inter-war unemployment in
international perspective: An overview. B. Eichengreen and T.J. Hatton,
eds., Inter-war Unemployment in International Perspective, Boston: Kiuwer
Academic Publishers, 1-59.

42

______ and Richard Fortes. 1986. Debt and default in the 1930s:
Causes and consequences. European Economic Review 30:

599-640.

Eichengreen, Barry and Jeffrey Sachs. 1985. Exchange rates and
economic recovery in the l930s. Journal of Economic History 45: 92546.

______ and ______ .

1986.

Competitive devaluation in the Great

Depression: A theoretical reassessment. Economics Letters 21: 67-71.

Einzig, Paul. 1937. The Theory of Forward Exchange. London:
Macmillan.

Fisher, Irving. 1933. The debt-deflation theory of great
depressions. Econometrica 1: 337-57.

Flood, Robert P., Jr. and Peter M. Carber. 1981. A systematic
banking collapse in a perfect foresight world. NBER working paper no.
691 (June).

Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. 1963.

A Monetary History

of the United States, 1867-1960. Princeton: Princeton U. Press.

}{aberler, Cottfrjed. 1976. The world economy, money, and the

Great Depression. Washington: American Enterprise Institute.

43

Hamilton, James. 1987. Monetary factors in the Great Depression.
Journal of Monetary Economics 19: 145-69.

______

1988.

The role of the international gold standard in

propagating the Great Depression. Contemporary' Policy Issues 6: 67-89.

Kindleberger, Charles P.

1984. Banking and industry between the

two wars: An international comparison. Journal of European Economic
History 13: 7-28.

League of Nations. 1935. Commercial banks, 1929-1934. Geneva.

______

1944.

International currency experience: Lessons of the

inter-war period. Geneva.

Lindert, Peter. 1969. Key currencies and gold, 1900-1913.
Princeton Studies in International Finance no. 24.

Newell, Andrew and J.S.V. Symons. 1988. The macroeconomics of
the interwar years: International comparisons. B. Eichengreen and T.J.
Hatton, eds., Inrerwar Unemployment in International Perspective, Kiuwer
Academic Publishers, 61-96.

O'Brien, Anthony. 1989. A behavioral explanation for nominal
wage rigidity during the Great Depression. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 104: 719-35.

Teuiin, Peter. 1976. Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great

Depression? New York: W.W. Norton.

______

1989.

Lessons from the Great Depression. Cambridge MA:

MIT Press.

Wigmore, Barrie. 1987. Was the Bank Holiday of 1933 a run on the
dollar rather than the banks? Journal of Economic History 47: 739-56.

</ref_section>

Ben Bernanke
Harold James
Notes

The original diagnosis of the Depression as a monetary

phenomenon is of course due to Friedman and Schwartz 1963. We find the
more recent work, though focusing to a greater degree on international
aspects of the problem, to be essentially complementary to the FriedmanSchwartz analysis.
2

Eichengreen and Sachs (1985) discuss several mechanisms and

provide some cross-country evidence, but their approach is somewhat
informal and they do not consider the relative importance of the
different effects.

To be clear, gold inflows to France did inctease the French
monetary base directly, one-for-one; however, in the absence of
supplementary open market purchases, this implied a rising ratio of

French gold reserves to monetary base. Together with the very low value
of the French money multiplier, this rising cover ratio meant that the
monetary expansion induced by gold flowing into France was far less

significant than the monetary contractions that this inflow induced
elsewhere.

Temin (1989) suggests that German monetary policy provided yet
another contractionary impetus.

There remains the issue of whether the differences in timing of
nations' departure from the gold standard can be treated as exogenous.

Eichengeen and Sachs (1985) argue that exogeneity is a reasonable
assumption, given the importance of individual national experiences,
institutions, and fortuitous events in each country's decision of when

to go off gold. Strong national differences in attitudes toward the
gold standard (e.g., between the Gold Bloc and the Sterling Bloc) were

remarkably persistent in their influence on policy. For example, League
of Nations (1935) reports that in July 1933, representatives of six

member nations of the Gold Bloc met in Paris and "drew up a protocol

providing for the common defence of the gold standard. An immediate
result was a subsiding of active speculation against the Dutch florin

and the Swiss franc." Yet in the same month, the League of Nations
report continues, six members of the British Commonwealth fornally
agreed that they should "persist by all means in their power, whether
monetary or economic, within the limits of sound finance, in the policy
of furthering the rise in wholesale prices until there is evidence that
equilibrium has been reestablished, and that thereupon they should take
whatever measures are possible to stabilize the position just attained."

6 The countries in our sample are listed in Table 1. We included
countries, other than Latin American countries, for which the League of
Nations collected reasonably complete data on industrial production,
price levels, and money supplies (League of Nations' !1onthly Bulletin of

Statistics and Yearbooks, various issues; see also League of Nations,
Industrialization and

Foreign

Trade, 1945). Our

exclusion

of Latin

America was motivated by concerns about the data and our expectation
that factors such as commodity prices would play a more important role

for these countries. However, see Campa (forthcoming) for evidence that
the gold standard transmitted deflation and depression to Latin America
in a manner very similar to that observed elsewhere.

We define abandonment of the gold standard broadly as occurring
at the first date in which a country imposes exchange controls,

devalues, or suspends gold payments; see Table 1 for a list of dates.

An objection to this definition is that some countries continued to try
to target their exchange rates at levels prescribed by the gold standard
even after "leaving" the gold standard by our criteria; Canada and

Germany are two examples. We made no attempt to account for this, on
the grounds that defining adherence to the gold standard by looking at

variables such as exchange rates, money growth, or prices risks assuming
the propositions to be shown.

8 In

constructing the grand averages taken over gold and non-gold

countries, if a country abandoned the gold standard in the middle of a

year, it is included in both the gold and non-gold categories with

weights equal to the fraction of the year spent in each category. We
use simple rather than weighted averages in the tables, and similarly
give all countries equal weight in regression results presented below;
we do this because, for the purpose of testing hypotheses, e.g., about
the relationship between deflation and depression, it seems most
reasonable to treat each country (with its own currency, legal system
financial system, etc.) as the basic unit of observation, and to afford

each observation equal weight. If we were instead trying to measure the
overall economic significance of, e.g., an individual country's policy
decisions, weighted averages would be more appropriate.
The use of the terms Ml and M2 should not be taken too
literally here, as the transactions characteristics of the assets

included in each category vary considerably among countries. The key
distinction between the two aggregates is that commercial banks, which
were heavily involved in commercial lending, were much more vulnerable

to banking panics. Savings banks, in contrast, held mostly government
securities and thus often gained deposits during panic periods.

10 However, it must be mentioned that recent exponents of the
real wage explanation of German unemployment invoke it to account for
high levels of unemployment throughout the mid- and late 1920s, and not
just for the period after 1929 (Borchardt 1979).

11 In the French case, however, there may have been some fear of
government default, given the large deficits that were being run;
conceivably, this could explain the higher rate on French bills.

12 A possible response to this point is that fear of devaluation
added a risk premium to assets in gold standard countries. This point
can be checked by looking at forward rates for foreign exchange,
available in Einzig 1937. The forward prernia on gold standard
currencies are generally small, except immediately before devaluations.
In particular, the three-month premium on dollars versus the pound in
1932 had a maximum value of about 4.5% (at an annual rate) during the
first week of June, but for most of the year was considerably less than
that.

13 The effect of deflation on banks, and the relationship between
deflation and bank runs, has been analyzed in a theoretical model by
Flood and Gerber (1981).

14 An important issue, which we cannot resolve here, is whether
government takeovers of banks resulted in some restoration of
intermediary services; or if, instead, the government functioned
primarily as a liquidation agent.

15 In the next section we divide our sample into two

groups:

11

countries with serious banking problems and 13 countries without these

problems. In 1930, the year before the peak of the banking crises, the
countries that were to avoid banking problems suffered on average a 12%
deflation and a 6% fall in industrial production; the comparable numbers

for the group that was to experience panics were 13% and 8%. Thus,
there was no large difference between the two groups early in the

Depression. In contrast, in 1932 (the year following the most intense
banking crises), industrial production growth in countries without
banking crises averaged -2%; in the group that experienced crises the
comparable number was -16%.
16

Although this correlation seems to hold during the Depression,

we don't want to conclude unconditionally that branch banking is more
stable; branching facilitates diversification but also increases the
risk that problems in a few large banks may bring down the entire
network.
17

Causality could run in both directions. For example, Wigmore

(1987) argues that the 1933 U.S. banking panic was in part created by a
run

on

the dollar.

18 It has been pointed out to us that if nominal wages were
literally rigid, then this approach would find no effect for wages even
though changes in the real wage might be an important channel for the

effects of deflation. The reply to this is that, if nominal wages are
completely rigid, the hypothesis that real wages are important can never
be distinguished from an alternative which proposes that deflation has
its effects in some other way.

19 In another sensitivity check, we also tried multiplying PANIC
times the change in the deposit-currency ratio, to allow for

differential severity of panics. The results exhibited an outlier

problem: When Rumania (which had a change in the deposit-currency ratio
of -

.76 in 1931) was excluded, the results were similar to those

obtained using the PANIC variable alone. However, inclusion of Rumania
weakened both the magnitude and statistical significance of the effect

of panics on output. The "reason" for this is that, despite its massive
deposit contraction, Rumania experienced a 5% growth of industrial

production in 1931. Whether this is a strong contradiction of the view
that panics affect real output is not clear, however, since according to
the League of Nations the peak of the Rumanian crisis did not occur

until September or October, and industrial production in the subsequent

year fell by 14%. Another reason to downplay these results is that the
change in the deposit-currency ratio may not be a good indicator of the
severity of the banking crisis, as the Italian case indicates.

20 Results were unchanged when lagged industrial production
growths was added to the equations. The coefficient on lagged
production was typically small and statistically insignificant.

21 Deflation is by the wholesale price index.

22 A

possible exception to this proposition for a small country

might be a situation where there are fears that the country will devalue
or abandon gold; in this case the country's price level might drop below

the world level without causing inflows of reserves. An example may be

Poland in 1932. A member of the Cold Bloc, Poland's wholesale price
level closely tracked that of France until mid-1931, when Poland
experienced severe banking problems and withdrawals of foreign deposits,

which threatened convertibility. From that point on, even though both
countries remained on the gold standard, money supplies and prices in

Poland and France began to diverge. From the time of the Polish crisis

in June 1931 until the end of 1932, money and notes and circulation
dropped by 9.1% in Poland (compared to a gain of 10.5% in France);
Polish commercial bank deposits fell 24.5% (compared to a 4.1% decline
in France); and Polish wholesale prices declined 35.2% (compared

to a

decline of 18.3% in France). Despite its greater deflation, Poland lost
about a sixth of its gold reserves in 1932, while France gained

gold.

23 This hypothesis does not bear on Temin's claim that there was

little

that central banks could do about banking crises under the gold

standard; rather, the argument is that if, fortuitously, French and U.S.
banking panics had not occurred, world deflation in 1931-32 would have
been less severe.
24

Indeed, if banking panics induced countries to abandon gold,

they may have indirectly contributed to an eventual rise in price
levels.

Ben Bernanke
Harold James

Table 1. Dates of changes in gold standard policies

Return
to gold

Australia

Suspension
of gold
standard

12/29

Austria

4/25

Belgium

10/26

Canada

7/26

10/31

Czecho.

4/26

---

Denmark

1/27

Foreign
exchange
control

-

--

Devaluation

3/30

10/31

9/31

---

3/35

--

9/31

9/31

2/34

9/3].

11/31

9/31

Estonia

6/33

11/31

6/33

Finland

10/31

--

10/31
10/36

France
Gerroany

8/26-6/28

9/24

Greece

4/33
--

-

-

-

-

--

---

-

--

7/31

-

4/32

9/31

4/32
-

--

--

4/25

-

--

7/31

Italy

12/27

-

--

5/34

10/36

Japan

12/30

7/32

12/31

Hungary

12/31

--

Latvia

8/22

-

--

Netherlands

4/25

-

--

10/36

Norway

5/28

9/31

9/31

N. Zealand

4/25

9/31

4/30

Poland

10/27

-

--

10/31

4/36

-

10/36

Table 1. (continued)

Return
to gold
Rumania

Sweden

3/27-2/29

4/24

Suspension
of gold
standard
--

-

Foreign
exchange
control

5/32

9/31

Spain

Devaluation

9/31
5/31

-

U.K.

5/25

9/31

--

U.s.

6/19

3/33

3/33

9/31
4/33

Source: League of Nations Yearbook, various dates; and miscellaneous supplementary
sources

Table 2. Log-differences of the wholesale price index

1. Countries not on the gold standard or leaving prior to 1931
1930

1931

1932

.01

-

.01

Spain

-

.00

Austral. (1929)

-

.12

-

.11

-

.01

N. Zeal.(l930)

-

.03

-

.07

-

.03

1933

1934

1935

1936

-

.05

.03

.01

.02

-

.00

.04

.00

.05

.03

.01

.03

.01

-

2. Countries abandoning the full gold standard in 1931
1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

Austria

-.11

-.07

.03

-.04

.02

-.00

-.01

Canada

- .10

- .18

- .08

.01

.06

.01

.03

Czecho.

- .12

- .10

- .08

- .03

.02

.04

.00

Denmark

- .15

-.13

.02

.07

.09

.02

.05

Estonia

- .14

- .11

- .09

.02

.00

- .01

.08

Finland

- .09

- .07

.07

- .01

.01

.00

.02

Germany

- .10

- .12

- .14

-.03

.05

.03

.02

Greece

- .10

- .11

.18

.12

- .01

.02

.02

Hungary

- .14

- .05

- .01

- .14

.00

.08

.03

Japan

- .19

- .17

.05

.11

- .01

.04

.06

Latvja

- .16

- .18

.00

- .02

- .01

.05

.04

Norway

- .08

- .12

.00

- .00

.02

.03

.05

Sweden

- .14

- .09

- .02

- .02

.06

.02

.03

U. K.

- .17

- .18

- .04

.01

.04

.04

.06

Average

-

.01

.00

.02

.03

.04

.13

-

.12

-

Table 2. (continued)

3. Countries abandoning the gold standard between 1932 and 1935
1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

Ruuania( 1932)

- .24

- . 26

-.11

-.03

.00

.14

.13

U. S. (1933)

-

Italy (1934)

Belgium (1935)

. 10

-

.17

-

.12

.02

.13

.07

.01

-

.11

-

. 14

-.07

-.09

-.02

.10

.11

-

.13

-

.17

-.16

-

.06

.13

.09

4. Countries still on

.06

-

gold standard as of 1936

1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

France

-

.12

- .10

- .16

- .07

- .06

- .11

.19

Neth.

-

.11

- .16

- .17

- .03

.00

- .02

.04

Poland

-

. 12

-.14

-.13

Average

-

.12

- .13

-

.15

-.07

-.04

* .06

.08

1932

1933

1934

1935

.04

- .05

.03

.04

5.

Gold

Grand

averages

standard countries

Non-gold

countries

-

.13

-

.01

-

.07

.00

-

Note: Data on wholesale prices are from League of Nations, Monthly Bulletin of
Statistics and Yearbooks, various issues. Dates in parentheses are years in which
countries abandoned gold, with "abandonment" defined to include the

imposition of

foreign exchange controls or devaluation as well as suspension; see Table 1.

Table 3. Monetary indicators

1. Countries abandoning full gold standard in 1931
1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

MO growth

- .04

- .02

-

.07

.06

.05

.05

.08

Ml growth

.01

-

.11

-

.07

.02

.05

.04

.08

M2 growth

.03

-

.08

-

.04

.03

.05

.05

.06

0.4

-0.2

-1.2

-0.4

-0.1

-0.1

1935

1936

-

.03

.03

-

.06

.08

-

.03

.05

-0.3

Discount rate
change

-0.8

2. Countries still on full gold standard as of 1936
1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

MO growth

.03

.07

- .06

- .02

.01

Ml growth

.05

- .06

- .07

- .05

M2 growth

.08

- .00

- .02

- .02

.02

-1.4

-0.4

0.1

-0.4

-0.4

0.8

1932

1933

1934

1935

MO growth

-.04

-.03

.01

-

.02

Ml growth

-.09

-.04

.01

-

.06

M2 growth

-.05

-.01

.01

-

.02

0.2

-0.5

-0.4

Discount rate
change

.01,

3. Grand averages: countries on gold

Discount rate
change

-

0.7

Table 3. (continued)

4. Grand averages: countries off gold

1932

1933

1934

1935

MO growth

-

.07

.05

.03

.06

Ml growth

-.06

.01

.04

.05

M2 growth

-

.03

.02

.04

.05

Discount rate
change

-0.3

-1.0

-0.4

-0.2

Note: MO is money and notes in circulation. Ml is base money plus commercial bank
deposits. M2 is Ml plus savings deposits. Growth rates of monetary aggregates are
calculated as log-differences. The discount rate change is in percentage points.
The data are from League of Nations, Monthly u11etin of Statistics and Yearbooks,
various issues.

Table 4. Log-differences of the industrial production index

1. Countries not on gold standard or leaving prior to 1931
1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

Spain

- .01

- .06

- .05

- .05

.01

.02

NA

Austral.(l929)

- .11

-.07

.07

.10

.09

.09

.07

N. Zeal.(1930)

-.25

-.14

.05

.02

.13

.09

.14

1936

2. Countries abandoning full gold standard in 1931
1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

Austria

- .16

- .19

- .14

.03

.11

.13

.07

Canada

- .16

- .18

- .20

.04

.20

.10

.10

Czecho.

- .11

- .10

- .24

- .05

.10

.05

.14

Denmark

.08

- .08

- .09

.14

.11

.07

.04

Estonia

- .02

-.09

- .17

.05

.17

.10

.10

Finland

- .10

- .13

.19

.02

.03

.10

.09

Germany

- .15

- .24

- .24

.13

.27

.16

.12

.01

.02

- .08

.10

.12

.12

- .03

Hungary

- .06

- .08

- .06

.07

.12

.07

.10

Japan

- .05

- .03

.07

.15

.13

.10

.06

Latvia

.08

- .20

- .08

.31

.15

.05

.04

Norway

.01

-.25

.17

.01

.04

.10

.09

Sweden

.03

- .07

- .08

.02

.19

.11

.09

U. K.

- .08

- .10

- .00

.05

.11

.07

.09

Average

- .05

-.12

- .07

.08

.13

.10

.08

Greece

Table 4. (continued)

3.

Countries abandoning gold standard between 1932 and 1935
1930

Rumania(l932)

- .03

U. S. (1933)

-.21

Italy (1934)

-

Belgium (1935)

-

1931

-

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

.05

-

.14

.15

.19

- .01

.06

.17

-

.24

.17

.04

.13

.15

- .15

.10

.08

.16

.16

.04

.01

.12

.05

1934

1935

1936

.08

- .17

. 12

-

.09

-

.07

-

4. Countries still on full gold standard as of 1936
1930

1931

1932

1933

.01

-

. 14

-

.19

.12

.02

-

.06

-

.13

Poland

- .13

-

. 14

Average

- .04

-

.11

France

-

.07

-

.04

.07

.07

.02

-

.03

.01

20

.09

.12

.07

10

.17

.10

.02

.00

.06

1932

1933

1934

1935

Gold standard countries

- . 18

.09

.03

.01

Non-gold countries

-

.06

.08

.12

.09

Neth.

-

-

5. Grand averages

Note: Data on industrial production are fron League of Nations, Monthly Bulletin of
Statistics and Yearbooks, various issues, supplemented by League of Nations,

Industrialization and

Foreign Trade,

1945.

Table 5. Log-differences of the real wage

1. Countries not on the gold standard or leaving prior to 1931
1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

NA

Spain
Austral. (1929)

.10

.01

-

.05

-

.04

-.03

.01

-.03

N. Zeal.(1930)

.03

.00

-

.00

-

.05

-

.01

- .01

.10

2.

Countries abandoning the full gold standard in 1931
1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

Austria

.14

.05

- .04

-

.00

- .05

- .03

.06

Canada

.11

.15

.00

-

.06

- .05

.02

- .01

Czecho.

.14

.11

.08

.02

- .04

- .05

- .00

Denmark

.17

.11

- .03

-

.07

- .09

- .01

- .04

Estonia

.16

.07

.02

-

.06

- .01

.06

- .03

- .07

- .03

- .02

.09

- .06

- .11

- .00

Finland
Germany

NA
.12

.06

- .03

Greece

-

.00

NA

Hungary

.14

- .00

- .07

Japan

.05

.21

- .04

-

.12

.02

- .05

- .05

Latvia

.20

.18

- .1.5

-

.05

.01

- .05

- .02

Norway

.08

.08

.02

-

.02

- .01

- .03

- .02

Sweden

.17

.09

.01

-

.02

- .06

- .01

- .02

U. K.

.17

.16

.02

-

.02

- .03

- .03

- .03

Average

.14

.11

.02

-

.03

-

-

.04

-

.03

-

.02

Table 5. (continued)

3. Countries abandoning gold standard between 1932 and 1935
1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

1936

Rumania(l932)

.20

.14

- . 10

- .05

- .02

- .15

- .12

U. S. (1933)

.10

.13

-

.03

.04

-

.03

.02

Italy (1934)

• 10

.07

.05

.07

.01

-

.11

-

.06

Belgium (1935)

• 19

• 10

.07

.04

.01

-

.16

-

.02

.01

-

-

4. Countries still on full gold standard as of 1936
1930

1931

1932

1933

1934

1935

France

.21

.09

.12

.07

.06

.09

-

.06

Neth.

.12

.14

.09

.01

-

.06

Poland

.11

.06

.05

.00

.01

.02

-

.03

Average

.15

.10

.09

.02

.01

.03

-

.05

1932

1933

1934

1935

.05

.03

.01

.02

-.02

-.03

-.03

-.04

-

.02

-

.04

-

1936

5. Grand averages

Gold standard countries
Non-gold countries

Note: The real wage is the nominal hourly wage for males (skilled, if available)
divided by the wholesale price index. Wage data are from the International Labour
Office, Year Book of Labor Statistics, various issues. Wage data were not available
for Finland, Greece, and Spain.

Table 6.

Year

UK

US

Indices of product wages

Germany Japan

Sweden

1929

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

1930

103.0

106.1

100.4

115.6

116.6

1931

106.4

113.0

102.2

121.6

129.1

1932

108.3

109.6

96.8

102.9

130.0

1933

109.3

107.9

99.3

101.8

127.9

1934

111.4

115.8

103.0

102.3

119.6

1935

111.3

114.3

105.3

101.6

119.2

1936

110.4

115.9

107.7

99.2

116.0

1937

107.8

121.9

106.5

87.1

101.9

1938

108.6

130.0

107.7

86.3

115.1

Source: Eichengreen and Hattori 1987, p. 15.

Table 7. A chronology of interwar banking crises, 1921-36

Country
1921

June

SWEDEN

Beginning of deposit contraction of 1921-22, leading to bank

restructurings. Government assistance administered through Credit
Bank of 1922.

1921-22

NETHERLANDS

Bank failures (notably Marx & Co.) and amalgamations.

1922

DENMARK

Heavy losses of one of the largest banks, Danske Landmandsbank, and
liquidation of smaller banks. Landmandsbank continues to operate
until a reconstruction in April 1928 under a government guarantee.

1923

April

NORWAY

Failure of Centralbanker for Norge.

AUSTRIA

May

Difficulties of a major bank, Allgemeine Depositenbank; liquidation in
July.

Table 7. (continued)

September

JAPAN

In wake of Tokyo earthquake, bad debts threaten Bank of Taiwan and
Bank of Chosen, which are restructured with government help.

1925

September

SPAIN

Failure of Banco de la Union Mineira and Banco Vasca.

1926

July-September POLAND
Bank runs cause three large banks to stop payments. The shakeout of
banks continues through 1927.

1927

NORWAY, ITALY

Numerous smaller banks in difficulties, but no major failures.

1927

April

JAPAN

32 banks unable to make payments. Restructuring of 15th Bank and Bank
of Taiwan.

Table 7. (continued)

1929

August

GERMANY

Collapse of Frankfurter Allgecneine Versicherungs AC, followed by

failures of smaller banks and runs on Berlin and Frankfurt savings
banks.

November

AUSTRIA

Bodencreditanstalt second largest bank, fails and is merged with
Creditanstalt.

1930

November

FRANCE

Failure of Banque Adam, Boulogne-sur-Mer, and Oustric Group. Runs on
provincial banks.

November

ESTONIA

Failure of two medium-sized banks, Estonia Government Bank Tallin and
Royal Credit Bank; crisis lasts until January.

December

USA

Failure of Bank of the United States.

Table 7. (continued)

December

ITALY

Withdrawals from three largest banks begin. A panic ensued in April
1931, followed by a government reorganization and takeover of
frozen industrial assets.

1931

April

ARGENTINA

Government deals with banking panic by allowing Banco de Nacion to
rediscount commercial paper from other banks at government-owned
Caja de Conversion.

May

AUSTRIA

Failure of Creditanstalt and n.m of foreign depositors.

May

BELGIUM

Rumors about imminent failure of Banque de Bruxelles, the country's

second largest bank, induce withdrawals from all banks. Later in
the year, expectations of devaluation lead to withdrawals of
foreign deposits.

June

POLAND

Run on banks, especially on Warsaw Discount Bank, associated with
Creditanstalt; a spread of the Austrian crisis.

Table 7. (continued)

April-July

GERMANY

Bank runs, extending difficulties plaguing the banking system since

the summer of 1930. After large loss of deposits in June and
increasing strain on foreign exchanges, many banks are unable to

make payments and Darmstadrer Bank closes. Bank holiday.

HUNGARY

July

Run on Budapest banks (especially General Credit Bank). Foreign
withdrawals followed by a foreign creditors' standstill agreement.
Bank holiday.

LATVIA

July

Run on banks with German connections. Bank of Libau and International
Bank of Riga particularly hard hit.

July

AUSTRIA

Failure of Vienna Mercur-Bank.

July

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Withdrawal of foreign deposits sparks domestic withdrawals but no
general banking panic.

July

TURKEY

Run on branches of Deutsche Bank and collapse of Banque Turque pour le
Commerce et l'Industrie, in wake of German crisis.

Table 7.

(continued)

EGYPT

July

Run on Cairo and Alexandria branches of Deutsche Orientbank.

SWITZERLAND

July

Union Financiere de Geneve rescued by takeover by Cornptoir d'Escompte
de Geneve.

ROMANIA

July

Collapse of German-controlled Banca Generala a Tarii Romanesti. Run
on Banca de Credit Roman and Banca Romaneasca.

MEXICO

July

Suspension of payments after run on Credito Espanol. de Mexico. Run on
Banco Nacional de Mfxico.

August

USA

Series of banking panics, with October 1931 the worst month. Between
August 1931 and January 1932, 1860 banks fail.

September

UK

External drain, combined with rumors of threat to London merchant
banks with heavy European (particularly Hungarian and German)
involvements.

Table 7. (continued)

September

ESTONIA

General bank run following sterling crisis; second wave of runs in
November.

October

ROMANIA

Failure of Banca Marmerosch, Blank & Co. Heavy

October

bank

runs.

FRANCE

Collapse of major investment bank Banque Nationale de Credit
(reconstructed as Banque Nationale pour le Commerce et

l'Industrie). Other bank failures and bank runs.

1932

March

SWEDEN

Weakness of one large bank (Skandinaviska Kreditaktiebolaget) as
result of collapse of Kreuger industrial and financial empire, but
no general panic.

May

FRANCE

Losses of large investment bank Banque de l'Union Parisienne forces
merger with Credit Mobilier Francais.

June

USA

Series of bank failures in Chicago.

Table 7.

(continued)

October

USA

New wave of bank failures, especially in Midwest and Far West.

1933

February

USA

General banking panic, leading to state holidays and a nationwide bank
holiday in March.

November

SWITZERLAND

Restructuring of large bank (Banque Populaire Suisse) after heavy
losses.

1934

March

BELCIUM

Failure of Banque Belge de Travail develops into general banking and

exchange crisis.
September

ARGENTINA

Bank problems throughout the fall induce government-sponsored merger
of four weak banks (Banco Espanol del Rio dela Plata, Banco el

Hogar Argentina, Banco Argentina-Uruguayo, Ernesto Tornquist &
Co.).

Table 7. (continued)

1935

October

ITALY

Deposits fall after ltalian invasion of Abyssinia.

1936

January

NORWAY

After years of deposit stability, legislation introducing a tax on
bank deposits lead,s to withdrawals (until fall).

October

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Anticipation of second devaluation of the crown leads to deposit
withdrawals.

Table 8.

Log-differences of commercial bank deposit-currency ratio

1930

1931

.05

-

.12*

Austria

.17

-

.40*

Belgium

-.13*

Australia

-

-.22*

1932

1933

1934

.05

.01

.05

-

.03

-

.01

.07

-

.01

-

.02

-

.06

-

.10*

1935

1936

.20*

-

.07

-.13*

..27*

.05

.00

.01

-

.06

.02

.07

-.03

-

.11*

-

.00

-.02

Canada

.07

-.01

.03

Czecho.

.11

-

.08

.07

Denmark

.08

-

.03

.00

-

.07

.02

.02

Estonia

.16

-

.29*

.02

-

.05

.10

.05

Finland

.09

-

.05

.14

-

.04

-

.06

-

.04

-

.09

.07

-

.12*

.01

-

.10*

-

.07

-

.10

-

.03

.05

-.09

-.01

.27*

-.03

.06

France

-

Germany

.1l* 4Ø*

-

-

-

.13

-.08

-.02

-

.04

.02

Greece

.17

Hungary

.07

-

.07

.10

-.03

-.08

-

.05

Italy

.04

-

.01

.05

.06

.01

-

.20*

.08

Japan

.09

.03

-.12*

.04

.03

-

.00

.09

Latvia

.03

.•57*

.11

-.06

.12

.1O

.45

Neth.

.10

-.36*

-.05

-.06

-.05

-.08

Norway

.04

-

.15*

.01

.03

-

.23*

New Zealand

.04

-

.11*

-

.32*

Poland

.07

-

.29*

Rumania

.11

-.76*

.00

-

.00

.00

-

.24*

Sweden
Spain

-

.07

-

-

-

.06

-

.09

-

.03

.07

.15

-

.08

.02

-.08

.10

-

06

-.05
-

-

.02
.08

-.11*
-

.06
.03

.28*
-

.11*
.01

-

.03

.24

.10

.10
-

.08
.06

-

.07
NA

Table 8. (continued)

1930

1931

1932

.07

.10

-

.07

.26*

-

.15*

U.K.

.03

-

U.s.

.00

- .15*

-

1933

1934

1935

.02

.01

.14

.05

-

1936
-

.03
.02

Note: Entries are the log differences of the ratio of commercial bank deposits to

money and notes in circulation. Data are

from League

of Statistics and Yearbooks, various issues.

(*)

denotes decline exceeding .10

of Nations,

Monthly Bulletin

Table 9.

Determinants of the log-difference of industrial production

Dependent variable: IdnIP

Independent variables

Equation

LilnPW

(1)

.855
(.098)

(2)

.531
(.095)

(3)

.406

.121)

(5)

(6)

(7)

PANIC

MnMO

.231
(.043)
.148
(.041)

.364
(.141)

.231
(.046)

.351
(.128)

.150
(.044)

-

.296

.103

-

(.123)

(.044)

(8)

DISC

.0191
(.0026)

(.111)

• 300

(4)

lnW

lnEX

.217*
(.048)

.0157

-

(.0027)
.272

(.206)

.072
.119
(.189)

-

.0156

-

(.197)

(.0029)
-

.0358

.015
(.189)

.0138

-

(.0102)

(.0028)

.0126

-

(.0031)

.405
(.098)

Note: For variable definitions, see text. The sample period is 1930-36. The panel
consists of 24 countries except that, due to missing wage data, Finland, Greece, and

Spain are excluded from equations 5-8. Estimates of country-specific dummies
not reported.

*

Export

Standard errors are in parentheses.

growth is measured in real terms in equation 8.

are

Table 10. Error-correction equations for U.S. and French wholesale
prices

Dependent variable
in FRAJPI

in USAWPI

constant

log USAWPI log FRAWPI
(lagged once)

4 lags of own
WPI growth

.044
(t — 3.81)

- .166
(t —

2.77)

.530

-

1.57;
p—.202)

(F —

Current and 4
lags of base
money growth

1.412
(F — 5.62;

Current and 4
lags of deposits
of failing
U.S. banks,
in logs

-

p — .0005)

.006

(t —

1.57)

.071
(t — 1.10)

.320
(F —

2.48;

p— .057)
.519
(F —

0.78;

p —

.569)

.020

(F —

p

5.61;
.0005)

.531

D-W

-

1.62

.307

1.87

Note: Deposits of failing banks are from the Federal Reserve Bulletin.

