                         NBER WOREING PAPERS SERIES




                  fiSCAL FOLLCY, CAPITAL ACCJNUIATION, AND
                           DEBT IN AN OPEN E0)NG1Y




                               Stephen J. Thrnovsky
                                   Partha Sen




                           Workir    Paper No. 3489




                    NATIONAL BJREAD OF EQJNCt4I C RESEARCh
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Caitridge, MA 02138
                                 October 1990




This paper is part of NBER's research prcqram in International Studies.
Any opinions expressud are those of the authors ani not those of the National
Bjreau of Econanic Research.
                                               NBER Workin Paper #3489
                                               october 1990


                  FISCAL FOLICY, CAPITAL ACUJMULATION, AND
                          DEBT IN AN OPIN ECOIfl4Y


                                     ABgrpcr

     This paper analyzes the effects of changes in government experrlitures on
both a domestically produce:i and an imported good in an open tnany based on
intertenpral optimizing behavior. The dynamic adjusthent is characterized
in detail and the critical role played by the accumulating capital stock is
highlighted. The evolution of the cUrrent account is seen to mirror that of
capital. The welfare of such policies is also assessed in tans of the
intertamporal utility of the representative agent. Both permanent and
temporary policy changes are considered, with the latter being shown to have
a permanent effect on the economy.




Stephen 1. Thrnovsky                           Partha Sen
ocparbnent of Economics                        parthent of Economics
University of Washington                       DeThi School of Economics
Seattle, WA 98195                              New Delhi, Irdia
1. INTRODUCTION
    The emergence of large fiscal and current account deficits in the United States during
the 1980's stimulated interest in the theoretical analysis of fiscal policies in open economies.
The recent literature addressing this prohlem does so using various versions of the utility
mwximizing representative agent framework. Two types of issues have received attention;
the effects of changes in government expenditure policy, on the one hand, and issues
pertaining to deht and tsx—financing policies, on the other. Of necessity, formal analyses
of this type are restrictive, being required to invoke abstractions svhich permit them to
focus on the specific issues at hand in the most lucid was'. But in almost all cases, the role
of capital accumulation, a central component of the adjustment process, is either ignored,
or incorporated in restrictive ways.                                                      -


    Particularly significant contributions to the literature are contained in a series of pa-
pers by Frenkel and Razin, most of which are brought together in Frenkel and Razin (1987).
This book provides a comprehensive treatment of the impact of deficits in a two—country
world economy. For a large part, their analysis abstracts from investment and output
effects, and when these are included, they are restricted to a two—period analysis. Buiter
(1987) introduces capital accumulation into a true dynamic setting, although like Frenkel
and Razin, he assumes that employment remains fixed. The main question he addresses
is the choice between borrowing and tax—financing of a given level of government expen-
diture. In order to obtain a nontnvial analysis of this issue, Ricardian equivalence must
be broken and he achieves this by adopting the finite life consumer model of Blanchard
(1985). More recently. Obstfeld (1989) also introduces capital accumulation, while main-
taining the assumption of a fixed employment of labor. Furthermore, in his model the
capital stock can be augmented instantaneously by imports from abroad, in which case
the rate of investment is infinite.

    The present paper analyzes the effects of government expenditure policy using a two
good model of a (semi—small) open economy] Since we wish to focus on expenditure,
rather than the details of government finance, we assume the existence of infinitely—lived
private agents, when, with competitive markets, the conditions of Ricardian equivalence
arc known to prevail. A key aspect of the model is that both em3loyment and the rate of
capital accnmulation are endogenously determined through the intertemporal optimizing
behavior of a representative agent. Investment behavior is generated by a Tobin q—theoretic

function, first developed within an intertemporal optimizing framework by Hayashi (1982),
Abel (1982), and others.2 The convex installation costs ensure that ihe rate of investment
remains finite at all times. As will become evident in due course, the endogeneity of
croployinent is crucitd to the dynamics of the entire systeus. Without it, the dynamics
would degenerate; a fiscal expansion would give rise to an instantaneous adjustment in the
relative price, with no change in the capital stock.

    Using this framework, we analyze the effects of changes in government expenditure on
both a domestically produced good and an imported good on a number of key macroeco-
nomic variables. These include, the rate of capital accumulation, employment, output, the
current account deficit, the real interest rate, and the real exchange rate. In doing this,
our analysis differs from the existing literature in several important respects. First, the
model is sufficiently tractable to enable us to characterize in detail the dynamic adjust-
ment of the economy and to highlight the critical role played by the accumulating capital
stock in this process. In particular, the evolution of the current account is seen to mirror
that of capital. Secondly, as well as describing the responses of the variables enumerated
above, our approach provides a natural framework for assessing the effects of such policy
shocks on the welfare of the representative agent, as measured by his utility along the
entire adjustment path.3
    Thirdly. for both forms of government expenditure, two types of changes are ana-
lyzed: namely an unanticipated permanent, and an unanticipated temporary expansion.
A striking feature of the latter is that a temporary fiscal shock has a permanent effect on
the economy. The reason for this is that, as we shall demonstrate below, the steady state
                                              9
corresponding to some sustained policy depends upon the initial conditions of the econ-
omy prevailing at the time this policy is introduced. The adjustment which occurs during
some temporary policy change will have an important hearing on the initial conditions in
existence at the time the temporary policy is permanently revoked.

     The fact that the steady state may depend upon initial conditions in models with
infinitely lived maximizing agents, having a constant rate of time discount and facing
perfect capital markets (assumptions to be made below), has been previously discussed by
Giavazzi and Wyplosz (1984). Hosvever, its significance for the implications of temporary
shocks has received little consideration.4 Yet tIns is a crucial issue, especially in the light of
the recent interest pertaining to hysteresis and the random walk behavior of real variables
such as output and employment. The present framework provides a plausible framework
for generating this type of behavior.

     In characterizing the dynamic adjustment paths generated by these fiscal disturbances,
the analysis identifies several channels through which they are transmitted to the rest of the
economy. First, there is the usual direct effect. This is simply the channel whereby a fiscal
expansion on the domestic good impinges directly on the domestic output market, while
a fiscal expansion on the imported good impacts directly on the trade balance. Secondly,
a fiscal expansion induces a short—ron change in the price of capital (the Tobin q), which
in turn determines the transitional adjustment in the capital stock over time. The model
is forward looking and as a consequence of this, the short—run adjustment depends upon
the long—run response of the rapital stock. As we will show below, this in turn depends
upon the form of fiscal expansion. While government expenditure on the domestic good
is unambiguously expansionary, government expenditure on the imported good is not.
Thirdly, a fiscal expansion generates a o'ealth effect, which with perfect capital markets,
remains constant over time. Moreover, because the economy changes its stock of wealth
while a temporary policy is in effect, thereby determining the initial conditions in existence
when the policy ceases, this wealth effect provides the channel whereby the temporary

                                                3
policy has a permanent effect. It is the essential snurce nf the hysteresis generated by the
mndel.



2. THE MACROECONOMIC FRAMEWORK
     For present purposes the household and production sectors of the economy may be
consolidated. The economy we consider is inhabited by a single infinitely—lived repre-
sentative agent who accumulates capital (K-) for rental at its competitively determined
rental rate and supplies labor (f) at its competitive wage. The agent is specialized in
the production of a single commodity, using the stock of capital and labor by means of a
neoclassical production function F(k, £). Expenditure on any given increase in the capital
stock is an increasing function of the rate of capital accumulation.5 That is, there are
increasing costs associated with investment (I) which we represent by the convex function
C) C' > 0, C" > Ø•6 By choice of units, we assume


                                    C(0) =   0, C'(O) =   1




so that the total cost of zero investment is zero and the marginal cost of the initial instal-
lation is unity.7

     Domestic output is used in part for investment, in part as a domestic consumption
good (x), with the rest being exported. In addition to consuming part of this output, the
agent also consumes another good (y), which is imported from abroad. While the price of
this latter good is taken as given, the economy is large enough in the production of the
domestic good to affect its relative price and therefore the terms of trade.

    The agent can also accumulate net foreign bonds (1) that pay an exogenously given
world interest rate (i*). Equation (la) describes the agent's instantaneous budget con-
straint

                                              4
                        b = 1[F(k, £) — CU)   —   x—   up +   uiTh T]                    (la)

where
    a = relative price of the foreign good in terms of the domestic good,
    T = lump—sum taxes.

In addition, the rate of capital accumulation and investment are related by the constraint


                                           k=I                                           (lb)

where for simplicity we abstract from depreciation.
    The agent's decisions are to choose consumption levels x. y, labor supply £, the rate
of investment I, and the rates of asset accumulation b, Ic to


             Maximize f [U(x,y) + VU) + VV(g1,95)]e_Sldt
                           s                                                             (ic)
                               U1>O, U5>O, V'>O, Ws:>O W51>O
where g. p5 real domestic government expenditure on the domestic good and the import
good. respectively. The optimization is subject to the constraints (la) (ib), and the given
initial conditions K(O) = I<s, b(O) = b5. For simplicity, the instantaneous utility function
is assuzned to be additively separable in the private consumption goods, x and y, labor,
C and the public expenditures g' and p5. We also assume that the utility function is
increasing in the consumption of both private and public goods, but decreasing in labor,
sod that it is strictly concave. Finally, the two private goods are taken to be Edgeworth
complementary, so that U1 >     0.

    The current—value Hamiltooian for this optimization is expressed by



   H U(x,y) + VU) + W(g1,g5) + [F(k,) — CU) — x                 —
                                                                    up + cib — T]   + q1 (2)
                                              5
where A is the shadow value (marginal utility) of wealth in the form of internationally
traded bonds, q is the shadow value of the agent's capital stock. Exposition of the model
is simplified by using the shadow value of wealth as numeraire. Consequently, q aq/A
is defined to be the market price of capital in terms of the (unitary) price of foreign bonds.
     The first order optimality conditions with respect to r, y, £, and I are respectively


                                        U1(r,y) =                                         (3a)



                                         U5(r,y) = A                                      (3b)



                                           = -F1(k,)                                      (3c)



                                          c') = q.                                        (3d)

Pairwise the first three equations describe the usual marginal rate of substitution conditions
for consumers. Equation (3d) equatcs the marginal cost of investment to the market value
of capital, which is essentially a Tohin q theory of investment.8
    In addition, the shadow value of wealth and the market value of capital evolve in
accordance with



                                        A=A(S-i)                                          (3e)



                                 = (i+)q_Fs(k).                                           (3f)

Since S and z are both fixed, the ultimate attainment of a steady state is possible if
and only if S =   z   and henceforth we asaume this to be the case. This implies A =         0


                                              6
everywhere, so that A is always at its steady—state value I (to he determined below).
Given the assnmption of interest rate parity, the domestic interest rate z(t) is related to
the world interest rate by


                                                                                          (4)

Equatton (3f) is therefore an arbitrage condition equating the rate of return on capital,
(Is + ))/q, to the domestic interest rate, i(t).
    Finally, in order to ensure that the private agent satisfies his intertemporal budget
constraint, we need to impose the transversality conditions


                              lim Abe' = l.Lm qke_ = 0.                                  (3g)

    Turning to the domestic government, its budget constraint, expressed in terms of the
foreign good, is described by the equation


                                à='{g1+cg5+cio—T]                                         (5)

where o is the stock of (traded) bonds issued by the domestic government. This equation
is perfectly straightforward and requires no further comment.
    Subtracting (5) from (ib), yields the national budget constraint


                   d= u[F(k,f)_(x+gy)_c(y+gy)_C(I)+ci*n]                                  (6)

where n b — o = stock of net credit of the domestic economy. That is, the rate of change
of net credit of the domestic economy equals the balance of payments on current account,
which in turn equals the balance of trade plus the net interest earned on the traded bonds.
To rule out the possibility that the country can run up infinite debt or credit with the rest
of the world, we impose the following intertemporal budget constraint
                                             ne' =                                          (7a)

This relationship, together with the transversality condition (3g), imposes a corresponding
constraint on the domestic government, namely


                                       hm oe' = 0.                                           (7b)

     The complete macroeconomic equilibrium can now he described as follows. First, there
are the static optimality conditions (3a) - (3d). with .\ = .\, together with the domestic
output market clearing condition.


                              F(k,f) = x +Z(a)+C(I) +g1                                      (8)

where Z() is the amount of the domestic good exported, with Z'(•) > 0. Secondly, there
are the dynamic equations (lb) (3f), (5), (6), together with the transversality conditions
(3g), (7a), (7h).
     The five ststic equations may be solved for x. y, ,   I. and a. in terms of A, k, q, and g1,
as follows:



                     x=   x(.k,q,g)     Xx   < O,x > Ox5 < 0,x5 <0                          (9a)
                     p = y(A,k,q,g1) Yx <°y > 0Yq <O,p5 <0                                   (9b)
                       = £(A,k,q.g1)    £          Of5 > 0,f >0                              (Oc)

                     a = a(A,k,q,g7) ax> O,ae > 0,a5 <0,a5 <0                               (9d)

                     I=I(q)       11>0                                                      (9e)

The following explanation of these partial derivatives may be given. An increase in the
marginal utility of wealth leads to s reduction in the domestic consumption of both goods.

                                              S
    The reduction in the demand for the domestic good causes its relative price to fall, i.e., a
p
    rises, thereby stimulating exports. The overall effect on the demand for domestic output
    depends upon whether or not this exceeds the reduction in x. If so, domestic output
b
    and employment both rise, if not, both fall. An increase in the stock of capital raises
    output and the real wage. The higher domestic income stimulates the consumption of x,
    though by a lesser amount, and the relative price a rises. With the two private goods
    being complementary in utility (LJ5 > 0), the increase in the consumption of the domestic
    good increases the demand for the import good as well. While the rise in the real wage
    rate tends to decrease V' thereby stimulating employment, the rise in a has the opposite
    clfcc t the net effect on cinployniciit ckpends tI( iii wIn cli i iifli iciicc doirunates. An increase
    in q stimi.dates investment. This increases the demand for the domestic good and its
    relative price rises; i.e., a falls. This in turn raises the marginal utility of the domestic
    good, implying that the consumption of r must fall, and with U15 > 0, p falls as well.
    On balance, the increase in investment exceeds the fall in demand stemming from the
    reduction in r and lower exports, so that domestic output and employment rises.

         An increase in government expenditure on domestic output raises the demand for that

    good, thereby raising its relative price (lowering a). Employment and domestic output are
    therefore stimulated. However, the increased output, together with the reduced exports
    stemming from the fall in a, is smaller than the increase in demand generated by tbe
    additional government expenditure, so that x must fall in order for domestic goods market
    cquilibriuni to prevail. \Vitli U15 > 0, the reduced demand for the domestic good spills
    over to the import good. All this describes only the partial effects of a short-run change
    in government expenditure on good r. In addition, such an expenditure generates jumps
    in A and q, thereby inducing further responses. The complete short—run response consists
    of a combination of these effects and will be discussed in Section 5 below. Finally, we
    may note that given the separability of the utility function in private and public goods,
    the short—run equilibrium does not depend directly upon p5. However, as we shall see in

                                                      9
Section 5, g5 has an indirect effect through its impacts on and q.
     The evolution of the system is determined by substituting the short—run equilibrium
into the dynamic equations and ensuring that the transversality conditions are met. It
is readily apparent that in fact the dynamics can be determined sequentially. Equations
(ib) and (3f) can be reduced to a pair of autonomous differential equations in q and Ic
and these constitute the core of the dynamics. This is achieved by first differentiating (Od)
with respect to



                                                                                        (9d')

aud then substituting this equation, together with (9c) and (9d), into (ib) and (3f). Next
(6) equates the accumulation of foreign assets by the economy to its current account
surplus. Using the domestic goods market clearing condition (8), this may be expressed
equivalently in terms of exports minus imports plus the interest service account


                                       = '[Z(a) — a(y + g) + urn]                        (6')

This equation may in turn be reduced to an autonomous differential equation in n, af-
ter substituting the solutions for q and k. The same applies to the government budget
constraint (5).


3. EQUILIBRIUM DYNAMICS
    Carrying out the procedure outlined above, (3f) and (1+) may be reduced to the
follosving pair of linearized differential equations around the steady state:9


                              4    =    C      —6[F + Fs,[5]        —4
                              Ic                       0        k—k                      (10)


where 9 w           >   0,   and denotes steady-state values.

                                                  10
      The determinant of the coefficient matrix in (10) can he shown to be negative and
therefore the long—run equilibrium is a saddlepoint with eigenvalues i' < 0, P2 > 0. It is
ticar that while the capital stock ahvays evolves continuously, the shadow price of capiral,
q. may jump instantaneously in response to new information. Along the stable arm,
therefore, k and q follow the paths


                                      k = k + (lcs —     k)e"                                       (lie)


                                                                                                    (lib)

      To determine the dynamics of the current account, we consider (6') in the form


                           = Z[a(, k, q, gm)]   —
                                                     y(, k, q, g) + in                               (12)
                               a,k,q.g1)
Linearizing this equation around steady state yields


                  = [($a    - CYkXk - k) + (a - uy9)(q - 4)] + r(n -0)
where '1     Z'   Z/a. Following Sen tuid 'furxiovsky (1989). assume that the economy
starts nut with an initial stock of traded bonds n(0) =             n5.   The solution for n(t) consistent
with the interteniporal budget constraint for the economy (7a) is


                              n(t) = +               .   (k's
                                                                —
                                                                    k)e"                             (13)

\vhere



                                 n—n5=. (k5—)                                                         (14)

and

                                                11
                                                                                                        4.

                                                                                                 (15)

     Equation (13) describes the relationship between the accumulation of capital and the
accnmulation of traded bonds. Of particular significance is the sign of this relationship.
The definition of 13 given in (15) emphasizes that capital exercises two channels of influence
on the current account. First, an increase in k raises the relative price a, both directly,
but also throngh the accompanying fall in q, as seen in (lib). What this does to the trade
balance depends npon j3. From the above definition of /9, /9 > 0 if and only if the relative
price elasticity of the foreign demand for exports exceeds unity. At the same time, the
increase in k increases imports both directly, and again through the fall in q, and this
reduces the trade balance. While either case is possible, we shall assume that the relative
price effect dominates, so that 11 > 0.

    Performing the same procedure for government debt, one can obtain an analogous set
of equations to (13) - (15), namely


                                 a(t) = a +    .         (k5    k)e't                           (16)
                                              1    —Ri
where



                                     —   o=               (ks   —
                                                                    )                           (17)



                                     (Os t°)(0k +                   >0                          (18)

    The steady state of the economy is obtained when k =                 = fl = a = 0 and is given by
the following set of equations                                                                          a


                                      =                                                        (19o)

                                                   12
                           U5(fg)=                 -                                     (19b)

                                   = -F,(,f)                                             (lYc)

                                                                                         (lod)

                            F(k,f)=+Z(d)+g,                                              (19e)

                           F5(k,f) =                                                     (lOf)
                            F(k,€)=±+g+&(Q+g5)—&ifl                                      (19g)
                             —
                               s=      (k — ks)                                          (19h)

                                       2   — lit (k—ks)                                   (19i)

                                 T=g1+ãg5+&id                                             (19j)




These equations jointly determine the steady—state equilibrium values of i, Q, k, £,   , , Pt, a,
and T.

     Several aspects of thio steady state merit comment. First, the steady state value of
q is unity, consistent with the Tobin q theory of investment, Secondly, the steady—state
marginal physical product of capital is equated to the exogenously given foreign interest
rate, thereby determining the capital—labor ratio. Thirdly, equation (19g) implies that
in steady—state equilibrium, the current account balance must be zero. Combined with
(19e), we see that this requires the trade balance to offset the interest earnings on traded
bonds. Equation (19h) describes the equilibrium relationship between the change in the
stock of capital and the change in the net credit of the economy. Equation (19i) describes
an analogous relationship between the stock of capital and the level of government debt,
while (19)) determines the required lump sum tax, which will ensure that the steady—state
government budget remains in balance.t5 Finally, the steady state depends upon the initial
stocks of assets k5,n5, and i5. It is this dependence upon initial conditions which is the
source of the iempsrary fiscal (or other) shocks having permanent effects.

                                              13
4. LONG-RUN EFFECTS OF FISCAL EXPANSIONS                                                            4
     The long—run effects of fiscal expansions, taking the forms of increases in government

expenditore on domestic goods and on import goods respectively, are reported in Parts A
and B of the Appendix and shall he discnssed in turn.


A. Increase in Government Expenditure on Domestic Good
     First, since the world interest rate C remains fixed, the marginal product condition
(19f) implies that the long—run capital—labor ratio is a constant, independent of either y
or g5. Capital and labor therefore change in the same proportions, so that the marginal
physical product of labor and hence the reel wage rate also remains constant. An increm-e in

g stimulates domestic output, thereby increasing employment and capital. The stimulus
in demand through government expenditure may, or may not, exceed the addition to output
and the relative price of the import good a may either rise or fall. At the ssrne time, the
increase in the steady—state stock of capital leads to a decline in the steady—state stock of
traded bonds held by the domestic economy. The increase in taxes necessary to finance the
additional government expenditure, coupled with the reduction in net interest earnings by
the ecooomy, means a reduction in real disposable income. As a consequence, the private
consumption of the two goods, A and both decline. While the reduction in 9             tends   to
raise the marginal utility A, the reduction in A tends to lower it (since U5 > 0). In general,
the overall effect is unclear, although A will certainly be increased if the utility function is

additively separable in the two goods. Finally, we see from (iF) that the long—run increase
in A must lead to a steady— state increase in the stock of government debt.
    Substituting (iSe) into (19g), the equilibrium trade balance is given by

                                                                                                    'S
                                  Z(&) — A(9 +   g5) =

The fiscal expansion on the domestic good raises the equilibrium trade balance, when

measured in terms of the foreign good (_i*fi),      It will do the same, even more strongly,
                                               14
in terms of the domestic good, as long as the domestic economy is a net creditor nation
(Ti > 0). However, for a debtor country, the trade balance in terms of domestic goods may
fall, if the relative price effect is sufficiently strong.



B. Increase in Government Expenditure on Impart Good

     The long—run effects on domestic activity, as measured by employment, capital, arid
output, may all he either expansionary or contractionary. What is going on is the following.
The increase in government expenditure on the import good raises its relative price, thereby
stimulating the demand for the domestic good, and this is expansionary. But at the same
time, the increase in lump sum taxes necessary to finance the additional expenditure
reduces disposable income, reducing private expenditure on the domestic good (without
any corresponding increase in public expenditure on that good), and this is contractionary.
The net impact on domestic activity depends upon which effect dominates. In addition,
the reduction in disposable income lowers the private consumption of the import good as
well. The response of the marginal utility A is an unambiguous increase. This is because
the government expenditure impacts more on the private consumption of the import good
  than on the domestic good i, with the result that the increase in the marginai utility
resulting from the fall in the former outweighs the decrease stemming from the fall in the
latter.

     The response of the equilibriom level of national credit ñ and the equilibrium level of
government debt a, both depend upon whether the long—ron effect of this form of fiscal
expansion is expansionary or contractionary. In the former case, ñ will fall and a will rise;
in the latter case the reverse occurs. What happens to the trade balance as measured in
terms of the foreign good, depends upon what happens to ñ. In the expansionary case it
will rise, while in the contractionary case it will fall. In terms of the domestic good. the
relative price effect also needs to be taken into account.

                                                 15
5. TRANSITIONAL DYNAMICS
    As discussed in Section 3, the dynamics of P and q are described by a saddlepoint in
P—q   space. The stable arm XX (in Fig. íA) is given by



                                     q=1+(k-k)                                          (20a)

and is negatively sloped; the unstable arm (not illustrated), is described by



                                     q=1+-(k—k)                                         (20b)

and is positivcly sloped. The effects of tho two types of fiscal expenditure shall be consid-
ered in turn.


A. Government Expenditure on Domestic Good
     As long as no future change is anticipated, the economy must lie on the stable locus
XX. The initial jump in q(O). following an unanticipated permanent increase in Yr is



                                              I' dg                                      (21)
                                    dg1
The long—run increase in the capital stock thus gives rise to a short—run increase in the
shadow price q(O).
     The dynamics following an unanticipated permanent increase in Yr is illustrated in
Fig. l.A and lB. Part A describes the adjustment in q and k, while Part B describes
the evolution of net credit. Suppose that the economy starts in steady—state equilibrium
at the point P on the stable arm XX and that there is a permanent increase in Yr The
new steady state is at the point Q, with the higher equilibrium capital stock k, and an
unchanged shadow price of capital 7 = 1. In the short run, q jumps from P to A on
the new stable locus XX'. From (3d) it is seen that the increase in q has an immediate
expansionary effect on investment and capital begins to accumulate.

                                              16
      The initial responses of other key variables are



                                df'(O)   ae       ac ax     ae dq(O)
                                dg       ag1 ax ag,                                          (22o)
                                                            aq dg1

                                         ag, ax ag,                                          (22b)
                                dg1                       aq dg,
                               dx(O)     ax       ax a ax dq(O)
                                dg,      3g,      ax ag, aq dg,                              (22c)


                                         ag,      ax ag,                                     (22d)
                                dg,                         aq dg,

\vhich ronsist of two channels of influence. First, there are the direct effects, consisting
of the partial derivatives snch as             and discussed in Section 3. Secondly, there axe the
indirect effects, which operate through induced jumps in .1 and q.
     Despite the fact that the various effects may, or may not, work in the same direction
(and iu fact the effects through A are ambiguous), we are able to establish that overall a
permanent increase in g, will have the same qualitative effects on employment and con-
aumption in the short run, as it does in the steady state. Namely it will raise employment,
while reducing the consumptions of the two goods. In addition it will lower the relative
price a. How the magnitudes of these short—run responses compare with the long run
depends upon whether the short--run effects resulting from the rise in the shadow price
of investment q(O) dominates the long—run effects stemming from the eventual increase in
the capital stock.

     From equation (9d') and the fact that upon reaching the point A in Fig. l.A on the
neu' stable locus, ,j < 0, /c > 0, we can infer that in the short run and during the subsequent
 ra anti uu ,   &   >   i.e. that the relative price of the i inport goud must be incrcasing. TIus
means that the short—run fall in the relative price overshoots its long—run response. At the
same time, the fact that & > 0 means that the fiscal expansion initially raises the domestic
interest rate above the fixed real world rate.il

                                                    17
    Differentiating (9a), (9b) analogously with respect to t, one can show using a similar
argument that during the transition          0,   > 0, so that these consumptions also overreact
in the short run. In both cases, the shadow price of investment effect dominates. In the
case of employment, however, we are unable to determine the relative sizes of the short—run

and long—run adjustments.
       Critical to these adjustments is the endogeneity of employment. To see this, consider
the steady—state relationships (19) and assume instead that employment is fixed, so that
the optimality condition (19c) is no longer applicable. The marginal productivity condition
(19f) now implies that the equilibrium stock of capital (rather than the capital—labor ratio)
is detennined exogenously by it and is independent of g1. It therefore follows from (ha),
(Nb) that the capital stock and the shadow price of investment reihain constant at all
points of time. Output is therefore unchanged. There are no dynamics and all that
happens is that the fiscal expansion leads to a once—and—for—all decline in the relative
price a and the private consumptions x, and y.52
       Part B of Fig. 1 illustrates the relationship between n and k. which combining (ha)
and (13) is



                                  n(t) — d   =         (k(t) —


This    is a negatively sloped line, denoted by ZZ. Since             = —[pr—i]jt- this llne
remains fixed. The movement along A to Q in Fig. l.A corresponds to a movement along
LM in Fig. lB. From this figure we see that an increase in government expenditure on
the domestic good leads to an immediate decumulation of foreign bonds. This is brought
about by the fact that the increase in g1 leads to an immediate reduction in the relative
price a, which with fl >    0   creates an immediate current account deficit. With the stock
of traded bonds being predetermined, the trade balance, measured in terms of the foreign
good also falls, and with the fall in a, the trade balance in terms of domestic goods falls

                                                  18
even more. Over time, the initial decumulation of foreign bonds is reversed. This occurs
through the rising relative price a, which causes the trade deficit to decline over time.

        Consider now a temporary increase in g'. Specifically, suppose that at time 0 the
government increases its expenditure on the domestic good, but is expected to restore its
expenditure to its original level at time T. The transitional adjustment is now as follows.13
As soon as the increase in g occurs, the stable arm XX will shift up instantaneously (and
temporarily) to X'X'. while the shadow price q increases to the point B, which lies below
X'X', at which point the initial rate of capital accumulation is moderated. The same is
true of employment. As is the case for a permanent expansion, the initial increase in (iq)
is less than the increase in the marginal physical product of capital resulting from the
additional employment, so that q begins to fall; see (3f). Moreover, the accumulation of
capital is accompanied by a decumulation of traded bonds. Hence immediately following
the initial jump, q and k follow the path BC in Fig. lA, while It and n follow the
corresponding path LH in Fig. lB. At time T, when the level of government expenditure
is restored to its original level, the stock of capital and traded bonds will have reached a
point such as H in Fig. lB. The accumulated stocks of these assets, denoted by ItT and nT
respectively, will now serve as initial conditions for the dynamics beyond time T when g
reverts permanently to its original level. .ks noted in Section 3, they will therefore in part
determine the new steady state equilibrium. With no new information being received at
time T (since the temporary natnre of the fiscal expansion was announced at the outset),
and no further jumps, the stable locus relevant for subsequent adjustments in q and It
beyond time T is the locus X"X", parallel to XX which passes through the point It = ItT.
Likewise, the relevant locus linking the accumulation of capital and traded bonds is now
z,z,.
    After time T, q and It follosv the stable locus CR in Fig. l.A to the new steady state
equilibrium at R, while correspondingly It and n follow the locus HN in Fig. l.B to the
new equilibirum point N. One can establish formally that X"X" lies above the original

                                              19
stable locus XX, while Z'Z' lies below ZZ, as these curves have beeo drawn. In the new
steady state, the shadow price q reverts to 1, hut with a higher stork of capital and a
lower stock of traded boisds than originally. The striking feature of the adjustment is
that the temporary increase in government expenditure leads to a permanent increase
in the stock of capital, accompanied by a lower stock of traded bonds. This is because
during the transitional adjustment period, during which the fiscal expansion is in effect,
the accumulation of capital and bonds will influence subsequent initial conditions, which
in turn will affect the subsequent steady state.14


B. Government Expenditure on Import Good
     The initial response of q(O) to a fiscal expansion taking the form of an increase in
government expenditure on the import good g5 is given by


                                                          o                     (23)
                                       I' dg5
                                     dg5
and depends upon whether the long—run effect on the capital stock is expansionary or
contractionary. In the former case, the dynamics are essentially as illustrated in Fig. 1.
There is an initial stimulus to iovestment, leading to a long—run accumulation of capital,
and decumulation of traded bonds. In the latter case, the adjustment paths are as depicted
in Fig. 2. The fiscal expansion now generates an initial drop in the shadow price q(O),
leading to a long— run decumulation of capital. accompanied by an accumulation of traded
bonds.
     The initial responses of [a, r, and y are given by

                          dB(O) 58 58 dq(O)
                          —=--=-+———-—
                           dg5  DX Sq dg5
                                                       8[,a,r,y                        (24)

In contrast to g1, there is no direct effect; government expenditure on the import good
operates entirely through .\   and   q. This is a consequence of our assumption of additive
separability of utility in private and public consumption.

                                              20
     By a parallel argument to that oven above, we can show the short—run response of
the relative price a, overadjusts in the direction of the long—run response. In the case that
the long—run effect of the fiscal expansion is expansionary, the initial fall in a(O) exceeds
the corresponding long—run reduction in &. On the other hand, if the long—run effect of g5

is contractionary, a overincreases in the short run. In this case, the fact that & < 0 over
time as the capital stock falls and the shadow price of investment increases, means that the
domestic interest rate falls below the world rate during the transition. The overresponse
of x and p is also true when p5 is expansionary. But in the contractionary case this is
not necessarily so. In this case, x and p may actually increase on impact, though they
will thereafter fall continuously to their lower equilibrium levels. Finally, the short—run
employment effect is unclear. This is in part due to the fact that one effect of the higher
p5 is to raise the marginal utility , the effects of which on employment are ambiguous.
     The relationship between the current account and the accumulation of traded bonds
is analogous to that already given and requires no further discussion. The same applies
with respect to the analysis of temporary incres.ses. This is illustrated in Fig. 2 and should
be self—explanatory.


6. WELFARE EFFECTS
     Thus far, we have been describing the adjustment of the economy to the various fiscal
expansions. Of particular relevance is the impact of such shocks on the welfare of the
representative agent in the econonw This can be conveniently analyzed by considering
the effect on the intertemporal utility function (with S =



                            f    [U(r.y) + V(f) + W(g1,g5)]e       tdt.                   (25)

In this section we briefly consider the welfare effects of permanent fiscal expansions. when
consumptions a, p and employment S follow the solutions given by (9a) - (Pc), where k and
p evolve in accordance with the dynamic paths (ha), (llb).is

                                             21
    The evaluation is bssed on a linear approximation to f. To ohtain this we first
linearize the instantaneous utility function U() + VC) about steady state


           U(x, y) + V(f) U(2, ) + V(E) + U1(r — 2) + U5(y —                   V'(2 —2)

where the marginal utilities U1, U1, U' are all evaluated at steady state. The transitional
paths followed by consumption and employment may be linearly approximated by


                                        2 + (r(O) — 2)e"t                                 (2Gb)




                                 y(t)   Q    + (y(O) — Q)e'                               (265)



                                  2(t) E+ (f(O)         i)ePlt.                           (26c)


With g1, p5 constant, one can then readily show that welfare may be linearly approxi-
mated by

                          1              -
                          [U(5,) + l'(E) + W(91,g5)J +
                                                                  U   [x(O)-
                                                    -
                                                                       —
                                                                           t
                          -         -                                                      (27)
                      +
                                              tt—Pt

The first term in (27) represents the level of welfare, if the steady state were attained
instantaneously. The remaining terms reflect adjustments to this, due to the fact that the
steady state is reached only gradually along the transitional paths followed by consumption
and employment. It is possible to express this linearized solution in terms of the time path
of the capital stock, but for present pnrposes this is not necessary.
    Using the equilibrium conditions (3a) - (3c), the effect of an increase in government
expenditure on good i(i = 1,2) on total welfare is given by
              d lOw                ,u1LT      c/f
                                              —+   c/9 dl?
                                                  c——F1—
                     s* Og       j.(j* _pj)   dg1   dg1      dg1
                                                                                          95
                                   Ur  dr(O) dy(O) df(O)
                                     p —+c-———F1-——      t=x,y
                             +     —
                                        dg1   dg1   dg

This is seen to consist of two types of effects. The first is the direct effect, , which being
permanent, is capitalized at the constant rate t. This effect is welfare improving. The
second are indirect effects which operate throogh private consumption and employment.
These in turn comprise the steady—state effects and those along the transitional path. Be-
cause the adjustment path cau be characterized in terms of the initial points and steady
state (see (26)), these effects can be expressed in terms of changes in the initial consu.mp-
tions r(O), p(O), and employment l?(O). and the corresponding steady—state quantities
and   £
      Since an increase in government expenditure on the domestic good Yr lowers the
consumption of both goods and raises employment (lowers leisure), both initially and in
the steady state (and therefore along the entire adjnstment path), we can see from (23)
that what we have called the indirect effects are negative. Thus whether an increase in
g1 is welfare improving or not depends upon whether these dominate the positive direct
effects. The optimal level of government expenditure on the domestic good is obtained
by equating the discounted direct marginal gains to the marginal losses resulting from the
crowding out of private consumption and leisure.17
      The welfare effects of so increase in g5 are generally similar. Even in the case where
increased expenditure on the import good is contrsctionsry, so that employment declines,
the welfare improving increase in leisure is dominated by the welfare deteriorating reduction
in private consumption. This net welfare loss must then be weighed up against the positive
direct effect, as before.




                                               23
7. CONCLUSIONS
                                                                                                  0
    This paper has considered the impacts of both permanent and temporary changes in
government expenditures on various key macroeconomic variables. The main results of the
analysis can he summarized as follows.

     When the increase in government expenditure is directed towards the domestic good,
the adjustment in the domestic economy is essentially expansionary. Employment and
output are stimulated both in the short run and over time. Despite the transitional rise
in the domestic real interest rate, investment is stimulated by the increase in q, leading
to a higher equilibrium stock of capital. In addition, the increase in demand for the
domestic good lowers the relative price of the imported good, leading to initial trade and
current account deficits. Over time, the relative price of the imported good rises, the
current account deficit falls, and in the long run, the initial trade deficit is transformed to
a surplus of sufficient magnitude to finance the interest payments on the debt accumulated
during the transition. Along the transitional adjustment path consumption and leisure are
both below their respective initial starting levels leading to reductions in welfare. These
losses need to be offset against any direct gains resulting from the additional govemment
expenditure. in assessing the net benefits.

     In the case where the government expenditure is directed towards the import good,
the dynamic adjustment of the economy depends critically upon the long—run response of
the capital stock. Here two effects are in operation. While the rise in the relative price
of the import good is expansionary, the increase in lump sum taxes required to finance
the additional government imports is contractionary. If the former effects dominates, the
dynamic adjustments are much the same as when the expenditure is on the domestic good.
However, if the latter effect prevails, the adjustments are reversed. There is a reduction in
output and employment, capital decumulates, the current account is in surplus, and the
interest rate falls below its steady—state equilibrium level.

    But perhaps the most interesting conclusion of the analysis is that tcmpsrary fiscal

                                              24
expansions will give nse to permanent effects. These are qualitatively the same as the cor-
responding responses to permanent expansions, although their magnitudes are dampened
appropriately. They stem from the fact that the steady state depends upon the initial
stocks of assets. As a consequence, temporary fiscal expansions, by altering these initial
conditions for some later date when the expansions cease, lead to permanent effects on the
economy. Repeated shocks will therefore generate random walk behavior. This conclusion
is very relevant for recent discussions of hysteresis. Recent studies have suggested that
temporary real and monetary shocks have led to permanent effects on employment and
unemployment in various European countries)8 Existing models explaining these phenom-
ena have done so in terms of union power over wages. The fact that they can emerge from
the competitive intertemporal optimizing framework adopted in this paper provides them
with an alternative and arguably a more rigorous theoretical underpinning. The depen-
dence of the steady state upon the stocks of initial assets, which we have noted is the
cause of this result, is in turn generated by the assumption that the domestic consumer's
time discount rate equals the exogenously determined foreign real interest rate.'9 This
assumption, necessary for a steady state equilibrium in this model to exist, does not seem
an unreasonable one for small open economies such as the United Kingdom and France,
for which the hysteresis phenomenon has been observed.




                                            25
                                   Temrary Increase

                                       Permanent Increase




                                                               x,




 n




                                               Permanent Increase




£12



ft1




                                                              k
                          FIGURE 1.B

      INCREASE IN GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE ON EXPORT GOOD
  q




q= 1




  b




   n1


      n


   It.


                   Permanent Increase            Eemrary Increase




                                                       z,
                                                 z

                                                            k

                                 FIGURE 2.3
          INCREASE IN GOVERNMENT EXPENDIThRE ON IMPORT GOOD:
                         CONTRACTIONARY CASE
                                                    APPENDIX
       LONG RUN EFFECTS OF INCREASE IN GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES


A. Domestic Good g,.
1. Capital—Labor Ratio:



                                                     dg


2. Capital, Employment and Outpat:


                                     =          =         =                AUrrJ   >0.
                              k dg £ dg             z dg aiD
3.   Relative Price:


                                         = A"'=a -                 - ACE51     0.

4. Consumption of Domestic Good:


                                 = l[td — fT] + 1te" +                               <0.

5. Consa sip tioa of Lisp or ted Good:


                                    =                 - aU] - eUnFstb) <0.
t, Marginal Utility:


                                                                                    0.

7. Net Credit:

                                           dO         —fI     dk
                                           dg C — ti dg
S. Net Government Debt:

                                           do
                                           —
                                           dg,
                                              =
                                                C—  —()
                                                     ji
                                                              dO

                                                              d5
                                                                     >0.
where



                      w-(-)<0:3Z' ->0; wU,U—U>0.

                             D_V"[fJxyZ'tZ'UrrcIV"[Ury ices]

                             —FIUZ54 —
                                   a-       FiUrx
                                             £  a + a £ + Z') >0.


B. Import Good gy
1.    capital—Labor Ratio:


                                                      -    0
                                                dg1

2.    capital, Employmeat, and Output

                              IdO ld IdE              F1
                                                                      xury]>0
                                                                           <
3. Relative Price:


                                        = I"(U55 — aU15) + zXF] >0.

4.                  of Boniestir Good


                                    = [V"Z'[aLTrs —   Ossi
                                                               —
                                                                   UxyF] < 0.
.5.   consumption of Imported Good



                             =[V"Z'[U,—0U]+{V" +FfJ]<0.
6     Marginal Utility:


                                    = [U55l" + A[çF5 — V"Z'c]] >0.

 7. Net credit:
                                 dñ —     dk
                                               <0.
S.   Net.   C;erniiciit Debt,:


                                                0.
                                 dg   —pi dg
                                                FOOTNOTES

        The constructive suggestions frnm the referees and the Managing Editor, Peter Sinclair, are gratefully
acknowledged.
        By semi—small we mean that the economy in able to influence the price of its expnrt goods.
     2This approach to investment in also adopted by Buiter (1987). His analynin of the semi—small economy
is based on numerrcal nimulationn; the model developed in thin paper in investigated entirely analytically.
For other recent applicationn of the cost of adjustment appràach to investment to the analysis of alternative
macro dinturbances in open economies see e.g., Matsuyama (1987), Brock (1988), Sen and Turnovsky (1989).
     °Thin is in contrast to a coasideration of steady—state utility, which neglects welfare along the transitional
adjustment path.
     4For a dincunnion of thin isnue in the context of tariffs see Sen asd Turnovaky (1989).

     5Throughout the paper we shall adopt the following notation. Where appropriate, primen shall denote
decivativen, nubscriptn shall denote partial derivatives, and a dot shall denote a derivative with respect to
time.

     6This formulation of the installation function follows the original specification of adjustment costs in-
troduced by Locus (1967) and Gould (1968). More recent work by Hayashi (1982) and others postulates an
installation function which depends upon k as well as I. This modification makes little difference to our
analysis and for simplicity we retain the simpler specification.
     7Note that this specification intplies that is the case where disinvestmest muy occur I c 0, CU) c       0   for
loss rates of disinvestment. This may he interpreted as reflecting the revenue obtained as capital is sold off.
The possibility that all changes in capital are costly can be incorporated by introducing sufficiently large
fixed costs, so that C(0) > 0. This does not alter our analysis in any substantive way.
    81n the case where the installation coat function is homogeseona of degree 1 is I and k, the investment
function implied by (3d) iv modified to


                                                      = G(q).

    5Note, the (1-I) element is the matrix (10) is obtained as follosvu. In general, following the procedure
outlined it is equal to 8[s + ukI/c —              Ecaluatiug the partial derivatives c, I , £ and noting the
steady—state conditions gives in (19), this expression evaluated at steady state reduces to i.
    tSWe should note that the adjustment of some form of tax is necessary in order for the steady—state
equilibrium to be auutainable. If instead of being lump sum, taxes were diutortinnary, then the appropriate
rate consiatent with (19j) would oeed to be set. This chosen rate woald of course impsct on the decisions of
                                                                                                                  S
the representative agent.

    Thrse rrvults imply that in spite of a higher (bat declining) interest rate crowding in of iavestment
occurs.

     tActoally it ia the assumption of endogeneity of employment in conjuaction aith infinitely—lived agents
that in critical. Thin is because this gives rise to short—can dynamics which are driven by long—run changes
in the capital stoch alone; see equations (9), (11). This may hr compared to the Baiter (1987) model, foc
example, where employment is fixed, but consumers have finite lives. In this cane, the long—run capital stock
is also independent of everything other than the foreign interest rate, and is therefore also independent of
domestic fiscal policy. However, in contrast to the present analysis, tempocary changes in the capital stock
may stilt occur. This is due to the fact that the short—con dynamics are also driven by long—run changes in
other forms of financial wealth which may be generated by changes in fiscal policy.

     53The formal derivations of these adjustment paths ure omitted, but are available from the authors on

request.
     54As the figures are drawn, C lies above N and H lies above N, respectively. The complete adjustment
paths NCR and LHN are therefore monotonic. We are unable to rule out the possibility of C lying below
N and H lying above N, in which case, the accumulation of capital and decumulation of bonds would be
reversed at some point during the transition. In any event, the tensporaey increase in the reistice price
nf dnmestic goods generates an initial current account deficit, which continues as long an capital is being
accumulated.
     '5The welfare effects of temporary shocks can be analyzed similarly. They are a little more complicated
doe to the fact that part of the transition is along an unstable path of higher dimension.
     'tmIt is possible to express all the changes in coussmptiou and employment appearing in (28) in terms
of changes in the lung—run equilibrium capital stock. Hosvever, this does not turn uut to be particularly
illuminating.
     In this regard a referee has rained the following point. If the government chooses an optimal level
of expenditure, agents hmaciug perfect foresight mciii anticipate this level of expenditure and consequently no
unanticipated changes in expenditure cau occur. This point is one which is frequently made in conjunction
 with having unanticipated shocks is models of perfect foresight. The difficulty would appear to be largely a
sensantic one. Operationally, the assumption of perfect foresight, as we are using it, pertains to a considera-
 tion of the forward looking solution to the dynamic system describing the economy. It does not require that
 discrete unanticipated exogenoss events be exactly predicted; indeed by their nature they typically will not
be.
      '8See Blanchard and Summers (1966). Lindbeck and Suower (1987).
      '9More fundamentally the necensity of the requirement that 5   = for the existence of a steady-state
equilibrium is a consequence of three assumptions: (i) an infinitely—lived representative agent; (ii) perfect
capital markets; (iii) constant rate of time preference. If any of these sssamptions is drnpped, the equality
between 6 and C is no longer required at all times for a steady state to obtain. In this case the model will
generally not give rise to hysteresis.
                                    REFERENCES


Abel. A.B., "Dynamic Effects of Permaneot and Temporary Tax Policies in a q Model of

    Investment," Jouroal of Monetary Economics 9, 1982, 353—373.
Blanchard, O.J., "Debt, Inflation, and Finite Horizons," Joornal of Political Ecsaomy 83,
    1985, 223—247.

Blanchard, O.J. and L.H. Summers, "Hysteresis and the Eoropean Unemployment Prob-
    1cm," in S. Fischer (ed.) NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1986. MIT Proso, 1986.
Brock, P.L., "Investment, the Current Account, and the Relative Price of Non—Traded
    Goods in a Small Open Ecnnomy," Journal of International Economics 24, 1988,
    235—253.

Bnitor, V/H., "Fiscal Policy in Open, Interdependent Economies," in A. Razin and E.
    Sadka (edo.) Economic Policy in Theory and Practice, St. Martins Press, New York,
    1987.

Frenkel, J.A. and A. Razin, Fiscal Policies and the World Economy, MIT Pross, Cam-
    bridge, MA, 1987.
Giavazzi. F. and C. Wvplosz. "The Real Exchange Rate, the Current Account, and the
     Speed of Adjustment," in I. Bilson and R. Macstun (edo.), Ezchange Rate Theory and

     Practice, University of Chicago Preoso, 1984.
Gould, J.P., "Adjustment Costs in the Thoory of Invostmont of the Firm," Reoieso of
     Economic Studies 35, 1968, 47- -56.

Hayahi, F., "Tohin's q Rational Expectations, and Optimal Investment Rule," Economet-
     rica 50, 1982, 213—224.

Lindbeck, A. and Dl. Snowor, "Union Activity, Unemployment Persistence, and Wage—
     Unemployment Rackets," European Economic Resiew 31, 1987, 157—167.
Lucas, R.E., "Adjustment Coots and tho Theory of Supply," Journal of Political Economy
     75, 1967, 321—334.

                                            26
Matsuyama, K., "Current Account Dynamics in a Finite Horizon Model," Journal of
    International Economics 23, 1987. 299—313.

Ohstfeld, M., "Fiscal Deficits and Rclatnc Prices in a Crowing World Economy," Journal
    of Monetary Economics 23, 1989. 461—484.

Son, P. and S.J. Turnovsky, "Tariffs. Capital Accumulation, and the Current Account in
    a Small Open Economy," International Economic Review 30, 1989, 811—831.




                                         27
