                         NB W3RGNG PAP SERIES




   ncs     m SPRE?LE,    rr     amns, NO mreir nlnmnaE:
                         N IXPThflL flThSflfl4




                               Mark Gertler
                             R. Glenn ftuI±ard
                               Anil Kap



                          Workirg Paper No. 3495




                   1TiCtlAL S3AU OF ECOtflUC RESflflB
                         1050 Massachusetts Avemza
                            cartridge,    02138
                               Oct±er 1990




We thank ngene Wan for eel1eztt research asaistarc; Flint Brayton, Eileen
Mauskcpf, ard Ivid Paifschneider for xnnents ard advice abcut data; ard
Benjamin Friedman, Gary Gorton, Bruce Creenwald, Frederic Mishkin, Jamas
Stock, Stephen Zeldes onnfenw participants, ard participants in seminars
at the Federal 1serve Bank of New York, the University of Pennsylvania, ard
the 1990 NEER Suimner Institute for helpful suggestions. The crrclusiona
expressed in this paper do oct necessarily reflect the opinions of the Roan
of Coverocra of the Federal Reserve System or its staff. This paper is part
of Nfl's research progress in Fcrcgnic Fluctuations aM Finarcial Markets
aM Ronetary Ecolunics. Any opinions expressed are thoee of the authors ard
oct those of the National 3.2reau of Econmnio Besearth.
                                                Nfl Workirq l'aper #3495
                                                Gctdar 1990

                  flhsn<kb's' WiflS   SRFAZS, 5EDIT 1S]1flh1S
                          ?JiD DWftCfl FLUCIUTIcKS;
                           M ENPThIAL flITIQ(



     We present a sinçle franncrk that inxtpcrates a rvle for "interest
rate spreais" in 1s   of invesnt fluctuations. Tonally, i develq' a
ample ncdel of izweetinent erd firiaxrial oontractirq urx3er asynretric
infonnaticn that can he used to generate an D.iler equation describirg fires'
intertanporal desisiona abazt invesunent. 'Iba Biler equation is tban
estintel usirq data on U.S. prtx1ucers' durable equipnent Investment. We
fird that &rirq certain perieds—ad.zq to agercy-xst prthlene — the basic
Toler equation is violated, ard shifts in interest rate differentials help
predict investment. Thus, the empirical rilta lent suçnrt to e].s
eiphasizirq ha,: (i) mvenents in agency csts of external finance can
anplify investment fluctuation, ant (ii) thanges in the interest rate spread
may signal rvenents in these agercy cccts.




Nark Gertler           R. Glenn lktbazd            nil Kashyap
Department of Exrnnics Graduate School of aisinass Mail Stcç 61
New York University    Cbltnubia University        Division of Reseerth
269 Netter Street      Uris Hall 609               ant Statistics
New York, NY 10003     New York, NY 10027          Federal Reserve Said
                                                        Washizqta'i,   20551
       Recent time-settee work in macroeconomics has emphasized the role of

the interest rite spread between risky           and   safe debt in forecasting real

GNP.     Stock   and Watson (1989) demonstrate that the interest differential

has greater      predictive      power for output than either money, interest

rates,    or any other financial variable. Increases in the spread are
associated with subsequent downturns in GNP growth. While the Stock and
Watson analysis is limited to postwar data, similar results apply to the
prewar period)
       Though the statistical relation between the spread and output
appears robust, relatively little effort has been devoted to providing a

sound    structural interpretation of the evidence. It is clear thst, under
any story, movements in the spread reflect changes in "payoff" or "de-
fault" risk, broadly defined.2 Nonetheless, the question emerges as to
what    are the sources of        shifts in this payoff risk. In this paper, we
argue    that    the   counter   cyclical pattern in the spread may in part be

symptomatic of a financial element in the business-cycle propagation
mechanism. Our reasoning draws heavily on some recent theoretical work
that links informational problems in capital markets at the micro level
with fluctustiona in aggregate economic activity. We also provide some
supporting econometric evidence, extending methods used recently to teat
for the impact of credit-market imperfections on investment.
        The theoretical literature to which we allude motivates a financial
propagation mechanism by providing a rationale for why the agency costs
of external finance may fluctuate countercyclically. Countercyclicsl
movements in the wedge between external and internal finance, in turn,
introduce a kind of "accelerator" effect on investment, ultimately
magnifying investment and output fluctuations.3 As Calnmiris and Hubbard
                                                                                   2



(1990) note, an associated implication of       these   theories is   that   the

spread between risky   and   safe interest rates should move inversely with

investment and   output. The basic idea is that the widening of         the spread

is associated with, among     other   things, increased agency coats of exter-

nal, finance- In addition to being compatible with the time-series

evidence, these theories also provide some formal underpinnings on the

earlier work on financial crisis, which emphasized sharp increases in the

spread as the precursors to financially induced disruptions in real

activity.

      An alternative to our story      is that cyclical   shifts in payoff risk

are   independent of financial factors. Defaults, for example, are driven
purely by technological factors. The spread is useful as a "leading
indicator" simply because it contains information about future techno-
logical disturbances, and not because there is any meaningful respect in
which financial structure interacts with real activity. Indeed, this is
a popular interpretation of the Stock-Watson results. While this expla-
nation has some intuitive appeal, the underlying theory is incomplete.
In the absence of any kind of imperfection in capital markets,
the pattern of financial payoffs from borrowers to lenders is indetermi-
nate (since the Nodigliani—Miller theorem sppliea). In particular, since
leverage ratios are indeterminate, there need be no particular connection
between interest rate spreads and output fluctuations, as we demonstrate
later.
       In any event, a teat of the competing theories is available. If the
spread is simply an "information" variable and is not in any way reflec-
tive of credit-market imperfections, then the data should not reject the
                                                                             3




neoclassical   model of investment under perfect capital markets. If the
story we offer is true ——   where movements   in the spread reflect at least
in part underlying movements in agency costs of external finance —- then
the null model should not bold. Further, an alternative model which
relates firms' marginal cost of finance to agency factors should fit the
data,   where the movements in the interest rate apread can serve as a

proxy   for unobserved movements in agency costs.
        We proceed in two steps. In section 1, we develop a simple model of
investment and financial contracting under aayaisetric information in
which the link between interest differentials and     the agency coats of

external finance ia made precise, and in whith changes in the (endogen-

oua) interest rate spread predict future movements in inveatnent and

output.    We produce an example within the context of the Euler equation
correapooding    to firma' intertemporal deciaiona shout investment.

Situations are identified where, due to agency problems, the basic Euler

 equation for inveatment is violated. Shifts in interest rate diffaren-

 tials help predict investment in these periods. By necesaity, the

 theoretical model is   highly stylized and, therefore, cannot be matched
 directly to   data. However, we eatimate a model that looeely incorporates

 the key features of the aimple stylized model. The estimation reaults

 are presented in Section 2. Section 3 concludes.


 1.     Interest Differentials and Fluctuations Under Aayetric Information

        To illustrate how the empirical link between the spread and output

 fluctuations may at least in part reflect a financial mechanism, we

 present   a simple model of inveatnent finance under aayaasetric informa-
 tion- We    first demonstrate that in   the benchmark case of ayssaetric
                                                                                    4



information, there is            no particular connection between financial vari-

able, (including the spread) and real           variables;   that is, the

Hodigliani-Hiller theorem applies. A standard Euler equation for invest-

ment emerges.         Under asyimsetric information, however, a determinate
pattern      emerges. Firma' financial positions become relevant to the

investment decision; investment moves inveraely with firms' internal net

worth. One manifestation of this relationship is that changes in the

spread help predict investment -—           even after controlling for changes in

investment opportunitiea. In particular, an additional term emerges in

the Euler equation, reflecting the impact of credit-market imperfections;

this term covaries with the interest rate spread.

        The model is a variant of Gertler and Hubbard (1988) and Gertler and

Rogoff (1990). There are two periods, zero and one. In period zero, an

entrepreneur (i.e., the firm) has access to a production technology which

yields a random quantity of output in period one, taking capital as

input. Investment I is done in period zero and entails convex adjustment

coats A(I), where A(') is twice continuously differentiable with A(O) =

0,    A' >   0   and A" >   0.   Capital K available for use as input in period one

is given by


(1)                   K =   I+    (1   —




where 6 is the depreciation rate and K is the period zero capital atock,

which we take as given.

        The mean level of output increases at a diminishing rate in the level

of    capital used as       input. In particular, output y obeys the following

twa-point distribution:4
                                    T with   probability   P(X)
                             =
                                    0 with probability 1 — PØC)




where P(K) ie increasing, strictly concave, and twice continuously

differentiable, with P(O)           0 and P(t) = 1.   That is, more capital raises

the probability of obtaining a high level of output, and the marginal

gain is diminishing.
      -
          The entrepreneur/firm has initial resourcea W0 ("internal net

worth"). We interpret W0 broadly here to include current cash, known

collateralizable      future resources, or valued relationahipa with lenders

specializing      in information gathering and monitoring (such as coassercial
banks). To invest ware than W0, the balance B must be borrowed using
risky (noncollateralized) external finance.5 To do so, the firai issues a
state—contingent security which pays lenders  in the event of a good

outcoae and Lb in the event of a bad outcome. Given that R is the
alternative gross riskleas return available to lenders and given that
lenders are risk-neutral, the payments on the security must aatiafy

(3)                   + (i   -   P(K))IP
with
(4)            Bl-W0.
The pattern of payments offered by the aecurity muat also satisfy the

following feaeibility conditions, corresponding to limited liability (given

that.     Wo is already invested)t
 (5)           L&<!,LbcO.
                                                                                         6



      The f in maximizes expected terminal wealth E(W1). Given that the
entrepreneur may invest ii       his   project or lend at the market rate It,
E(W1) ia given by

(6)         E(W1) = P(K)Y -      [P(EL    + (1 —   P(R))Lb) + R(w0 +   B -   I)   -   A(I).

The   first two terms in     equation (6) are expected net project earnings;

the third is the return from holding the safe asset; and the fourth is

the   adjustment      investing.
                   cost of

       The outcome under syretric information is simple to characterize.
The fins invests in productive capital to the point at which expected
marginal profitability of        investment equals the gross risklesa return

plus the marginal cost of        investing.   That   is, thefirst—beat value of
              *
investment   I is given by

(7)          P'(K)Y = R +


where      = 1* +   (1 —   )K.     Equation (7) is a conventional Euler equation

for   capital accumulation.
        It is also important to note that the pattern of contractual pay-
ments is indeterminate in this case. Any set of payoffs which aatiafiea
the expected return constraint (6) is acceptable. Because information is
syaiaetric, there is no interdependence between financial structure and
real economic decisions. As s consequence, there i• no            relationship

between    the spread and investment in thia case, after controlling for the
variables that appear in equation (7).
     To motivate a meaningful role for financial structure, we introduce
a classic incentive problem, one described originally by Berle and fleana
 (1932) as the basic motive for divergence of interests between ownership
and management.6 In particular, we assume lenders cannot observe the
                                                                                                   1



     disposition of investment funds. That is, while outside lenders observe

     firms'   initial resources             and total borrowing B, the borrower has

     private information about how he allocates investment funds. Yor sim-
     plicity, we assume he can          divert the funds to the safe asset and reap the
     benefits   from this activity himself.

            On the other hand, outside lenders may              observe    output. Under asym-

     metric    information, therefore, contracts can be conditioned only                    on
     realized output y, and not on investment I. Given the output-contingent
     payoffs    (i),rP)   specified by the contract, the borrower will choose I to
     maximize expected final wealth,            given by equation (6).         This involves

     equating    his expected marginal gain from investing with the opportunity
     cost of secretly diverting funds to a safe asset;                           -




     (8)                  P'(KflY   -        - 1b)) =   R +   A'(I).

     So long as L8     differs from Lb, investment I will differ from its
                                        *
     first-best optimum value I ,            as may   be aeen by comparing (7)        and   (8).
     The problem is that the borrower'e marginal gain from investing depends

     not only    on   the marginal gain in expected output, but on the change in

     his expected obligation to lenders as well. In designing the contract,

     lenders take      into   account the     borrower's      decision rule,    as   given by (8).

             Note that the larger is the spread between L and Lb, the lsrger is
                                                      *
      the   gap between I and the first-best level, I .  One way to obtain the

      first best would be to make Lb lsrge enough so as to make tha contract

      truly "sum  certain," so that L8 = = R(I* - N0) This optimum is sot
                                                                       -




      feasible when W0 < 1*, because of the limited liability condition in
I-
      equation (5)     (recall   that the project yields nothing in the bad state).
                                                                                               8



       Consider the case for which borrowing is required (W0 c 1*). The

solution to the contracting problem is fairly intuitive. The contract

pays lenders nothing in the bad state,                   so that the    limited lisbility

condition, (5), is binding for Lb. (More generally, the contract always

pays lenders the maximum               feasible amount in the bsd state.) This ar-
rangement mioiisizes the              spread between          and iP,   thereby   minimizing the

gap   between I and I. Similarly1 equation (4) is binding; under the
incentive—compatible arrangement, the f iris borrows only to finance
investment and does not allocate funds to the riskless aaset. Borrowing
more than is required to finance investment I wnuld raise the gap between
      and   Lb.

        Given that Lb             0 and B =   I   — W0, the following two relations

jointly detensine I snd


(9)                 1 P'(K) = R   +   A'(I)   +   L   P'(E)


(10)                  = R(I   —


where       K   =   I + (1 - 8)K      from equation (1).

        Equation (9) is obtained from the incentive condition (8), and is a

donward—sloping           locus in (I,L8) space. The curve slopes downward since
higher values of L8 lower the firms1 expected marginal gain from
investment and therefore must be offset by reduced investment. Equation
(10) is obtained from the condition that the security must offer a
competitive return (from equation (3)), and is upwsrd-sloping in (I,L).
The positive relationship emerges because higher investment requires
greeterborrowing and becausebL cannot adjust, since the hinted
 liability constraint is binding.
                                                                                           9



       Whenever V0 C
          *
                          I,   investment, I, will be less than         the first-best
level,   I         Increases in internal net worth raise investment by lowering

L, thereby relaxing the impact of the incentive constraint on

investment.

       The    spread S between the firm' s marginal         cost   of finance sad the
riskiesa rate is given by

(11)           5


                   =



                       R(y_1)
When   the    incentive constraint is binding, the spread is always positive.

Further, a rise in V0 increases K, snd therefore reduces S. That is,

axiaw0   > 0,      implying asjaw0   c   a.

       If the only shocks in the economy were to firms'                net   worth (W0),

then   there will be an        inverse   relation between changes in the spread (AS)
                                                                                            -
and    the level of investment (dl = I). In this case,                moveeents in the

spread   contain information about movements in net worth] Of course, in
actual data, this relstion is a correlation. Shocks to the- level of or
distribution of the marginal product of capital will also shift the
spread (given se level of net worth). To carry the simple Euler
equation in (8) to dsta, it will be necessary to control in the estima-
tion procedure         for such shift-u,      as we describe   in Section 2.2 below.

        It is worth     emphasizing that       shocks to internal     net worth   V0 can be

broadly interpreted here --          for      example,   reductions   in collsterslizable

resources (as io Gertler snd Kubbsrd, 1988) incresses in debt-service

burdens (as in Cainmiris, Hubbsrd, and Stock, 1986; or Gertler and
                                                                                10



Hubbard1 1989), or disruptions in ("bank")       credit markets   in which

problems     of asyimsetric information are less severe   (as in Bernanke, 1983;

or   Calomiris and Hubbard,    1989). In each   case, the transmission mecha-
nism   is that movements in the "spread" correspond to shocks to internal
net worth, due to the impact of movements in net worth on the agency
coats of external finance.

2.     Empirical Evidence for U.S. GNP Growth and leveatsent
2.1    Interest Rate Spreads, GNP    Growth, and Investment: Reduced-Form
       Evidence
       For   our empirical work, we examine short—term spreads. One reason
for preferring short-tern measures to the alternative long-term Baa—
Treasury bond spread is that the Baa-Treasury spread data are not sta-
tionary over our period (with a significant increase in the average value
of the spread during the 1980s, relative to the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970a).
We focus on the short-term interest rate differential corresponding to

the    spread between   aix-month coemiercial paper and Treaanry bill rates.

The spread is plotted in Figure 1. The short-term spread is positive in
all periods, of course, averaging 61 basis points. Following the intui-
tion from the previous sectioo, we will focus our attention on changes in
the spread, which can be pronounced (as in 1970, 1914,        and   1982, for
example) -

       begin our empirical analysis by corroborating the predictive
       We


power of the interest rate spread for output growth (measured by the
growth rate of real CMI'). As a eimple reduced—form test, we regressed
the quarterly CNP growth rate on a constant, fonr lags of the GYP growth
rate, and four lagged values of the spread or changes in the spread.
Given lags and consideration of the thickness of the market, the
                                                                               11




quarterly data cover the period from 1964 to 1989. We can reject it        the
1.9 a 10 level the       hypothesis   that the upread coefficients are zero; approxi-

mately the   same level of rejection holds for the change io the interest rate
spread. The coefficient estimates suggest a negative effect of the
spread on GNP growth.                 -


      Following the model in the      previous section, our primary interest

lies in examining the effects of movements in the spread on investment.

Data on real gross private domestic investmeot in fixed, nonresidential

producers' durable equipment are plotted in Figure 2. We selected

equipment investment because of the greater variation in the series

(relative to structures investment) during our sample period, and because

of the negative trend in the investment-to-capital ratio for structures

over the period. Repeating the simple time-series tests done for CliP

growth for investment, we can reject at the 0.0014 level the hypothesis

that the spread coefficients are zero (or at the 0.10 level for the

change in the spread). As with CliP growth, there is a negative effect of

the   spread on the rate of investment. These results are consistent with the
findings in Stock and Watson (1989) of the predictive power of the
interest    rate differential for real activity. To investigate these

correlations more formally, we outline below an econometric approach to

modeling investment in the spirit of the model of section 1.


2.2 Econometric Approach for Inveetaient

         There   are serions difficulties in econometric implementation of
investment modela, even ahsent considerations of capital market iaiperfec-
tions.    One conventional   approach stresses the role of "marginal q," the
 increase    in firm value from additions to the capital stock. It is well
                                                                                   12



known    that   by   upecifying a functional form for adjustment costs, one can
solve for en investment function relating the rate of investment to q
(see    for example Haysshi, 1982; sod Susiaers, 1981). The problems with

this approach are three. First its empirical success in explaining the

variation in investment (in aggregate data or micro data) has not been

overwhelming. Second, empirical proxies for "marginal q" --           typically
"average q" -—        are   likely to be inadequate1 owing to imperfect competi-

tion in the product market, non-constant returns to scale in production,

or imperfect capital markets. Finally, the q model may be an inappropri-

ate vehicle given our interest in asynnetric information, as expectations

reflected in prices quoted on centralized securities markets will not in

general reflect insiders' valuations of future investment projects.8

         stylized model of Section 1 suggests an Euler equation for
        Our

investment with adjustment costs, modified to include a term that re-

flects credit-market imperfections (see equation (8)). Since this model
is not    directly estimable, we follow the spproach outlined in Hubbard and

Kashyap (1989) to exsmine the effects of proxies for movements in inter-

nal net worth on investment. Specifically, we develop an empirical Euler

equation for investment that incorporates the possibility that           financial
constraints are important. Building on the intuition from the previous

section, violations of a null ("perfect capital markets") Euler equation

should be in the direction of an alternative model in which varistions in

net worth affect the marginal cost of outside finance, holding constant

investment opportunities. We argue, expanding upon the model in section

2, that movements in the interest rate differential sre good proxies for

these    shifts in net worth. This approach builds upon the related
                                                                               13




approach of Zeldes (1988) in testing for liquidity constraints on

consumption.

       While the discussion in section 2 applies to "investment" broadly,

we present evidence below for effects of interest differentials (as

proxies      for internal net worth) on fixed investment using quarterly time-
series      data for producers' durshie equipment investment in the United

States. The specific framework within which we operste is derived under

the assumption that risk-neutral firms maximize the present discounted

value (V) of profits (I]) from investment, where




(13)           V0 = E0
                         tl1
where         is the discount factor at time t. the msxijsization takes place

subject to the following constraints:


Cspitsl Accumulstion: 1C = (15)Kt +             I,   where I snd K represent

investment and the end—of-period cspital stock, respectively, and where 6

is the (sssumed constant) rats of depreciation.


Profits: Profits are the residual after taxes, paywents to variable

factors, investment (and adjustment costs) and debt service. Finance is
                                            9
composed of internal equity and debt.

Let:

       N = vector of variable factors of production

       w =    vector   of variable factor prices

        B = value of net deht outstanding (one-period loans)

        i     interest rate on loans
                                                                                                    14



        p1     effective price of capital goods at time t (incorporating                      tax

               considerations)
                        revenue function (F > 0, F C 0)
        P(Kt_ItNt)
                      = costs of adjusting the               capital stock.
        A(Xtj,It)
Then,
(14)                    =    FUC_11Nt) - wtNt           —
                                                            A(I,K_1)
                             - it_iBt_i    +          - S1 - pI
All prices and values are            expressed        relative to   the general       output price

deflator (i.e., so that real profits are maximized).


Trsnsversality Condition: So that firms cannot borrow an infinite amount
to distribute, we require that

                            T- 1
                    lit I PtBT = 0, V
                    T-' t=0

        The recent tradition in the q-theory literature is to assume that
marginal, and average q are equal,                and to obtain an estimating equation.

Instead       of following this route, we choose to eliminate the shadow value
of   capital from the first-order condition for the choice of                         the capital
stock,       sod work with the dynamic equation for investment, as in Hubbard

sod Kaahyap (1989). That is, the firat-order condition for the choice of

the capital stock (from maximizing (13) subject to the constraints

mentioned above) is given by:                                                     -




(15)            t+IEt{FX -                        +                           t
                                   A.L(Kt,It+l)        (1-d)[A1(K,I+1)
                              - Ai(K_1,It)        -         = 0.
        To obtain an equation for investment, it is necessary to psraaieterize

the sdjusthent cost function A. We let1°
                                                                                            15


(16)        A(Kt_j.It) =       F0o((I/K_1)         i) *
                                                           (ei/2)(U/K_1)
                                                                                  —

where   p is   the average (normal) investment rate. Now,

(17)        Ait a + oi(I/K_1            —   ii),   and


(18)                                        —
            Axt    —(ai/2)U+/1C)s               IA(ao —   a1p/2).

Substituting (17) and (18) into (15) yields the Euler equation:



                              Pt÷iEt[(01J2)(It+i/K)l + P(°o
(19)                                                                    —
            Pt+IEtFKt +                                                     n1pJ2)}


                          Oo —ai(I/K_1—p)—p
                        + B+1u-o)E{eo + o1(It+i/K - )                       + +} =     o.


       We assume that expectations are rational, and allow for an expecta-

tional rror fl, where Et                = 0 and E (ri1.1) = o2.              Hence we obtain:

(19)                   + t+iEt{(o1/2)(It+j/Kt)z              +   P(°o   -




                          —a0     -a1   (It/Ktl -
                          +   6+1(1-d)E{ao + ax(J+1/K -                 P) +   P11 =
The    model in (19) ia a nonlinear equation in I/K, and can be estimated to
identify a1.
     We incorporate financial factors by adding a constraint on the use
of debt finance by firms. In particular, we assume that the outstanding
                                            *
debt, B, must be less than an debt ceiling 8 . The ceiling, while
possibly   unohaervable to the econometrician, depends on measures of
collateralizable net worth. That is, movements in the value of firma'
net worth will affect firms' ability to finance investment, holding
constant    actual investment opportunities)1 If we let w be the Lagrange
                                                                                                    16




mutliplier associated with the constraint that                         ?, the         first-order

condition for borrowing (from (13)) is now


(20)         1 —
                   Pt+i(l+i)
                               —        = 0,

so that when w is nonzero,                 =
                                               (l_w)/(I+i).           We can now rewrite

equation (19) as:


(21)          (no[B+i(1_8)(1_w) — 1 +              p1 + atp(1-p/2))
                   +               +                          ÷ si(I_a)(It+i/K) +
                       Bt+i{Fxt        (aiJ2)(It+i/I)?                                        (1—d)p÷11
                   —                   —       =         +                   +
                       ai(I/Kt_j)          P       n÷1       WtPt+]   [Ext        (n1/2)(11/K)2
                   +                           +
                       aI(l_o)(I+1Jx)              (I—5)p÷1]).

Daring periods in which the constraint is binding, w >                           0,   and the error

tern contains the additional expression in (21)-

       Two   issues    arise in the estimation of (21). First, there is an

obvious simultaneity problem because of the presence of other endngenous

variables along with I/K. This necesaitatea the use of instrumental

variables- The exact set of instruments used is discuased below.

Second, comparison of equations (19) and (21) reveals the significance of

financial constraints for the model to be eatSated. When is ia zero, the

standard     "perfect capital markets" model is a good approicimatinn. When
w i' 0, hnwever,       financial constraints affect investment spending.
Ideally, we would like        to   have data on "internal net worth" to specify a
 relationship between w and observable variables. We argued in the
previous aection that changes in the interest rate spreads can serve as
 proxies for unobserved effects of net worth on inveatment. Hence,
 following equation (12), we let
                                                                                   17



(22)               =   Ii     Y2ASt_p

where S represents the interest rate spread. Again, in the empirical

results reported below, we employ as a proxy the difference between

yields on aix-month coercial paper and Treasury bills.

           Our approach follows the intuition from the previous section. We

first estimate the null model corresponding to equation (19) over our

sample period. Second, we estimate the alternative model corresponding

to (21), with the additional interaction terms incorporating the rols of
       •                           12
the interest rate spread.


2.3 The Data

           The data used in estimating the Euler equations for equipment

investment are standard macroeconomic time-series that are available from

several sources. Working through the terms in equation (15), the dis-

count factor B         is   constructed using one of two proxies for the ax ante

real rate of interest. First, we define the real rate as the differences

between the avenge market yield on U.S. Treasury securities at a one-

year constant maturity and the average expectation of the one-year—ahead

change       in the consumer price index. Expectations data are taken from the
Michigan survey on inflation expectstions.13 Second, as a risky interest
rate       alternative, we use the Moody's Baa Bond rate less the expected

inflation proxy suggested in Gordon and Veitch (1986).

           We use a series on the aversge product of capital to proxy for the

marginal product of capital. The two variables will be proportional when

the technology is constant returns to scale and factors are paid competi-

tively. While the assumption that the ratio of price to marginal cost is

unity is questionable, the alternative approach of using separate data
                                                                             18



for output and cost and estimating a markup is even more difficult at

this level of aggregation. The difficulty arises primarily because, when

using the National Income and Product Accounts, it is not possible to

separate completely the returns to different factors.14 Thus, we use the

sum of pre-tax corporate profits (with capital consumption and inventory

valuation adjustment) and net interest as the return to capital. In

particular, the ratio of this sum to the beginning-of—period capital

stock ia our average product of capital measure.

     As noted earlier, our investment data pertain to real gross private

domestic investment in fixed, nonresidential producers' durable equip-

ment. The corresponding capital stock series is constructed by a perpet-

ual inventory calculation starting in 1950 using an assumed (annual) rate

of depreciation of 0.137 (the estimated rate obtained by Auerbacb and

Hines, 1987). The initial value of the series for the capital stock is

taken from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

     The price variable appearing in equation (19) is the tax-corrected

price of investment gooda (relative to thc output price). The price

deflatora used in constructing this ratio are the implicit price deflator

for gross private domestic investment in fixed, nonresidential producsrs

durable equipment and the implicit GB? deflator.


24 Evidence for Investment

     Before outlining the reaulta, we should stress two features of our

satimation procedures. First, since we use interest rate data (nominal

interest ratea and measures of expected inflation) in conatructing the

 discount factor ,   shifts   in interest rates are already accounted for,

 and cannot explain a correlation between the change in the interest rate

 spread and the investment residuals from equation (19). Second, we uae
                                                                             19



an   instrumental variables procedure, not contemporaneous data on the

observed change in the spread. This is important, since using Contempo-

rsneous data on the change in the spread would nnt allow us to distin-

guish our hypothesis from a competing model in which contemporaneous

movements    in the spread reflect contemporsneous technology shocks not
accounted for in our approach.
       We present our results from estimating the structural model for
investment    in Tables 1   and 2 below. The data are quarterly, covering
the period    from 1964 through 1989. First, we eatimate the null model in

equation (19) for producers' durable equipment. Second, we estimate the

alternative model incorporating (21); that is, we allow the multiplier on

the credit constraint to depend on a constant and lagged change in the

apread.

       Results from estisating (19) and (21) by generalized method of

moments are presented in Tahle 1.         Instruments for the endogenous van—

ahles include a constant and two lagged values of each of the following

--   I/K,   (I/K)2, the relative price of equipment investment goods, the

constructed discount factor ,       the   ratio of profits to capital, and the

comaercial    paper-Tressury bill interest rate spread. The two columns
correspond to the two cx ante real rate proxies uaed in constructing             ——




the "riskleas" and "risky" alternativea, respectively. Overidentifying
restrictions associated with the null model are soundly rejected at the 2
and   7   percent levels, respectively.
                                                                               20



     As noted in the second set of columns in Table 1, the alternative

model --   in which   the change in the interest rate spread affects the

value of the Lagrange multiplier asaociated with the financial

constraint -— can he rejected only at the 10 or 11 percent level. The

adjustment coat coefficient remains precisely estimated, and the estimate

of the (transformed) share of equipment capital doea not change much.15

The coefficient on the (lagged) change in the interest rate spread —-

which measures the marginal impact on the Lagrange multiplier --         is
poaitive and precisely estimated. Taken literally, the implied effect is

large; a 50—hasia-point increase in the spread would he equivalent to

lowering the (quarterly) discount factor        from an average of about 0.99

to shout 0.98, roughly doubling the (implied annual)discount rate.

Given that information about future payoff risk is already in the level of the

interest rate, such a shift is difficult to explain abaent information-

related capital-market frictions.

     We considered the possibility, however, that potential misspecifica-

tion of the underlying null model could lead to a apurious correlation

between the residuala (from (19)) and any fnrward-looking variable. To

explore this case, we tried two other "leading indicator" variables

suggested by Stock and Watson (1989) --      the   percentage changes in "housing

starts" and "manufacturers unfilled orders" --        instead   of the change in

the spread. Those results are reported in Table 2 using the "risky"

discount factor; results using the risky rate in constructing were

virtually identical.

     The first column     for   each variable represents results from estimat-

ing the null model in equation (19), adding the leading indicator vari-

able to the instrument list. In both cases, the overidentifying
                                                                              21



restrictions associated with the model are rejected by the data; the

coefficient estimates resemble closely those reported for similar cases

in Table 1. Allowing a separate effect of the lagged percentage change

in housing atarts or manufacturers' unfilled orders does not change htis

result. Rejection levels actually increase, and the signs on the coeffi—

cienta on both variables are coanterintuitive f roe the perspective of an

omitted-leading-indicators explanation, and the coefficients are isipre-

cisely estimated.

     Finally, we added both the (lagged) change in the interest rate

spread and the percentage change in the alternative "leading indicator"

variables.   Those results are reported in Table 3 (using the risky rate

alternative in constructing ).      In both   cases, the coefficient on the

change in the spread is positive, precisely estimated, and approximately

the same size as the estimate in Table 1. The coefficients on either of

the alternative leading indicator measures -- bonsing starts and manisfac-

turere' unfilled orders --   are   of the wrong sign and ste very imprecisely

estimated. The factors leading to the acceptance of the overidentifying

restrictions for the alternative model are associated only with the

interest rate spread variable and not with alternative "leading indica-

tor" measures.




3.   Conclusion and lmplicstions

     In this paper, we have presented a simple framework that incorpo-

rates a role for "interest spreads" in models of investment fluctuations.

Our empirical work suggests that links between changes in interest rate

 spreads and investment ace consistent with models emphasizing (i) how

 movemeots in agency costs of external finance can amplify investment
                                                                              22



fluctations    and, relatedly, (ii) how changes in the interest spread may

signal movements in these agency costs. Because we worked with aggregate

time-series data, the usual    caveats   apply. The results suggest, however,

that   fluctuations in sgency costs (induced in large part by changss in
firsis' net worth) significantly affect the timing of investment. In
addition, the findings shed light on the significance of widening inter-
est rate spreads for predicting output declines in post-war time series
(Stock   and Watson, 1989), as well as during earlier periods of financial

crises (Bernanke, 1983; and Calomiris and Hubbard, 1989).

       Thst   the predictive power of short-term interest differentials
likely raflects more than simple technological risk has also been argued
recently by     Bernaoke (1990). Bernanke   finds   further that the cosmiercial

paper -   Treasury bill spread measures the stance of monetary policy;

specifically,     he notes that the spread is related to traditional indica-

tors of monetary policy (e.g., the Federal funds rate). An explanation.

consistent with our analysis, is that contractioosry monetary policy

shrinks cosmiercial hank lending, forcing marginal (high-agency-cost)

firms into the commercial paper market (see Kashyap, Stein, and Wilcox,

 1990, for example)- As well, an increase in the riakless rate of

 interest (resulting from a tightening of monetary policy) lowers the

 value of firms' collateralizable net worth, increasing agency costs of

 external finance. That is, the effect on investment and outpnt of a

 cbaoge in the riskless rate associated with contractiooary monetary

 policy is magnified through the     information-related channel we have
 stressed.      While more careful research on these transmission mechanisms

 is needed, we believe tbst our approach and that taken by Bernaoke are

 complementary.
                                                                            23



     A logical axtension of our approach would be to study panel data and

exploit predictions about crass—sectional differences in firm   behavior.
For exasiple, as Calomirie and Hubbard (1990) note, the "perfect markets"

neoclassical model of investment should work for firms unlikely to face

financial constraints. }lovementa in the interest spread should he

relevant to the inveatmant behavior of those firms likely to be con-

strained Presuming it is possible to divide the sample appropriately,

it would be interesting to investigate this hypothesis with panel data.16
                                                                                 24



Notea

1.           The associations of widening interest rate differentials among

        securities of different quality with financial crisis was stressed

        early on by Sprague (1910), who studied financial panics during the

        National Banking Period in the United States. During panic epi-

        sodes, rates charged risky borrowers rose dramatically relative to

        rates on safe securities. Historical accounts generally link

        financial crises to subsequent fluctuations (see e.g. Eagehot, 1873;

        Sprague, 1910; and Hitchell, 1913), though the precise channels are

        not always clear. Hishkin (1990) has documented the historical

        association of a widening differential between risky and safe rates

        and subsequent recessions.

             Calomiria and Hubbard (1989) used models based on links between

        interest differentials and subsequent output asynasetric information

        fluctuations in the period just prior to the founding of the Federal

        Reserve system. They construct a set of instruments to approximate

        the difference between the low-risk coat of eaptial under syimsetric

        information and the actual cost of borrowed funds. Using a

        structual VAR    model,   they found that shocks to risk differentials

        had a positive effect oo business failures and negative effects on

        hank loans and output. This focus on interest differentials paral-

        lels the seminal study by Bernanke (1983) of financial factors in

        the propagation mechanism of the economic downturn of the early

        1930a.     Focusing on the breakdown of the banking syatem,    Bernanle

        notes     that the pool of borrowers in loan markets (some of which
        would have been serviced      by banks) was of   lower quality in the
         1930s.   raising the differential between risky and     safe interest
                                                                           25




      rates. The differential between Baa corporate bond yields and the

      yields on U.S. government bonds was a strong explanator of current

      and future output growth.

2.    We abstract here from taxes and regulatory frictions that may lead

      to shifts in safe rates and thereby widen the spread (see Cook,

      1983, for a discussion).

3.    See for example Keetoo (1979), Stiglitr and Weiss (1981), Greenwald,

      Stiglitz, and Weiss (1984), flyers and flajluf (1984), Williamson

      (1987), Bernanke and Gertler (1990), Calomiria and Hubbard (1990),

      and the survey in Gertler (1988). Countercyclical movements in

      agency costs may be explained by procyclical movements io borrowers

      net worth- See Hoshi, Xaahyap, and Scbarfstein (1990) for evidence

      on the real costs (in terms of reduced investment and sales) of

      financial distreaa.

4.    The use of zero of the bad-state outcome and the two-state descrip-

       tion of the production realization are not crucial for the qualita-

       tive results that follow.

 5.    Strictly   speaking, we are treating W0 as "internal funds," so that

       I-W0 is tbe amount   borrowed.   The real equilibrium is unaffected if


       W0   is instead "collstaralizable resources."

 6.    See also Jensen and tleckling (1976), Jensen (1986), and Gertler and

       Hubbard (1989).

 7.    Strictly speaking, in the example we present, the capital stock K

       contains   as much information about internal net worth as does S (see
       equation (9)). This is only because we have treated W0 as "internal
        funds" to minimize algebra. If W0 instead represented
                                                                                26



      "collateralizable resources," S would reflect some information about

      W0 Dot contained in K.

8.
      In macro—data studies in this area, "q" has been ueed as a reduced-
                                                                                     p
      form control for investment opportunities -- so that some included

      measure of inside finance (arguably) does not substitute for expect-

      ed future profits (see Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen, 1988; and

      Bosh, JCashyap, and Scharfstein, 1990).

9.    We do not mean to suggest that equity finance is irrelevant at the

      margin in actual data. The inclusion of equity finance adds little

      to the basic setup for testing the effects of internal net worth on

      investment spending, however.

10. This formulation assumes convex adjustment costs. In addition, those

      costs are decreasing in the size of the capital stock.

11. This specification of a "finance cnnstraint" is not particularly

      restrictive. If firms faced an upward-sloping debt-supply schedule,

      so that i =          —
                               B*),   where i' >   0,   then   = (1 —
                                                                        i)/(i   +



12.   Here we are building on recent Euler equation tests of effects of

      financial constraints on investment (see for example Hubbard and

      Kashyap, 1989; Whited, 1990; Gilchrist, 1989; and Biamielberg, 1989).

      For an earlier treatment, see Bernstein and Nadiri (1986).

13. Using the (one-year-ahead) cx ante real rate calculated by Huizinga

      and )lishkin (1986) produced qualitatively similar results.

14. For example, proprietors' income relative to capital has declined

      markedly over the last forty years. If one excludes proprietors'

      income from variable costs, then the difference between output and

      cost (relative to capital) likewise has a dowuward treed.
                                                                          27




    Unfortunately, it is not possible to identify the portion of propri-

     etors' income tbat represent labor input. Therefore, it is ant

     possible to make a simple adjustment to produce a reliable series on

     variable costs

IS. The estimate is that of the share of equipment capital in total

     capital.

16. For example, recent empirical studies of corporate debt have empha-

     sized shifts in the distribution of act worth across finns (see

     Bernanke and Campbell, 1988; Bernanke, Campbell, and Whited, 1990;

     and Warahawaky, 1990).
                                                                        28




Reference,

Auerbach, Alan J. and James H. Hines, Jr. 1981. Anticipated tax changes

     and the timing of investment. In The Effects of Taxation on Capital

     Accumulation, ed. N. Feldatein. Chicago: University of Chicago

     Press.

Bagehot, Walter. 1813. Lombard Street. london: Henry S. King.

Berle, Adolph sod Gardiner Means. 1932. The Modern Corporation and

     Private Propy. New York: Macmillao.

Bernanke, Ben. 1983. Nonmonetary effects of the financial crisis in the

     propagation of the Great Depression. American Economic Review 13

     (June): 257—76.

Beroanke, Ben. 1990. On the predictive power of interest rates and

     interest rate spreads. Mimeograph, Princeton University.

Bernanke, Ben, and John F. Campbell. 1988. Is there a corporate debt

     crisis? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no 1; 83—125.

Bernanke, Ben, John F. Campbell, and Toni Whited. 1990. U.S. corporate

     leverage: Developments in 1987 sod 1988. Brookings Papers on

     Economic Activity, no. 1.

Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler. 1990. Financial fragility and economic

     performance. Quarterly Journal of Economics 105 (February): 87-114.

Berostein, Jeffrey I. and N. Tsbaq Nadiri. 1986. Financing and

     investment in plant and equipment and research and development. In

     Pricea, Competition, and Equilibrium, ed. N.H. Peston and R.E. Quandt.

     New York: Philip Alan Publishers.

Calomiris, Charles W. and R. Glenn Hubbard. 1990. Firm heterogeneity,

     internal finance, and credit rationing. Economic Journal 100

     (March): 90—104.
                                                                          29



Calomiris, Charles W. and H. Glenn Hubbard. 1989. Price flexibility

     credit availability1 and economic fluctuations: Evidence from the

    United States. 1894—1909. Quarterly Journal of Economics 104

     (August): 429—52.

Calomiria, Charles W., H. Glenn Hubbard, and James H. Stock.   1986. The

     farm debt crisis and public policy, Brookings Papers on Economic

     Activity, no. 2: 441-79.

Cnok,Timothy Q.and Thonas A. Lawler. 1983. "The Behavior of the Spread

     Between Treasury Bills and Private Money Market Rates since 1978."

     Ecomoutic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, 69 (November,

     December 1983) : 3—15.

Ecksteio, Otto and Allen Sinai. 1986. The mechanism of the business

     cycle in tbe postwar era. In The Americso Buaioesa Cycle:

     Continuity and Change, ed. H. 3. Cordon. Chicago: University of

     Chicago Press.

Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen. 1988.

     Financing constraints and corporate inveatmeot. Brookiogs Papers

     on Economic Activity, no. 1:   141-95.

Fisher, Irving. 1933. The debt-deflation theory of great depressions.

     Econometrics 1 (October): 337—57.

Friedman, Benjamin M. and Kenneth N. ICuttner.   1989. Honey, iocoiue, and

     pricee after the 1980a: NBER Workiog Paper No. 2852.

Gertler, Mark. 1988. Financial structure and aggregate economic

     activity. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 20 (August, part

     2): 559—88.

Gertler, Mark and H. Glenn Hubbard. 1988. Financial factors in business

      fluctuations. In Financial Market Volatility, Federal Reserve Bank

      of Kansas City.
                                                                        30




Gertler, Hark and R. Glenn Hubbard. 1989. Taxation, corporate capital

    structure, aod aggregate fluctuationa. Himeograph, Columbia

    Univeraity.
                                                                          31




Gertler, Hark and Nenneth Rogoff. 1990. North-South lending and

     endogenous domestic capital market imperfections. Journal of

     Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

Gilcbrist, SImon. 1989. Ass empirical analysis of corporate investment

     and financing hierarchies using firm level panel data. Mimeograph,

     University of Wisconsio.

Gordon. Robert J and John N. 'Mitch, 1986. Fixed investment in the

     American business cycle, 1919—83- In The American Business Cycle:

     Continuity and Change, ed R. J. Gordon, Chicago: University of

     Chicago Press.

Greenwald, Bruce C., Joseph E. Stiglits, and Andrew Weiss. 1984.

     Information imperfections in the capital market and macroeconomic

     fluctuations. American Economic Review 74 (May): 194-99.

Itayasbi, Fumic.   1982.   Tobin's marginsl q and average q: A neoclassical

     interpretation- Econometrics 50 (January): 213-24.

Ilimmselberg, Charles P. 1989. A dynamic aoalysis of dividend and inveat—

     meot behavior under borrowing constraints. Mimeograph, Northwestern

     University.

Hosbi, Takeo, Anil Kasbyap, and David Scharfstein. 1990. Corporate

      capital structure, liquidity, and investment: Evidence from

      Japanese industrial groups. Quarterly Journal of Economics 105

      (forthcoming).

Hoshi, Taken, Anil Kasbyap, and David Scbarfstein. 1990. The role of

      banks in reducing the coats of financial distress in Japan.

      Journal of Financial Economics (forthcoming).
                                                                          32




Hubbard, B. Glenn and Anil Kashyap. 1989. Internal net worth and the

     investment process: An application to U.S. agriculture. Misieograph,

     Columbia University.

Huinnga, John sod Frederic S. Mishkin. 1986. Mooetary policy regime

     shifts and the unusual behavior of real interest rates.   In The

    National Bureau Method, International Capital Mobility, and Other

             Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol.

    24, ed. K. Brunner and A. Meltzer, Amsterdam: North holland.

Jensen, Michael C. 1986. Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate

     I ioance, and takeovers. American Economic Review 76 (May).

Jensen, Michael C. and William Heckling. 1976. Theory of the firm:

    Managerial   behavior, agency costs, sod ownership structure.

    Journal of Financial Economics 3 (October): 305-360.

Kashyap, Anil, Jeremy Stein, and David Wilcox. 1990. "The Monetary

    Policy Transmission Mechanism: Evidence from the Composition of

    External Finance." Mimeograph, Board of Governors of the Federal

    Reserve Systen.

Keetnn, William. 1979. Equilibrium Credit Rationing. New York:

     Garland Press.

Kindleberger, Charles P. 1978. Marsias, Panics, and Crashes: A History

     of Finanrial Crises. New York: Basic Books.

Mishkin, Frederic S.   1990. Asysasetric information and financial crises:

    Historical evidence. Mimeograph, Columbia University.

Myers, Stewart C. and Nicholas S. Majiuf. 1984. Corporate financing and

     investment decisions when firms have information that investors do

     oat have. Journal of Financial Economics 13 (June): 187—221.
                                                                         33



Sims1 Christopher. 1989. Coimsent on Stock and Watson. In N3ER

    Macroeconomics Annual 1989, ed. 0.J. Blanchard and S. Fischer.

    Cambridge: MIT Press.

Sprague, 0.M.W. 1910. History of Crises Under the National Banking

    System. National Monetary Commission. U.S. Senate Document No.

    538, bist Congress, 2nd session.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. and Andrew Weiss. 1981. Credit rationing in markets

    with imperfect information. American Economic Review 71 (June):

     393-410.

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson. 1989. New indexes of coincident and

     leading economic indicators. In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989,

     ed. 0.J. Blanchard and S. Fischer. Cambridge; MiT Press.

Susasers, Lawrence H. 1981. Taxation and corporate investment;   a


     q-theory approach. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no 1:

     67—127.

Warshawsky, Mark J. 1990. Is there a corporate debt crisis?: Another

     look. Working Paper, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of

     Governors of the Federal Reserve System

Whited, Toni M.   1990. Debt, liquidity constraints, and corporate

     investment: Evidence from panel data. Working Paper No. 114,

     Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors of the

     Federal Reserve System.

Wojnilower, Albert M. 1980. The central role of credit crunches in

      recent financial history. Brookinga Papers on Economic Activity,

     nn. 2: 277-326.
                                                                     34



leldes, Stephen P. 1988. Consumption and liquidity constraints: An

    empirical investigation. Journal of Political Economy 95 (December)

    1196—1216.
Ct
'a
C




U
'a
                                I
                           0'
                           —




=
                           -I
                           °'   1


                                a



                           -i   .5


'a                         N
 o                         0
V


U
V
F-0   0      0         0

          swod fluff
I


    1965                       1980               1985


           In 6nx1bCo   pj1 P.pcr     6 oxolli Tina*oy ii1 Raie,
               &o USEqi.i
Table 1. Euler Equation Estimates for U.S. Equipment Investmeot 1964-3989.
         (Including Interest Rate Spread Effect,)



                                                      Coefficient Estimates
Parameter                                      Null ?lodel         Alternative Model

Constant
            -
                                            -1.04       -L07        -0.933     —1.02
                                            (0-160)      (0.168)    (0.188)    (0.167)
Constant (Time—varying )                     1.03         1.08       0.921      1.04
                                            (0.164)      (0.175)    (0.191)    (0.172)
Quadratic adjustment cost factor (a1)        4.18        3.21        2.08       1.90
                                            (0.864)      (0.949)    (1.19)     (1.15)
Equipment share                              0.045       0.103       0.044      0.113
                                            (0.015)     (0-036)     (0.027)    (0.046)
Y2 (Lagged change in spread)                                         0.022      0.016
                                                                    (0.008)    (0.008)
Shift in constant due to time—varying                               —o.oia     —0.013
   credit—constraint multiplier (lagged                             (0.006)    (0.0066)
   change in spread)
   ——
        Orthogonality   test                34.4        29.9        23.5       25.9
(p value)                                   (0.024)     (0.072)     (0.112)    (0.102)


Note: The models are estimated using generalized method of moments. For the

         "null" and alternative" models, the two columns refer to measures of

        constructed from one-year Treasury and has hood rates, respectively.

        Instrumental variables include a constant, two lagged values each of I/K,

         (I/K)2, the (tax—adjusted) relative price of equipment investment goods,

        of the constructed ,   the   ratio of profits to rapital, and of the

        coessercial paper/Treasury bill interest rate spread. Heteroscedasticity—

        consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Table 2. Euler Equation Estimates for U.S. Equipment Investment, 1964-1989.
           (Including Alternative "Leading Indicator" Variable Effects).



                                                       Coefficient Estimates

                                               Null Model               Alternative Model
Parameter                                    (H)             CUD)           (H)        CUD)


Constant                                    —1.03         -0.987           -1.00      L02
                                            (0.158)       (0,150)           (0.163)   (0.179)

Constant (time—varying )                     1.02          0.978             0.990     1.02
                                            (0.163)       (0.155)           (0.167)   (0.187)

Cost-of-adjustment                           4.10           3.92             4.38      3.51
                                             (0.855)       (0.859)          (0.913)   (1.01)
  coefficrent(01)
Equipment share                               0.059         0.055            0.046     0.044
                                             (0.020)       (0,020)          (0.021)   (0.063)

y2 (lagged perceitage change                                                 0.152     0.254
    in leading indicator variable)                                          (0.130)   (1.34)

Shift in constant due to time—varying                                       -0.137    -0.388
   credit constraint multiplier (lagged                                     (0.115)   (1.14)
   percentage change in leading indicator
   variable)

   --   Crthogonality   test                 35.8          37.0             36.1      49.1
 (p value)                                   (0.057)       (0.043)          (0.029)   (0.0008


 Note: The modela are estimated using generalized method of momenta. In

         all cases,     is constructed from the Baa bond rate and our measure of

         expected inflation. Instrumental variables include a constant, two

           tagged values each of I/K, (I/K)2, the tax—adjusted relative price of

           equipment inve.tment goods, the constructed ,    the     ratio of profits to

           capital, and of the percentage chaoge in the "leading indicator" variable.

           The two leading indicator variables are denoteAby "H" (housing starts)

           and "UO" (manufacturers'unfilled orders). Heteroacedasticity—consiatent

           standard errors are reported in parentheaes.
Table S. Euler Equation Eatitatee for U.S. Equipment Investment. 1964-1989.
          (Including Interest Rate Spread end "Leading Indicator" Effects)

Parameters                                         Coefficient Estimates for
                                                      Alternative Model
                                                      (H)               (130)


Constant                                           —1.01               —1.11
                                                   (0.182)             (0.187)

Constant (time—varying )                            1.00                1.11
                                                   (0.19)              (0.196)

Quadratic adjustment cost factor (01)               2.77                1.52
                                                   (1.24)              (1.10)

Equipment share                                     0.055               0.047
                                                   (0.026)             (0.054)

is (Lagged change in spread)                        0.019               0.022
                                                   (0.001)             (0.001)

Shift in constant due to time-varying              -0.014              -0.017
   credit—constraint multiplier (lagged            (0.005)             (0.005)
   change in spread)

y (Lagged percentage change in leading              0.218               0.509
    indicator variable)                            (0.190)             (1.13)

Shift constant due to time-varying                 -0.182              -0.597
   credit—constraint multiplier (lagged            (0.154)             (0.885)
   percentage change in leading indicator
   variable)

   -—   Orthogonality   test                       27.2                24.0
(p value)                                           (0.129)            (0.242)


Note: The models are estimated uaing generalized method of momenta. In

         both cases,     is constructed from the Baa bond rate and our measure

         of expected inflation. Instrumental variablea include a constant,

         two lagged values each of I/K, (I/K)2, the tax-adjusted relative price

         of equipment investment gooda, the constructed ,     the   ratio of profits

         to capital, and of the percentage change in the "leading indicator"

         variable.      The two leading indicator variables are denoted by "H"

           (housing starts) and "130" (manufacturers' unfilled orders).

         Heteroscedasticity—consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses.
