NEER W3RIONG PP,PE SERIES

P,)CATION AND T OF CAPITAL:
ThE "OilY' VIEW, ThE "NEW" VIEW,
AND AIThER VIEW

Hans—Werner Sinn

Workir Paper No. 3501

NATIONAL JREAIJ OF ECtNti4IC RESEARC1

1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Ce±rie, ) 02138
Octther 1990

The paper has benefitta fros useful cransnts by tvid -adford arif Larly

Goolder. It was written while the author was Research Scholar at the Center
for Eoonauic Policy Research, Stanfo University, ar Olin Visitin
Professor at the Wocdrca Wilson School of Poblic ar International Affai.rs,

Prireton University. The support arxl hospitality of these institutions is

gratefully ackncM1eged. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
Thxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author ard not those of
the National Rireau of Eooncznic Research.

NR working Paper #3501

Octr 1990

TAYATICV AND 11 F OF CAPITAL:
"OLD" VIEW, ThE "NEW" VIEW,
AND NCThER VIEW

This paper is a critical survey of the recent literature on the tax
effects on ctrporate financa ani investnent decisions. It onrrects a xutn
misinterpretation of the "new4' view, eçtasizes the aishion effect of

finarcial cçtimization, dismisses the view that cçtinizing fins behave as if

they rnaxtsizsl their t of finarce, stalies the role of innature firms,
questions the alle&1 supçort of the old view by the cxrirrerce of share
repirthases, assents on a potential US t*xlget crinpranise, an suggests the

idea of a Political Miller Eqiilibrium.
Hans—Werner Sinn

N ani

University of Munith
Elepartnent of Eornnira

Iidwigstr. 33
8000 )t.nen 22

1. Introduction
Economists agree that the cost of capital is an important analytical tool for predicting a

country's intersectoral distortions, its growth performance, or its attractiveness for
international capital. However, there is no consensus as to how the tax influence on the
cost of capital should be measured.

The cost of capital is defined as the minimum pre—tax rate of return an
investment project must earn to be profitable. The controversy among tax economists is

primarily concerned with the question of how the required rate of return is affected by

personal and corporate income taxation, and the double taxation of dividends has
received particular attention. While it is obvious that the double taxation creates a
substantial tax burden for corporations, there is no agreement as to how much of the

burden fails on marginal investment projects. The "old view" is that the total tax
burden falls entirely on marginal investment projects and therefore implies a high cost of

capital, far above the market rate of interest. By way of contrast, the so—called "new

view", which, in fact, is no longer that new, is that only the tax burden on retained
earnings matters. The burden of the double taxation of dividends is seen to fall largely

on intramarginal investment projects and is believed to not affect the cost of capital
overly.

This note is an exposition and critical review of some of the arguments

exchanged between the members of the two schools. It presents the basic theories,
discusses the role of financial optimization, comments on immature firms, and includes

an analysis of the role of share repurchases which has recently led to a revival of the
"old" view among North American economists. It also presents the idea of a political
Miller equilibrium.

The crucial reason for the different views on the way taxes affect the cost
of capital is that authors make different assumptions about the firms' financial decisions,

sometimes without explicitly mentioning them. The holders of the new view have
pointed to the importance of these assumptions and they have emphasized that new

share issues, debt, and, in particular, retained profits should be distinguished as
alternative sources of finance. Three different cost of capital expressions are typically
used by them depending on which source of finance is assumed.

Equally important, however, is the distinction between alternative uses

for profit. These uses are not only dividend and interest payments, as is usually
assumed, but also profit retentions and share repurchases. The specification of the use
for profits is as essential for the calculation of the cost of capital as the specification of

the source of finance. Only when it is dear where an additional dollar used for
investment comes from and where its returns are going, is it possible to calculate the tax

burden on marginal investment and to find out which minimum pre—tax return is
required to make this investment profitable.

Distinguishing retained earnings, debt and new share issues as marginal
sources of finance and retentions, dividends, interest income, and share repurchases as
marginal uses for profit in principle gives up to 12 different expressions for the cost of
capital. However, since interest payments are the use for profits only when the source of

finance was debt, the number reduces to 7. The possibilities are depicted in Table 1. As

will be shown, not all of them will be equally rdevant to an optimizing firm: however,
they will turn out to be a useful guide in the course of this paper.

2. The Old View

In the good old days economists distinguished just two financial alternatives: equity and
debt.

With equity finance, the conceptual experiment for determining the cost
of capital was that shareholders inject an additional dollar into their firm by purchasing
newly issued shares and compare the returns in the form of dividends with the returns

they could have received by investing their money in bonds. Let iv be the annual

r

3

dividend from an investment of one doilar and i the annual rate of interest on bonds.
Then the shareholders would be willing to inject funds into their firm until ¶ =

I if there

were no taxes.

if taxes are levied, the decision is different. Suppose distributed earnings

are subjected to a corporate tax of rate id and in addition to a personal tax of rate 'r,j,,
the frequently deplored "double tax". Assume that interest income on the other hand is

only taxed once at the personal rate t. In this case, the marginal investment project is
determined by equality of the dividend net of all taxes and the net—of—personal tax
interest rate: 1v(l—rd)(l—rd)

= I (i—Sq). In all OECD countries except Norway the

personal tax on dividends is the same as that on interest income: Tdp =
can therefore be simplified to lr(1—rd) =

(1)

¶5.

The equation

I or, solving for iv, to

r=
1—

The right side of this equation is the firm's cost of capital which is represented in the

box in the first column and first row of Table 1.

if the formula were true, the cost of capital would exceed the rate of
interest significantly. Before 1986, when the U.S. corporate tax rate was 46 %, the cost
of capital would have exceeded the interest rate by 85 % and presently, with a corporate
tax rate of 34 %, it would exceed the interest rate by 52 %.
Clearly this signals substantial economic distortions. Too much of the

available aggregate stock of capital would be allocated to the non—corporate sectors or to

countries that do not impose a corporate tax on dividends (such as Norway, Germany,

or Italy). Aggregate output would be smaller than in the case where all investment
projects had to satisfy the same profitability requirements. This is the traditional or
"old" view of the role of corporate taxation that can be attributed to Harberger (1962,

4

1966) and McLure (1979) and, in an international context, to MacDougall (1960), Kemp
(1962, 1964), and Hamada (1966).

It was clear to these authors that the cost of capital would be lower if
firms could escape the double taxation of equity returns by chosing debt as the source of
finance. An early writer who emphasized this point was Oberhauser (1963, pp. 67—68).

He argued that, because of the deductibility of debt interest, a debt—financed marginal
investment project is not affected by the tax rates and the cost of capital is simply equal

to the market rate of interest. For a debt financed investment project, the dividend net
of interest payments and net of all taxes is (ir—i) (1—Ta) (1—ran). Obviously, the taxes

reduce this dividend when it is positive, but they do not make it negative. All
investment projects which are worth being carried out in the absence of taxation
therefore retain this property despite taxation and

1r=i

(2)

remains the marginal investment condition. This is the case captured by the box in the
third row and second column of Table 1.

Debt financing is an important example of a situation where the corporate

tax is a burden on intramarginal, but not on marginal, investment projects. Only
intramarginal projects generate profits in excess of their interest cost; only they pay the
tax. Marginal debt financed projects which just break even are tax—exempt. This is the

reason that the set of profitable investment projects is not affected by the corporate tax
and the cost of capital equals the interest rate. The neutrality of the corporate tax in the

case of debt financing has been emphasized by many authors and is well accepted by
holders of the "old" view of corporate taxation. Often the literature takes account of the

role of debt financing by assuming that the cost of capital is a weighted average of
equations (1) and (2).

5
Table 1

Ugefor

sQu'.._pnOfitI

Dividends

Intert

Share
repUrCh&I

Retentions

SnaDCe

•

New

tuu,

(I,)(t,)

i—,

i—

(1—ri)(1—.ip)(1—'i)

1—el

Retained eaxnsngs

(di'ddend reductions)

—

•

(I—r,)(1—v.)

(l—v.)(I—v,)

Debt

I—,

(1—e,)1(1—e)'

,

!udt coedttine. d.flnsd Ic SIne (1q88).

3. The New View

One of the problems with the "old° view is that it rests heavily on the assumption that

new share issues are the marginal source of equity finance. This assumption does not
harmonize well with the empirical fact that most corporate equity capital is generated

by internal investment rather than new share issues. For example, in the period from
1980 to 1985, an average 67.8 % of gross investment by U.S. non-financial corporations

was internally financed, 31.0 % was debt financed, and only 1.2 % was financed with

share issues.t Contrary to the assumption of the holders of the old view, these data
suggest that corporations are self—perpetuating enterprises that rarely rely on equity

'See Survey of Current Business, volumes 57 (July 1977, p. 24n.), 61 (1981, special
supplement, p. 10), 63 (July 1983, p. 30), 66 (July 1986, p. 33); and Federal Reserve
Bulletin, Volumes 55, (November 1969, p. A 71.4) 60 (October 1974 p. A 59.4 64
@une 1978, p. 433), 65 (December 1979, p. A. 44. For a more extensive recora see
Gertler and Hubbard (1990, Table 1).

6

injections by shareholder households but generate the needed equity capital primarily
through profit retentions.

Probably the first to analyze the cost of capital consistently in the case of

profit retentions was King (1974a, 1974b, 1977). His contributions initiated a new
literature which includes the contributions of Bradford (1980, 1981), Auerbach (1979,

1983), Fullerton and King (1984), Edwards and Keen (1984), Sinn (1985), and many
others. The common element of this literature, which soon was labelled the "new view",
was that it allowed witheld dividends to replace new share issues as a marginal source of
equity finance.

The modification is important in all cases where the personal tax on
capital gains differs from that on dividends and where different corporate tax rates are

applied to retalned and distributed earnings. Let i-,. be the corporate tax rate on
retalned profits, .r,j (as before) the corporate tax on distributed profits, and Tc the

personal capital galns tax rate. In the classical system of corporate taxation which
prevails in the U.S. and a few smaller countries (Australia, Luxemburg, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Switzerland),

equals Td; there is only one corporate tax rate regardless

of whether earnings are retained or distributed. However, in nearly all other OECD
countries, rr exceeds Td because imputation systems are used which refund part of the

corporate tax to shareholders. The statutory capital gains tax rate in the U.S. is
currently — however perhaps not for much longer — equal to the personal tax rate, but it

is applied only to realized rather than accrued capital gains. It is a widely used
approdmation to model this preferential treatment by assuming an effective tax on
accrued capital gains whose rate is smaller than the personal tax rate: r, c

v. A good

guess is that, in the U.S., Tc is currently half the personal tax rate where the latter can
be taken to be 28 % for the typical shareholder. In most other countries, the difference
between Tc and Tj is even more pronounced for the simple reason that these countries do

not have any personal capital gains tax rates worth mentioning. Currently, only one

7

third of the OECD countries impose personal taxes on capital gains that are realized
alter a holding period of more than one year!
Verbally deriving the cost of capital expression for the case where retained

earnings is the source of finance is slightly more arduous than in the case where new

share issues or debt are the sources of finance. Nevertheless the argument is
straightforward. Consider a firm that decides to increase the amount of profit retained
at the expense of its dividend payment in order to finance additional investment. From

the shareholders' point of view, this policy is worthwhile if its rate of return on
investment is sufficiently high to generate future dividends in excess of the interest
income which they would have earned had they received the withheld dividends and
invested them in bonds. The minimum pre—tax rate of return necessary to satisfy the
shareholders is the cost of capital to the firm.

To calculate this cost of capital, it is important to realize that the decision

to retain more profits creates more capital gains and raises the shareholders' capital
gains tax liability. Suppose, in toto, one dollar is given up by the shareholders in terms
of both additional capital gains taxes to be paid and net—of—tax dividends foregone. If all

market participants know what is going on, this renunciation will increase the market
value of shares by exactly one dollar. Thus the additional capital gains taxes equal
and the foregone dividend net of the personal and corporate dividend taxes equals l—m.

"Grossing up" the foregone dividend with the corporate and personal dividend taxes ra
and Tdp translates it into (1—rC)/[(1—rd)(l—rdp)1 units of before—tax profits or, after

subtracting the corporate tax on retained earnings, into investable funds of size

(lTc)(lrr)/[(1_rd)(1rap)I. Next the flow of net-of—tax dividends resulting from this
investment outlay has to be determined. If one additional dollar were invested in the
firm, the resulting before—tax return would be it and the corresponding net—of—all—tax
dividend flow would be iv (1—T4(l—rd). If, on the other hand, the additional amount

invested is not one dollar but (l—rc)(l—rr)/[(1—ra)(1—rdp)} dollars then the resulting
net—of—all—taxes dividend flow is {(1—Tc)(l—rr)/[(l—rd)(l—rdp)]} .

iv (i—r)(i—x) or

8

simply it (1—rc)(1.-tr). Comparing this amount with the interest income that the
shareholders could have earned by not giving up the dollar but investing it in the capital

market results in the break even condition it (1—vc)(1—rr) = i (1—n). The solution of this
condition for iv yields the expression for the cost of capital which was sought:

iv=i

(3)

1—ij

(1—re) (1-t)
This is the value represented by the box in the second row and first column of Table 1.

With current U.S. tax rates nf, say, ¶5 = 0.28, rr =

0.34,

and r, = 0.14,

the cost of capital implied by (3) would be 27 % above the interest rate vs. 52 %
according to the old view. This still signals economic distortions, but, with the usual
quadratic excess burden functions, the welfare loss from intersectoral distortions would

only be one fourth of that implied by the old view. Before 1986, when the maximum

marginal personal tax rate (50 %)

exceeded

the corporate tax rate (46 %) and the

effective tax rate on accrued capital galns may have been about one fifth of the personal
tax rate, it was even possible that (1—va) (1—rr) n 1—vt. With this constellation, the cost

of equity finance would have equalled the interest rate under the "new" view, while, as
argued above, it would have exceeded this rate by 85 % under the "old" view.

In most OECD countries, including those in continental Europe, the
practical non—existence of capital gains taxes implies that equation (3) reduces to
iv

=i

i—fl

lTr

(European case)

and the relative magnitudes of the personal and corporate tax rates alone determine the

cost of capital. In the special case where both tax rates are equal, the tax system
operates like a pure Schanz—Haig—Simons tax2 and the cost of capital equals the interest

2Qn the definition and origins of this tax see Goode (1977).

p

rate —

a.s

if debt rather than retained earnings were the marginal source of finance.

Basically, this is the fundamental neutrality result which European tax economists call
the Johansson—Sainuelson Theorem.5

The role of the personal income tax rate

in equation (3) merits

particular attention. Holders of the "old" view often argue that the corporate tax is a
tax on investment and the personal income tax one on savings, largely irrelevant for the
"investment wedge" as measured by the difference between the pre—tax rate of return to

capital and the market rate of interest. In their opinion, all the personal tax does is
create a "savings wedge" between the market rate of interest and the net rate of return

the saver receives, but it has no implications for the investment tax wedge. Under the
new view this argument seems highly misleading because equation (3) shows that both
taxes are equally important for the investment tax wedge, perfectly offsetting each other

when the tax rates are equal. It is true under the "new" view that the corporate tax is a

tax on real investment and that the personal income tax is a tax on savings. However,
the personal income tax is also seen as a subsidy on real investment because it reduces
the opportunity cost of funds retained in the firm — after all, equation (3) was derived
from a portfolio consideration where the shareholders' personal investment in bonds was

compared with their company's investment in real assets. The higher the personal tax
rate, the smaller is the investment tax wedge and the larger the firm's optimal level of
investment with any given market rate of interest.

Apart from the fact that it implies lower intertemporal and intersectoral
distortions than suggested by the "old" view, this particular role of the personal income

tax results in paradoxical changes in the allocation of the available aggregate capital
stock. An increase in the personal income tax rate for owners of corporate shares induces
3See Sinn (1985, ch. 5) for further details. The theorem also gives a precise definition of
true economic depreciation. When depreciation for tax purposes is accelerated relative to
true economic depreciation, the cost of capital falls short of the interest rate, and, with
an immediate write off, the cost of capital equals the rate of return the saver receives,
s (l—t1). By way of contrast, under the "old" view of corporate taxation, the cost of
capital with imtediate depreciation equals the interest rate, i.

10

4
a

reallocation of the aggregate stock of capital from the non—corporate to the corporate

sector regardless of whether or not it is matched by a tax increase for the owners of
non—corporate firms. And, provided the OECD's residence rules for the taxation of

international interest income flows are kept, a unilateral increase in one country's
personal income tax rate will induce capital imports. The higher the personal income tax
rate, the more profits will be retained by domestic companies for the purpose of internal

investment and the less capital is available for reinvestment in the capital market. The

shortage of funds boosts the domestic interest rate and attracts foreign capital. Via a
revaluation of the domestic currency and the subsequent current account deficit, the
foreign capital succeeds in entering the domestic economy and makes an increase in
aggregate domestic investment possible (see Sian 1988, 1989).

It is obvious from equation (3) that capital gains taxes are the counterpart

of personal taxes on interest income. A cut in the capital gains tax rate brings about the
same portfolio effect as an increase in the personal tax rate does. The "compensation" of

a cut in the capital gains tax rate with an increase in the personal income tax rate which
has recently been considered as a potential US budget compromise between Republicans

and Democrats would therefore be strongly non—neutral with regard to international

capital movements. It would create domestic investment incentives, raise the US
interest rate, support the Dollar, and increase the American current account deficit.

An important aspect of equation (3) is that no dividend taxes appear in it.
Economists have often been misled by this aspect into believing that the equation refers

to the case where the profits generated by the marginal investment project (iv) are
retained in order to avoid the high burden of dividend taxes. In fact, holders of the "old"
view typically assume that equation (3) is the appropriate formula for the case where all
profits are retained and they often use a weighted average of equations (1) and (3) where
the weights are determined by the dividend—pay—out ratio.4 Unfortunately however, it
Cf. Miller (1977, pp. 266—267), Gordon and Malkiel (1981, pp. 141—143) or, to refer to
more recent examples, Bernheim and Shoven (1987, 1989). On p. 18 of their 1989 article,

11

seems that the formula has never been consistently derived from an optimization
approach that would justify such a use or interpretation and, in fact, section 5 will raise

doubts that it ever can be derived.5 Under the "new" view, the true interpretation of
equation (3) is not that the profits from the marginal investment project are retained

but, on the contrary, that they are fully distributed in the form of dividends. The
message of the new view is not that the dividend taxes are neutral when the firm avoids

them, but that they are neutral when, and in an important sense even becau.se, it pays
them.

The very fact that the firm pays dividends and dividend taxes in the
investment phase implies that the marginal investment project is subsidized at the rate
1—(lrd) (lrdp) which is the same rate at which its returns are taxed. This symmetry
explains why the dividend taxes drop out of the equation and why they are neutral. The

the latter argue that, in the King—Fullerton model, "net earnings flowing from an
investment financed with retained earnings must be entirely retained", deplore this
assumption as counterfactual, and then seek greater generality by allowing the use for
profits to be determined by an exogenous dividend—pay—out ratio. This ratio is used to
calculate the weighted average expression mentioned. Admittedly, King and Fullerton's
(1984, p. 23) derivation of equation (3) can indeed be misunderstood, because they begin
their dicussion of the retained earnings case with the marginal condition ir (l—rc)(l—rr)
= i (1—ri) which above was merely the last step in a chain of transformations. There can

be no doubt, however, that only the interpretation given here reflects the literature
summarized under the heading "new view" adequately — including the work of King
and Fullerton. For formal proofs of equation (3) in the context of explicit optimization

models of the firm that support this interpretation see Sinn (1985, ch. 5, and 1989,

appendix).
5Section 7.1 will show, however, that equation (3) can also be derived in the case where
the marginal profits are used for share repurchases and where new share issues are the
source of finance. Note, moreover, that the equation is compatible with retentions where
these are equivalent to dividend payments. The point that will be made in section 5 is
that equation (3) is inappropriate when retentions are preferred to dividend payments,
because then the marginal value of equity, q, cannot be a constant [cf. equation (6)1.
To the best of the author's knowledge the consistently derived expression that
comes closest to the weighted average of equations (1) and (3) is Poterba and Summers's
(1985) equation (my notation)

p/(i—r)
(1—rd) + (1—rc)(1—a)
where p is the shareholders' discount rate, T = rr = ird, and a is the dividend—pay—out
ratio. Poterba and Summers's equation is not a weighted average of (1) and (3) since p
is assumed to deviate from the net-of—tax interest rate i (1—rt) by an amount that is
inversely related tb the dividend—pay—out ratio a.

12

personal and corporate taxes on retained earnings that appear on the right—hand side of

equation (3) are riot the taxes on the profits generated by the marginal investment
project, they are taxes on the funds invested. This aspect is often overlooked, but it is
obvious from the arbitrage calculus presented and it is essential for the new view.
The deeper economic reason for the neutrality of the dividend taxes is that

dividend taxes are cash flow taxes that make the government a silent partner in the
business. From the viewpoint of a single shareholder the government is very similar to

another shareholder who claims a constant fraction of the distributed profits but does
not make effective use of his voting rights. It is true that, unlike other shareholders, the

government may have received its partnership in an unfair manner by establishing the

tax law, but for a dividend paying firm this is merely a part of its miserable history. It
is not an aspect that gives the shareholders incentives to vote for a policy other than the
one they would prefer if they could claim the tax—inclusive fraction of dividends.

The neutrality properties of taxes on corporate distributions were
emphasized by Bradford (1981) and induced the Meade Committee (1978) to propose a

dividend tax as the only tax on corporate profits. Many economists believe that such
taxes are among the most neutral ones available.

While holders of the "new" view may have different opinions about the
introduction of a dividend tax, most of them would object to the abolition of existing
dividend taxes. They would argue that this abolition would reduce tax revenue, create

unjustified windfall gains for those who currently happen to hold their wealth in
corporate shares, and would not induce firms to deviate from the investment behavior

described by (3). The case is not as hypothetical as it may seem. A major reason for

Congress not following the Treasury Department's (1985) proposal to integrate the
corporate and personal tax systems in the course of the 1986 reform was the fear that
'5

13

this integration would incur substantial revenue losses without promising significant
efficiency gains.6

4. Financial Fle.zibilüy and Real Distortions

The existence of at least thiee alternative cost—of—capital expressions poses severe
problems for economic models designed to measure tax distortions, for the magnitude of

the predicted distortions will obviously depend on the financial behavior assumed.
Ideally, the financial behavior should be determined endogenously together with the

firm's investment behavior, and the cost of financial and real distortions should be
aggregated to overall welfare measures. However, in the absence of sound theories of the

firms' financial choices, this approach has rarely been taken in the literature and no
simple solutions have been offered so far.7

Holders of the "old" view often solve the problem by neglecting it.
Frequently, they simply run their models on the basis of equation (1), finding huge real
distortions and writing alarming reports about the devastating effects of the tax system.

The results are not overly surprising if one realizes that, with the classical system of
corporate taxation, they are based on the implicit assumption that firms marzmize their
cost of finance.

A more promising approach may be that of Fullerton and King (1984).
These authors provide a methodology for measuring tax distortions which is probably
now the most frequently used by research institutes and tax authorities throughout the
world. They assume that the cost of capital is a weighted average of the costs of debt,

retained earnings, and new share issues where the weights are the fractions of debt,

This was communicated to the author by Charles McLure, the scientific supervisor of
the proposal.
C1. Miller (1971), DeAngelo and Masulis (1980), and Gordon and Malkiel (1981).

14
4,

surplus capital, and original capital in a firm's assets. The King—Fullerton methodology

has been criticized on the grounds that it equates average with marginal financial
structures and imposes these structures exogenously upon the firm.

Another possibility is Sinn's (1985) approach which is based on the
assumption that firms minimize their cost of finance subject to the constraint that a
minimum marginal equity—asset ratio is required. The resulting cost of capital in this
approach is a weighted average of the cost of debt finance and the lower of the cost of
internal and external equity finance. Naturally, the economic distortions it predicts tend
to be lower than those suggested by old—view models or models of the King—Fullerton

variety. The approach includes an endogenous explanation of the equity—asset ratio
along the lines suggested by DeAngelo and Masulis (1980). Amongst other things this
explanation implies that the equity—asset ratio increases with the allowed acceleration of

tax depreciation and with the firm's planned rate of growth.

The constrained cost—of—capital minimization approach rests on the

assumption that the firm pays dividends and retains profits only to finance its
investment in real assets. For a firm that does not pay dividends, the cost of capital may
be determined according to different rules.
One reason for not paying dividends is the existence of a tax system which
favors retentions over debt since (i—i-s) (1vr) > 1—ti.8 Stiglitz (1973) believed that such

a system prevailed in the U.S. before the 1981 tax reform and he argued that it would

induce firms to use the part of profits exceeding their real investment for financial
investments in the capital market. A marginal decision to invest in real assets would
under these circumstances require a reduction in the capital market investment and, as

this would be equivalent to marginal debt finance, the cost of capital would equal the

S

5Anotber

reason is that the firm may not have enough profits. See section 6 for an

analysis of this 'case.

15

market rate of interest. Taxes on the returns from equity capital do not matter in this
approach even though all real investment is equity financed.

Stiglitz's argument was recently used in the work of Howitt and Sinn
(1988) who analyzed investment in the case of anticipated changes in dividend tax rates.

These changes resulted in strong changes in the firm's financial behavior, but left its real
investment unaffected. The cost of capital was invariant to tax rate changes.

The result emerging from this discussion is that the firms' financial
flexibility is crucial for the amount of real distortions a tax system causes. Obviously,
the financial decisions can serve as a cushion that protects the economy from the blows
imposed by the tax system. The higher the degree of financial flexibility, the easier it is
for firms to escape discriminatory taxation and the lower are the real distortions.9 Models

that are built on the assumptions of fixed financial structures, or even of maximizing the
cost of finance, may miss an important economic self—protection device and are likely to

overstate the economy's distortions.

5. Do Fir-ins Maximize their Cost of Capital?

While the old view's implicit assumption that firms maximize their cost of capital may
at first sight look awkward to say the least, this assumption has recently been defended

by Hansson and Stuart (1985) with an interesting argument. The argument rests on the
widespread view that, unlike equity finance, debt finance involves invisible costs which,

in a financial optimum, just compensate for its tax advantages at the margin (see
Gordon and Malkiel 1981). The invisible costs are similar to the costs of rent seeking in

9Fuilerton and Mackie (1989) estimate the welfare implications of the 1986 U.S. tax

reform alternatively under the "new" and "old" view. Although their formal
specification of, these views is not exactly compatible with the interpretation iven in
this paper, theyfind that the "old" view implies larger distortions than the "new' view.

16

I
public choice models and can, for example, be taken to represent the cost of avoiding

bankruptcy or, more generally, the differential transactions costs resulting from the use
of debt in lieu of equity capital. According to Hansson and Stuart, the presence of these

costs implies that, although firms actually minimize their cost of finance, they make
their real investment decisions as if they maximized the cost of finance with regard to
the visible costs and as if they used only equity at the margin.

If correct, this argument would help rehabilitate models that neglect the

role of financial decisions and would constitute a strong criticism of all models that
allow for financial flexibility or that assume the cost of capital to be a weighted average
of the direct, visible costs of different sources of finance.

To check the argument neglect the difference between external and

internal equity finance and assume that the invisible cost of debt finance can be
described by a function q'(K,D) where Kis the firm's stock of assets, and D its debt. Let

e be the visible cost of equity finance as given in equation (1) or (3) and i the (visible)
cost of debt financing as given in equation (2). Assume that the tax system favors debt

over equity and that i < e. An interior solution of the debt—equity choice which
captures the llansson—Stuart view is presumably characterized by

(4)

where

is the marginal invisible cost of debt finance. The equation expresses that the

sum of the marginal visible and invisible costs of debt finance equals the visible cost of

equity, as the authors maintained. However does this mean that the cost of capital is
equal to the cost of equity capital e?
Probably not. The general condition for an optimal marginal investment is
that its rate of return, iv, be equal to the marginal visible cost of a source of finance plus

the marginal change in the invisible cost where, because of the interior solution, it does
4

17

not matter which source is chosen. Consider the case where retained earnings constitute
the marginal source. In this case the condition becomes1°

(5)

ir=e+yg

with

as the change in the invisible cost resulting from a marginal equity—financed

increase in the cost of capital.
According to (5), the Hansson—Stuart proposition that it = e is correct if,

and only if,

= 0 . This, however, is a problematic assumption. If the invisible costs

reflect bankruptcy or agency costs, as the authors suggested, then it seems very
plausible that an increase in the firm's stock of equity reduces these costs and that

<0. If it were indeed true that

= 0 for all levels of D,

then the cross derivatives

and WDK would both be zero and the stock of debt that satisfies (4) would be
independent of the firm's stock of assets. The firm could grow indefinitely, but there
would never be an incentive to use more debt. Obviously, the Hansson—Stuart argument

rests on the implicit assumption that equity is the only marginal source of finance. It is
not surprising then that the cost of finance is not a weighted average of the costs of debt

and equity finance, but equals the latter.

If these implausible implications are removed by using the more realistic
assumption WK < 0 (and w01 c 0), then, despite the interior debt equity choice, the cost

of capital is between the costs of debt and equity, just as weighted average models

predict. Even in a Hansson—Stuart world, firms do not behave as if they were
maximizing their cost of finance, they behave as if the weighted average formulations
were correct!

'°In the case of debt financing the marginal investment condition is it = i
which, because df (4), is the same as (5).

++

18

I
6. The Role of Immature Firms

It is certainly not reasonable to expect firms that have access to alternative sources of
finance to behave as if they were maximizing their cost of finance, but neither is it true
that the most attractive sources of finance are always available. This is obvious for debt

financing which is often subject to tight constraints imposed by the banking system.
However it is also true for retained earnings. Young and immature firms may not have
enough profits to finance all available investment projects profitable enough to bear the
cost of retentions given in equation (3).

This is a severe problem for the "new" view. Even in mature economies

there are always inventors who try to found corporations to cash in on their ideas.
Moreover, new investment opportunities that require more equity funds than the firm is

able to generate by witholding its dividends show up regularly for existing firms. In all

these cases the new view is not very helpful for predicting the firm's cost of capital,
because its basic assumption that the firm can finance more investment by witholding
more dividends is not satisfied.

At first glance this seems to rehabilitate the "old" view and its basic
8ost—of-capital expression, equation (1). After all, new share issues may be unavoidable

when other sources of finance are not available. Unfortunately, however, there is no

reason to be optimistic. In fact there seem to be hardly any circumstances where
equation (1) can possibly be true for value maximizing neoclassical firms when dividends
are taxed more heavily than retentions [(1—Td) (1—rdp) < (1—r)

(1r)]

The fundamental problem with equation (1) is that it is based on a
conceptual mistake. The equation is derived from the assumption that marginal profits

are paid out as dividends, but it implies that the firm prefers to retain them. To
understand this inconsistency, suppose the firm followed equation (1) and stopped

issuing shares at the point where the last dollar invested yielded a return equal to

i / (1—v,j).

In this case there would be a set of unexploited investment opportunities

19

with a rate of return above the cost of withheld dividends as given by equation (3). In
the presence of such opportunities, dividend payments cannot be optimal. Instead, it is

optimal for the firm to enter an extended period of purely internal growth where it

retains its profits and does not pay dividends until all of the projects have been
implemented.

To calculate the true cost of new share issues in the presence of a phase of
purely internal growth is not an easy task, and a parametric cost of capital formula does

not seem readily available. Nevertheless, it has been shown in Sinn (1988) that the cost
of new share issues, as well as the length of the period of internal growth, increases with

an increase in the dividend tax rate and will, under mild conditions, exceed the value
given by the traditional formula (1).

The first of these results says that an increase in the dividend tax burden

reduces a young firm's starting stock of capital and slows down its development to

maturity. It is a potential explanation of Poterba and Summers's (1985) empirical
finding that the frequent changes in the British dividend tax rate exhibited adverse
effects on aggregate investment. 11
The second result implies that even the "old" view underestimates the

cost of capital for newly founded firms. These firms may be endowed with only a very

small nucleus of original capital and may be forced to generate more capital through
internal investment than a focus on equations (1) and (3) would suggest. The result is

the net aect of two countervailing forces. On the one hand, the deferral of dividend

payments reduces the present value of the firm's tax burden. This, in itself, would
reduce the cost of capital if there were unlimited internal investment opportunities

liThe authors' own explanation is a signalling argument. According to this argument, an
increase in the dividend tax rate reduces the optimal volume of dividends which in turn

increases the shareholders' discount rate. (Cf. also fn. 5.) A third explanation could
simply be that, for at least some of the periods considered, the overall tax burden on
dividends fell short of that on retentions. In this case new issues of shares would he the
cheapest source of equity finance and it would not be surprizing that dividend taxes
entered the cost of capital. This point was made in Sinn (1985, ch. 7).

20

which the firm could use up to a predetermined point of time.U On the other hand, the

cheap possibility of generating capital through profit retentions makes it wise to
economize on new share issues and to start with only a nucleus of equity capital if the
set of internal investment opportunities is limited and the time of dividend payments is
endogenously determined. New share issues reduce the scope of profitable retentions, and

this reduction is an opportunity cost that increases the cost of external equity funds
beyond the value implied by the traditional equation (1). Table 1 reports this result in
the box which is in the first row and third column.
The phase of internal growth, which should necessarily follow the issue of

new shares, is a phase where the firm neither issues new shares nor pays any dividends

and where retentions are both the only source of finance and the only use for profits.
The careless holder of the new view who focusses simply on the firm's marginal source of

funds might interpret this phase as one where the firm's cost of capital is given by
equation (3). Similarly, the careless holder of the old view might do the same because he

focusses on the firm's use for profits and interprets equation (3) in the "old" way
described in section 3 (shortly after presenting the equation). However, they would both
be wrong. As long as there is a strict preference for profit retentions, the firm's marginal

investment projects will obviously have a rate of return above the value given by
equation (3), and the economic distortions will be larger than this value suggests.

Formally, the phase of internal growth can be shown to result in a decline
in q, the firm's marginal value of equity, from one to (1—rd)(1—rap)/[(1—Tr)(1—rc)], the

value which the new view predicts for a dividend paying firm.'3 This decline is a capital

i2This is the argument which those who argue that the mere possibility of a deferral of
dividend payments reduces the cost of capital may have in mind. The argument covers
only one side of the problem.
"The variable q is the increase in the firm's market value resulting from a one dollar gift
to the firm. Its value equals one when the firm issues new shares because the gift would
be able to substitute a one dollar equity injection by the shareholders. To understand

that q = (1—Td)(1—rd)/[(1—r)(1—TC)j if the firm pays dividends recall the arbitrage
calculus given in section 3. There it was shown that one dollar which the shareholders
give up in the f9rm of dividend reductions and capital gains tax increases translates into

investable funds equal to (1—rc)(1—Tr)/[(1—rdp)(l—rd)]. The inverse of this expression is

21

loss that increases the cost of capital beyond the value given by (3). Let 4

measure

the

annual increment of q, 4 being negative in the phase of internal growth. A shareholder

whose only returns are capital gains would be indifferent between a policy of profit
retentions and a personal capital market investment if the rate of capital gains on his
shares equalled the net—of—tax interest rate, i.e. if (1—re) [ir(1—'rr) + 4/q] =

(1—v1)i.

Solving for ic, the pre—tax rate of return to real capital, one obtains the following
modified cost—of—capital expression:'4

(6)

(1rc)(1rr)

1Tr

As 4/q c 0, this expression indicates a higher cost of capital and higher distortions than
equation (3). Its entry in Table 1 is in the second row and third column.

The work reported in this section has implications for the empirical
literature on the tax influence on the cost of capital. Among others, two conclusions
emerge. The first is that "new view" approaches of the King—Fullerton variety tend to

underestimate the true cost of capital. These approaches use weighted averages of
expressions (1)—(3) but do not take account of the facts that the cost of new share issues

is likely to exceed the value given in equation (1) and that the cost of retained earnings
exceeds that given in equation (3) when firms are immature.

The second conclusion refers to "old view" approaches of the Harberger

variety. It is the tradition of these approaches to explain the magnitudes of real
the cash shareholders would receive if the gift were distributed or, equivalently, the
capital gain they could enjoy if the gift were retained. See Auerbach (1979) for an early
analysis of q in the phase of dividend payments.
As profit retentions follow new share issues, this equation also applies to the case of

new share issues. However, in itself, it does not reveal that this cost is above the
traditional value i/(1—rd). Equation (6) can be derived from the explicit intertemporal
optimization approach for immature firms provided in Sinn (1988). The proof that the
cost of new share issues will, under mild conditions, exceed i/(l—r,s) is also given in that
paper. It is based on a comparison of the time paths of the "true" q and the q implied by
equation (1).

22

distortions with the measurable income tax burden or, what amounts to the same thing,
to assume the cost of capital to be a weighted average of equations (1) and (3) where the

dividend—pay—out ratio is used to construct the weights. In the light of the above

analysis of immature firms this procedure stands the truth on his head. A high
measurable tax burden signals that many firms are mature and pay dividends. The cost
of capital is low, because investment can be financed with dividend reductions. On the

other hand, a low dividend—pay--out ratio and a low measurable tax burden signal a
shortage of funds. It means that many firms face the high cost of retained earnings as
given by equation (6) or even a cost of new share issues in excess of the traditional value

given in equation (1). In short: when it comes to a comparison of mature and immature

firms, the true cost of capital is inversely related to that measured by "old view"
approaches.

7. Why Share Repurchases Do not Rehabdit ate the "Old View"

Share repurcbases and acquisitions have long constituted an important aspect of U.S.
corporate behavior. Scherer and Ravenscraft (1984) found that, from 1950 to 1975, at
least 1800 independent firms were acquired by those 148 firms that persistently belonged

to the set of the 200 largest U.S. firms. And Shoven (1986) reported that, in the years

foilowing 1983, corporate share repurchases, predominantly acquisitions, exceeded
ordinary dividend payments.

As shown in Sinn (1985, ch. 6) the excessive acquisition activity of U. S.
firms can, in principle, be explained by the undervaluation of corporate shares resulting
from the high burden of dividend taxes. Buying shares is a cheaper way of acquiring real

assets than buying investment goods; is a method of distributing dividends which

23

circumvents personal income tax; and, if debt financed, is a convenient way of enjoying
the tax advantages of a higher degree of corporate leverage.'5

Quite surprisingly, the observation of corporate share repurchases has
recently led to a revival of the "old" view of corporate taxation among North—American

economists. The puzzling aspect about this development in the history of economic
thought is that although share repurchases are a way of avoiding the dividend taxes,
they are nevertheless believed to reinstate the distortionary image of these taxes.

The "naive" interpretation of the empirical fact of share repurchases is
that, if anything, they reduce the cost of capital because they constitute a less heavily
taxed use for marginal profits than dividends. Consider two straight—forward thought
experiments to derive the implication of share repurchases for the cost of capital before
the "puzzle" will be addressed.

7.1. Share Repurcha.ses and the Cost of Equity Capital

In the first experiment, the shareholders inject funds into their company in exchange for

newly issued shares and receive the returns by gradually selling shares back to this

company. The issue of new shares increases the market value of all shares simply
because it injects money into the firm and has no immediate tax consequences when it

occurs at the market clearing price. However, when the firm uses its profits to
repurchase shares there are tax consequences. While they avoid the personal income tax

that the shareholder household would have to pay on ordinary dividends, the share

repurchases do not prevent the firm from having to pay corporate tax on retained

'To establish "acquisition neutrality" a removal of the affiliation privilege or the
introduction of a special tax on corporate acquisitions was recommended which under
the present U.S. tax rate would have to be 52 % of the purchase volume. For further
discussion of the acquisition problem in the context of tax incentives see see Poterha
(1987), Auerbaêh and Reishus (1988), and Bagwell and Shoven (1988).

24

earnings and they in addition create a personal capital gains tax liability because the
remaining shares are gaining in "weight".

To derive the corresponding cost of capital expression, suppose
shareholders inject one dollar into their firm by purchasing new shares and this dollar
generates a permanent annual return of it before tax or it (1—ir) alter the corporate tax
on retained earnings. The total market value of outstanding shares will rise at the time
of the equity injection, but it will not be affected thereafter if this net—of—tax return is

used for distributions in the form of share repurchases.16 Because of the profit
distributions the investment does not generate perpetuated increments in the market
value of outstanding shares as would have been the case had the profits been reinvested

for the purpose of further internal investment. This does not mean, however, that there

are no taxable capital gains. On the contrary, since a given overall market value is
divided by a smaller number of outstanding shares, there are capital gains in every year

after the investment. The capital gains compensate for the decline in the number of
shares, and when the repurchases occur at the respective current market prices of shares,

they will just equal the annual repurchase volume it (1—ir). The capital gains tax is
therefore Tc it (1rr) and the shareholders' net of—all—tax return is it (1—ic)(1—Tr). In the

optimum, this return must equal the interest rate net of the personal income tax at
which shareholders could invest in the capital market, i (i—it). Solving for it

gives

the

corresponding value for the cost of capital in the case where new share issues are the
source of finance and share repurchases the use for profits:

(7)

it=i

1—ri

(Fr) (]rrr)

Table 1 reports this (surprisingly familiar) value in the box in the first row and fourth

column.
l5Tbe same would be true for any other channel of corporate distributions.

25

In the second thought experiment, retained earnings in the sense of
dividend reductions are the source of finance and share repurchases the use for profits.

As explained in section 3, one dollar given up by the shareholders via dividend cuts
translates into (l—rc)(l—T)/[(l—-rd)(l—Td)] dollars of investment. However, as the

profits from this investment are channelled to the shareholders via share repurchases the

net return per dollar invested is it
Multiplying the

(1-.rc)(l—vr),

as was shown in the previous paragraph.

net return per dollar of investment with

the number of dollars

available

a return of it (l_rc)2(l_vr)2 / [(1r)(1t)] for the dollar
shareholder. Equating this again to I (1—rj) and solving for it gives

for investment results in

given up by the

(1—Ta) (1—ran) (1—ri)
(8)
(1—'rc) 2(1_Tr) 2

whereby, as mentioned in section 2, Tap = in practically all OECD tax

Equation
finance

systems.

(8) shows the cost of capital in the case where dividend cuts are the source of

and share repurchases the use for profits. It is represented by the box in the

fourth column and second row of Table 1.

Both

equations (7) and (8) confirm

repurchases reduce the cost
which

the "naive" view that share

of capital. The value given by (7) is exactly the same as that

follows from the new view for the case where retained earnings are the source of

finance

and dividends the use for marginal profits. As argued above for the U.S. tax

system

(Ta = Tr = 0.34,

Tp

= 0.28, Tc = 0.14) it exceeds the interest rate only by 27 %

versus 52 % as predicted by the "old" view formula (1).

A particularly low value of the cost of capital is implied by (8). With the
same

U.S. tax rates, it exceeds

the interest rate by just 6 %. In the pre—1986 U.S. tax

system, the corporate tax rate was Ta =

0.46 and

it may well have been possible that

(1Tj)/[(1Tc)(1Tr)] appronimated one. Under these circumstances, the cost of capital
given by equation (8) would have been about 50 % below the interest rate. The reason

26

for this cost of capital being so low is the fact that, by reducing its dividends and
repurchasing shares, the firm can twice take advantage of the preferential tax treatment

of retained compared to distributed profits. It gains when it replaces dividends with
retentions in the investment phase and it gains when it substitutes share repurchases for

dividends in the return phase. Without preferential treatment of retained earnings, i.e.

with (l—r)(1—r) = (1—ra)(1—-rd), equation (8) would coincide with both equation (1)
and equation (3).

Note that, in striking contrast to the "old" view, the possibility of share
repurchases may even reverse the role of dividend taxation. According to (8), a cut in
the corporate tax rate on dividends — say through the introduction of an imputation
system — would actually increase the cost of capital if retained earnings were the source

of finance and share repurchases the use for profits. The reason for this unusual result is

that the tax cut reduces the tax saving in the investment phase but does not imply a
countervailing tax relief in the phase of profit distributions. This asymmetry induces a
rational firm to invest less and to react in the opposite way as the "old" view suggests.

7.2. Share Repurchases and Economic Model Building

What then is the explanation of the puzzle that holders of the "old" view defend their
results with the allusion to share repurchases?

It is simply their assumption that dividends are a fixed fraction of profits
while the remainder is used for net investment and share repurchases.'7 This seemingly

innocuous assumption, which is currently spreading fast among new models with old

views, implies that new share issues are the only marginal source of finance while
dividends and share repurchases are the use for marginal profits. The cost of capital

"See, e. g., Goulder and Summers (1989).

27

which the assumption generates is a weighted average of equations (1) and (7) where the
dividend—pay—out ratio determines the weights.'8

Although popular this approach is not, in this author's opinion, an
ultimately convincing response to the important phenomenon of share repurchases.
Apart from its counterfactual implication that the firm retains no profits (except for

"retentions" in the form of share repurchases), the approach may be a theoretical
artifact with little economic meaning.

Holders of the new view could easily counter the trick by constructing
models where share repurchases are a fixed fraction of profits and the remainder is used

for dividends and net investment. In these models, retained earnings in the sense of
dividend reductions would be the only marginal source of finance and marginal profits

would be used for share repurchases and dividends. The cost of capital would be a
weighted average of equations (3) and (8) where the weights would again be derived
from the dividend—pay_out ratio.'9 Obviously, the cost of capital would be much lower

than in the popular specification, and the perverted role of the dividend tax rate which
(8) implies would still be present.

An equally arbitrary, but less biased, assumption would be flaing the
volume of share repurchases relative to dividend payments where the sum of these
'5Solving the problem with an explicit dynamic optimization approach shows that the
weighted average takes the form

a(1—rd) +(l—a)

(irc) (1'rr)
1—Ti

where a is the dividend—pay_out ratio and 1—a is the fraction of profits used for share
repurchases and investment.

'5The exact formula foliowing from an explicit optimization approach is
1

a

(lTdp)(1Td)

+(1—a)(1—rr)
l—Tc

where 1—a is the fraction of profits used for share repurchases and a the fraction used for
dividends and investment.

28

quantities exhaust the part of profits not needed for real investment. This specification

would imply that new share issues and retained earnings are the marginal sources of
finance and that share repurchases and dividends are the uses for marginal profits. It
would be indistinguishable from a reduction of the dividend tax rate under the "new"
view and would be fully neutral since it would mean a reduced subsidy in the investment

phase which is compensated for by a reduced tax in the return phase. The cost of capital

would be a weighted average of the identical equations (3) and (7). It would be exactly
what the "new" view suggests.

These considerations show that the "naive" interpretation of share
repurchases may, after all, not be all that wrong. From a theoretical viewpoint, there is
no reason to believe that share repurcha.ses might revalidate the "old" view of corporate
taxation. On the contrary, the possibility of share repurchases conflicts sharply with the

"old" view and, if anything, it supports the "new" view of corporate taxation. It is true

that formal models that offer the "new" view often exclude the possibility of share
repurchases. It is also true that the dividend puzzle — the question why firms pay
dividends after all — cannot really be resolved by these models.2° However, as was shown,

this does not mean that the cost—of—capital expression [equation (3)] that the "new"
view offers is no longer correct. While this expression does not necessarily foliow from

the joint observation of share repurchases and dividend payments it is perfectly

compatible with this observation when the relative composition of corporate
distributions stays constant.

p
2OThe new view can explain why dividend taxes do not affect the timing of dividend
payments but not why firms pay dividends instead of repurchasing shares. See Bradford
(1981, 1989), Auerbach (1983, 1989), or Sinn (1985, ch. 4).

29

8. The Political Miller Equilibrium

WhJle the previous analysis was concerned with the economy's reaction to the tax
system, an equally important question is how the tax system reacts to the economy's
behavior. All countries have their histories of tax reforms and certainly these reforms
were largely introduced in response to unforeseen and unwanted economic developments

caused by the preceding tax systems.

One of the major issues in capital income tax reforms has always been the

problem of financial distortions. Be it because financial reactions to tax reforms often

come fast and strong, because politicians and lobbyists find it easier to understand
financial rather than real distortions, or because differently leveraged firms called for
"fair" comparative tax treatments, legislators have always paid particular attention to
financial distortions and have sought to introduce tax reforms that are in harmony with

the principle of financial neutrality. As a result of this type of behavior, many tax

systems of OECD countries approximate what may be called a political Miller
equilibrium.

The term Miller equilibrium usually refers to segmentation equilibria
where shareholders rather than legislators are the agents. However, for the economist

the term does have the connotation of an adjustment process towards financial
neutrality, and this is the sense in which it is used here.2'

The political Miller equilibrium is a first, albeit crude, approximation to
reality. Actual tax systems hover around the neutrality path deviating sufficiently from

it to motivate papers like this one. However, there are forces that push the existing
economies towards the Miller equilibrium and the deviation from this equilibrium may

be less than what a focus on one country's tax system at one point in time would
suggest.

2lSec Miller (1977).

30

Seen from an American perspective, it may seem obvious that the tax
system discriminates heavily against corporate equity. Alter all, the returns to equity
are taxed twice and the return to debt only once. However, as mentioned earlier, from a

world—wide perspective the picture is not as clear as that. Two out of three OECD
countries do not tar capital gains realized alter a holding period of more than one year,

but four out of five countries tax dividends twice. In most countries, there is only a
double taxation of dividends, not a double taxation of corporate earnings in general.

It is true, of course, that the number of taxes imposed on the same base
does not necessarily reveal the magnitude of the overall tax burden. Nevertheless, the

rare occurence of capital gains taxes is a fact and it shows that the tax discrimination

against corporate equity capital may be more an Anglo—Saxon speciality than a
phenomenon with world—wide significance. The double taxation of dividends is a

world—wide phenomenon, but it merely discriminates against a particular way of
generating equity capital, not against equity capital as such. For the vast majority of
existing firms in mature economies, a balanced tax treatment of retained earnings and
interest income is sufficient to ensure financial neutrality, and the reality may often not

he far away from that. The political forces operating towards a balanced treatment of
retained earnings and interest income have always been strong. They explain why most

countries do not have genuine capital gains taxes and why those that do, offer
substantial reliefs such as a less than full inclusion of the gains in the personal tax base

or a taxation upon realization rather than accrual.

By way of contrast, comparative forces demanding dividend tax cuts to
facilitate the foundation of new firms and avoid the distortions described in section 6 do
not seem to exist. The well—established lobbies of mature firms do not have an interest
in pushing this particular path towards financial neutrality.

The U.S., which has a long standing tradition of double taxing retained
earnings, is not free from the forces driving towards a political Miller equilibrium. In
1986, the capital gains tax base was increased from 40 to 100 % of realized gains, but in

31

1990, after only four years, the government proposed reducing the tax burden again. At
the same time, plans were being discussed for increasing the maximum average personal

tax rate (and the marginal tax rate for very high incomes) from 28 to 33 %. Both moves
would have been steps towards a more balanced treatment of debt and retained profits,

but they have been ruled out by a budget compromise. The issue is almost certain to
come up again.

The 1981 U.s. tax reform can, in part, also be seen as a step towards
financial neutrality. Before 1981, rich people's income tax rates exceeded the corporate

tax rate sufficiently to create strong preferences for profit retentions. It was the time
when doctors and baseball players incorporated to enjoy the privilege of accumulating

their earnings under the rules of the corporate tax law. The 1981 reform reduced the

maximum marginal personal tax rate to 50 %, just four percentage points above the
corporate tax rate, and largely abolished the preferences for retentions.

Anecdotal evidence that demonstrates the general dominance of financial

over real distortions in political debates about tax reforms comes from the discussion
preceding the German tax reform of 1977. The achievement of financial neutrality was

the official goal of the reform and detailed numerical examples demonstrating the
seeming non—neutrality of the previous laws were published in numerous reports and

newspaper articles. Allocative arguments focussing on real rather than financial
distortions had virtually no survival chances in debate.

To make a final point, note that many countries have recently reduced

their capital income tax rates following the example of the U.S. Typically, these
reductions were not limited to one tax, but inciuded both the personal and corporate tax

rates. Surely this symmetry was predominantly motivated by the attempt to avoid
substantial deviations from financial neutrality.

These reflections on the political Miller equilibrium do not imply that
there is no point in studying distortions resulting from differences in the tax treatment

of retained earnings, dividends, and interest income where such differences occur.

32

However, they do suggest a stylized tax model that has the same overall tax rates on

interest income and retained profits, but allows for a discriminatory taxation of
dividends. This model may be a good first—order approximation to the tax laws of many

countries and may serve well in many economic applications. It would imply that the

cost of capital for mature firms equals the market rate of interest, and it would have
various technical advantages. It would be simple and avoid the unsatisfactory task of

modelling financial constraints when mature firms are considered. It would allow
focussing on the distortion which the double taxation of dividends causes for immature
firms. And it would pave the way for an analysis of provisions of the tax laws that may

cause more severe distortions than mere tax differentials, examples being the ITC,
accelerated depreciation allowances, accounting practices in the presence of inflation, or
discriminatory treatments of border crossing interest and dividend flows.

9. Conclusions

This paper discussed the influence of statutory capital income tax rates on the cost of
capital, starting with a comparison of the "old" and "new" views of corporate taxation.

It corrected a common misinterpretation of the "new" view, emphasized the cushion

effect of financial optimization, dismissed the view that firms behave as if they
maximized their cost of finance, studied the role of immature firms, questioned the
alleged support of the old view by the occurrence of share repurchases, and suggested the
idea of a political Miller equilibrium. Various conclusions emerge from the discussion.

(1)

For mature firms, the distortionary effects of the corporate tax may not
be very large, because they are mitigated by the firms' financial decisions

and by compensatory tax reforms that aim at establishing conditions of

financial neutrality. Seen from a world—wide perspective, these tax

33

reforms have reduced or even abolished the double taxation of retained
corporate profits and may have driven the allocation of resources dose to

that implied by an integrated corporate tax system (which, of course, is
not free from distortionary effects either).
(2)

When mature and immature firms are considered, the double taxation of

corporate dividends is a more severe problem than the "new" view
suggests, but does not generate the distortions exactly where the "old"
view suspects them. It is not true that firms that pay dividend taxes suffer

from a high cost of capital. On the contrary, those that do not pay these
taxes because they are immature and retain their profits suffer most. The
dividend tax burden expected in the future makes it wise to economize on

new share issues and to invest even less capital than the "old" view's cost
of capital formula suggests. The possibility of a deferral of dividend taxes
increases the cost of outside equity finance.
(3)

Share repurchases are a more severe problem for the "old" view than for
the "new" view, for if they are the way through which companies channel

their marginal profits to shareholders, the cost of capital will be equal to

that implied by the "new" view or even below this value, depending on

whether new share issues or dividend cuts are the marginal source of
finance. The cost—of—capital expression resulting from the "new" view
harmonizes perfectly with share repurchases when corporate distributions

split in fixed proportions into share repurchases and ordinary dividend
payments.
(4)

Under the "new" view, both an increase in the personal income tax rate
and a decrease of the personal capital gains tax rate stimulate corporate

investment demand with any given market rate of interest. In an open
economy that taxes cross—border interest income flows according to the
OECD's residence principle, the substitution of personal income taxes for

34

capital gains taxes results in a domestic investment boom, higher domestic

interest rates, a revaluation of the domestic currency, and a capital
import.
(5)

The fact that an interior debt—equity choice implies equal marginal costs

of deht and equity finance does not legitimate the assumption that firms

invest as if they used only equity at the margin. Despite the interior
solution, the firm's cost of capital remains between the costs of debt and

equity finance if debt and equity participate in financing marginal
investment projects.

Arguably, the first two of these results are the most important. They

suggest that tax distortions are to be found not in established corporations that
currently suffer most from the high burden of dividend taxes. They are to be found with

young and immature firms and with firms that are not yet existing. These firms do not

currently suffer from a high tax burden, but the prospect that they will makes them

overly timid in the present. Holders of the "old" and "new" views alike have
concentrated on the behavior of firms that pay dividends and dividend taxes. How the

tax system affects the foundation and development of new firms is a question that
merits equal professional attention.

I

35

References

Auerbath, A. J. (1979): "Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital," Quarterly
Journal of Economics 94, pp. 433—436.

—,

(1983): "Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy and the Cost of Capital," Journal

of Economic Literature 21, pp. 905—940.

—,

(1989): "Tax Policy and Corporate Borrowing," in: R. W. Kopcke and E. S.
Rosengren, eds., Are the Distinctions between Debt and Equity Disappearing?,

Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, pp. 136—162.

Auerbach, A., and D. Reishus (1988): "The Effects of Taxation on the Merger Decision,"

in: A. Auerbach, ed., Corporate Takeovers: Causes and Consequences,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Bagweil, L. S., and J. B. Shoven (1989): "Cash Distributions to Shareholders," Journal
of Economic Perspectives 3, pp. 129—140.

Bernheim, B. D., and 3. B. Shoven (1987): "Taxation and the Cost of Capital: An
International Comparison," in: Ch. E. Walker and M. A. Bloomfiled, eds., The

Consumption Tax: A Better Alternative?, Cambridge, Mass.: Baflinger

Publishing Company, pp. 6 1—86.

—,

(1989): "Comparison of the Cost of Capital in the U.S. and Japan: The Roles of

Risk and Taxes," Center for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University,

working paper No. 179.

Bradford, D. F. (1980): "The Economics of Tax Policy toward Savings," in: G. M. von
Fürstenberg, ed., The Government and Capital Formation, Cambridge, Mass:
Ballinger Publishing Company.

—,

(1981):

"The Incidence and Allocation Effects of a Tax on Corporate

Distributions," Journal of Public Economics 15, pp. 1—22.

—,

(1989): "Tax Policy and Corporate Borrowing", Discussion of Auerbach (1989),
in: R. W. Kopcke and E. S. Rosengren, eds., Are the Distinctions between Debt

and Equity Disappearing?, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, pp. 163—168.

DeAngelo, H., and R. W. Masulis (1980): "Optimal Capital Structure under Corporate
and Personal Taxation," Journal of Financial Economics 8, pp. 3—29.

Edwards, 3. S. S., and M. 3. Keen (1984): "Wealth Maximization and the Cost of
Capital: A Comment," Quarterly Journal of Economics 99, pp. 2 11—214.

Fullerton, D., and J. M. Mackie (1989): "Economic Efficiency in Recent Tax Reform
History: Policy Reversals or Consistent Improvements?," National Tax Journal
42, pp. 1—13.

Fullerton, D., and M. King (1984): The Taxation of Income from CapitaL A
Comparative Study of the United States, the United Kingdom, Sweden and West
Germany, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

36

Gertler, M., and K. C. Hubbard (1990): "Taxation, Corporate Capital Structure, and
Financial Distress," Tax Policy and the Economy 4, pp. 43—71.

Goode, K. (1977): "The Economic Definition of Income," in J. A. Pechman, ed.,
Comprehensive Income Taxation, Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Gordon, K. H., and B. G. Malkiel (1981): "Corporation Finance," in: H. .1. Aaron and J.
A. Pechman, eds., How Taxes Affect Economic Behavzor, Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution, pp. 131—198.

Goulder, L. H., and L. H. Summers (1989): "Tax Policy, Asset Prices, and Growth,"
Journal of Public Economics 38, pp. 265—296.

Harnada, K. (1966): "Strategic Aspects of Taxation on Foreign Investment Income,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics 80, pp. 361—375.

Hansson, I., and Ch. Stuart (1985): "The Taxation of Income from Capital. A
Comparative Study of the United States, the United Kingdom, Sweden, and
West Germany," review article, Journal of Political Economy 93, pp. 826—831.

Harberger, A. C. (1962): "The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax," Journal of
Political Economy 70, pp. 215—240.

—,

(1966): "Efficiency Effects of Taxes on Income from Capital," in: M. Krzyzaniak,

ed., Effects of Corporation Income Tax, Detroit: Wayne State University Press.

Howitt, P., and H.—W. Sinn (1989): "Gradual Reforms of Capital Income Taxation,"
American Economic Reviev, 79, pp. 106—124.

Kemp, M. C. (1962): "Foreign Direct Investment and National Advantage," Economic
Record 38, pp. 56—62.

—,

(1964): The Pure Theorp of International Trade, Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall.

King, M. A. (1974a): "Taxation and the Cost of Capital," Review of Economic Studies
41, pp. 21—35.

—,
—,

(1974b): "Dividend Behaviour and the Theory of the Firm," Economica 41, pp.
25—34.

(1977):

Public Policy and the Corporation, London: Chapman and Hall; New

York: Wiley & Sons.

MacDougall, G. D. A. (1960): "The Benefits and Costs of Private Investment from
Abroad: A Theoretical Approach," Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics
22, pp. 189—211.

McLure, Ch. E. (1979): Must Corporate Income Be Taxed Twice?, Washington D.C.:
The Brookings Institution.

Meade Committee (1978): The Structure and Reform of Direct Taxation. Report of a
committee chaired by J. E. Meade, The Institute for Fiscal Studies, London:
Allen & Unwin Ltd.

37

Miller, M. II. (1977): "Debt and Taxes," Journal of Finance 32, pp. 261—275.

Oberhauser, A.

(1963):

Westdeutscher Verlag.

Finanzpolitik und private

Verrnogensbildung,

Köln:

Poterba, J. M. (1987): "Tax Policy and Corporate Saving," Brookings Papers on
Economic Activty, pp. 455—515.

Poterba, J. M., and L.H. Summers (1985): "The Economic Effects of Dividend
Taxation," in: E. Altman and M. Subrahmanyam, eds., Recent Advance in
Corporate Finance, Homewood/fli.: Irwin.

Scherer, F. M., and D. Ravenscraft

(1984):

"Growth by Diversification:

"Entrepreneurial Behavior in Large—scale United States Enterprises," Zeitschrift
fir Nationalokonomie, Supplement 4 (Schumpeter conference, Bonn 1983), pp.
199—218.

Shoven, J. B. (1986): "New Developments in Corporate Finance and Tax Avoidance:
Some Evidence," National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper No.
2091.

Sinn, H.—W. (1985): Kapitaleinkommeri.sbesteuerung, Tflbingen: Mohr. English edition:
Capital Income Taxation and Resource Allocation, Amsterdam, New York etc.:
North Holland Publishing Company, 1987.

—'

(1988): "The Vanishing Harberger Triangle," University of Munich, discussion
paper No. 88—05, and National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper No.
3225, 1989.

—,

(1988): "The 1986 U.S. Tax Reform and the World Capital Market," European
Economic Review 32, pp. 325—333.

—'

(1989): "The Policy of Tax—Cut—cum—Base—Broadening: Implications for

International Capital Movements," in: M. Neumann and K. Roskamp, eds.,
Public Finance and Performance of Enterprises, Proceedings of the 43rd Congress

of the International Institute of Public Finance, Paris, 1987, Detroit: Wayne
State University Press.

Stiglitz, J. E. (1973): "Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy, and the Cost of Capital,"
Journal of Public Economics 2, pp. 1—34.

U.S. Department of the Treasury (1984): Tax Reforms for Fairness, Simplicity, and
Economic Growth, Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.

