                          NEER BKt PAP SERIES




                    }ELGI INFIAflON AND ThE NL ANGIOi
                             OF AN OPEN EEtY




                                  idiael Bnno




                             Workir Paper No. 3518




                     NATICAL JREA1J OF EO4IC RESEA11
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              xrbrie, W 02138
                                Noveiter 1990




This paper is part of NBER's research prcqram in International Studies. Any
cpinions expresse are those of the author ard not those of the National
aireau of ECXnCIIIIC
                  Rseaxth.
                                             N Working Paper #3518
                                             November 1990

                         INFlATION D ThE NCKtL ANCii3PS
                             OF AN OPEN E0t1C]IY




     Ahigh inflation process is usually due to a real imbalance ard cannot
be cured without a correction of real furamenta1s. Yet it can be
characterizej as a quasi-stable nanThal process whicth gets divor fran the
real system in what Patinkin cx*ild call a valid classical dictiotany. This
paper extends the existing seignorage nxx3.el aproad to multiple inflationary
Li1ibria by rationalizing a high inflation equilibrium as well as its
stability as the outcanes of sub-cptimization by a 'soft' government. It
considers the advantages as well as the weaknesses of using the exchamge rate
as the key ncininal andnor in the various stages of stabilization to 1CM (or
zero) inflation. Finally the rationale for using multiple naninal ancthors is
also discussed. Applications of the theoretical anuments are illustrated
fran recent high inflation arx stabilization experiexxe.



                                            Midae1 Brtn-jo
                                            Governor
                                            Bank of Israel
                                            Ftst Office Box 780
                                            Jerosalein
                                            ISRAEL
                                     Contents



I.   Introduction: Between Garden Variety and Hyperinflation            1

II. The Neo-classical Framework and the Nominal—Real Dichotomy          7

Ill. Seignorage and the Optimal Inflation Rate                         13

IV. Choice of Anchors During Disinflation                              20
     The argument in favor of the exchange rate                        21

     Multiple nominal anchors                                          24
References                                                             30



                                  List of Tables


Table 1. Hyperinflations of the 1920s (1920—1924)

Table 2. High inflation, Hyperinflation and Stabilization, 1970—1989

Table 3. The Exchange Rate, Nominal Wage, Unit Real Wage Costs
         and Unemployment in the Business Sector, Israel 1986—1990



                                  List of Figures


Figure 1. Hyperinflations of the 1920s

Figure 2. Major Inflations of the 1970s and 1980s

Figure 3. Government Finance, Base Money and Equilibrium Inflation
 M. Bruno



              HIGH INFLATION AND THE NOMINAL ANCHORS
                        OF AN OPEN ECONOMY*




I.    Introduction: Between Garden Variety and Hyperinflation
      It has given me great pleasure to be able to commemorate a great economist by
giving a talk on a subject that lies close to one of his great contributions —Graham's

(1930) pioneering study on hyperinflation in Germany during 1920—23. Much of my
talk will relate to a somewhat different, albeit extreme, inflationary process — high
(chronic) inflation and its stabilization. This was not known in Graham's days but, I
am sure, he would have loved to study, given his interests, were he living 60 years
later, in our time and age.
     Graham starts the preface to his book by referring to a remark of Cliffe-Leslie's
that in social matters the greatest scientific progress is made when economic disorders
raise vexing questions as to their causes. He continues by saying:
     In the study of social phenomena, disorder is, it is true, the sole substitute
     for a controlled experiment in the natural sciences. But it sometimes
     happens that, in the midst of disorder, events move so rapidly that we are
     not able properly to absorb them; disorder may be excessive even to the
     most detached of scientists. The course of inflation in Germany in the first
     post-war quinquennium had so much of this character that it has seemed
     to many to be incapable of throwing any light upon monetary problems.
     This most striking of monetary experiences has in consequence evoked a
     minimum of scientific curiosity....

There follows a footnote that substantiates this last sentence from the vantage point
of the 1920s — in a chapter on the 'The Banking System of Germany,' which
appeared in 1929 in a book titled Foreign Banking Systems, it is declared that 'it would
                                                                                    2
he useless to try to connect the development of the German currency from 1919 to
 1923 with any theories of money...."
     In hindsight this statement does indeed sound even more strange than it did to
Graham, as the German hyperinflation has subsequently become one of the most
researched episodes in monetary history and theory — vide the endless stream of
papers and monographs on the subject which continues to appear to this very day.
Frank Graham was undoubtedly a pioneer in this matter.
     There are two topics in Graham's study that remain relevant in our present
context even though the dynamic process to be discussed will be a different one. One
has to do with the circular process of prices, the exchange rate and money chasing
each other. The question of causality in the process occupied Graham's mind. Econo-
metric techniques were not known at the time yet he tried in his own way to trace
leads and lags in the data. The second issue pertains to the costs and benefits of
extreme inflation, to which we shall turn below. Graham maintained the surprising
view that inflation benefitted Germany because it helped to erode the real value of
the required reparation payments. The motivation for high chronic inflation is some-
what different but the basic notion that one has to look also at the benefits (to the
government) of inflation versus its social costs will still apply.
     While the German hyperinflation displayed very extreme dimensions (at the
height of the crisis, in October 1923, prices increased by almost 30,000 percent!) it
was not the only case in its category. Cagan's (1956) definition of hyperinflation
(monthly rates over and above 50 percent, amounting to five digit annual inflation of
more than 13,000 percent) covers several other European episodes in the 1920s (see
Table 1 and Figure 1) and also in the 1940s (not shown here; see Yeager, 1981).
Hyperinflations of similar magnitude occurred again in very recent history — Bolivia
(1983—85), Argentina and Brazil (after their respective 1985—6 stabilization programs
collapsed) as well as in Yugoslavia and Poland (1989) (see Table 2 and Figure 2). The
common characteristic of all of these episodes is their relatively short and highly
explosive nature. Even if we broaden the definition of the range of the process as
applying to sustained monthly inflation rates above 25 percent (which amounts to
more than an annual four-digit rate of 1,455 percent) the German hyperinflation
lasted only 20 months while the other three major episodes of the 1920s mentioned
here lasted only between 9 and 16 months. This was also the length of the process in
Bolivia as well as in Argentina and Brazil (at least until the beginning of 1990 —see
Table 2).
     The relatively short duration of the hyperinflation phenomenon is closely related
to its highly unstable, dynamically explosive nature. It represents in most cases a
virtual collapse of the monetary system which can only be cured by a sharp fiscal and
monetary reform. It is important to bear these facts in mind when considering another
type of relatively extreme, yet somewhat different, inflationary process to which the
cumulative experience of the 1970s and 1980s has drawn our attention, that of high
(chronic) inflation. This is a much more prolonged and more stable process which
could last up to 5 or even 8 years and show monthly rates of inflation between 5 and
25 percent, or annual three digit rates — see Table 2 for the case of Chile before 1979
and that of Argentina, Brazil and Israel before 1985 and Mexico before 1988. While
the origin of high inflation, as in the case of its more extreme hyper brother is the
existence of a large public sector deficit, the quasi-stability of this dynamic process
comes from an inherent inertia which is strongly tied up with a high degree of indexa-
tion or accommodation of the key nominal magnitudes — wages, the exchange rate
and the monetary aggregates — to the lagged movements of the price level. It is the

way an inflation-prone system attempts to protect itself from the evils of inflation,
thus giving it a longer lease on life and delaying its more fundamental cure.
     Moderate versions of chronic inflation, having some of the same indexation or
monetary accommodation characteristics already appeared in Latin America in the
1950s (see Pazos, 1972). However, as long as inflation stayed below a monthly rate
of, say, 5—6 percent (which corresponds, roughly, to no more than a two-digit annual

rate) its cure could be gradualist, as in the case of the garden variety, more con-
ventional type, of inflation. It is the large external shocks of the 1970s and 1980s (oil
                                                                                          4
 shocks and debt crises) which brought about the new species of alIopin. vet ftr a
 time quasi-stable, rate of inflation in the three-digit annual range. Its cure is unlikely
 to be feasible in a gradualist manner while its shock therapy in some sense tends to
 be more complicated than that of a hyperinflation because there is a persistent
 inflation memory that has to be broken in addition to the sharp fiscal reform. On the
 other hand, if it is not terminated in time or if its stabilization attempt fails, the high
 inflation process is most likely to lead eventually to a 'classic' hvperintlation. as the
recent case of Argentina and Brazil illustrates.'
     The various types or stages of inflation outlined here — roughly corresponding
to the number of digits of annual inflation — can, in fact, be sequenced by the
existence or absence of some key institutional or behavioral attributes. Failure to
stabilize a stage I 'garden variety' inflation plus systematic indexing (and/ormonetary
accommodation) may lead to chronic inflation (stage II). In the presence of large
price shocks this may in turn lead to high (chronic) inflation (stage III). Failure to
stabilize the latter will eventually move the system into hyperinflation (stage IV).
Countries can, of course, move from stage I (or H) to stage IV directly without going
through stage III at all. This was the case for most 'classic' hyperinflations and most
probably also applies to the most recent hyperinflations of Eastern Europe like
Yugoslavia and Poland where liberalization of a repressed price system could lead to
hyperinflation almost at once.
     The reason for focusing theoretical and policy-oriented interest on high chronic
inflation comes from the fact that it exhibits a case in which, almost independently of
the size of the real budget deficit (the 'real anchor') the dynamic nominal process may
live a life of its own, the system having lost its 'nominal anchor'. Such type of
'disorder' can be well grounded in the fundamentals of the neoclassical monetary
system. A mental experiment that any student of Patinkin's Money, Inieresi and Prices
was taught in his youth (at least in Israel) was the following: 'double the quantity of
money and that of all nominal prices and the real system will stay invariant. This, of
course, is nothing but an expression of the basic homogeneity postulate of the
                                                                                      c

neoclassical model which underlies the absence of money illusion, the neutrality of
money as well as the so-called nominal—real dichotomy. Was this particular nominal
doubling' experiment destined to remain only a mental exercise? As it turned out —

twenty years later an almost ideal laboratory experiment offered itself in Patinkin's
own country.
     In early 1981, in observing the inflationary process in Israel. it occurred to me
that we may be in the midst of an actual 'experiment' of this kind. For t'o years
Israel had been running a more or less stable inflation rate of 130 percent per annum
(7 percent per month),2 up from an annual 6—7 percent in the 1950s and 1960s, and
accelerating two-digit inflations throughout the 1970s. By now a nominal annual
doubling' process was going on which seemed divorced from the real economy and
almost running a life of its own, though it was originally rooted in the real system and
eventually almost ruined it. All nominal variables — prices, wages. nominal assets and
the exchange rate — were moving in a quasi steady state. Nominal or real shocks
could change this steady state rate of inflation (which indeed they did), yet the same
real system, including a persistent, reasonably stable, government deficit of the order
of 15 percent of GNP, was consistent with several rates of inflation. A similar pheno-
menon had been observed at the time in Brazil, whose inflation profile before 1985
is almost identical with Israel's as well as in Argentina and more recently in Mexico
and a number of other countries, which have likewise 'lost their nominal anchor' (see

Figure 2).
     It is important to stress that this phenomenon is relatively new. It is different
from the much studied short and explosive hyperinflation process, in being much
more stable and therefore sustainable for a longer period. It also differs from the
'garden variety' inflations in exhibiting relatively small changes in relative prices
compared to the nominal ones. One manifestation of this property is the virtual
disappearance of short-term Phillips curve tradeoffs.
     This phenomenon could simply not persist for any length of time were it not for
the inherent capability of exhibiting a nominal—real dichotomy. At an inflation rate
                                                                                         6
  of 7 percent a month, for example, a nominal wage inflation of less than 6 percent
  a month, say, would imply a cumulative real wage drop of over 12 percent within a
  year. This would obviously and eventually be resisted by wage earners and a cor-
  rective formal or informal improved indexation mechanism would set in. Similarly for
  the real erosion of the money stock, which would eventually be accommodated even
 by a moderately independent central bank, or erosion of the real exchange rate.
 whose repercussions on the loss of foreign exchange reserves would soon be felt, in
 the absence of a crawling devaluation at a rate more or less equal to the inflation
 rate. In other words, once inflation reaches a high rate, unless a short-lived explosive
 or implosive situation quickly develops institutional and policy mechanisms must set
 in which in turn perpetuate inertia and a quasi-stability of the kind mentioned.
      Given the empirical existence of a high inflation process there are two important
 sets of questions to be asked. The first is in the area of positive economics. Is a high
 inflation rate itself a random walk or can it be determined as an equilibrium solution
 to some rational (real) process? If such equilibrium exists is it unique (the answer
usually is 'no') and what are its (or their) stability properties? Considerable literature
has developed in this area in recent years, based on a seignorage deficit finance
framework (see Liviatan, 1983; Sargent and Wallace, 1987; Bruno and Fischer, 1990)
but it is as yet incomplete. We shall here extend the existing discussion somewhat and
motivate the existence of high inflation and its relative stability as the outcome of
suboptimization by a 'soft' government.
     There follows an obvious second set of normative policy questions. An infla-
tionary process of the kind mentioned must have its roots in some fundamental dis-
equilibrium of the real economy, invariably a sustained government and/or current
account deficit. Once this gets corrected it in itself is no guarantee that the infla-
tionary process will not persist by force of inertia, sluggish expectations or lack of
credibility. Remember — there is nothing in the dichotomous system to make such
outcome inconsistent with the real fundamentals unless the institutional arrangements
that have perpetuated the dynamic nominal process are also broken. The very nature
                                                                                         7

of the process described would suggest that there is room for a coordinated 'shock'
program that will simultaneously shift the system from high inflation to a new zero

(or relatively low) level equilibrium so as to avoid sharp and destabilizing changes in
relative prices. This is the conceptual basis for the so-called 'heterodox' stabilization

program. What then is the main nominal anchor (or several anchors) and set of rules

on which the new equilibrium must be based? Could the choice of anchors change
with the stage of disinflation?
     The next section (11) takes up a simple open economy extension of the basic
macro model and considers alternative price level anchors. The subsequent section
(III) looks at the case of steady state inflations, and the nature of alternative
equilibria. This is followed (section IV) by the issue of the choice of nominal anchors

in the context of rate stabilization — what are the pros and cons of using the exchange

rate rather than a monetary aggregate as the key stabilizer. How is that related to
wage stabilization policy and more generally can a case be made for the choice of
more than one anchor even though the system could then be overdeterniined? We
end with some empirical observations based on recent policy experience.



II. The Neo-classical Framework and the Nominal—Real Dichotomy
     Absence of money illusion, the neutrality of money as well as the so called valid
nominal—real dichotomy (see below) all stem from the basic homogeneity postulate

— excess demand functions in each and every market are homogeneous of degree zero

in all nominal variables or, in other words, are functions only of real (or relative price)

variables. General equilibrium will in general determine a unique solution for the real

variables (and, with some Samuelsonian assumptions, also their stability). The price
level, however, remains indeterminate unless one other nominal variable (e.g., the
money stock or the nominal wage or, in an open economy, the nominal exchange
rate) is fixed. The latter lies at the heart of the concept of a 'nominal anchor'.
     In this context one may invoke Patinkin's (1965) important distinction between
the 'invalid' and 'valid' classical dichotomies:
                                                                                       8
      It is fatal to succumb to the temptation to say that relative prices are
      determined tn the commodity markets and absolute prices in the money

      market. This does not mean that value theory cannot be distinguished from

      monetary theory. Obviously, there is a distinction; but it is based on a
      dichotomization of effects, not on a dichotomization of markers. (Patinkin,

      1965, Ch. VIII, p. 181.)
 It is the latter, valid nominal—real dichotomy which is the relevant one for ourpresent
 context.

       Consider first a simplified closed economy model which could conveniently be
summarized in two excess demand schedules for the labor and commodity markets

respectively:

                L(W/P; A1) = 0                                                      (1)

                Y(W/P, M/P; A) = 0.                                                 (2)
                  + +

W, M, P are the nominal wage, aggregate money stock and price level, respectively.

A, and A., are exogenous shift factors for the labor and commodity market excess

demand schedules, respectively (e.g., the capital stock and productivity. A also
includes demand shift factors like fiscal policy). The absence of the interest rate as
a separate variable could be justified in terms of Patinkin's (1965) model (Chapter
IX) through the substitution in the commodity market for the interest rate from the
market equilibrium condition for either money or for bonds.3 Equations (1) and (2)
determine unique equilibria for the real wage (W/P) and real balances (M/P). Stability

of the equilibrium depends,of course, on the conventional adjustment rules for W
and P under excess demands L and Y.

     Now consider the simplest exercise in monetary expansion (we assume a static
economy with no growth). An increase in money supply (M) causes an excess supply

for money (not shown here) and an excess demand for goods [i.e., in equation (2),
Y > 0]. The intlationary gap brings about a dynamic adjustment in the price level (P
                                                                                     9

moves up) which in turn reduces the real wage (at a given nominal wage \V) and
causes an excess demand for labor [in equation (I), L > 0]. The latter in turn brings
about a dynamic upward adjustment in W. Equilibrium will finally be re-established
only after P and W have increased at the same rate as the initial increase in M.
As long as all markets (commodities as well as labor) are fully flexible \V and P
levels will move towards a new unique equilibrium whenever M changes (whether
upward or downward). On the other hand these nominal magnitudes are bound to
stay stable if M is kept stable (as long, of course, as there is no change in the
exogenous shift parameters A). It is in this sense that we say that money is the
nominal anchor of the system.
     One could equally envisage an economy in which it is the nominal wage which
is the anchor. Suppose we are in a strongly unionized economy in which fear of
Keynesian unemployment dictates an accommodating monetary policy. In that case
M/P will stay pegged and W becomes the nominal anchor of the system. In the
absence of price controls a rise in W will eventually be followed by an equivalent
increase in the price level (and the quantity of money), leaving relative prices (i.e.,
W/P and M/P) the same. Incomes policy (affecting W) will determine the relative
stability of the system.
     For the sake of completeness one may ask if there is a case in which P itself
can be directly controlled as the nominal anchor. The answer to that is a qualified
'yes', providing we consider a command economy in which the prices of all compo-
nents of the commodity basket (composing the aggregate index P) are fully con-
trolled as was the case in a communist regime of the old (and maybe soon extinct)
style. In such a regime which presumably also dictates W across the economy,
inflation, even if it potentially exists, will not come into the open. Such argument may
explain why during the periods in which there was substantial open inflation in the
western industrial world the eastern block countries exhibited prolonged price
stability.
     An increase in M may cause excess demand for goods [in equation (2)] and the
                                                                                         10

 inflationary gap will not be bridged by a price increase but rather by shortages.
 rationing, queuing etc. In other words this is the case of repressed inflation. In present-
 day Soviet Russia the problem of the so-called 'monetary overhang' is precisely that.
 Any price liberalization process is bound to lead to open inflation. P is thus a
 nominal anchor only in a very formal sense. The cost of recourse to such anchoring
 is. of course, the distortive effects on the real economy (likewise fixing W at a level
 that does not clear the labor market, if such a market exists at all, will force the
system to disguise the unemployment).
      While an extreme form of sustained and widespread price and wage regulation
may not seem a realistic possibility in a market economy it should be pointed out that
partial price and wage controls (e.g., controlled prices of key commodities and wage
controls in the public sector) are rather widespread. In the process of stabilization of
an economy the exercise of such controls and even temporary imposition of full
controls could serve an important expectation signalling role providing, of course, the
real disequilibria are removed and fundamentals are first set in place. We shall come
back to that question and the issue of 'multiple' anchoring in Section IV.
     Leaving aside the case of direct price or wage fixing, and as long as we are in a
closed economy, it is the quantity of money (or some other widely used nominal asset)
which is the sole and informationally the most efficient nominal anchor of the system.
     Keynes, Patinkin and most of the classical writers set up their macroeconomic
frameworks for discussion of monetary theory in the context of a closed economy.
Neutrality of money and issues of price inflation were thus naturally centered around
the control of the money supply or loss thereof. Most economies of the world,
however, are open in one way or another and the price system of one country can be
tied to that of the rest of the world through the choice of the exchange rate. It is, in
theory at least, a perfectly valid contender to M as the centerpiece of the monetary
game in any individual economy (though not, of course, in the global economy, at
least as long as there is no active trade with outer space...).
     The above macro framework is most easily and realistically extended into an
                                                                                   11


open economy by allowing the aggregate good to be imperfectly tradable on the
export market (with exports positively dependent on exogenous world demand and
relative world to domestic prices) while imports consist of a competing input into the
aggregate production function. Equations (1) and (2) must now be rewritten with an
additional relative price, the real exchange rate (ER, where E is the nominal
exchange rate) appearing inside the respective excess demand functions for labor and

goods:4


               L(W/P,E/P;A,)=O                                                   (1')

               Y(W/P, M/P, E/P; A).                                              (2')
                 + +      +


     We now add a third market for foreign exchange with a suitable excess demand

function (the current account):


               F(E/P, W/P; Y1) = 0                                                (3)
                    -    +
     The   set of three equilibrium conditions (1'), (2') and (3) will fix a unique
solution for the three relative magnitudes MIP, W/P and El? and fixing any one of
the four nominal variables will fix the equilibrium level of the remaining three. E is
now a legitimate alternative nominal anchor. An exercise, similar to the previous one,
can be conducted showing how a change in E will feed into suitable changes in
excess demands of other markets and an adjustment will take place in all other nomi-
nal variables. The endogeneity of M in this simplified pegged exchange rate system
will come from a specie flow mechanism that feeds from changes in exchange reserves
(when F > or < 0) into the domestic money supply. The dynamic analysis must be
suitably modified if foreign exchange borrowing is allowed and foreign and domestic
assets are not perfect substitutes, but the long-run equilibrium solution is the same.
     So far price inflation has been represented as an adjustment to an excess
demand in the commodity market with parallel excess supply in the money (or foreign
                                                                                           12

exchange) market. A persistent inflationary process such as high inflation may '.erv
we!] continue to take place even while the commodity market is in continuous
balance. It will simplify matters if we make this assumption from now on. Also, since
from now on we want to talk about high inflation processes and comparative
dynamics thereof we can translate an equilibrium equation such as (2') into an
equation in terms of rates of change of the nominal variables. We leave it to the next
section to discuss the rationale for having the system sustain a steady rate of inflation
at all.
       Log-linearizing (1') and considering changes over time we get:


                7r=a1w+a,c+a3+v                                                           (4)


where ,r =        — rate of inflation, and a dot represents a discrete (P1 —      P1_1)   or
instantaneous (dPldt) time change: w = */w — wage inflation;                 E/E — rate of

devaluation; p =     M/M — rate      of monetary expansion; v — supply and demand
shocks; a1 + a2 + a3 =      1   by homogeneity of (1 ').
      Equation (4) may be rewritten in the form of an inflation acceleration equation


                  — IT1   = a1(w — ir_1) + a2(E —   r1) + a3(p —       + v                (5)


7T is the one-period lagged inflation rate [(P1_1 — P1_2)/P1J.
      Start from a steady state in which all nominal variables rise at the same rate
Suppose now that a real shock to the current account (for example Af in (3)
increases due to a permanent fall in world demand) requires a step adjustment in the
exchange rate so that there is a one-time increase in EIP, i.e., a one-time blip in
  —
      H' after which again             ir. In the absence of a negative real shift in the

commodity market, such as a fiscal cut, this requires a one time drop in M/P or in
both (simultaneous labor market equilibrium would require both). If M and \V
have hitherto grown at the rate p and cannot be made to grow at a lower rate, only
                                                                                       13

a one-time additional increase in the price level, causing a temporary blip to the
inflation rate, will bring about the required one-time drop in M1P and W/P after
which all nominal magnitudes will resume their steady state rate.

     Suppose, however, money is always accommodating and wages are formally
indexed to past inflation. In that case w =    = 7r always. M and W will now grow
at a rate higher than       after the devaluation. The one-time blip in     — ir (after
which we must preserve e = ir) by equation (5) must cause a permanent increase in
the inflation rate and all nominal variables will rise at a new steady rate that is higher
than j.   This, of course, is a well-known property of formally indexed systems which
exhibit considerable inertia. Under full indexation a one-time change in a relative
price (real devaluation, real wage and/or monetary cut) can only be achieved by a
jump in the inflation rate itself.
     An interesting property of such systems relates to workers' demand to raise the
degree of indexation as the inflation rate increases, but at the same time reduce the
length of lag in the formal part of indexation. Suppose wage adjustment takes the
form w = 6ir1 + (1 — S),re, where Ire are the expectations of inflation as reflected in
the wage contract which also incorporates a partial cost of living adjustment.
Accelerating inflation will tend to motivate an increase in 6 which will enhance the
inertia of the inflationary process. However a shortening of the lag (embodied in the
length of time period between which 71i and ir are measured) actually reduces
inertia. Monthly. weekly, and in the limit perhaps daily indexation would reduce
inertia. It also destroys the quasi-stability of the process and enhances the shift from
stage III (high inflation) to stage IV (hyperinflation). At the same time reduced
inertia also makes it easier to quickly reduce inflation, once there is a will, with
relatively less real disruption.


III. Seignorage and the Optimal Inflation Rate
     So far we have avoided the question of a rationale for having any positive
inflation rate. For that we have to look at the rules governing the supply of and
                                                                                       14

demand for the depreciable asset money. A natural beneficiary of inflation is the
government which reaps an inflation tax to the extent that the public is willing (or
forced by law) to hold its depreciable monetary issue. Suppose we denote the part of
the deficit financed by seignorage by d. the nominal money base b' H and the real
base (H/P) by h. In steady state we have H/H = it, the inflation rate, and there-
-
tore:


                 d=hir.                                                               (6)


        As is common in the literature and is also confirmed by empirical work, assume
a semi-log (Cagan, 1956) demand function for money, where ,r denotes expected
inflation. (The real interest rate is assumed exogenous, and is suppressed here.)


                 h = exp(_alre)                                                       (7)


     Figure 3 draws equation (6) for a given d, as a rectangular hyperbola and the
money demand schedule h (7) as cutting it, at most, at two points A and B. both
of which represent steady-state inflationary equilibria (it = 7re). As is well known there
is one value of d at which there is a (single) tangency point between the two curves.
This is Friedmans (1971) maximum seignorage (d°)


                            d° = Max[ir exp (—cir)] = 1/ae,


where the maximizing inflation rate is r0 =     1/a.

     The elasticity of demand for money (air) at that point is unity. If d > d° there
is no steady state equilibrium (this may correspond to the case of explosive hyperinfla-
tion), while for d < d° there will be two intersections A, B as shown in Figure 3.
     Rightward shifts of the d curve (an increase in the seignorage-finance deficit)
or leftward shifts of the money demand function (a fall in money demand or a rise
                                                                                     15

in an exogenously given reserve ratio) — will cause an upward shift of the lower
equilibrium point A, i.e., an increase in stead state inflation. In a growth context
(with rate of growth a) d should be taken as the share in GNP and in that case (6)
becomes d = (ir + n)h and the curve could also shift to the right by an exogenous
drop in the rate of growth.
     Such framework has been used to rationalize the upward jumps in Israel's infla-
tion profile in the period 1970—85 (see Bruno and Fischer, 1986). Empirical evidence
for Israel in the period mentioned (Melnick and Sokoler, 1984) also suggests that the
revenue-maximizing rate was 6.5 percent a month (115 percent annual inflation) and
that starting somewhere around the early 1980s the elasticity of demand for money
exceeded unity and that inflation may have moved toward an upper (B) equilibrium.
Note that at B an increase in the deficit actually reduces the inflation rate —       a

'perverse' result which will be discussed below.
     Is there a sense in which the existence of an upper, high-inflation, equilibrium
could be rationalized as the outcome of optimal choice?
     An argument based on Barro (1983)6 clearly suggests this possibility, provided
we assume discretionary behavior. Suppose we assume that the government benefits
from seignorage but trades off that benefit against the social costs of both actual (ir)
and anticipated (ire) inflation. Assume that the objective function takes the general
form:


               V=ad_f(ir)_g(,re)                                                    (8)


a — (the marginal benefit from seignorage) is exogenous (but may vary over time) and

f', g' > 0.
     Substituting from (6) and (7) into (8) and maximizing V with respect to ir
(namely choosing actual money growth for given ire) we find:


               V'j = a exp (cr1() — f'(ir) = 0                                      (9)
                                                                                         16
       Under rational expectations on part of the private sector we have r =   lrC.    This
 gives an equilibrium inflation rate which may very well be at a point like B.
      From (9) we have in discretionary equilibrium        lrd:



                a7r   =   nc nf'(d)
                               —
                                                                                       (10)


 For sufficiently large a, a7rd will be >
      In theory, at least, there is an interesting paradox here — with an economy at a

 stable high inflation equilibrium (B in Figure 3), a mere budget cut (leftward shift
 of the d-curve) will shift the new B-equilibrium up — i.e., in the absence of a change

 in the dynamic adjustment rules the new upper equilibrium inflation rate is even
 higher. This seeming paradox can be given economic content (see Bruno, 1989) — the
 fiscal cut involves an instantaneous monetary squeeze and a step increase in the
 nominal interest rate — with asset markets adjusting instantaneously and the com-

modity market more slowly. An upward shift in the interest rate signals an equal shift
in ( — E_1) and in inflationary expectations.
     The vagaries of discretion stand out even more when we contrast it with the
alternative case of a government that can precommit itself and thus control infla-
tionary expectations in a non-discretionary ('rules') way. If one maximizes V under
precommitment (ir =           we    get:


               V' =            (1   - air)o exp(-c7r) - f'(r) - g'(ir) = 0            (11)


     For this equilibrium rate (denoted by 7TR) we have:

                 -        =        exp(c7rR)
                                   a(f' + g')
                                                >   •
     Thus the optimal precommitted rate of inflation will always be less than the

revenue-maximizing rate, i.e., the economy will in that case always be at a low equi-
librium point like A.8
                                                                                        17

     One weakness of the preceding analysis is the assumption that d itself is chosen
in some optimal way. Another question is the stability of the equilibrium inflation
rate. In practice governments often find themselves in deficits or in inflationary
situations which have occurred as a result of past mistakes and stay there because of
an inability to muster the strength or the social consensus needed for a major reform.
Suppose now that d is exogenously determined and we ask what determines the
stability of an equilibrium point A or B. For that we have to say something about
expectation formation or dynamic behavior of the nominal variables out of steady
state equilibrium. Several avenues have been studied all of which have in common
some friction in the inflationary process whether in price expectations, money. wage
or exchange rate adjustment. The speed of adjustment determines the stability or
instability of equilibrium at A or B.
     The simplest example, for a closed economy, is that of adaptive expectations (see
Bruno and Fischer, 1990):


                  =            — ,Te) .                                                (12)



Log time-differentiation of (7) and substitution in (12) gives the equation of motion
of     out of equilibrium,


                  =   (1
                           —
                                   )1[d exp(a,re) — .ej .                              (13)


     The familiar Cagan (1956) Condition a/3 < 1 or > I determines whether A,B
are stable or unstable equilibria, respectively. It is important to point out that
adaptive adjustment of expectations is only one option by which this result is
obtained. Slow adjustment of one of the other nominal magnitudes under rational
expectations will give similar results. In another paper (Bruno, 1989) I have applied
the same idea to the exchange rate, substituting            (the rate of devaluation) for i(
in equations (7) and (12). Another modification makes the adjustment coefficient (3)
                                                                                        Is
 increase with the rate of inflation. This is a rule for a crawling peg which has also
 been estimated empirically:


                    = ,B(ir)(ir —   .
                                                                                      (14)


        The variability of raises the interesting possibility that both A and B may
 be stable equilibria. Assume $ '(ir) > 0 and let ir be the threshold inflation rate at
which a(ir*) =       1.   If A <        < ire. both equilibria are in fact stable.
        A discrete time version (non-linear difference equation) was run over 123
monthly observations for the crawling peg period in Israel 1975—1985 in the form:


                     —       = — (f9i + $2w11)(ir11 _irUj — E.1) + J


where ,rUS is the U.S. inflation rate and J1 represent dummy (jump) variables for
periods of discrete level devaluations that took place in 1975, 1977 and 1983. The
threshold inflation rate (lr*) was estimated to be a monthly rate of 4.8percent (for
wholesale prices) or 5.8 (for consumer prices) or 76, 97 percent, respectively in annual
terms (see Bruno, 1989). We note that this rate is the one that roughly distinguishes
between two-digit (stage II) and three-digit (stage III) high inflations.
     Here comes an interesting question — can one motivate an adjustment rule like

(14) as the result of some underlying optimization? It turns out that one can,9 if one
takes the existence of inflation as a norm.
     Given that a steady process of inflation has already been taking place there are
costs of marginally deviating from it, so that some local sub-optimization may still be
relevant. Assume the government minimizes a quadratic loss function of the following
form:



                 L a1(c — e_)2 +                —    — o)2 .                         (15)
                                                                                    19

     The first term represents the cost not of inflation per se but of changes thereof
while the second represents the cost of deviations from current account balance
(depending on the relative exchange rate). It does not matter whether we replace

by       or by ir as long as it is exogenous to the choice of €.
     Maximizing L1 with respect to        we get:



                  —     =       — — a0)    ,                                      (16)



where $ =   a,/cr1.

     This is precisely the discretionary adjustment rule that was introduced above, and
observed in the empirical data, except that we have now provided a rationale for it.
It also makes sense to assume that the higher the rate of inflation the smaller is the
marginal cost of absolute deviations from it relative to those of current account
imbalance. Thus $ may be assumed to rise with the rate of inflation.'0 A certain
weakness of the quadratic loss function (15) is its symmetry with respect to upward
and downward deviations.
     It is interesting to note that such sub-optimization may 'anchor' the rate of
inflation at either a higher or a lower inflation rate depending on initial conditions
and external inflationary shocks to the system. However the two alternative equilibria
themselves depend on real fundamentals.
     Applying this theory the sharp rise in Israel's inflation rate between 1975 and
1980 can be attributed to two major monetary decisions. The one on which many
observers agree is the introduction of foreign exchange-linked (Patam) bank accounts
in 1977—8. This has shifted the demand for M1 (an inward shift in the h-schedule in
Figure 2) and introduced indexation into a broader measure of money M3. The
other, much less stressed, is the decision taken in 1975 to give up the pegged foreign
exchange rate anchor and move to a flexible crawling peg. Gottlieb and Piterman
(1985) identified 1975 as a crucial turning point in the expectation formation
mechanism. This amounts to a change from p = 0 in equation (14) to $ > 0 and
                                                                                       20
 gradually rising.
      A discrete devaluation in 1977 and again in 1983 caused a jump not only in the
 price level but, with almost complete indexation of the nominal system, a series of
 upward jumps in the rate of inflation ('flats' in terms of Figure 2) making the system
 tend to move towards higher inflation equilibria. After the 1983 shock a new equi-
 librium was probably never reached, since the 1985 stabilization interrupted the
 process.


IV. Choice of Anchors During Disinflation
      Consider a country that has been running a high inflation and wishes to stabilize
while minimizing the initial cost of adjustment. Obviously, first and foremost the real
source of fundamental disequilibrium has to be removed. Existence or absence of that
necessary 'orthodox' ingredient contributed the major distinction between success and
failure in recent stabilization episodes of the 1980s. We therefore take it for granted
that the policy package includes a set of measures that corrects the fundamental
sources of imbalance in the government budget or in the balance of payments or
(usually) in both. This would in general involve a substantial fiscal cut with or without
an initial step adjustment in the exchange rate. Our discussion here, however, takes
off from the point that correction of fundamentals will in general not suffice to
eliminate high inflation. The earlier analysis tells us that the corrected real system
could still be consistent with more than one inflation rate and for that reason the self-
perpetuating nominal mechanism must be made to switch at once to a stable low (or
zero) inflation target. Moreover, minimizing the social cost of adjustment (or even its
political feasibility) dictates minimal superfluous changes in re1atie prices during the
transition.

     There are at least two separate issues here. One is the problem created by
formal institutional arrangements such as backward indexation, particularly of wages.
Even if inflation starts to drop lagged indexation may cause a very large initial
increase in the real wage thus exacerbating unemployment. The nominal system must
                                                                                     21

be made to forget its memory of the past. But a mere formal de-indexation will in
general not suffice either, since sluggish change in government credibility (or lack of
price coordination) may cause forward nominal stickiness (in         and ir) Ac lear
signal of a sharp shift in policy is required, by targeting at least one nominal anchor.
(The possible need for more than one anchor will be taken up below). Suppose one
central anchor has to be pegged during the transition to low inflation — is it the
exchange rate or the quantity of money?


The argument in favor of the exchange rate
     The cumulative history of sharp disinflations in open economies seems to point

to a dominant use of the exchange rate as a key nominal anchor. A general discussion
of the role of the exchange rate in stabilization was given in an earlier Frank Graham
lecture by Dornbusch (1986). In a survey of past substantial inflations (Yeager. 1981)
only the Italian disinflation of 1945 seems to have involved extensive use of a
monetary target rather than the exchange rate. In almost all historical hyperinflations
as well as in recent attempts at stabilization from high inflation, fixing the exchange
was a key element of rapid stabilization (see Dornbusch and Fischer, 1986; Bruno ci
a!., 1988, 1991). In the case of more moderate inflations the experience is more mixed

(see Kiguel and Liviatan, 1989).
    There are several practical reasons for the choice of the exchange rate quite
apart from the intuitive a priori reasoning that if the exchange rate had been a key
manifestation of the loss of the nominal anchor it would only make sense that dis-
inflation would also require re-establishing it as an anchor. But is there a more
systematic theoretical argument in favor of that choice?
    Fischer (1986) has investigated the question in the context of a small open
economy of the kind mentioned in Section II with perfect capital mobility and wage
contracts set for either one or two-periods, thus explicitly bringing in some norniniI
stickiness but no backward indexation. The model assumes rational expectations and
instantaneous credibility once a policy change takes place (an assumption that is. of
course, highly questionable in practice and will be discussed again below). Exchange
rate led stabilization is compared with choice of a money growth target in terms of
the resulting sacrifice ratio — the ratio of total loss of output to the fall in the inflation
rate. calculated over two periods.
     The analysis shows that while examples of exceptions can be produced, in
general the case of exchange rate stabilization is less costly. For the same drop in the
inflation rate the fall in the quantity of money is smaller under reduced exchange rate
adjustment (since endogenous money demand rises as a result of the drop in e, here
the interest rate). The required equivalent reduction in the rate of growth of money
under the monetary option (with a flexible exchange rate) is thus larger than in the
previous case. With a smaller reduction in the quantity of money, given wage
stickiness, the output loss is smaller. The extent of the recession depends on wage
stickiness and sensitivity of aggregate demand to the real exchange rate (which
appreciates) and the real interest rate (which rises), and for this reason the result is
not unambiguous. Fischer shows one extreme example in which exchange rate stabili-
zation produces a higher sacrifice ratio than money growth stabilization — when
interest elasticity of money demand is zero (i.e., extremely low) and the direct
elasticity of the price level to exchange rate changes in the cost function is very high
(0.8 is assumed), both of which are empirically unlikely.
     A larger recession with monetary stabilization could, in principle, be avoided if
the reduction in the rare of growth of money is coupled with a one time initial upward
adjustment in the leie1 of the money stock. Such up-front monetary expansion does
create a well-known credibility problem, however, and is therefore inadvisable in
practice.
     Once uncertainty is introduced into the analysis the specific market location of
disturbances matters for the result. If they arise in the goods market, output tends to
be less stable under a fixed exchange rate than under fixed money while prices tend
to be less stable under a fixed money rule. What is probably practically more relevant
is the finding that the fixed exchange rate regime is preferable when disturbances are
                                                                                        23
primarily in the demand for money, a fact well horn Out in the practice of stabili-
zation. Wage disturbances are a problem under either procedure and provide the
rationale for making wages consistent with the new inflation target through an
incomes policy or a 'package deal', a subject to which we shall return below.
     F-Iowitt (1987) has analyzed a model similar to Fischer's (1986) in which the
optimal disinflation policies of a central bank are discussed under two types of wage
stickiness assumptions — backward-looking stickiness under a dynamic Phillips curve
and forward-looking stickiness arising from lack of credibility. There is a history of
positive inflation and a disinflation program is instituted. The central bank is assumed
to maximize an infinite sum of squared output and inflation terms. Under backward
stickiness the optimal speed of disinflation becomes an increasing function of the
weight attached to inflation in the objective function and of the slope of the Phillips
curve. It is found that monotonic reduction of monetary expansion is not generally
optimal. Rather El? should be reduced immediately and then allowed to rise mono-
tonically back to its initial value. A similar general result is obtained under forward
stickiness coming from lack of credibility — the government has no tolerance of
inflation but private agents do not know this. The speed of disinflation depends on
a variance ratio that measures the severity of the central bank's credibility problem.
     In practice the problem of credibility pushes relatively 'soft' governments in the
direction of attaching themselves to the reputation of a 'stronger' government's
conservative central bank through a fixed exchange rate. This argument of 'tying one's
hands' lay at the roots of the choice of historically inflation-prone countries, like Italy
and France, to join the EMS and tie themselves to a strong D-mark (see Giavazzi and
Giovannini, 1989). These can be contrasted with the case of the United Kingdom,
which delayed its decision on the EMS and suffered from considerably higher intlation
rate, whose reasons were not fiscal. It will be interesting to see how the United
Kingdom's final entry into the EMS (in October 1990) will have affected its sub-
sequent relative inflation performance.
     In addition to the theoretical arguments discussed so far one may mention a
                                                                                     24

couple of quasi-practical reasons for the advantage of the exchange rate over the
money supply in the process of disinflation. In an open economy tradable goods form
a substantial part of the goods basket and thus of the components of the price level.
Stabilizing a key price in the economy, which is observable on a daily basis (unlike the
price index which is usually published only once a month and with some delay) thus
provides an important signal to the rest of the system, much more than the indirect
signal embodied in the quantity of money. Also, the exchange rate is a clearer mag-
nitude to set against the wage rate in the stabilization game played with the wage
fixers, whether employers or unions in a highly unionized economy (see below).
Finally the instability of monetary targets especially during disinflations has already
been mentioned. The demand for M1, for one, tends to rise steeply in the early
stages of a quick disinflation as expected inflation is adjusted downward.
     A subsidiary issue with which we have not dealt here but may be of considerable
practical importance is the basis for exchange rate pegging during transition to lower
inflation. Pegging to a major currency which had been the closest substitute to
domestic money in the asset market, and thus serves as a unit of account in many
transactions, would be preferable from the point of view of establishing initial
credibility (the dollar in the case of Israel and the DM in the recent stabilizations of
Yugoslavia and Poland). Given the fluctuations of cross rates in world markets,
pegging to a trade weighted basket of currencies would be preferable from the point
of view of real trade flows. Israel, in fact, moved to a basket approximately one year
after its initial stabilization.


Multiple nominal anchors
     If the exchange rate seems a more effective instrument what are its defects? The
key problem arises from forward wage and price stickiness due to the slow credibility
build-up. This invariably leads to real appreciation of the exchange rate, expectations
of further adjustment of the exchange rate peg resulting in large cycles of speculative
capital flows and substantial monetary and interest rate fluctuations. To avoid regime
collapse larger exchange reserves have to he held than under a flexible exchange rate
regime and there is also a tendency to maintain exchange controls which can be
distortive or else relatively ineffective.
     These arguments work in favor of confining oneself to the use of the exchange
rate as a key anchor in the early stages of sharp stabilization but once credibility has
been built up the system could be flexened. For example, the median exchange rate
can be kept as a longer run signal while greater short-run fluctuations within a fixed
band are allowed. This enables a moderation of capital movements and provides a
more active role for monetary policy even under less restrictive foreign exchange
controls.
     Is there a sense in which it pays to coordinate more than one anchor in the
process of disinflation? In answer to that question one should distinguish between the
two possible stages in the stabilization process, the initial step of a very sharp cut in
inflation (from three digit inflation to 20 percent per annum, say) and the subsequent,
usually slower and more gradual drop, to the lowest (zero?) inflation target.
     Assume as before that the required fiscal and exchange rate adjustments have
been made and now the exchange rate, say, is pegged. Even the smallest backward
or forward stickiness in any of the other nominal aggregates in a disinflating system
with confusing signals, may cause very sharp shifts in relative prices which in turn may
upset the planned equilibrium of the real system. Wage indexation has to be
suspended, at least temporarily, and monetary aggregates had better be set so as to
be consistent with the wage and exchange rate freeze. Are temporary price controls
— the   fourth anchor — also required? Given the uncertainty of signals, especially for
goods and services that are not tradable (as well as wages in the government service
sector, for example), price controls can help in signalling the sudden shift and
absolute commitment of the new policy. In making a deal with the trade unions on
a wage freeze, such counterpart freeze of prices may be required as part of the
bargain anyway (This has been the experience in the Israeli stabilization of 1985.)
Price controls, if they are to be monitored by the public, can only apply to an absolute
level freeze, and not to any positive rate of inflation, which cannot easily be
monitored.
     Controls, we know, can be very distortionary. But a sharp disintlation, if it
persists, may outweigh, in terms of the distortions eliminated, the temporary distortive
effects of price controls. What this argument suggests, however, is that price controls
may not pay for small disinflations and even under large disinflations, they had better
be short-lived and be eliminated rather quickly, as soon as the credibility and
signalling objective has been achieved.
     Given the underlying macro economic framework of Section II there is a prima
facie contradiction in an argument that calls for the fixing of more than one nominal
variable at a time. Unless the coordinated choice of nominal targets is exactly 'right'
the system must be overdetermined or, alternatively, get into a disequilibrium. This
statement, however, rests on an assumption of full certainty. Here we are considering
an optimal policy choice under uncertainty. In such case market equilibrium or dis-
equilibrium must be redefined in an expectational sense. Given the potential benefits
of success and the high risks of failure of a sharp disinflation, tying one's boat to
several anchors rather than one would seem to be a prudent policy as is the portfolio
diversification of risk in the optimal menu of risky assets.
     The analog of the multiple anchoring of a boat (in which only one of the anchor
ropes can be tight and may threaten to break at any point in time), has been the
rationale behind the simultaneous intervention in all other nominal variables during
the Israeli stabilization of 1985. In addition to a sharp fiscal contraction (including a
cut in subsidies) and an up-front devaluation the government announced a credit
freeze as well as its intention to keep the exchange rate pegged providing the unions
would temporarily suspend the COLA and freeze wages for a few months. Agreement
on the latter was, in turn, made conditional on the introduction of price controls. The
resulting tripartite agreement between employers, trade unions and government
provided the supportive means by which the nominal system was at once shifted from
a 500 percent inflation to 25 percent (and subsequently to 15—20 percent) per annum.
     It is important to point out that the ex ante freeze of all nominal variables, other
than the exchange rate, was rather short-lived ex post and significant chanies took
place in relative prices only a few months after the initial 'shockS. primarily a real
wage increase and a real appreciation. Yet the lower inflation rate was maintained
successfully. This may show that the signalling of serious intentions and precom-
mitment on part of the government constituted the most important role of the syn-
chronized freeze in the early stage of stabilization. A real appreciation (though not
a real wage increase) has also accompanied the successful stabilization in Balivia and
Mexico.

     Consider now the second stage. Once price controls are lifted and the exchange
rate is maintained as the key nominal anchor monetary policy will be geared to
protect the exchange rate. The inflation that remains can best be described as the
outcome of a repeated game between the government (setting the exchange rate) and
the private sector (setting the nominal wage), in which the government attempts to
establish its reputation and credibility is gradually built up. In practice the game may
be a much more complicated one with each sector also playing an internal game —the
central bank and the ministry of finance over the commitment to a pegged exchange
rate and the unions versus the employers over the wage rate. However, even the
bilateral monopoly case is not an easy one to model realistically. A beginning has
been made in a paper by Horn and Persson (1988).
    In the Israeli case the exchange rate was adjusted five times during the five years
following the July 1985 stabilization (January 1987, December 19S8, January 19S9.
June 1989 and March 1990), almost always coupled with an agreed suspension of the
cost of living adjustment. Since March 1990 Israel moved to a more flexible regime
in which fluctuations within a 5 percent band above and below the mid-rate are
allowed and a greater role is given to the foreign exchange market and to monetar
policy in the determination of the exchange rate. An alignment of the mid-rate was
made in September 1990.
    Table 3 shows the annual rates of change of the nominal exchange rate (trade
                                                                                         2S

 veghted basket of currencies), the nominal wage and the per unit real wate cost in
 the business sector. The figures suggest a gradual learning process that took place in
wage behavior over the period 1985—89 with an eventual turnaround in unit wage
 costs by 1989. 1990 has very likely shown a continuation of this process. This result,
 however, was bought at the cost of rising unemployment and considerable initial real
appreciation. Flexening of the foreign exchange market and the slack in the labor
market allow a gradual easing of the burden from the exchange rate as the key
nominal anchor. A sequence of exchange-rate realignments with real appreciations
as well as painful adjustments of management and labor have also characterized the
gradual and very slow disinflations of EMS-linked countries like Italy and France over
the 1980s. Because of its much more flexible labor market Mexico could shift from
a fixed peg to a crawling devaluation at an earlier stage of its stabilization program
albeit at a rate which has kept real appreciation going.
     The second phase of a disinflation process, that of gradually pulling a 20—25
percent inflation further down turns out to be the most difficult part of the stabi-
lization effort. In all recent successful stabilizations from high inflation,in addition to
Israel's (Bolivia, Chile and Mexico) the inflation rate has still remained close to that
range. The stickiness of the inflation rate in all of these cases most probably had to
do with some lack of credibility and the weakening of commitment to the stability
goal once 'the worst is seemingly over'. In Israel's case a variety of structural factors
played an inhibiting role (slow removal of indexation, slow dismantling of protective
and monopolistic obstacles, minimum real wage legislation, etc.). Of the four countries
mentioned only Chile has in recent years managed to reverse the trend in its real
exchange rate.
     Finally, in characterizing the end of the high-inflation process we may also return
to the issue of the nominal—real dichotomy. We have seen that the system undergoes
a fundamental change in this respect as inflation 'lifts off' from a two-digit range into
a high-inflation dichotomous regime. Upon 're-entry' — once sharp disinflation has
taken place — one may expect a reversal of the dichotomy between the nominal and
                                                                                     29

the real economy and a closer resemblance to the ordinary 'garden variety' intlations.
One would thus expect to see much less nominal accommodation and an enhanceU
importance of real versus nominal shocks. A related property would be an increase
in the tradeoff between inflation and unemployment which under high inflation
virtually disappears. A recent study by Leiderman and Liviatan (19S9) confirms these
findings for a comparison of the nominal and real variable behavior in Israel before
and after stabilization. The degree of nominal inertia has substantially fallen hue the
variability of changes in real output, employment and the trade deficit has not
changed. The Phillips curve short-term tradeoff seems to have increased considerably.
This is further evidence for a shift back from stage III, high chronic inflation, to a
lower stage inflation regime. It remains to be seen if and when the Israeli economy.
and similarly Bolivia, Chile and Mexico will finally move to the lower rate of inflation
which has characterized the industrial world in recent years.
References
Barro, R. J.. "Inflationary Finance Under Discretion and Rules." Canadian Jouriwlof
     Economics, 16 (No. 1. February 1983). pp. 1—16.
Bruno, M.. "Econometrics and the Design of Economic Reform," Econoinetrica, 57
     (No. 2, March 1989), pp. 275—306.
       G. Di Tella, R. Dornbusch and S. Fischer, eds., InJ7ation Stabilization:
     Argentina, Israel, Brazil, Bolivia and Mexico, Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press, 19SS.
     p. 419.
Bruno M. and S. Fischer, 'The Inflationary Process: Shocks and Accommodation." in

     Y. Ben-Porath, ed., The Israel Economy: Maturing Through Crises, Cambridge,
     Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1984.
     and        , 'Seignorage,   Operating Rules and the High Inflation Trap.' Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 105 (No. 421, May 1990), pp. 353—374.
      S. Fischer, E. Helpman and N. Liviatan, eds., Lessons of Economic Stabilization
    and its Aftermath, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, forthcoming, 1991.
Cagan, P., 'The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation," in M. Friedman, ed., Studies
    in the Quantity Theoty of Money, Chicago: Chicago University Press. 1956.
Dornbusch, R., "Inflation, Exchange Rates and Stabilization," Essays in International
    Finance, No. 165, Princeton, N.J., Princeton University, October, 1986, pp. 28.
      and S. Fischer, "Stopping Hyperinflation: Past and Present," Welrwirtschaftliches
    Archiv, 122, 1986, pp. 1—47.

Fischer, S., "Exchange Rates versus Money Targets in Disinflation," in S. Fischer, ed.,
    Indexing Inflation and Economic Policy, Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press, 1986.
Friedman, M., "Government Revenue from Inflation,' Journal of Political Econonn',
    79 (1971), pp. 846—857.

Giavazzi, F. and A. Giovanninj, Limiting Exchange Rate Flexibility: The European
    Monetary System, Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press, 1989.
Gottlieb, D. and S. Piterman, "Inflationary Expectations in Israel," Bank of Israel
    Eco,zomic Review, 57 (May 1985), pp. 1—25.
                                                                                    31

Graham, F. D., Exchange, Prices and Production in Hyper-injiazion Ge,nia,zv: 1920—23.
     Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press, 1930.
Horn G. and T. Persson. "Exchange Rate Policy, Wage Formation and Credibility,
     European Economic Review. 32 (October 1988). pp. 1621—1636.
Howitt, P., 'Optimal Disinflation in a Small Open Economy," mimeograph, University
     of Western Ontario, July 1987.
Kiguel, M. and N. Liviatan, "The Old and New in Heterodox Stabilization Programs:
     Lessons from the Sixties and the Eighties," Washington, D.C., The World Bank.
     Working Paper, October 1989.
      and N. Liviatan, "Some Implications of Policy Games for High Inflation
     Economies," Washington, D.C., The World Bank, WPS No, 379, March 1990.
Leiderman, L. and N. Liviatan, "Comparing Macroeconomic Performance before and
     after Disinflation in Israel," Washington, D.C., The World Bank Working Paper
     1989.

Melnick, R. and M. Sokoler, 'The Government's Revenue Creation and the Infla-
     tionarv Effect of a Decline in the Rate of Growth of GNP." Journal of Monetary
    Economics, 13 (1984), pp. 225—236.
Patinkin, D., Money, Interest and Prices, New York, Harper and Row, 1965.
Pazos, F., Chronic Inflation in Latin A,nerica, New York, Praeger, 1972.
Liv-iatan, N., "Inflation and the Composition of Deficit Finance, in F. E. Adams, ed..
    Global Econometrics, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1983.
Sargent, T. J. and N. Wallace, 'Inflation and the Government Budget Constraint,' in
    A. Razin and F. Sadka, eds.. Economic Policy in Theoiy and Practice. London.
    Macmillan, 1987.

Yeager, L. B., Experience with Stopping Inflation, American Enterprise Institute.
    Washington, D.C., 1981.
\otes

  This paper is based on notes initially prepared for the Frank Graham Memorial
Lecture given at Princeton University in March 19S9. A draft of the paper was sub-
sequently read at a workshop in honor of Don Patinkin, held in Jerusalem in May
1990. 1 am grateful to Rudiger Dornhusch for a very useful discussion of the paper
at that workshop. Research for this paper was partly conducted during brief stays at
the National Bureau of Economic Research, with the support of the National Science
Foundation, for which thanks go to both institutions.

1. For a study of recent high-inflation experience, stabilization and its aftermath in
the eight countries of Figure 2 see Bruno et a!. (1991).
2. The 7-percent monthly rate actually lasted four years — until 1983 — when a large
jump took place. This shows in Figure 2 as a 'flat' between 1979—83 and a kink in
1983.

3. In the original Patinkin model MIP in the excess demand for goods comes from
the real balance effect. In this case the interest rate appears as a separate variable,
which could be suppressed by substitution from the equilibrium condition in the bond
market. In that case A.1 must also incorporate exogenous shift factors from the bond
market. An alternative approach, based on an ISLM model tradition and leading to
a similar formal result would be the substitution for the interest rate in aggregate
commodity demand Y from a money equilibrium condition H(M/P, i) = 0, say. (In
equilibrium, by Walras's Law, bonds will also be in equilibrium.) Since investment
(and consumption) demand depends on the real interest rate, one should in any case
also include a price expectations variable under the shift variable A. I am indebted
to Carl Christ for pointing out an ambiguity in my previous version of this argument.

4. Since imports are an input into the production function, labor demand now
depends also on its relative price EP/P (P is the world price of the import good
which will appear as one of the components of the shift factor As). For the com-
modity market a similar modification follows from both the supply and the demand
side. Excess demand can he written as the difference between aggregate demand
yd(M/p EP*/P; Ad) and aggregate supply Y(M/P, EP/P; As), where P is the
world price of exports and the shift factors are suitably extended to include the
respective world parameters. The signs of response on E/P assume labor and
imports to he gross substitutes in production.
5. Out of a steady state we can write (for a discrete time model)
                        d1 = (H1       —
                                           H11)/P1   =   h1
                                                              —
                                                                  h1(1   —
                                                                             ir1)
where h1 =   H1/P1   and 1r1 =   (P1
                                       —



6. 1 am indebted to Nissan Liviatan for this reference. See also Kiguel and Liviatan

(1990).
7. For example, using an exponential form for f (as in Barro, 1983) one gets an
explicit analytical solution. Assume f(ir) = k/b exp(bir); we get 7TJ = en(a/k)/(b + a).
Thus alrd > I providing a > k exp (1 + b/a).
8. Note that we get zero inflation (lrg = 0) when f' (Irk) + g' (IrR) =                 1/a.   Also note
that this result does not depend on the inclusion of g(7rc) in the objective function
V, i.e., one may put g'        0 in (3.6).
9. I am indebted to Nissan Liviatan for this important insight.
10. c —     is the rate of change of W/E, i.e., the rate of real appreciation, which
leads to a certain change in foreign exchange reserves. (e —                 e) is the absolute change
in the rate of devaluation (inflation). At a steady rate of inflation of 100 percent per
annum a 5 percent deviation is relatively less costly than the same absolute deviation
at a 10 percent steady rate.
                                                                         34


Table I

Nyperinflations of the 1920s (1920—1924)


                     Average           Peak      Number of     Number of
                     monthly          monthly    months with   years with
                       rate            rate       inflation     intlation
                                      (date)       >   50%      > 100%
                                                  (> 25%)

Germany                 949           29,525             11         4

                                     (10/23)           (20)


Poland                   33                275           9          3

                                     (10/23)        (16)

Austria                  17                129           4          3


                                      (8/22)        (10)


Hungary                  17                 98           5          3
                                      (7/23)           (9)




Sources: Cagan (1956) and Sargent (1982).
Table 2
High inflation, Hyperinflation and Stabilization, 1970—1989 (monthly percentages and
numbers of months and years)


                   Average monthly rate3         Peak      No. of      No. of years
Country                                         monthly   months       with annual
(Year of          '70—79   '80—'S5   '86—'90      rate    with rate    rate > 100
major                                            (date)    > 50%
stabilization                                             (> 25%)     '70—'79 '80—'S9
program)           (1)       (2)       (3)         (4)      (5)        (6)      (7)


Chile               7.6      1.7       1.4         88          1         4       —
(1975)                                         (10/73)      (1)
Bolivia             1.4     18.5       2.1        182         9
(1985)                                          (2/85)     (16)

Argentina          6.8      11.9      19.0        197         3          5       10
(1985)                                          (7/89)     (16)

Brazil             2.4       7.9      19.7         73         3         —        S
(1986)                                          (1/90)     (16)

Israel             2.6       9.1       1.4         28        —          —        6
(1985)                                          (7/85)      (1)

Mexico              1.2      3.9       4•8b                             —
(1988)                                          (1/88)      (—)

Turkey              1.9      3.3       3.8         21        —          —
(1980)                                          (2/80)      (—)

Yugoslavia          1.4      3.4      14.5         60         3
(1990)                                         (12/89)      (7)

Poland'            0.3       9.6       8.6          77        2
(1990)                                          (1/90)      (5)

Source: International Financial Statistics (International Monetary Fund).

a Monthly averages refer to periods from January of the first year to December of the
last year, except for 1990 for which most data reach on]y up to January-Februar\
1990.

b
    From April 1988 to April 1990 the average monthly rate was 1.7 percent.

    Based on annual data up to 1987 and monthly data for 1988—1990.
                                                                                  36
Table 3

The Exchange Rate. Nominal Wage, and Unit Real Wage Costs in the Business
Sector, Unemployment and Inflation, Israel 1986—1990 (annual rate of change)


                                     1986      1987       1988       1989       199()



Exchange ratea                         45         13         2        16         11h

Nominal wage                           65       33         22         18         14c

Unit real wage costs                       6      4          0        —4        n.a.

Rate of unemployment
 (percentage)                              7      6          6         9         l0
Wholesale prices                       45       19         18         21         11b

Consumer prices                        48       20         16         20         17h




Source: 1986—1989 — Bank of Israel, Annual Report, 1985. 1990— Preliminary estimates.

a Based on trade-weighted basket of currencies.

    Based on first 9 months of the year.

    Based on first 7 months of the year.
d
    First half of 1990.
      10 -
(5J
C)
            —




•o 106
2     ILl
.0
0
-c                                                Poland
0
      i0                                             Hungary
>
      102
0
       10




                                    1921   1923   1925




Figure 1
Four Hyperinflations of the 1920s
     100
                   • Major stabijization programs                                    Argentria
     10a
     10 —
 C




                                               Chile




       70/1      72/1     74/1       76/1      78/1    80/1   82/1   84/1     86/1     88/1      90/1




Figure 2
Major Inflations of the 1970s and 1980s
Source: IFS (IMF). The sample of 8 countries is analyzed in terms of recent
           experience, in Bruno et al. (1991).
                     h

It
     B
         -
                 h




                                          A°



                                                        d°




 11*

                                                             d



                                                             h(n)




Figure       3
Government Finance, Monetary Base and EquHibrium Inflation
