                    NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




                MACROECONOMIC MODELS WITH EQUITY
                      AND CREDIT RATIONING




                       Bruce C. Greenwa].d

                       Joseph E. Stiglitz




                     Working Paper No. 3533




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December 1990




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                           NBER Working Paper #3533
                                           December 1990


                  MACROECONOMIC MODELS WITH EQUITY
                        AND CREDIT RATIONING


                               ABSTR.P&T


     This   paper presents a simple, general equilibrium macro-
economic model incorporating financial constraints, both credit
and equity rationing, as well as other informational

imperfections in labor and product markets, such as efficiency
wage effects. A formulation somewhat analogous to the standard
IS-LM model, but not suffering from the well known defects of
that model, is derived. The mechanisms by which monetary policy
affects the economy are described. Dynamics, including

implications for long run growth, are investigated.

Bruce C. Greenwald                         Joseph E. Stiglitz
Room 2A—347                                Department of Economics
Bell Communications Research               Encina Hall
435 South Street                           Stanford University
Morristown, NJ 07960—1961                  Stanford, CA 94305—6072
                                                      -2-

       The role played by imperfect information in business fluctuations has received increasing

 attention since Lucas' early work.' However the locus of that attention has shifted from sys-

 ternatic misperceptions of prices (the original Lucas form of imperfect information) to the

 macroeconomic consequences of information related microeconomic failures.2 This paper seeks

 to summarize a major development of this latter literature, to integrate that development into a

 standard macroeconomic model and to provide a reformulation which casts additional light on

 the mechanism by which monetary policy affects the economy. The microeconomic failures in

question occur most significantly in financial markets. In credit markets, it is by now well-

established that lenders who are less well-informed than borrowers about the risk characteristics

of the borrower's investment projects may well respond by fixing interest rates and (under cer-

tain conditions) rationing crediL3 In equity markets, it is equally well established that, when

potential equity issuers are better informed about their future prospects than potential equity pur-

chasers, raising funds by issuing new equity may be a highly costly, if not prohibitively difficult,

undertaking.4 Briefly and crudely stated, the significant macroeconomic consequences of these

financial market failures (which are essentially microeconoimc in nature) include an increase in

the importance of internally generated funds in determining firm behavior — especially invest-

ment behavior, a reduction in the importance of interest rates as a determinant of both borrowing

and investment (and hence as a macroeconomically stabilizing variable); amplification of the

output responses of firms to demand and other disturbances, the risks and cash flow conse-

quences of which cannot be shifted either by issuing equity or by increased borrowing (leading
   See Lucas [1979].
 2 See Bemanke and GcrtJer [1989], Shapiro and Stiglicz [19841. Diamond 119821 and Greenwaid, Stiglitz and
Weiss [1984) for diverse examples from a large and growing literature.
    See Siiglicz and Weiss 119811.
    See Majiuf and Myers [1984) and Greenwald, Sugiitz and Weiss [1984]. Empirical support for these models is
provided by Asquith and Muliins [1984) and in extensive related literature.
                                                       -3-

to accelerator like behavior); and significant changes in the likely consequences of

macroeconomiC policy.

        However, financial markets are not the sole area of impact of imperfect informatiort on

macroeconomic behavior. Efficiency wage models of labor market5 behavior and comparable

models of product markets6 have contributed importantly both to understanding macro-

economic phenomena like unemployment7 and to investigating likely paths of adjustment

between macroeconomic equilibria.8 Thus the paper's basic model of financial market failures is

extended to incorporate the impacts of these further informational imperfections in labor and

product markets.

       The paper consists, therefore, of five sections. The first two describe the impact of imper-

fect information in financial markets on investment and loan market behavior respectively. A

third section incorporates these behaviors into a traditional IS-LM model of macroeconomic

equilibria. The fourth section then briefly discusses an extension of the model to examine likely

paths of adjustment between equilibria when labor and product markets also suffer from infor-

mation imperfections. Finally, a fifth section investigates the long-run growth implications of

the model.




      See Weiss [1980). Shapiro and Stiglicz [1984], Suglitz [1974. 1976), Akerlof [19841, Bulow   and Summers
(1985) and Salop and Salop [1976] for examples.
  6   See Suglicz [1987).
      For swveys see Suglit2 [1982, 1987] and Yellen [1984].
      See Greenwald and Stiglitz [1989).
                                                          -4-

 Section I.    Firm Behavior and Investment

       The model of firm behavior which will be used is essentially that of Greenwald and Stiglitz

 [1987]. Firm decision makers maximize the expected end-of-period equity of the firm minus an

 expected cost of bankruptcy, which is simply the cost of bankruptcy times the probability of ban-

 kruptcy.9 We assume initially that firms use only circulating capital; inputs must be paid before

outputs are available for sale and before output prices are known.W Formally, therefore, firms

                                               max ä(q, ) — c (q, )"B

where    1(q,) is expected end-of-period equity, c(q1) is the cost of bankruptcy which we will

assume is linear in q, (the size of the firm) so that c (q,) = cq,,                B is the probability of ban-
kruptcy and q, is the firm's capital stock in period r which is also, in this circulating capital

world, the OUtpUt that the finn has available for sale at the end of period r. Here end-of-period

equity is


                                            d(q,)=j51q—(l+r)b,

where ji, is price of output at the end of period r, 1', is the firm's indebtedness at the beginning

of period: and r is the return to borrowers which is a random variable (as is #)since the firm

may go bankrupt and default on its loans. Then

                                              ä(q,)=q1 —(1+)b,
where       is the expected value of and the expected price level is normalized at one.

      Bankruptcy occurs if the end of period value of the firm, a,, is less than zero; if


      Similar resuits obtain if firms maximize an expected utility (or valuation function) of end-of-penod equity if the
utility function is characterized by decreasing absolute risk aversion.
   10 We assume that
                         for a variety of informational reasons, futures markets are not a significant economic factor
(see Greenwald and Suglitz (1986]).
                                                         -5-

                                                 fi1q, (l+r)b1

 where r is the contractual level of interest that the firm promised to pay debtholders at the

 beginning of period:. The debt incurred by the firm at beginning of period r is

                                                   = W1 (g q, — ar_i

 where we assume that output is produced with a constant-returns-to-scale technology using only

 labor as an input,1' : is the amount of labor needed per unit of output,
a,_1 =p,_1q1_1—(l+r,_1)b,_1 is the equity level that the firm inherits from period :I, and we

assume for the moment that no dividends are paid out..

       The cost of bankruptcy incurred here represents the cost to managers of the firm (i.e., those

deciding on output levels). The justification for such bankruptcy costs is two-fold. First, in a

world of imperfect information, outside observers cannot distinguish between failure due to

incompetent management and failure due to bad luck (which is idiosyncratic to a firm in ques-

tion). As a result failure will unavoidably stigmatize managers whether deservedly or not. The

negative impact of this failure on their future earnings is, therefore, what is represented by the

cost c (q1 )•12 Alternatively, the imposition of a punishment associated with failure may be one

way to structure management incentive contracts which are characterized by sharing rules for

positive profits but no means of credibly forcing managers to participate in losses. And, for

these purposes, bankruptcy may be one natural point for assessing such penalties, since the abil-

ity of management to conceal losses is greatly reduced under such circumstances. Having ban-

kruptcy costs increase with firm size then simply reflects the fact that a larger scale of operation


      The restriction to only labor inputs is made solely for esposiucnal convenience. The effect of relaxing thc
conslant-rewrns-to-scale assumption is examined in Greenwald and Suglitz (1986).
   12 The importance of banbupicy itself in this igard is that it represents identifiable failure as opposed to other
failures which may be at least partially obscured by accounting flexibility.
                                                       -6-

requires more managers. The advantages of this kind of interpretation of bankruptcy cost are,

first, that it enables bankruptcy costs to play a larger role in firm decisions than estimates of

actual reorganization cost, which are relatively small, would imply and, second, that relatively

high bankruptcy costs of this kind account for the observed fact that bankruptcy is a rare event

which managers appear to sthve disproportionately actively to avoid.13 Finally, we will assume

that reorganization costs to debtholders are zero.

      We will assume that the contractual rate of interest paid by firms is set to yield an expected

return to debt-holders which equals a required return,              .   For the moment we will assume that

the equity constrained firms are not credit rationed.

      Thus, each finn's decisionmakers maximize

                               q1—(l+r1)(w(,)q1 +(1+r,)a,_1—cq,P8                                               (1)

where the probability of bankruptcy,


              P8 = F [ui],


                     price below which firms go bankrupt = (l+r1)w C, — (a,_1 / q,),

F is the distribution function of jJ, and the contractual rate of interest, r:, is determined, simul-

taneously with is,, by the equation



                       (l+r,)(w,(—(a,_1Iq,))=u,(l_F(u,))+5,dF(,).                                              (2)
                                                       0


In this last equation, the right-hand side represents the expected return required by borrowers per


      In most models in which rrganizazion costs are small, lenders fnce imperfect information about the risks of
investment projects and managers serve the interests of shareholders, managers should seek high risk projects which
increase shareholder renanis at the expense of lenders. Under these conditions one would eXpect bankruptcy to be a
frecuent occurrence.
                                                         -7-

 unit of output (i.e., the required return, 1 -t-r,, times the amount borrowed per unit of output).

 The left-hand side represents the actual expected return to borrowers per unit of output as a func-

 tion of is,. The definition of u, implies that the return from selling the output q, at u, just covers

 the contractual return to debtholders (i.e., 1+ r,). At prices below u,, the returns to debtholders

 are just p, q, (since they receive the entire proceeds from sales of output) or j, per unit of output.

       The optimal level of output (and hence investment), q,, which solves this maximization

problem depends positively and linearly on a,_1, since the maximand, on being divided by a,_1,

is a function of (q, IQg_) and u, depends on q, only through (q, /a,_1).14 The first order condi-

tion determining the optimal level of (q, I a,_1) takes the form

                                   —
                         I=(l+r,)w,1.+cP8+c
                                                                d           q,dJ'8
                                                            d(q,/a,...1) a,_1j du

The left-hand side of this equation is the expected end-of-period return to output (investment)

and the right-hand side is the expected marginal cost of output including the marginal increase in

bankruptcy costs associated with higher levels of output (the second and third right-hand side

terms). The output (investment) function of a typical firm can, therefore, be written as

                                             q, = h (w, ,    , a,) a,                                            (3)


where a, represents the spread of the price distribution, F, and

                                         h <0, h, <0 and h0 <0.
       The levels of firm output and investment depend not just on the expected return to invest-

ment, which depends in turn on wages and interest rates as it does in the traditional case, but also

  14
      This result depends on the conszant-reuirns-to-scaje troduction assumption and assumptions on the
disuibution F necessary to ensure that the second crder condition is satisfied (see Greenwald and Stiglitz [1986) for
details) which are quite general.
                                                -8-

on the firm's equity level and the level of uncertainty concerning future prices. Higher equit

levels mean that the same level of output (and hence investment) can be attained with a lower

level of borrowing and thus with a lower risk of bankruptcy. Moreover, under quite general cir-

cumstances (e.g., if bankruptcy is an event which occurs in the lower tail of a single-peaked dis-

tribunon of prices), then higher equity levels also lower the incremental risk of bankruptcy asso-

ciated with any given level of output (investment). This means that higher equity levels reduce

the incremental cost of higher output and, thus, lead to increased output and investment.

     Increased uncertainty about future profitability has an opposite effect. Greater uncertainty

increases both the absolute and incremental risk of bankruptcy under quite general conditions at

any level of investment (output) and firm equity. Thus, firms respond by lowering investment

(and output), since they cannot absorb the increased risks by issuing more equity.

     Complete specification of the output and investment model then requires an equation

describing the evolution of equity levels. Substitution from the definitions of b, into the

definition of a, yields

                                 a, =p,q, —(1+r,)(w,(, —a1_1)

Thus, firm equity levels in period t are firm equity levels in period r—I plus profits (including a

shadow return on a,_1). The critical assumption here is that a firm does not have recourse to

external equity markets.

     The formal rationale for such an assumption is developed in the Appendix to this paper.

However, it is straightforward to describe the arguments involved. Suppose that in addition to

the level of output, q,, prices, wages and interest rates, the profitability of each firm depends on

an unobservable productivity variable. If all firms look identical to potential investors, then

firms with high levels of unobserved productivity (and hence future profits) will sell stock on the
                                                          -9-

 same terms as those with low levels of unobserved productivity. However, the cost of selling

 any given amount of stock is higher for the high productivity finn since the shares that it sells

 represents a portion of a higher level of profits. Thus, only low productivity firms would sell

 stock on these terms)5 However, in doing so, they would identify themselves as low produc-

 tivity firms with a resulting negative impact on their current market values. If, therefore, firms

 (or their managers) are concerned with the current as well as the future market values of their

 equity, this second effect may deter even low productivity firms from issuing equity.

       Allowing for dividends leads to only a slight modification of the equity equation as long as

dividend levels are fixed. Then, the end of period equity of the firm becomes


                                                                                                                  (4)

where d1 is the level of dividends. The rationale for such an assumption is similar to that for res-

tricting equity issues. Dividends arc negative equity issues to which a firm has made a prior

commitment. Only low productivity firms with a high incremental value for such funds as pro-

tection against bankruptcy would seek to abandon this commitment and the consequent negative

signal involved should discourage such changes)6

      If a firm is, in addition, constrained in the amount of debt that it can issue and that con-

straint is binding, then the output function is even simpler. Let b, denote the maximum level of

allowed borrowing, then

                   w, (,q,   = dollar amount of investment = (a, ,. + b,)


      The value of equity in providing protection against bankruptcy is also greater for low than high productivity
finns, since low productivity ñrms are in greater danger of bankruptcy.
   16 In practice, since dividend levels typically involve an implied promise of continuity, reducing dividends to
obtain equity funds is likely to be less appealing than issuing equity since the cturent equity yield is likely to be
smaller.
                                                 -10-

 which is inherited equity plus the level of borrowing allowed under the credit constraint. If the

output (investment) of these firms is added to that of firms which are merely equity constrained,

 then the aggregate investment function will now include the allowed borrowing level, b, as an

explanatory variable. The investment function of equation (3) can thus be rewritten as

                                    q=h(w,,r,v311a1_11b1)                                         (5)

where b1 represents the level of rationed credit and hb > 0.

     Extending the circulating capital model to incorporate investment in long-lived physical

capital is principally a matter of redefining the production period. Consider a firm whose sole

investment project consists of a plant with a fixed life of T periods. Assume for simplicity that

funds borrowed to support the plant are due to be repaid (including accrued interest) at the end

of period T, that input costs and output revenues are contemporaneous in each subperiod

r = l,...T (or at least are subject to minimal uncertainty looking forward from the beginning of

each sub-period) and that intervening subperiod profits are reinvested at a safe rate of return

the end-of-period T return to the plant investment is

                                            T

                                           t=1


where    (k) is the profit in subpcriod: looking forward from the time of the initial investment

which is a random variable and a function of that initial investment, k. The end-of-period —T

equity of the firm is then


                                     r =AT(k)—(I+rO)TbO

where b0 is the level of initial borrowing and r0 is the contractual rate of return on that borrow-

ing. If a7 is less than zero, the firm goes bankrupt and incurs a bankruptcy cost proportional to

its scale of operation, k. Finally, initial borrowing by the firm is simply
                                                          —11—



                                                    b0 = p k —a

 wherep is the price of capital goods and a0 is the initial equity of the firm.

        If t(k)   is linear in k (i.e. constant-returns-to-scale), this long-run investment problem is

 identical in structure to the circulating capital formulation described above. Thus, nothing in the

 model restricts the definition of investment to circulating capital and the basic implications of

 financial market imperfections m the circulating capital model, (e.g. the dependence of invest-

 ment on both inherited equity and the uncertainty of the economic environment)17 can apply

equally well with fixed capital investment.

       Several points should be made about the nature of aggregate (and individual firm) invest-

ment behavior implicit in equations (4) and (5). First high profitability in any given period by

generating increases in firm equity levels (for non-credit constrained firms) and increased cash

flow (for credit constrained finns) will lead to increased future investment. Thus, the model sug-

gests the kind of significant relationship between cuirent operating cash flow and investment

found by Hubbard, Fazzari and Petersen [1988], among others. Also, if high profitability in any

period is related to increases in demand in that period, the model will exhibit the kind of

accelerator behavior that has been so successful in explaining actual investment behavior.t8 The

model can be usefully thought of, therefore, as providing a microeconomic rationale for both the

cash flow and accelerator aspects of investment behavior that appear to play such a significant

role in practice.19

    However. in practice, there are cneiplications inrrodtced by the existence of long-lived capital. If loans are
made on a thort term basis, then a bankruptcy constraint must be defined for each sub-period, t, which, in turn,
requires that there be some meaas of valuing fixed capital at these intervening times. Doing this is not
straightforward, Also, firms typicIly invest in both fixed and working capitaL Thus, each individual decision
period entails choices of both long-lived mvestment and cuntnt output. The interaction of these two kinds of
decisions also signthcandy complicates the analysis, although it dees not chenge its fwidameinal implicauont
      See Elmer [1967). Jorgensen [19631 and Linmer [1971) for examples of a large literanire.
  19 A second
                accelerator like effect also arises if there is fixed capital and increases in demand for a firm's output
is persistent. Then past increates in output and profitability are Likely to be indicators of future profitability which
                                                          - 12 -


      The role of interest rates in determining investment may be circumscribed in two important

ways. First, the critical rate in the model is that facing firms not some average rate on all assets.

With imperfectly informed lenders, changes in general market rates do not necessarily lead to

changes in the rates charged to borrowing flrms.2o Some part of the shift in loan supply is

absorbed by increased credit rationing since charging higher interest rates has an adverse effect

on the quality and riskiness of the borrower pooi (see below). Thus, the rate, r,, (and the associ-

ated expected return to lenders r, ) which enters the investment model above may vary

significantly less than widely observed market rates which would be available for use in any

empirically estimated investment equation. Second, the impact of interest rates tends to be small

relative to the impact of changes in a firm is financial position,21 and real interest rate series

have until the quite recent past been observably quite stable. Thus, the variability in the finan-

cial positions of firms and the perceived riskiness of the environment they face over the business

cycle can be responsible for a far greater share of the variation in investment over time than

market interest rates. For both reasons, the model provides an explanation for the relatively

small and elusive role that interest rates play in empirical investment equations and suggests chat

interest rates themselves do not play a primary role in macroeconomic stabilization.22
would raise the value of a firm's fixed capital stock. In a world without informational imperfections, any such
increases in future profitability would be reflected in the market values of firms and would enter a classical
investment equation through Tobin's q. In a model with imperfect information, it is the perception of the
manager's of a finn, based on their private information, which matter and these perceptions matter in two distinct
ways. First, parallel to the classical effect, a rise in future expected return (i.e. an increase in expected pnces
relative to w ) will directly elicit higher levels of output. But, in addition, higher future profitability increases the
flow of future equity funds and affects ouq,ut (investment) through that channel as well. In practice, of cotnse.
stock market valuations and internal firm assessments may be highly correlated, especially in cross-sectional data.
so that the two models will be hard to distinguish. Nevertheless there are important differences between the two.
For example, in the past, stock market values have appeared to fluctuate with any clear relationship to future firm
profitability and cash flow. Such fluctuations would affect Tobin's q and investment in the classical, but would not
affect investment in the model presented here.
      See Stiglica and Weiss [19811 and the discussion below in Section II.
   21 See
           Greenwald and Stiglitz [1986).
      These same factors also explain why properly specified neo-classical investment models like those of Abel
[1980] and Abel and Blanchard [1986] perform relatively less well empirically than simple accelerator models.
                                                     - 13 -


      Finally, as will be noted extensively in later sections of this paper, investment, although

defined for explanatory purposes as investment in physical capital of the usual sort, need not and

should not be interpreted so narrowly. Part of investment takes the form of working capital and

the hiring and training of workers and a rise in the cost of investment (because, for example, of a

deterioration in a firm's equity position) will be reflected as a reduction in working capital, in

employment, and, since the costs of working capital and hiring are part of the costs which deter-

mines aggregate supply, in aggregate supply and labor demand. Pricing, too, may have an

important investment component. If future demand depends on current sales, then firms will

invest in future demand by lowering current prices and expanding current sales.23 An increase in

the cost of investment will consequently appear as an increase in current prices and a reduction

in current output as firms respond by reducing investment in future demand. Again, therefore, a

reduction in investment will appears as a reduction in current supply. Productivity growth may

also have an important investment component both through research and development spending,

the learning associated with implementation of new technologies embodied in fixed capital

investment and learning-by-doing related to higher current output. Thus, the idea of investment

should not be narrowly construed as relating solely to fixed investment and in what follows we

will cake such a broad view.



Section II: Credit Rationing and Loan Markets

     In describing loan markets, this section will focus on the role of bank lending. The

justification for doing this is threefold. First, cyclical changes in firm financing are dominated

by changes in short term bank financing. This is especially nue at the peak and during the

    See Phelps and Wirner(19711 for a model of this kind.
                                                      - 14 -


 downward phase of the cycle.24 Second, the role (or lack of role) of monetary policy is central to

 macroeconomic theory and, in most modem industrial societies, the proximate impact of mone-

 tary policy is on the banking system. Therefore, in examining the role of monetary policy, the

 banking system is a logical point of departure. Finally, a model of loan markets based on bank

 lending appears relatively easy to extend to incorporate direct lending to firms, whereas the
opposite — extending a direct loan model to incorporate a banking system — seems to be less

straightforward.

      We will assume, following Stiglitz and Weiss [1981], that lenders are unable to distinguish

among borrowers, that borrowers accept a common fixed loan size and that as the contractual

rate of interest charged borrowers rises the quality of the borrower pool falls.25 This occurs

because the pool of borrowers at high contractual interest rates consists to a disproportionate

degree of those who, because they have high expected default rates, do not face comparably high

expected interest rates. This means that as contractual interest rates rise, the expected returns on

loans may first rise, but ultimately fall as the cost of deterioration in the borrower poo1

outweighs the direct gains from higher contractual rates. At the same time, the variance of loan

returns should rise steadily with rising contractual rates of interest as default rates arise.

Changes in contractual rates of interest will, therefore, trace out a mean-variance frontier of loan

returns as illustrated in figure 1. We will assume that the expected return on this frontier peaks

at a contractual interest rate rm corresponding to an expected lender return 7,,, and a return stan-

dard deviation, a,,, -

     Next we assume that lenders (banks) have a choice of investing in risky loans along this


  24 See Zamowitz
                  [1986].
     See discussion in Appendix concerning loan sizes and the information to be derived from observing loan sizes
                                                        - 15 -


 frontier or in safe government bonds which pay a return, r, in period t. In making this choice

 we assume that banks are risk averse and characterized by declining absolute risk aversion as

 their financial positions improve.26 Like some of the firms to which they lend, banks are

 assumed to be run by manager/decision-makers who are not fully diversified (i.e. they are

 disproportionately invested in the banks that they manage).

       A useful starting point is to consider a case in which loan demand at any interest rate below

 r,,, exceeds the total lending capacity of banks. Then banks will always ration credit and the

 efficient investment frontier for a bank runs along a line from the point r on the vertical axis to

 a tangency with the mean-variance loan return frontier traced out by varying contractual rares of

 interest (see figure 1) as long as rf is below . At interest rates on government bonds above Tm,

 banks   invest entirely in government bonds. The tangency point on the loan return frontier deter-

mines the terms on which bank loans are made. It necessarily occurs at an expected return at or

below ? and, thus, entails a contractual loan rate at or below Tm. The fraction of the bank's

assets devoted to commercial loans (on the terms determined by the tangency of the efficient

frontier and the loan return frontier) is then determined by the tangency of the bank decision

maker's mean-variance indifference curve with the efficient frontier. This too is shown in figure

1. The position of this tangency point depends on several factors.

      As rf falls toward zero, the point of tangency on the loan frontier may move only very
slightly, especially if the frontier has a shape like that shown in figure 1. As a result, the contrac-

tual rate of interest charged borrowers may be highly insensitive to changes in the rate of interest

in public securities markets. Nevertheless, as rcalls the tangency of the efficient frontier with


     Note that this represents a departure from the perfectly informed, risk neutral lenders of Section I. However.
accommodating such behavior does not fundamentally alter the characteristics of the firm level model.
                                                         - 16-


the bank indifference curves may change substantially leading to a significant change in bank

lending.

      As the financial positions of firms improve, the quality of the overall borrowing pool

improves, since firms are less likely to default. This appears as a shift upward in the loan return

frontier, since at each contractual rate of interest the expected return on loans rises and the van-

ance of returns falls as default rates decline. The slope of the efficient frontier will then become

steeper and the tangency of the frontier with the decision makers indifference curve will move to

the right (i.e. to a steeper point on the indifference curve).27 Thus, the optimal bank portfolio

will consist of a greater fraction of loans and a smaller fraction of government bonds. A reduc-

tion in the interest rate on the government bonds will have a similar effect. An improvement in

the financial position of a bank can be interpreted as a flattening of the risk-return indifference

curves (because of declining absolute risk aversion) and hence a shift to the right in their

tangency with the efficient frontier. This implies a greater fraction of commercial lending and

less investment in the safe government asset.28

      The actual level of bank commercial lending is the product of the share of loans in the bank

portfolio and the level of bank assets. The latter is, in turn, just the sum of bank capital and

deposits. Since we will assume that the money supply consists only of deposits and that reserve

requirements are negligible, deposits will be equal to the money supply. Thus total loans are


   v This is not quite the whole stoiy. The point of tangency with the loan return frontier will also shift — under
most circumstances — to the left. Thus the shaze of loans represented by any point along the horizontal axis will
increase and the total increase in the loan share in the bank's portfolio will consist of the combined effects of the
shift in the tangency with the indifference curve and the shift in tangency with the loan retum frontier. Also, as the
tangency with the loan return frontier changes the conacwaI rate of interest charged to firms changes.
      Altemauyely. the increase in the bank's financial position could be interpreted as a shift upward in all
expected returns (as net bank profits increase), if these are reinterpreted to reflect net bank profits after paying
interest on bank liabilities. This would move the whole picture to a region of the indifference map with flaucr
indifference curves (since absolute risk aversion has declined).
                                                   - 17 -



                                                                                                  (4)
                                  bt=[_+Yi] [r'.a1_i,a,i]
 where 1 t3         0 is the fraction of bank assets loaned which depends on r, the rate of return on

 government bonds, a1_1, borrowing finn equity positions and a1, the equity position of banks

 astheyenterperiod: with1 <0,>Oand>0. Thevariablc'isbankcapitaJinperioj
 t, M, is the nominal money supply and P is the price level, all magnitudes except those last two
 being real variables.

       The contractual rate of interest on loans in the rationing equilibrium is

                                        r, =a(rf,a1...1) a1 0,                                   (5)

 and ct2 may be either positive or negative. The level of bank equity does not affect      r in the
rationing equilibrium because r1 depends only on the tangency of the efficient frontier with the

 loan return frontier. If at this contractual interest rate the demand for loans is less than the

amount that bank portfolio decisions make available (i.e. there is no credit rationing), then com-

petition among banks will drive down the contractual rate of interest (given that loan size

remains fixed as in Stiglitz-Weiss [1981]). As this occurs bank loan returns move down along

the loan return frontier. The available efficient portfolio frontier under these circumstances runs

from the point r, on the vertical axis (see figure la) to the point of the loan return frontier

corresponding to a particular contractual interest rate. Along this new frontier banks select a

portfolio mix at which it is tangent to their risk-return indifference curves. At this tangency

lower contractual returns will lead to less loan investment by banks and hence lower loansupply.

Ac the same time lower contractual rates of interest increase loan demand. At some point the

two just balance and an equilibrium without credit rationing occurs. However, under these con-

ditions, r1 still   depends on r md a1_1 which affects both loan demand and the position of the
                                                       - 18-

loan return frontier.29

     In order to complete the loan sector of the model, we must specify how bank equity and

bank capital evolve over time. For simplicity we assume that bank capital may conic only from

reinvested earning. Bank capital borrowing and new equity, like those of other firms, will be

assumed to be impossibIe. Formally, therefore,

                                            -1=z-17z-2-1
where ; is bank profitability and dt1 is bank dividends in period r — 1.

     The restrictions on capital borrowing and new equity issues might suggest that bank capital

is also bank equity. However, that is not the case. The equity of the bank looking forward from

the beginning of period : includes the value of the bank's franchise as perceived by its
managers. This will depend, if there are restrictions on entry and deposit interest, on level of the

expected future money supply and thus, in turn, on current monetary policy. To keep things as

simple as possible we will assume formally that


                                               Oi ='1+Ji...1
where          the value of the bank's franchise depends upon current and expected future mone-

tary policy.

      The availability of credit to firms and the terms on which credit is made available, there-

fore, depends on the financial condition of the firms themselves and that of the banking sector,

which reinfortes the cash flow and accelerator-Like investment behavior noted in Section I.

Monetary policy affects loan conditions through a number of channels. First, and perhaps least


      If banks can distinguish among categories of potential borrowers this process of increasing loan demand will
entail the making of the loans to successively less attractive groupa and razioning the marginal group in equilibnum.
      The borrowing restriction here has no significant impact on the implications of the mode!.
                                                       - 19 -


  importantly, money policy will affect the interest rate on government bonds. Second, changes in

  monetary policy will lead to changes in the equity of banks due to changes in the perceived

  value of their franchises.31 Third, monetary policy increases the assets in the hands of banks that

  are available for loans to firms. This last effect is an artifact of the assumed restriction of lend-

  ing in the model to banks. Monetary policy which shifts control over financial investment funds

  from households to banks naturally increases lending to firms if only banks are able to do this.

 However, to the extent that banks enjoy special advantages in making loans to firms a similar

 impact, but one of lesser magnitude, would occur even if direct lending to firms were allowed.

 Allowing banks to borrow for capital purposes would also offset this third effect, but again (in

 the absence of perfect capital markets and perfect deposit competition) onlypartially.



 Section III. The Macroeconomic Model

          The changes introduced into a standard macroeconomic framework by incorporating the

effects of financial market imperfections are extensive. However, much of the familiar structure

of the traditional model can be preserved. If the inherited equity levels of firms (a,_1), and the

level of environmental uncertainty (a,) axe treated for the moment as exogenous parameters,

then a goods market equilibrium (suppressing these parameters for notational convenience) can

be written


                                    y, =i,(r, ,b, ,w,)+g, +c,(r,',y,)                                         (6)

where y, is real output, g, is real government spending and c, is real consumption which is

assumed to depend on the level of output and the interest rate on government bonds, r, which is


     This is similar in spirit, but Likely to be moce significant in magnitude than the wealth effect of monetary
policy.
                                                       - 20 -


assumed to    be the interest rate available to consumers.32 The principle difference from the tradi-

tional IS curve is that financial market conditions are no longer embodied in a single interest rate

variable, but rather in one interest rate facing consumers (re) and two variables (r, , b) which

capture the loan market conditions, involving both price and quantity rationing, facing firms.

       The financial market equilibrium (LM-curve) interacting with the goods market described

above implicitly consist of four financial markets: (1) a money market equating the supply and

demand for demand deposits, (2) a government bond market equating the demand for govern-

ment bonds to the existing supply, (3) the market for loans described in the previous section and

(4) a market for the fixed amount of outstanding common stock of firms.

       The last of these markets can be ignored in the analysis which follows. This stock market

can be thought of as equilibrating the supply and demand for shares through the determination of

a stock price per share. Since equity sales are excluded in the model, this stock price does not

influence investment and, since consumption does not depend on perceived wealth, it does not

affect consumption demand.33 Nor need its interaction with other asset markets be considered.

Strictly speaking stock price should enter the demand curves for both money and government

bonds (and loans if banks were allowed to own common stocks), but in this case the stock price

could be eliminated by solving for stock prices from the stock supply and demand equation and

substituting into the money and government bond market equations.

       Similarly, the money and government bond demand equations can be solved to yield a

reduced form equation for the government bond interest rate in terms of the real supplies of
  32 This consumption function which is common to traditional mroeconomic models is used for the sake ol
simplicity. A full general equilibrium model with intertemporal consumer utility maximization is developed in
Greenwald and Stiglicz [19861. A model with a consumption function modified to take count of permanent
income in a rational expectations context is developed in Greenwald and Sciglitz [1988). Another general
equilibrium alternative is developed by Woodford [1988).
      Relaxing this condition would complicate the analysis without altering iLS fundamental conclusions.
                                              - 21 -


government bonds and money and the level of output, y1, which presumably affects money

demand. This is roughly equivalent to a traditional LM curve and will be written formally as

                                      G, M
                             rf=(y1,---,-—
                                      't ': ,t1>O,(2>O,(3<O                                    (7)


where G, is the outstanding nominal amount of government debt.


     The principal innovation that arises from credit rationing is the introduction of equations

(4) and (5) describing the loan behavior of banks. These determine r1 and b, as functions of rf

given the equity positions of banks, a71 the equity positions of borrowing firms, a,_1; the levels

of environmental uncertainty () and wages (we) which affect the demand for bank loans; and
the levels of bank capital (t) and the money supply (M1 I?,) which determine bank resources.

For analytical purposes, because two loan market variables are involved, the simplest approach

is to incorporate the loan market equilibrium into the IS curve by substituting from equations (4)

and (5) into the investment function of equation (6). This yields a goods market equilibrium of

the form


                               M
                 y,   =i, r rf,—,w,
                                Pt
                                    ,b rfl,—,w,                +g1   +c1(rf,y1)                (8)
                                           Pt

where the variables a1_1 ,     ,    , c and q,_1 have been -suppressed as parameters. Since r1
is increasing and b1 is decreasing in r, an increase in rf reduces investment demand and hence

aggregate demand. This credit-rationing-modified IS curve is, therefore, downward sloping in

the usual way.

    The traditional macroeconomic equilibrium is then depicted in figure 2 with the intersection

of the IS and LM curves determining an equilibrium level of output and the government bond

interest rate for any given ievel of real wages. It also has several familiar properties. An
                                                          22 -

  increase   in government debt shifts the LM curve upward leading to an increase in interest rates

  and a reduction in output. Also the model is characterized by the standard neutrality result. If

 the government debt and money supply are increased proportionately, then prices increase in the

 same proportion and real magnitudes are unchanged. The same result arises, if the taxes

 required for debt service are fully discounted by taxpayers and the money supply increases.

       However, there are significant differences from a traditional macromodel. In particular an

 increase in the (real) money supply shifts both the LM curve downward and the modified IS

 curve to the right, since such a shift directly increases bank lending. As a result it is conceivable

 given the relative magnitudes of these shifts that an increase in the money supply could lead to

 higher equilibrium output and higher interest rates on government bonds. And, sincemonetary

 policy affects the IS curve directly, its effect on total output is likely to be far more significant

 than that of government debt operations alone which affect only the LM curve. This seems to be

 borne out by empirical observations. The added potency of money supply changes arises

 because it shifts resources into and out of the hands of financial institutions with particular

access to borrower information.

      Furthermore unanticipated monetary policy may have stronger impacts still. Assuming that

most firms have nominal liabilities (bonds, bank debt, taxes payable, etc.) and real assets, an

unexpected monetary expansion may lead to a transfer from lenders (ultimately households) (0

firms, enhancing the equity positions of finns. This would lead to a further rightward shift in the

IS curve, a further increase in output and more upward pressure on interest rates.


    This assumes that the increase in the supply of government debt is not completely offset by an increase in
demand fci government debt in anticipation of higher future taxes. Moreover, since the consequences of the source
of the increase in debt (i.e. higher government spending or lower taxes) are not considered the change should be
interpreted in terms of a comparison ofa high debt economy (fir histot'ical reasons) to a low debt economy.
                                               - 23 -


     Another exogenous factor which exerts a particular influence in this credit and equity

rationing model is an increase in the uncertainties faced by individual firms. In practice, this

could correspond either to an increase in the overall rate of inflation (which has empirically been

related to increased relative price fluctuations and to increased variability in rate of inflation) or

to an increase in the unpredictability of monetary policy (as in 1979-82). Such an increase in

uncertainty would reduce investment demand both directly and indirectly through its effect on

bank lending terms. The IS curve of equation (8) would shift to the left and equilibrium output

and real interest rates would fall (although the change in actual loan rates might be small).

     The model is completed by an equilibrium in the labor market which determines the real

wage, w1, as a function of the IS-LM equilibrium. The labor demand curve in this market is just

the marginal product of labor at a given level of output net of the incremental risk of bankruptcy

borne by managers as output (and employment) increases. This is a downward sloping marginal

product curve of the usual sort as shown in figure 3. However, this labor demand curve shifts

with the fiuiancial position of firms. An improvement in a firm's equity position reduces the

incremental risk associated with increased output (and employment) at any given output level.

Thus, unanticipated shifts in monetary policy which lead to changes in firm equity positions will

shift the labor demand curve. Similarly, credit rationing restrictions and the cost of paying

workers in advance of production may change the marginal product of labor (net of associated

material and interest costs) in response to changes in loan market conditions.

     The labor supply relationship may be embodied in either an upward sloping supply curve of

the usual sort or a no-shirking constraint of the kind developed in Shapiro and Snglitz [1984]. In

both cases, shifts in policy which change the labor demand curve (by inducing shifts in either

firm equity positions, loan market conditions or the uncertainty of the economic environment)
                                                 - 24 -


  will lead to changes in
                            equilibrium employment, wages and output (see figure 3). In the case of
 a labor supply function there will be no associated unemployment. In thecase of a no-shirking

 constraint (efficiency wage) model the shift in the labor market equilibrium will be associated

 with a change in unemployment. In both cases the change in wages will tend to offset, but only

 partially, the contemporary change in output at constant wages predicted by the IS-LM interac-

 tion along. Finally, it should be noted that these changes inoutput may be relatively short-lived

 (in contrast to the supply effects of capital accumulation in overlapping generations models),

 since firm financial conditions may change relatively quickly (along with loan market condi-

 tions), and they do not depend on any arbitrary nominal price rigidities (in contrasts to tradi-

 tional Keynesian models).



Section IV. Short Term Adjustment

     The equilibrium shift in output and wages implied by a particular movement in the labor

demand curve (see figure 3) should, given the likely slopes of either the labor supply or the non-

shirk constraint curve, involve significant changes in both wages and output (employment).

However, with imperfect information the adjustment path to the new equilibrium is likely to

involve large initial changes in output (employment) and only small changes in wages. This

possibility is based on three simple assumptions in addition to the assumption that firm decision

makers are risk averse; namely, that firms are uncertain of the impact of their actions, that this

uncertainty increases with the size of movements from the statusquo and that uncertainties asso-

ciated with price and wage changes are greater than those associated withquantity changes (e.g.

in output or unemployment). The first two of these assumptions should be uncontroversial, but

the last is central and requires some explanation which will be provided below.
                                                      - 25 -


     The reason that rates of adjustment concerning the impacts of different decision variables

are related to their relative uncertainties can be seen intuitively as follows, if firms are risk

averse, then they will consider both the mean and the variance of the returns yielded by differer

combinations of changes in decision variables. As firms make adjustments, the expected value

and the variance of profits change together. However, if uncertainty concerning the impact of

one decision variable A (a price) is greater than uncertainty concerning the impact of another

decision variable B (a quantity), then, other things being equal, the optimal portfolio of adjust-

ments will contain less movement in A than B                    Following such initial changes which are

greater in B than A, the expected returns to further changes in A are likely to rise relative to the

expected returns to changes in B (since B will now be closer to its new optimal value). Thus,

ultimately A may adjust as extensively as B, but in the short run A wiU exhibit inertia relative to

B.

     One important qualification must, however, be made to this simple description. When the

consequences of actions are particularly uncertain, and firms are particularly risk averse, it is

sometimes suggested that firms will simply maintain the status quo. But what does it mean to

continue doing what you were doing before? Does it mean keeping absolute prices fixed or rela-

tive prices? Absolute wages, or relative wages? We provide here an answer: very risk averse

firms will take those actions which minimize the variability of their profits. Thus, in speaking in

the previous paragraph of the magnitude of changes in A relative to B, these must be interpreted

as changes from the minimum variance point not as changes from pre-existing levels. If the

economic environment is one in which the variance of profit is related to relative wages or

prices, firms will minimize variance by keeping relative wages or prices fixed. Thus, in the
      Where uncertainty here is appropriately defined in terms of the covariance matrtx of uncertainties cortcerrnng
the impacts of the several decision variables.
                                                      - 26 -


  present model, the minimum variance response is one of no change in real magnitudes.36


      The arguments just given imply that immediate term movement in real wages from the no

 change point will be relatively small compared to those of output and employment, if firm deci-

 sion makers face relatively large uncertainties about the effects ofwage changes. In efficiency

 wage models this is likely to be the case. The usual efficiency wage assumption is that
                                                                                            average
 productiviries can be observed accurately. Thus, if a large group of workers is laid-off or not

 replaced (where there is substantial normal turnover), the lost labor supply is just the number of

 workers involved times average productivity. There is little or no uncertainty about this. How-

 ever, firms are likely to be much less certain of the impact of a wage change on labor supply

 since this involves estimating the impact of wage changes onturnover (both in quality and quan-

 my) and worker performance. Neither is likely to be known very accurately nor can these

effects be ascertained immediately following any initial wage change (they take time to become

manifest). The result will then be a pattern of adjustment characterized by rapid output and

employment changes and small wages and price changes that is very similar to what is observed

in practice.



Section V. Long Terni Dynamics

     The long run dynamics of the model are driven by rates of accumulation in capital and

equity. For simplicity, we will assume that bank and firm capital grow in proportion (because of

structures of relative profitability in banking and production activities) and thata1, the environ-

mental uncertainty, is fixed. The IS-LM-labor demand-labor supply equilibrium for given real

money arid reaJ government debt levels can be solved to yield a level of equity accumulation as a
    These arguments are developed in Greenwald and Stigliiz [1989].
                                               - 27 -


function of a,_1 and presumably k1. In this reduced form function


                                i,=g(k,a,_1),g1>O,g2>O.
Higher levels of firm equity (and higher levels of physical capital) tend to lead to higher levels of

output and investment. In steady-state, investment must replace depreciation and equip new

workers entering the labor force (if the labor force is growing). Thus, in steady-state

                                      i=(8+n)k=g(k.a)                                            (9)

where n is the rate of growth of the labor force, k and a must now be interpreted as per capita

magnitudes and we assume constant returns to scale (including in the bankruptcy cost function).

In a general equilibrium context,g1 should be less than 6+n (because increased capital which

increases wages and interest rates has a relatively small general equilibrium effect on new

investment demand). Under such a condition, the steady-state levels of a and k in equation (9)

are related by an upward sloping curve (see figure 4). This is essentially an equity demand

curve. It describes the level of equity per capita in steady-state which is required to generate

sufficient investment to sustain a particular level of the per capita capital stock. For levels of a

below this curve, the per capita capital stock will be declining. For the levels of a above the

curve, k will be increasing.

     A second steady-state relationship exists between k and a which can be described as an

equity supply curve. Higher levels of both the capital stock and equity tend to increase output,

drive up wages and ultimately reduce profits and retained earnings. Since retained earning are

the source of equity growth and equity per capita must grow in steady-state at a proportional rate

n, the steady-state equity demand relationship is

                                  na=h(k,a),h1<0,h2<O                                           (10)
                                                           - 28 -

  which is a downward sloping curve (see figure 4). Where this second curve intersects
                                                                                       the equity
  demand curve is the long-run steady-state of the equity and credit rationing model. A simple

  phase plane analysis indicates that the equilibrium is stable with dynamic paths which may

  either return monotoriically (most likely) or cyclically to equilibrium. Thus, temporary devia-

  tions in firm equity levels, due for example to unexpected money Supply changes, are ultimately

 eliminated as the model returns over time to the long run steady-state. Cycles in these models

 appear, therefore, like most observed business cycles to be self-limiting.

       This long-run steady-state can also be used to study long-run comparative statics. For

 example a sudden increase in uncertainty (a1) shifts the equity demand curve upward and yields

 a new steady-state with lower capital and higher equity levels.37



 Section VI. Conclusion

       The important point to note about the macroeconomic implications ofeven the relatively

simple model of credit and equity rationing developed here is that it describes many aspects of

observed aggregate behavior, which are difficult to account for in terms of traditional

macroeconomic models, remarkably accurately. At the same time, it embodies realistic

microeconomic assumptions about information availability which produces highly reasonable

rnicroeconomic descriptions of firm and lending institution behavior.




  "   If learning by doing is incorporated into the model, different steady-states con-espond to different growth rates
as well as different levels and temporary deviations from steady-state have persistent effects on the level of output
(see Greenwaid and Sliglitz[1989]).
                                                    - 29-


                                                Appendix


     This appendix describes the structure of information which underlies the microeconomic

description of firm level behavior in Section I of this paper. In doing so, it will be useful to

begin with the model of the text altered only slightly to include an additive productivity factor,

8,, which is unobservable to outside investors but known with certainty by a firm's managers so

that the profits of the firm are


                                     it, = p1   q1 — (1   + r, ) b,   + 0,

Substitution from the definition of b,, and normalization so that (,, output per unit of labor, is

one, yield




where p, is the price at which goods are sold at the end of period r, w, is the wage level, q, is

output (investment) in period :, r, is the return to lenders and a,_t is the equity funds which the

firm inherits from period i—I. At the beginning of each period, each firm receives an indepen-

dent 0, draw from a distribution which is the same for all firms38 This distribution has

E [8,]=0 and a range [Ga 'Ob]- At the beginning of a period a firm knows w1, q,, a,_1, r, and

8, with certainty. It also knows the distribution of p, but not the particular realized value of p,.

which materializes only the end of the period.

     At the beginning of period r, neither q, nor 0, is observable to outside investors. We will

also assume for the moment that lending to firms is done by banks who have access to

confidential finn information (i.e., they observe 0, and q, ), but are constrained not to reveal that

     This restriction is of no practical significance since different 0 distributions would correspond to
observauonally different classes of firms and we nee4 only replicate the analysis for each such class.
                                                   - 30-

 information either by revealing borrowing levels, b,, or by acting upon it (i.e., by purchasing the

 stock of a firm in the open market). Thus only a...1 for each firm is observable to outside (i.e.,

 non-bank) investors at the beginning of period r.

        We assume that financial contracts arc limited to either (1) debt contracts, which provide a

 fixed return, r,, if a firm is solvent or, in the event of insolvency, all the assets of the firm, or (2)

 equity contracts which provide a fixed fraction of the firm's net worth if the firm is solvent and

 nothing otherwise. In practice, under equity contracts shareowners receive their returns through

 dividends. We will assume that loans are made by banks, which arc owned, in turn, by house-

 holds and that equity is held directly by households (i.e., Glass-S teagle like restraints restrict

 bank ownership of common stock). We will also assume initially that all investors are risk neu-

 tral and require an expected rate of r, on their investments.

        Under these circumstances, the equation determining the level ofr1, the contractual rate of

return on loans, directly determines the probability that a firm goes bankrupt (i.e., it, 0). From

the definition of it,, bankruptcy implies that


                                                  (1+r,)a,_1+8,
                             p, < (l+r,)w, —                           E



where, by definition, is, is   the price realization below which firms go bankrupt. The expected

total return to investors is, therefore,



                    b,E(1+r,)=(u, .q,+e,) (1_F (u,))+ j(q,p, +O,)dF(p,)
                                                                0


since   at prices above u,, lenders receive ,    per   unit of output plus 9, and, at prices below u,.
lenders   as residual claimants receive the entire p, per unit of output plus 0, again. The level of

r,, and hence is,, is then set so that this expected return is equal to (1 +r, ) b,.   Thus, substitution
                                                      - 31


for b, and rearrangement of terms yields

                         —            a_i+O1/(1+r,)              —               —
                    (1+r1) w1—                               =u(1—F(u))+fp1dF.

which is just the equation of the text modified by the inclusion of the 9 factor (which is

observed by bank lenders).

      Expected profits are also a simple extension of those in the text. In particular

                                             —                   —                   0,
                         E(1t)=(1—(l+r,)w)q1+(1+r1)                      a1_1+
                                                                                     I+   r

Thus, in both instances (expected profits and the definition of u1), the effect of the additive pro-

ductivity factor, 6, is to replace a1_1 by at_i + 0, /(1 4-r,), and the output function of the firm

can be written

                                                 —                 0,
                                       = h (w, ,     .0,)         +—
                                                                        I + r1

where the function h     is exactly that of the text.39 If, therefore, we define

                                                                 8,
                                                     a,_1+        —
                                                             1   + r,

then the analysis can proceed directly in terms of z,_1 instead of a,_1. Since q, is linear in z1 and

u, is a function of the ratio of q, and z,, u, is independent of z,. Thus, the objective function of

finns,

                               (1—(1+r,)w,)q, +(1+r,)z, —cq, F(u1),


      The use of a more realistic multiplicative productivity factor would merely complicate the analysis without
altenng its basic implications.
                                                 - 32 -

 is linear in; and the end of period valuation funciion for the multiperiod problem is linear in

 end of period equity, as are future expected profits (and their discounted value). Theexpected

 end-of-period market value of the firm is, therefore,


                                 E[V1]=kE[z1+j]=kE[a141]=k'z,

 where k' and k will depend on w1 ,r1 , a and their future expected values, and the second

 equality follows from the fact that E [Os] = 0, cx ante, for each r.

      Ns' w consider a decision to raise an amount of equity, e0. The share of the firm retained by

 the original shareholders depends on the market value of the firm when it decides to issue equity.

 V, where


                           V,1=              E[V,)—k'E[z,]               l_
                                    1+r1                            l+r,


where   the expectations are now taken conditional on the information available to outside equity

investors. Thus

                                               E [8, /equity issued]
                               E[z,J=a1_1+                —
                                                       I+

The share of the firm sold to new shareholders is




                                           3e0+V
The cost of this equity sale from the perspective of the firm's inside managers is

                                                                    8,
                             sk'(z1+e0)=sk' a,_1+e0+ —
                                                     +          I    r1


since they observe 8,. Since the new equity simply increases a1_1, the value of the equity issue,

e0, is k" e0. Thus, the condition that firms issue equity is simply
                                                           - 33   -

                                                           0,
                                e0k' a,...1+e0+             —
                                                           + r,)
                                                                      (e0+V)k'e0
                                                      (1


or, after rearranging terms,

                             8,     (k'— l)a,_1(l +r,) + k'E[8/equity issued].                                    (A-i)

      With no impediments to issuing equity, k' is equal to one and, the equity issue condition

becomes

                                            0, E [0/equity issued].                                               (A-2)

This condition implies, in turn, that no equity will be issued. The expectation of 8, for equity

issuers would be derived only from those with 8, less than that expectation (i.e., those who issue

equity according to equation (A-2) above) and this can only occur at °a' the lower limit of the 8

distribution, where essentially no one issues equity. Thus, no equilibrium without equtty issue

restrictions is compatible with the information structure assumed here.

      However, an equilibrium with such restriction, and consequently k'> 1, may exist. In that

case, it is still firms for which 8, is less than or equal to some threshold who issue equity (see

equation (A- 1)) and, in consequence,

                              E [0/equity issued] <E [0/noequity issued]

Thus, firms announcing equity issues will face an immediate decline in current market value. If

current, as well as end-of-period market value enters a firm's objective function,41 this will in


  4° In general k' exceeds one.ecause without being able to issue unlimited amounts of equity, positive
tnkruptcy risk ensures that (l+r,)w, <I and firms make positive profits r unit of output. Since equity
increases output, it cams these positive profits in addition to the normal return (1 + r,).
      Such a situation will arise if firms serve existing shareholders and existing shareholdezs sell a fraction of their
current holdings in the beginning of each period (after equity issues have been announced). An over-lapping
generations model in which current shareholders are older households coftsunung wealth at a fixed rate will give rise
in such a situation.
                                                         -34-

  turn represent an additional fixed cost of issuing equity and a further deterrent to doing so. In

  practice, therefore, asymmetric information concerning firm prospects (i.e., 6) between

  managers and outside investors may well restrict equity issues to a small number of firms and an

  insignificant amount of funds, as appears to be the case in practice.42 This is the underlying
  rationale for the equity issue constraint.

        In relaxing the informational assumptions described above, the obvious place to begin is

 with the assumptions of well-informed bank lenders. If banks cannot distinguish among poten-

 tial borrowers (i.e. they cannot observe q, or 6,), then the contractual rate of interest r, must be

 set at the same level for all firms. Under these circumstances, the analysis must be adjusted

 slightly but remains fundamentally unchanged. There is an induced tendency for poor (i.e., low

 8,) firms to borrow more since they have higher default rates and hence lower expected interest

 costs for any r, than good (i.e., high 8,) firms. This does not, however, alter the linearity of the

 problem in z, so that the basic qualitative results of the fully-informed lender case continue to

 apply (slightly stronger assumptions arc needed to ensure that the second order maximum condi-

tions are satisfied).

       A further difficulty is raised if lenders are able to infer 0, from the level of firm borrowing

and reveal this information to investors at large. However, in thiscase, poor firms would have

an incentive to increase borrowing (and invest in non-production technologies) to conceal their

low 0, values from the market. At the same time, very poor firms (i.e., those with z, <0) have

an incentive to borrow a great deal (since the probability of bankruptcy declines with output for

such firms) so that the need for viable firms to distinguish themselves from very poor firms

  42
      With decreasing-returns-to-scale, the ValLie of additional equity is also smaller for high 0 than low 0 firms
since the extra output made possible by the additional equity is incrementally less valuable at the high 0 firms
higher levels of Output. See Taggart (1985].
                                            - 35 -


should set an upper limit on borrowing. Thus, if lenders attempted to infer firm quality from

borrowing levels, there would be a countervailing tendency for all firms to borrow the same

amount and equilibria exist in which borrowing levels are constant across firms and uninforma-

tive.
                                                - 36 -


                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY


 Abel, A. B. (1980), "Empirical Investment Equations: An Integrative Framework" in On the

      State of Macroeconomics, K. Brunner and A. Melizcr, eds., Carnegie-Rochester Conference

      Series on Public Policy, Vol. 12, pp. 39-9 1.

 Abel, A. B. and Blanchard, 0. J. (1986), "The Present Value of Profits
                                                                          and Cyclical Movements
      in Investments", Econometrica, VoL 54, pp. 249-274.

 Akerlof, G. A. (1984), "Gift Exchange and Efficiency Wage Theory: Four Views", American

     Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 74, pp. 79-83.

 Allen, F. (1984), "Reputation and Product Quality", Rand Journal of Economics, Vol. 15, pp.

     311-327.

Asquith, P. and Muffins, D. (1986), "Equity Issues and Stock Price Dilution", Journalof Finan.

     cia! Economics, Vol. 13, pp. 296-320.

Bernanke, B. and Gertier, M. (1989), "Agency Costs, Net Worth and Business Fluctuations',

     American Economic Review, Vol. 79, pp. 14-31.

Bulow, J. I. and Summers, L. H. (1985), "A Theory of Dual Labor Markets withApplications to

     Industrial Policy, Discrimination and Keynesian Unemployment", NBER Working Paper

     No. 1666 (July, 1985), Cambridge, MA.

Diamond, P. A. (1982), "Aggregate Demand Management in a Search Equilibrium", Journal of

    Polincal Economy, Vol. 90, pp. 881-894.

Eisner, R. (1967), "A Permanent Income Theory for Investment: Some Empirical Explorations,

    American Economic Review, Vol. 57, pp. 363-390.
                                             - 37   -




Greenwald, B., Kohn, M. and Stiglitz, J. E. (1989), "Financial Market Imperfections and Produc-

     dvity Growth", Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, (Forthcoming).

Greenwald, B. and Stiglitz, J. E. (1986), "Information, Finance Constraints and Business Fluc-

     tuations", NBER Working Paper, June, 1986, Cambridge, MA.

Greenwald, B. and Stiglitz, J. E. (1987), "Imperfect Information, Credit Markets and Unemploy-

     ment", European Economic Review, Vol. 31, pp. 223-230.

Greenwaid, B. and Stiglitz, J. E. (1988). "Money, Imperfect Information and Economic Fluctua-

     tions", in M. Kohn and S. C. Tsiang, eds., Expectations and Macroeconomics,, Oxford

     Univ. Press, Oxford.

Greenwald, B. and Stiglitz, J. E. (1989), "Toward a Theory of Rigidities", American Economic

     Review, Vol. 79, No. 2, pp. 364-369.

Greenwald, B., Stiglitz, J. E., and Weiss, A. M. (1984), "Informational Imperfections in Capital

     Markets and Macroeconomic fluctuations", American Economic Review, Papers and

     Proceedings, Vol. 74, pp. 194-199.

Hubbard, G., Fazzari, S. and Petersen, G. (1988), "Financing Constraints and Corporate Invest-

     ment", Brookings Papers and Economic Activity, No. 1, pp. 141-206.

Jorgensen, D. W. (1963), "Capital Theory and Investment Behavior", American Economic

    Review, Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 53, pp. 247-59.

Lintner, J. (1971), "Corporate Finance: Risk and Investment" in Dererminaius of investment

    Behavior, R. Ferber, ed., NBER, NY.

Lucas, R. E. (1979), "An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle", Journal of Political Econ-

    omy, Vol. 83, pp. 1113-1144.
                                             - 38-

 Myers, S. C. and Majiuf, N. S. (1984), "Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions When

      Firms Have Information That Investors Do Not", Journal ofFinancial Economics, Vol. 11,

     pp. 187-221.

 Phelps, E. S. and Winter, S. G. (1970), "Optimal Price Policy Under Atomistic Competition" in

     E. S. Phelps, ed. Microeconomic FoundatioM of Employment and Inflation Theory, New

     York, W. W. Norton and Co.

Poterba, J. and Summers, L. (1988), "Mean Reversion in Stock Prices", Journal of Financial

     Economics, Vol. 22, pp. 27-59.

Salop, J. and Salop, S. (1976), "Self-Selection and Turnover in the Labor Market", Quarterly

     Journal of Economics, Vol. 90, pp. 619-627.

Shapiro, C. and Stiglitz, J. E. (1984), "Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline Dev-

     ice", American Economic Review, Vol. 74, pp. 433-44.

Stiglitz, J. E. (1974), "Alternative Theories of Wage Determination and Unemployment in

     L.D.C.s: The Labor Turnover Model", Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 88, pp. 194-
     227.

Stiglitz, J. E. (1976), "The Efficiency Wage Hypothesis, Surplus Labour and the Distribution of

     Income in LD.C.s", Oxford Economic Papers, Vol. 28, pp. 185-207.

Stiglitz, J. E. (1982), "Alternative Theories of Wage Determination and Unemployment: The

     Efficiency Wage Model", in Modern Developments in Public Finance: Essays in Honor of

    Arnold Harberger, M. Boskin, ed., Basil Blackwdll, Oxford.

Stiglitz, J. E. (1987), "The Causes and Consequences of the Dependence of Quality on Price".

    Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 25, pp. 1-48.
                                             - 39 -


Sciglitz, J. E. and Weiss, A. M. (1981). "Credit Rationing in Markets With Imperfect Informa..

     tion", American Economic Review, Vol. 71, pp. 393.440.

Taggart, R. (1985), "Secular Patterns in the Financing of U.S. Corporations", in Corporate Cap-

     iwi Structures in :hUnitth States, B. Friedman, ed., NBER-Univ. of Chicago Press, Chi-

     cago.

Weiss, A. M. (1980), "Job Queues and Lay-offs in Labor Markets With flexible Wages", Jour-

     no! of Political Economy, Vol. 88, PP. 526-38.

Woodford, M. (1986), "Expectations, Finance and Aggregate Instability", in Erpectaiions and

     Macroeconomics, M. Kohn and S. C. Tsiang, eds., Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford.

Yellen, J. (1984), "Efficiency Wage Models of Unemployment",. American Economic Review.

    Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 74, pp. 200-05.

Zarnowitz, V. (1985), "Recent Work on Business Cycles in Historical Perspective: A Review of

    Theories and Evidence", Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 23, pp. 523-80.
</ref_section>
           L1
                L&1




                 "A" ./ DIPCIIs.4L




                       a


                      44'4)



     *j.
   dt

n7,4At
               /   , a4a,ue e'w


                            e6e4d
                                      y44%. A.#A 4)
                                                      1&t1i

                                            4nn




                                          -r
             4i4
                                        ,
                            c7                 0•
    46é4n.C &sL &uI14/fl.        £t

r              ,,, a7A&k€. e*wc




                                  4,1 /41#%




                   0
                       IA
                4,,,                        ,& 4L)
