NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

WHY ARE THERE SO FEW BLACK
ENTREPRENEURS?

Bruce D. Meyer

Working Paper No. 3537

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1990

This project is related to work begun with Harvey Rosen and I have
benefitted from numerous conversations with him. I would like to
thank Rob Porter, Chris Udry, Paula Worthington, and seminar
participants at the IRP Summer Workshop, the NBER Summer
Institute, Northwestern, and Rice for their comments. Wayne
Atkins and Robert Fairlie provided excellent research assistance,
and Mark Holliday worked on this project as an independent study
course under the author's guidance. I am also indebted to Al
Nucci and David McMillen of the Census Bureau who answered
numerous questions about the CBO and SIPP respectively. This
project was supported by a University Research Grant from
Northwestern University, and the NSF through SES—882l721. This
paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER WOR1ING PAPER #3537
December 1990

WHY ARE THERE SO FEW BLACK
ENTREPRENEURS?
ABSTRACT

Black

entrepreneurship has been unsuccessful in the U.S. The

fraction of employed blacks that work in their own businesses is

about one—third that of whites. Other measures of success such as
net income, number of employees, and form of organization show
large differences between blacks and whites. This paper examines
explanations for these differences, particularly focusing on the
frequently cited economic explanations of liquidity constraints
and consumer discrimination. Liquidity constraints are examined
by estimating logit equations for who is self—employed in a
cross-section and who becomes self-employed in a panel. These
estimates suggest that net worth is not an important determinant
of the racial differences in self-employment. An examination of
small business starting capital indicates that little capital is
needed to start most business and beginning entrepreneurs do not
usually borrow. Examining the industrial distribution of black
and white businesses, I do not find a greater relative
representation of blacks in industries requiring less starting
capital. I also examine if black businesses are relatively more
common in industries where white customers more frequently
patronize black businesses. Little support is found for this

hypothesis. I conclude that cultural differences may explain
black/white differences in self—employment, but this explanation
requires further study.

Bruce D. Meyer
Department of Economics
Northwestern University

2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208

1. Introduction

Black entrepreneurship has not been successful in the United States. The 1980 Census
indicated that 13.3 percent of employed white males worked in their own businesses, while 4.3
percent of black males did. Net income for black owned businesses is on average 35 percent of that
of white male businesses. There are also enormous differences between black and white businesses

in mean receipts and the number of employees.
These differences should be a source of concern for several reasons. First, self.employment

has been frequently proposed as a route Out of poverty and is currently being promoted by many
states and the federal government as a way to leave the welfare and unemployment insurance rolls.
Second, it is often argued that self-employment provides a safety valve for those who are unable to

obtain jobs elsewhere, due to discrimination, high unemployment, or other reasons. Third, small
businesses are often perceived as a source of dynamism and growth in the economy. It is frequently

argued that small businesses create a disproportionate share of new jobs and innovations.' Fourth,
small business owners have an important affect on political decisions in the U.S.2 The lack of black

businesses means greater inequality in political power. Furthermore, the dearth of black businesses
is behind the tensions between groups of blacks and ethnic Store owners in many cities.

This paper begins by documenting the vast differences between blacks and whites in the
number and earnings of entrepreneurs. The differences in self-employment rates are shown to be
large using several independent data sources. I show that measures of success such as number of

employees and business receipts are also very different for blacks and whites. I then examine
explanations for these differences, focusing on the frequently cited economic explanations of liquidity

constraints and consumer discrimination. Liquidity constraints are examined by estimating logit
equations for who is self-employed in a cross-section and who becomes self-employed in a paneL
These estimates suggest that net worth is not an important determinant of the racial differences in
self-employment. Little capital is needed to start most business and beginning entrepreneurs do not

usually borrow. Additionally, the industrial distribution of black and white businesses does not

'Brown et at. (1990) provides a critical analysis of the evidence.
2See Brown et at. (1990).

2
indicate a greater relative representation of blacks in industries requiring less starting capital.
Consumer discrimination can also be examined using the industrial distribution of black and white
businesses. I examine if black businesses are relatively more common in industries where white

customers more frequently patronize black businesses. Little support is found for this hypothesis.
I conclude that cultural differences may explain black/white differences in self-employment, but this

explanation requires further study.

2. Liquidity Constraints
Numerous authors have argued that low black assets and discrimination in lending have been

responsible for low black self-employment rates.3 Blacks on average have very low assets relative

to whites. Blau and Graham (1990) report that studies comparing the two groups find black/white
asset ratios of .08 to .19. Their own unadjusted ratio for households with a primary respondent age

24 to 34 in 1976 or 1978 is .18. These black/white ratios are strikingly low and suggest that the
liquidity constraints hypothesis needs further investigation.
Several authors have emphasized the role of an individual's assets in the decision to become self-

employed. Examples are Evans and Jovanovic (1989), Evans and Leighton (1989) and Blanchflower

and Oswald (1990). It has also been argued that limited access to credit has prevented minorities

3Examples are Bates (1985a), Chen and Cole (1988) and Small Business Administration
(1988).

41n the Survey of Income and Program Participation data, which include detailed questions
about several dozen categories of assets and debts, I find a ratio of .21 for those households with
head age 24 to 34. For all households I find .26, a ratio which tends to rise with age (across
cohorts) at least until age 65.
5Blanchflower and Oswald (1990), which analyzes British data, is particularly interesting for
two reasons. First, their measure of assets is gifts and inheritances so it is arguably exogenous to
the decision to enter self-employment. Second, they find an effect of assets that is quantitatively
large as well as being statistically significant.

3
from starting businesses. An example of the small literature on lending discrimination and minority
businesses is Ando (1988).6

Alternatively, Light (1972), Sowell (1981), and others argue that lending by formal institutions
is not very important in the establishment of small businesses. They argue that people usually do not
borrow to set up a business, and when they do, they mainly borrow from friends and relatives. Sowell

argues that the degree of cohesion within a community will affect the ability to borrow. The lender

needs to know that the borrower is worthy of credit (and maybe also be able to monitor the
borrower'a effort).

3. Theories of Consumer Discrimination

Many people have argued that low black self.employment rates are due to consumer
discrimination, while others have suggested that consumer discrimination might be important, but have

not necessarily endorsed the view that it is a primary cause.7 Consumer discrimination models have

characterized some whites as being only willing to purchase a product from some blacks at a price
lower than they would pay whites. Becker (1971) suggests that this type of consumer discrimination

is likely to be important in retailing and the professions. He also argues that it is likely to be more
important in jobs where there is substantial contact between blacks and whites.

In his survey, Cain (1986) argues that consumer discrimination is not important in explaining
black/white earnings differences because blacks could easily find employment in jobs where there is

little contact with consumers. This argument seems to be right for discrimination against wage and
salary workers. However, the vast majority of the self.employed are sole proprietors who necessarily
have substantial contact with customers. Thus, consumer discrimination might have a great effect on

6Ando (1988) finds that black men in her sample have a 12.8 percent lower loan acceptance
rate, and black women have a 15.5 percent lower loan acceptance rate than nonminority men.
However, this evidence is weak because the sample is small and highly unrepresentative. The
data come from a sample which had a cumulative nonresponse rate (through two stages) of 97
percent.
7See Moore (1983), Chen and Cole (1988), and Borjas and Bronars (1989).

4
the self-employed exactly for the reason it may have little effect on wage earners. One might expect

consumer discrimination to be more important in industries where it is difficult to verify the quality

of the product or service sold. In these industries it is likely that prejudiced individuals would not
obtain evidence to weaken their prejudices.
In a recent paper, Boijas and Bronars (1989) argue that the low black self-employment rate is
due to consumer discrimination. They claim that consumer discrimination will lead more able whites

and less able blacks to become self-employed. They argue that positive selection in an earnings
equation for the white self-employed and negative selection for the black self-employed is a test of
this hypotheses. The test is not completely convincing in that it depends on normal error terms and
the exclusion of variables measuring the local labor market conditions from the wage equation. The

test is also a general test of negative selection for blacks, rather than a test of consumer
discrimination per se.

Coate and Tennyson (1989) make an argument similar to Borjas and Bronars. They claim that

labor market discrimination can push lower ability minorities to find jobs as entrepreneurs. This
lower quality will be recognized by the credit markets which will raise the interest rate charged to

minorities when they borrow to start a business. They argue that in equilibrium, labor market
discrimination can reduce the self-employment rate of minorities. They point Out that their argument

can also hold if consumers recognize the lower quality of minorities entering self-employment and
lower the price they are willing to pay for their products.
On the other hand, many authors have argued that labor market discrimination will push those
discriminated against into self-employment where an individual's return would depend directly on his

or her ability. This argument is supported by anecdotal evidence about the history of Chinese and
Japanese immigrants to the U.S. in Light (1972).

tSee Light (1972), Sowell (1981), and Moore (1983). for example.

5
4.

Data sources

This paper primarily uses data from two sources: the 1984 Panel of the Survey of Income and

Program Participation (SIPP), and the 1982 Characteristics of Business Owners (CBO). The Survey

of Income and Program Participation is a longitudinal survey conducted by U. S. Bureau of the
Census. In the 1984 Panel, approximately 20.000 households9 (50,000 people of all ages in total)

were interviewed nine times over a three year period.'0 The multi-stage stratified sample was
selected to represent the noninstitutional population. The intervie took place between October
1983 and August 1986. Each interview asked about earnings and other income sources during the
previous four month period. Detailed information was given about the two wage and salary jobs and

two self employment jobs at which an individual worked the most hours during the survey period.

Two supplemental surveys provide detailed information about assets and liabilities. Questions are
asked about 20 types of assets and a dozen types of liabilities. The quality of the asset information

is one of the key reasons for using SIPP."
The 1982 Characteristics of Business Owners data combines information from the Surveys of
Minority-Owned Business Enterprises (SMOBE) and the Survey of Women-Owned Business (WOB)

with information from a mail survey. SMOBE and WOB are a combination of IRS and Social
Security Administration supplied information and Census Bureau Economic Census data. The IRS
provides the Census Bureau with the name, address and employer identification number of the firm;

social security numbers of the owners, partners or shareholders (up to 10 partners or shareholders
per firm); principal industrial activity code; dollar receipts; and legal form of organization. The IRS
does this for businesses filing forms 1040. Schedule C (sole proprietorships), 1065 (partnerships), or
1 120S (Subchapter S corporations). Using the social security number (SSN) from the IRS. the Social
Security Administration supplies the racial information filled out when the individual originally applied

for a SSN. Prior to 1981, applicants for a SSN would categorize their race as (a) white. (b) black.

Budget cuts reduced the sample by about 20% halfway through the sample period.
'°One.fourth of the sample was only interviewed 8 times.

"See U.S. Bureau of the Census (1986) for a description of the SIP? asset data.

6
or (c) other. In 1981 the racial categories were expanded, but the Census Bureau used a mail canvas
to obtain information on groups other than whites and blacks. The Census Bureau Economic Census

files then provide the SIC code, geographic code, legal form of organization code, receipts, and
number of employees and annual payroll for firms with paid employees.

This SMOBE and WOB data is supplemented by a mail survey Sent to approximately 25,000
business owners in each of five panels: non-Hispanic white-male, black, women, Hispanic, and other

minority. The sample was stratified by state, snd 2-digit SIC. About eighty percent of those mailed

surveys responded)2 The survey was sent out in 1986 but asks questions about 1982. The survey

contains detailed questions about starting capital, sources of funds, the fraction of customers and
employees that are minorities, net income, length of ownership, age, sex, marital status, education,

work experience, and other matters. The data cover all industries except
agricultural production, railroads, and public administration. Businesses with sales less than $500, and

businesses with more than nine partners or shareholders are also excluded)3 The micro data from
the survey are not publicly available. The analysis below uses Special tabulations by 2-digit industry

done under contract by the Census Bureau.

5. Statistical Summary of Black and White Self-Employment

SELF-EMPLOYMENT RATES
Blacks, other minorities and women all tend to have lower self-employment rates than white
males. Table 1 gives self-employment rates from the 1980 Census of Population for several racial and

ethnic groups, for both men and women. The self-employment rate is calculated as the fraction of

all those working who are self-employed. The numbers in this table include agricultural selfemployment.

'2See Nucci (1989), p. 12.
13See Nucci (1989).

7

The black self-employment rate for males of 4.3 percent is less than ne-third that of whites
which is 13.3 percent. The number for black women is also about one-third the figure for white
women. Those of Spanish origin have self-employment rates about one-half the white rate, while
Asians have self-employment rates similar to those of whites, with Asian women being self-employed

at a higher rate than white women.
The numbers reported in Table 2, from the Surveys of Minority-Owned Business Enterprises and

the Survey of Women Owned Businesses, suggest an even worse picture for black and Hispanic

entrepreneurship.14 These numbers suggest that blacks are less than one-fourth as likely and
Hispanics are less than one-third as likely to be entrepreneurs as white males. Table 3 presents

analogous self-employment rates from the 1984 Panel of the Survey of Income and Program
Participation.15 The SIPP numbers are sample counts rather than population estimates. I have
excluded those working in agriculture and those not working full-time. An individual is classified as

self-employed if he or she worked a majority of hours in self-employment. Most full-time workers

had only self-employment hours or wage and salary hours and not both, as can be seen by the
relatively small number of side businesses reported in Table 3.

SELF-EMPLOYMENT EARNINGS

Not only are there proportionately fewer black owned businesses than white ones, but those

blacks who do become self-employed seem to fare worse than white entrepreneurs. This section
describes the earnings of black businesses, while later sections analyze other measures of business

success. Table 4 reports the number and mean net income before taxes of white-male, black and
Hispanic owned businesses for 1-digit SIC industries. These

t4The numerator of the self-employment rate is slightly different from that in Table 1 because
agricultural production is excluded, and the numbers are a count of businesses so they include
side businesses with receipts over $500. The denominator also excludes those in the armed
forces.

'These tabulations and all others below from SIPP exclude entirely imputed observations.

8
comparisons unfortunately combine differences between blacks and whites and men and wnmen.
Even allowing for this, they suggest an enormous difference between the profits of black and white

owned businesses, and less of a difference between hispanic and white owned businesses. Black
businesses have net income about 35 percent of that of white-male owned businesses, while the

comparable figure for Hispanics is 66 percent. The ratios differ greatly across industries with

black/white ratios over 70 percent in construction and transportation and under 30 percent in
agriculture, manufacturing, and wholesale trade.

Table 5 provides several summary statistics for white, black, and Hispanic self-employment
earnings from SIPP. The exact measure of self-employment earnings used is given in the notes to
the table)6 Comparisons of self-employment earnings with wage and salary earnings are hindered
because comparisons tend to depend on what measure of central tendency is used. The comparisons

are different depending on whether one uses mean, mean of log, or median earnings)7 The SIPP
numbers on log earnings suggest that black and Hispanic earnings are similar or slightly better than

those of whites in self-employment compared to relative earnings in wage and salary jobs. The
standard errors are large given the small number of minority entrepreneurs, so that few conclusions

can be drawn from the SIPP numbers. An analysis with the larger 1980 Census would be more
definitive.

EARNINGS REGRESSIONS

isAn economic definition of self-employment earnings would be net income minus the interest
rate times business equity plus the expected change in business equity. I have used the selfemployment draw earnings concept because net income was missing for almost half of the selfemployed. I did several tests for the data being missing at random, all of which failed. I plan to
adjust reported earnings to accord more closely with an economic definition of the return to selfemployment.
i7This points to the much greater dispersion of self-employment earnings than wage and salary
earnings. In fact, calculating self-employment rates for each of the earnings deciles (selfemployment plus wage and salary earnings) for those working full-time in non-agricultural
industries yields startling results. The self-employment rate for the lowest decile is 23 percent, the
rate is 20 percent in the top decile, and 6 percent in between.

9

Table 6 reports several earnings equations for both wage and salary workers and the selfemployed. The self-employed seem to earn much less than wage earners, with the gap even larger
after controlling for individual characteristics. The self-employed tend to be older and more educated

so that regression controlled estimates suggest that self-employment earnings are even lower.
Compared to their wage earnings, blacks seem to do better in self-employment than whites, but the

difference is not significant. The analogous comparison for Hispanics does suggest higher selfemployment earnings relative to whites and the coefficient is significantly different from zero. Other
interesting coefficients include a significantly higher return to education in self-employment than in
wage and salary jobs,

OTHER MEASURES OF SUCCESS
Table 7 reports other measures of the success of white, black and Hispanic businesses. The data

indicate that black businesses have much lower receipts, fewer employees, and are less likely to be

incorporated or be partnerships. These numbers accord with the general view that black
entrepreneurship has not been very successful in the U.S.

6. SIPP Micro Data and Liquidity Constraints
This section analyzes data on individuals from the Survey of Income and Program

Participation (SIPP) and asks if differences in individual attributes can explain the black/white
differences in self-employment rates. Many authors have found that self-employed and wage and
salary workers tend to have differing characteristics. For example. the self-employed tend to be older

and more educated. This section examines whether these differences can explain the difference
between the black and white self-employment rates. The section particularly focuses on black/white

differences in net worth as an explanation for the differing self-employment rates.

Some suggestive evidence comes from the self-employment rates by net worth quartile. The
rates from lowest net worth quartile to highest are 5.2. 7.0, 8.6 and 16.8 percent. The percentage of
wage and salary workers in wave 4 who are self-employed one year later (wave 7) is from lowest to

10

highest net worth quartile (wave 4) 1.8, 1.6, 1.7, and 2.2 percent. While the cross-section selfemployment rates suggest a relationship between net worth and self-employment, it is not clear what

the causality is. The transition probabilities suggest that the relationship between net worth and
entering self-employment is less pronounced.

I begin by examining a cross-section of individuals from Wave 4 of the 1984 Panel of SIPP.'8
Table 8 reports estimates from several logit equations where the dependent variable is equal to one
if an individual is self-employed and zero if he or she is a wage and salary worker. The sample for
the analysis is all those working more than five hours/week; an individual is called self-employed if
a majority of his or her work hours are in self-employment. A number of demographic variables such

as age and education are included as well as measures of asset holdings. Assets are measured using

two variables, net worth and net worth interacted with a dummy variable for the top net worth
quartile. This specification is suggested by the self-employment rates by net worth quartile reported

earlier. Those numbers indicated that the self-employment rate differs only slightly between the
bottom three quartiles of the asset distribution, but rises dramatically in the top quartile. In most of
the specifications, net worth excluding business equity is used as the assets variable because business

equity is endogenous.

The estimates of Table 8 indicate that individuals who are more educated, older, married or
previously married, and with young children are more likely to be self-employed. Blacks are estimated

to be have a significantly lower self employment rate, and this coefficient is estimated precisely. The

coefficient can be used to calculate the derivative of the self-employment rate using the distribution

of explanatory variables in the sample. Using the estimates from specification (4), this calculation
implies that the black self-employment rate is 7.36 percentage points lower than the white rate even

after accounting for the other differences between blacks and whites. This estimated difference is

ttSince several dozen questions are asked about assets, for example. I only exclude
observations that are entirely imputed. If I exclude an observation because one asset item is
imputed, I lose 30.4 percent of the observations used below in the transition logit equations.
However, in this same sample. 97.2 percent of the observations have 3 or fewer imputed asset
items Out of 44 items.

11

larger than the unadjusted difference in racial self-employment rates. Hispanics also have a
significantly lower self-employment rate than whites. The asset variables are always significant. but

the black indicator variable falls only slightly with the inclusion of assets in the specifications.
Comparing specifications (2) and (3), one can see that the exclusion of business equity from net
worth changes the coefficient on net worth dramatically, but the black indicator variable changes only

slightly. These results suggest that differences in net worth do not explain the black/white selfemployment rate difference.
Another way to examine the importance of assets and other variables in explaining black/white
self-employment differences is to substitute the explanatory variables for one group in a logit equation

estimated on the other group.'9 For example, one can estimate a logit equation on the white
subsample and then calculate the mean predicted self-employment rate using the distribution of
explanatory variables from the black sample. This calculation can be thought of as an estimate of the

white self-employment rate if whites had the characteristics that blacks have, but their process
determining self-employment did not change. Mathematically, let the probability that individual i of

race j

is

self-employed estimated from a logit model be A(x,.,p1) =

where

j=b for blacks and w for whites. Then the estimated white self-employment rate if they are given
black characteristics is IA(xbpW)/nb, where

b is the black sample size. This calculation can be

thought of as performing the experiment of giving the black asset distribution as well as other
characteristics of blacks to the white population and calculating the resulting self-employment rate
assuming that the process generating white entrepreneurs does not change. If the resulting statistic
is close to the self-employment rate in the black sample then it suggests that most of the difference
between the black and white self-employment rates is due to differences in the characteristics of the

whites and blacks in the data. If the resulting statistic is close to the white self-employment rate, it

suggests that the process generating black entrepreneurs differs from that generating white
entrepreneurs.

This type of exercise is described extensively in Cain (1986). Here I have used the
distribution of explanatory variables for a racial group rather than the mean, as the two methods
will differ in a nonlinear model.

12

The reverse calculation can also be performed and is equally valid.

The statistic

can be interpreted as the predicted black self-employment rate if blacks are given the
characteristics that the sample of whites has, but the process generating black entrepreneurs does not

change. Similarly, if this statistic is close to the white self-employment rate it suggests that most of
the differences in self-employment rates can be attributed to differences in the characteristics of the

white and black samples. If the statistic is far from the white rate it suggests that whites and blacks
have different processes generating entrepreneurs.

Both sets of statistics for each of the first four specification are reported at the bottom of
Table 8 along with the raw self-employment rates in the sample for each race. Using specification
(3), the statistic with black characteristics indicates that about 31 percent of the blackjwhite difference

can be explained by individual characteristics. However, only 4 percent of the difference is explained

by net worth, which one can see by comparing speciOcations (1) and (3). The statistic using white
characteristics indicates that about 53 percent of the difference is due to individual characteristics,

with about 38 percent of the difference attributable to net worth differences. This

approach yields

conflicting results, because one method implies that assets explain little, while the other indicates they

explain about 38 percent of the difference between blacks and whites.2'
The derivative of the self-employment probability with respect to assets that is implied by the

logit estimates is also very small. Using specification (3), the estimates imply that giving $100,000
(almost 1 1/2 times mean net worth excluding business equity) to each person would only raise the
self-employment rate by .69 percentage points.

ait has been argued that the reverse calculation is more appropriate because policies to
change black characteristics are more plausible than policies to change white characteristics.
However, the choice is analogous to an index number problem so that both statistics are
equally
valid in principle. One or the other calculation may be preferred because it has a smaller
sampling variance.
21The reason for this discrepancy is clear upon examination of the white only and black only
specifications in columns (5) and (6) of Table 8. The white coefficient on net worth is negative.
while the black coefficient is large and positive. One might want to discount the results using the
black net worth coefficient because the coefficient is not precisely estimated.

13

TRANSITIONS TO SELF-EMPLOYMENT

There is a good reason to not base conclusions on the cross-sections described above.

It is

likely that household asset holdings are endogenous. The cross-sectional correlations between self-

employment and assets found above may be an indication that the self-employed are more able to

accumulate assets rather than an indication that assets are crucial in enabling a person to become

self-employed. An approach which eliminates much of this endogeneity is the examination of
transitions into self-employment. Longitudinal analyses have the advantage of using past values of
individuals' characteristics such as assets to explain transitions. We can be more confident that past

values are a cause rather than a consequence of being self-employed. There still may be some
endogeneity of assets if a person saves to enter self-employment.

The logit equations are estimated over two time periods. Most of the analysis concentrates

on transitions between the end of 1984 and the end of 1985, a one year period The analysis is

repeated for a longer interval between the end of 1984 and the middle of 1986, a 20 month
transition.n The sample consists of those who are wage and salary earners in period t-l, and either

self-employed or wage and salary workers in period t? About 1.9 percent of wage and salary
workers are self-employed one year later. This percentage rises to 2.3 percent if one looks over the
longer 20 month period.

Tables 9 and 10 report estimates from a number of specifications of the logit transition
equations. The effects of most demographic variables in the transition equations is very similar to
their effects in the cross-sectional analysis. The more educated, older workers, males, and married
people are more likely to enter self-employment. A change from the cross-sectional results is that
young children decrease the transition rate and the effect of being previously married is smaller, but

am able to match 87.27 percent of the observations in Wave 4 to data in Wave 7.

A change in the rotation group pattern causes this to be a twenty month transition for
three-quarters of the sample, and a sixteen month transition for the last quarter of the sample.
'The sample analyzed is restricted to individuals who worked more than five hours per week
in both periods.

14

these effects are not pronounced. Again, blacks and Hispanics are estimated to have lower transition

rates.

Several different alternatives for the way net worth affects transitions are tried. These
specifications include net worth entered linearly, net worth with a different slope in the top net worth

quartile, net worth interacted with age, and net worth split into five asset categories. In none of
these approaches does net worth explain an appreciable fraction of the difference between the black
and white transition rates. The coefficient on the black indicator variable changes only slightly when

the different measures of net worth are included. In specification (3) of Table 9 the coefficient

implies that the black transition rate is 1.11 percentage points lower than the white rate after
accounting for net worth and other individual characteristics. This difference is exactly the same as
the comparison of mean transition rates without accounting for individual characteristics.

Again, an alternative way of measurtng the importance of net worth and other explanatory
variables is the calculation of the predicted transition rate for blacks when their characteristics are
substituted in the logit equations estimated using the white only sample. The reverse exercise cannot

be performed here with much confidence as the black sample is too small to estimate separate
coefficients precisely. Specification (1) of Table 9 indicates that 36 percent of the difference between
the black and white transition rates can be explained by a small set of demographic variables including

age, education, and marital status. Comparing specifications (1) and (3) one sees that the addition
of net worth only increases the explanatory power of individual characteristics to 39 percent. The

other specifications yield similar results. Again, differences in net worth do not appear to be an
important explanation for the self-employment differences.

The derivative of the transition rate with respect to net worth that is implied by the logit
estimates is also very small. Using specification (3). the estimates imply that giving $100,000 (almost
1 1i2 times mean net worth excluding business equity) to each person would only raise the transition

rate by .00077.
Table 10 reports some results on the importance of other variables in the transition rate logit

specifications. Specifications (5) and (6) suggest that those entering self-employment previously had

4

15

low earnings but worked long hours. Specification (6) suggests that those that have previously

worked in a small business are more likely to start their own business. Not surprisingly, the
specification also indicates that union members and those who have held the same job for a long time

are unlikely to start a business.

INTERPRETING THE RESUL1'S
The interpretation of the reduced form transition equations raises several questions. Saving

to enter entrepreneurship might bias the coefficient on net worth upward. Consider a situation
where everyone is identical, except that some people save to enter self.employrnent. Then the net
worth coefficient will be positive in a transition equation, but by assumption everyone has the same
ability to accumulate assets and enter business. If people only borrow to enter self-employment, then

the asset coefficient will be zero, unless assets are used as a criteria for giving a loan. As will be
shown below, a majority of entrepreneurs do not borrow to begin their businessea. Thus the second

argument does not seem to be of great importance.

Additional evidence that may explain why net worth has little effect on self-employment
transitions comes from data on changes in household asset portfolios when entering self.employment.

The data indicate that most of these businesses have low equity and assets, and individuals do not
usually borrowed money to establish the business. I examine the portfolios of the 241 people who
are wage and salary workers in Wave 4 of the 1984 SIPP panel. and are self-employed one year later.

The 44th percentile of change in business equity upon entering self-employment is zero, the 71st
percentile is $10,000. The 44th percentile of the change in business value is zero, the 70th percentile

is $10000. The 72nd percentile of change in business debt is zero, the 85th percentile is $10,000.

BUSINESS FAILURES

The variables added in specification (6) are taken from Wave 3 and pertain to the main job
held during the four months previous to Wave 4. 1 have implicitly assumed that individuals held
the same job at that time. Because some observations did not match Wave 3, the sample size is
smaller in specification (6).

16

I have concentrated above on the black white differences in transitions to self-employment.

The SIPP data indicate that blacks are only 43 percent as likely to transit to self-employment as
whites, while the analogous level of black self-employment is 35 percent of that of whites. This

suggests that while most of the difference in self-employment rates is due to a lower business
formation rate, part of the difference is due to a higher black business failure rate. This section
analyzes the determinants of exit from self-employment using several logit specifications.
Table 11 reports estimates from a logit model for exit from self-employment. The sample is
all those individuals who are wage and salary workers in Wave 4, but are self-employed one year later

in Wave 7. The dependent variable is 0 if an individual is still self-employed eight months

later in Wave 9, and 1 if the individual is not working or is a wage and salary worker in Wave 9.
These equations thus provide estimates of the short run failure rate for recently started businesses.
Specifications (1) and (2) classify an individual as wage and salary or self-employed on the
basis of where he or she worked the most hours. Specification (3) investigates if the results change
when one includes only those individuals who only have wage and salary hours in Wave 4 and only
self-employment hours in Wave 7. In all of the specifications, most variables enter with the expected

signs, but the sample is too small to estimate the race variables with any precision. The results are

informative, however, on the issue of assets. The net worth coefficient is always small and
insignificant. The implied derivative from specification (1) indicates that giving $100000 in net worth

to each self-employed individual would only lower the failure rate from .307 to .300. Again. it does

not appear that assets play a central roll in the ability to be self-employed.
The sample size for the business failure logit equations is too small to be informative on racial

differences in failure rates, but the evidence from other studies suggests that the black failure rate

If one fits a first-order homogeneous Markov chain to the data by using the one year
transition rates for whites and blacks in Table 9, and the self-employment rates from Table 8, one
obtains an implied failure rate for whites of .173 and .232 for blacks.

17

is similar to that of other groups.V Thus, the evidence indicates that most of the difference in
black/white self-employment rates is due to transitions to self-employment.

7. CBO Industry Data, Liquidity Constraints and Consumer Discrimination
In this section, I analyze the liquidity constraints and consumer discrimination hypotheses
using the Characteristics of Business Owners data. The data indicate that most businesses require
only a small amount of capital to open and that their owners rarely borrow. This confirms the lack
of importance of assets in the logit equations and the small changes in portfolios following entry into

self-employment found in Section 6. I also find that blacks are not overrepresented in industries that
require little starting capital or in those industries where whites frequently patronize black businesses.

AMOUNTS AND SOURCES OF CAPITAL

Table 12 reports the starting capital that was needed by the business owners in the CBO
sample. The exact question is:

What was the total amount of capital YOU needed to start or become an owner of this business?
Capital includes your own assets, money that was given to you, and money you borrowed?
The most striking thing about the numbers in Table 12 is that the amount of capital needed to start
a business tends to be small. 63 percent of nonminority males responding and 78 percent of blacks

responding indicated that they needed less than $5,000 to start their business. Note that this is the
starting capital of a Cross-section of existing firms, not a sample of entering firms. Thus, it will heavily
weight successful firms.

27Using the Survey of Minority-Owned Enterprises. Stevens (1984) finds that the failure rates
of black, Hispanic and Asian businesses differ only slightly over a five year period. Bates (1989)
examines the largest quarter of the CBO businesses and finds thai black owned firms had a
slightly higher failure rate.

The respondent chose from nine possible categorical responses such as None, $1-4,999,
S5,000-$9,999. etc.

18

One might wonder how one can start a business with such small amounts of capital. However,

it seems plausible that a small-scale contractor would begin by renting equipment, an insurance
salesman would not need any capital, and a peddler would need little. One might argue that some
businesses may need cash over a long period of time. Presumably respondents would account for this

in their answers. Furthermore, a small businessman can use cash flow to finance further expansions

and it is unlikely that a business will need a lot of capital later just to operate if it needs little to
begin. Lastly, if black businesses are hindered by an inability to obtain subsequent capital, then they
should have a much higher failure rate which is not the case.

Despite beginning with little capital, these enterprises are worth studying. To be in the
sample, a business had to have at least $500 in receipts. If the CBO includes a large number of
marginal enterprises, then Its universe estimates should be much greater than those from other
sources. A comparison of the CBO number of businesses as reported in Table 2 to the number of

people in Table 1 or 3 that are primarily self-employed indicates that the CBO numbers are only
slightly larger than the Census estimates (which do not include side businesses) and are the same or

smaller than the SIPP estimates including side businesses. Furthermore, if these businesses are
marginal enterprises it is even more surprising that minorities are not overrepresented. Lastly, the
CBO responses on hours worked indicate that most of these businesses required a great deal of their

owners' time. 64 percent of the white-male business owners worked more than 30 hours/week in
their business and 72 percent worked more than 20 hours/week.

Table 12 reports the percentage of starting capital that was borrowed, and Table 13 reports
the sources of borrowed capital and equity capital. The numbers indicate that generally capital is not
needed or an individual uses his or her savings. Banks are not a key source of funds, and neither are
family members.

19

SELF-EMPLOYMENT BY 2-DIGIT INDUSTRY
Table 14 reports the number of black and white-male owned businesses in each 2-digit SIC
industry, as well as the mean value of several characteristics within each industry. The percentage

of firms with less than $5000 in startup capital comes from the "starting capital needed" question
described above. The percentage less than $5000 was chosen rather than the mean because for many

industries at least one of the capital size categories was suppressed due to Census confidentiality
requirements. The percentage of firms needing less than $5,000 to start provides a measure of the
financial hurdle an individual faces when considering opening a business in the industry.

The columns for percentage of firms with primarily minority customers needs further
explanation. The CBO question asks "During 1982, what percentage of the customers served by your

business were White and NOT of Hispanic origin?" Seven different percentage ranges were given

as possible responses. Again, because many industries had the frequency of at least one possible
response suppressed due to Census confidentiality requirements, the percentage of firms that had at
least 50 percent minority customers was used as the summary statistic.

LIQUIDITY CONSTRAINTS
The liquidity constraints/low assets explanation for low black self-employment rates suggests
that there will be relatively more black businesses in industries where a large percentage of businesses

need less than $5.000 in initial capital. This suggests a positive slope to the relationship between the

ratio of the number of black businesses to the number of white-male businesses and the percentage

of black businesses with startup capital less than $5,000. Figure us a graph of this relationship for

1-digit SIC industries. A positive relationship is not evident in these points. Figure 2 is the

Missing values limit the sample to a subset of the SIC's in Table 10. All nonmissing values
are shown in the table.

20
analogous graph for 2-digit SIC industries. Again, there does not appear to be any relationship. Since

Figure 2 is dominated by the outlier SIC 41, local and interurban passenger transit. Figure 3
reproduces the graph excluding SIC 41. Again, there does not appear to be a relationship between
the relative number of black businesses and the starting capital needed in that industry. Figures 4
and 5 are analogous to Figures 2 and 3. but they use the percentage of white-male owned businesses

that needed less than $5,000 starting capital. Again, there is no apparent positive slope that would

be predicted by the liquidity constraintsilow assets explanation for low black self-employment.
Regression estimates of the relationships in these graphs are in Table 15 and are discussed below.
A possible deficiency of this analysis is that starting capital may not include funds an individual

needs to support himself or herself while a business is being started. While, the opportunity cost of
time is presumably lower for blacks on average given lower wage and salary earnings, lower savings

might be an impediment not captured by starting capital requirements. A second difficulty is that a
2-digit SIC is an aggregation of many activities. For example, SIC 41, which is mainly taxicabs, has

a moderately high entry cost if one buys a car, but a fairly low one if one leases. In some cities the

cost of legal entry is high because of the expense of a taxicsb medallion, while in others it is
essentially free.
Additionally, the ability to use capital as collateral for sloan may differ across industries. This
problem is probably not very severe as most small businessmen are not entering specialized industries

where their capital could not be used as collateral.

Lastly, the industry distribution of black

businesses is likely to be influenced by minority set-aside programs. However, the available
information on these programs is insufficient to determine if they have a profound effect on the
number of firms, and how the effect varies across industries.30

30See Bates (1985b) for a description of preferential treatment programs.

21

CONSUMER DISCRIMINATION
This section provides evidence on the plausibility of consumer discrimination as it is typically

formulated. I take consumer discrimination to mean that some whites are only willing to patronize
some black businesses if the price charged

by

the black businesses is less than that of white

businesses. I also assume that this discrimination will be more pronounced in some industries than

in others. This difference could occur because the distaste whites have in shopping at black
businesses may depend on the type of business, because the type of contact will vary. Alternatively,

industries might differ in the ease with which the quality of the product can be verified. In those
industries where the quality is not easily verified, prejudice might be more likely to persist.

I measure the degree of consumer discrimination in an industry by the percentage of black
businesses that indicate that their customers are at least half minorities. If the black businesses have

mostly minority customers, I assume that whites are unwilling to shop there because of consumer

discrimination. I take this approach because it is difficult to objectively classify industries as to

whether or not there is a high degree of customer contact, whether the customer contact is
objectionable to someone discriminating, and whether it is difficult to verify the quality of the
product. Therefore, I have used the degree to which the business attracts white customers as an
objective measure of consumer discrimination.

Figures 6 througn 9 plot the blackiwhite-male ratio of the number of businesses against the

percentage of black businesses that indicate that their customers are at least half minorities.
Consumer discrimination implies a negative relationship between these two variables. If black
customers also discriminate against black business owners, or black businesses are able to cater to
black tastes better (clientele effects) then one might not expect to see the hypothesized relationship.
Figure 6 is the 1-digit industry graph, while Figures 7 and 8 display the 2-digit relationship with and

without SIC 41 (tadcabs). None of these graphs show the negative relationship predicted by

consumer discnmination. For comparison, Figure 9 graphs the black/white-male number of business
ratio against the percentage of white-male businesses with primarily minority customers.

One might be concerned that the primarily minority customers variable

strongly reflects

geographic location. Most of the industries examined are retail or service industries and are local
businesses. If these black businesses are unable or unwilling to locate near white

neighborhoods then

it suggests that they feel they will not find white patrons. If they are only able cater to blacks, then
the consumer discrimination hypothesis implies that their market would be limited and they would

not prosper.
Table 15 reports a series of regressions which test the visual impressions of the

figures using

the 2-digit SIC data. The dependent variable in all cases is the logarithm of the black/white-male
ratio of the number of businesses. Regressions using two samples are reported because each

sample

has its advantages. The first sample is the full sample, and the second excludes SIC's with fewer than

500 black businesses and fewer thsn 10,000 white businesses. The full sample suffers from some
measurement error in the right-hand-side variable because it is a group average, with the degree of
measurement error depending on the number of businesses. The subset of industries excludes the
most mismeasured observations, but introduces some bias because of truncation determined by the

dependent variable. I do not expect that either bias will be pronounced, but as a check I have
reported both sets of estimates.

The regression estimates in Table 15 do not provide much support for either the

liquidity

constraints or the consumer discrimination hypothesis. The coefficients on the starting capital
variables do not generally have the expected positive sign, and the minority customer coefficients do

not generally have the expected negative sign. The only coefficient that is of the expected sign and

almost significant is the white starting capital coefficient in Specification (2) for the full sample. For

23

these equations I also performed heteroskedasticity tests which failed to reject homoskedasticity in

8 of 9 cases by a wide margin.3'

An additional set of graphs examine if the effect of liquidity constraints and consumer
discrimination is more evident in the ratio of black to white-male net income by industry. Without
the micro data only a 1-digit SIC industry analysis can be presented. Figures 10 through 12 are
graphs analogous to those above, but they display relative net income rather than the relative number

of businesses. These graphs seem to fit the theories somewhat, with the starting capital graphs
showing the expected positive slope if one excludes transportation, and the minority customers graph
showing the expected negative slope.

8. Other Explanations
Several other explanations for the low rate of black entrepreneurship have been proposed.

Two of these explanations might be called the consumer demands explanation and the culture of
entrepreneurship explanation. Kinzer and Sagarin (1950). Glazer and Moynihan (1970), and Light

(1972) all describe special demands of various ethnic and racial groups that were served by
entrepreneurs from that group. Examples are exotic vegetables that Chinese immigrants sold to each

other, Kosher wine and matzos that Jewish entrepreneurs sold to other Jews, and pasta that Italians
sold to their former countrymen. These special consumer demands provided business opportunities
that were not easily filled by members outside the group. It is argued that blacks had very few special

consumer demands that could not be satisfied by white entrepreneurs.

There are several difficulties with this consumer demands theory. First, it does not explain
the success with which Chinese and Japanese immigrants seem to have been able to sell to those

31j regressed the square of the OI..S residuals on a constant and the variance in the dependent
variable obtained using unpublished CBO standard errors and the delta method.

24

outside their group fairly soon after their arrival in the U. S.32 Second. businesses catering to
special consumer demands may provide a captive market, but it is a small one. Today such businesses

must make up an even smaller percentage than they did in the past. For this explanation to continue

today it requires a great deal of persistence in group entrepreneurship patterns.

The second explanation is that blacks have lacked a culture of entrepreneurship. Frazier
(1957) has talked about a lack of [black] traditions in the field of business enterprise." Glazer and
Moynihan (1970) have argued that as slaves, blacks did not have a tradition of managing money, and

that this has hindered attempts at entrepreneurship. Related to this argument is evidence suggesting

that many people learn about entrepreneurship from friends or relatives. The difficulty with this
explanation is that it can approach a tautology. The explsnation also requires these trends persist
over long periods of time, which may not be plausible given the high rate of small business turnover.

In a series of books and articles, Light33 has tried to add more substance to the Frazier
argument by describing cultural and class characteristics that aid entrepreneurship. He describes
informal capital markets, usually rotating credit associations, that aided entrepreneurship

among

Chinese, Japanese and Korean immigrants. He also emphasizes ways that the tight knit nature of the

these groups supported entrepreneurship. Business development was aided by ethnic solidarity,

mutual support networks, nepotistic hiring, informal and formal restraints of trade, and language
barriers according to Light. He also argues that recent Korean immigrants came from a business
class.

There are important weaknesses to this cultural explanation. The capital market argument
does not seem likely to be crucial to small business. As we saw in SIPP and CBO data, large amounts

of capital generally are not need, and new businessman do not regularly borrow. Rotating credit

32See Light (1972), pp. 15-18.

33See Light (1972, 1979, 1984), Light and Bonacich (1988).

25

associations tend to provide very short term loans, usually only lasting several months. Even Light's

own recent data on Los Angeles Koreans indicates that the vast majority of businesses are self-

linanced and do not rely on rotating credit associations. The other aspects of the cultural
explanation merit further study.

9. Conclusions

The evidence here does not support the liquidity constraints/low assets explanation for the

low black self-employment rate. Black/white differences in net worth can only explain a small part

of the differences in their rates of business formation. Logit equations for who is self-employed in
a cross-section and who becomes self-employed in a panel suggest that net worth is not an important

determinant of the racial differences in self-employment. Little capital is needed to start most
business and beginning entrepreneurs do not usually borrow. Also, the industrial distribution of black

and white businesses does not indicate a greater relative representation of blacks in industries
requiring less starting capital.

This evidence should not be taken to imply that liquidity constraints are unimportant in the
establishment of large businesses. I have only examined their importance for the small businesses that

the vast majority of entrepreneurs own. However, entrepreneurs commonly begin with a small
business, build it up and sell it, and then enter a more capital intensive business.35 The rate of very
small business formation may be the key indicator of future business success.
I have also examined if black businesses are relatively more common in industries where white

customers more frequently patronize black businesses. The evidence does not support this form of

See Light and Bonacich (1984), pp. 254-259.
35See Light and Bonacich (1988), p. 243 who note this for Korean businesses in Los Angeles.

26

consumer discrimination, but the conclusion is less definite. I conclude that cultural differences may
explain black white differencea in self-employment, but this explanation needs further study.

27

References
Ando. Faith (1988): "Capital Issues and the Minority-Owned Business." The Review of Black
Political Economy. pp.77-lO9.

Bates, Timothy (1985a): "Entrepreneur Human Capital Endowments and Minority Business
Viability," The Journal of Human Resources. 20, pp. 540-554.
Bates. Timothy (1985b): "Impact of Preferential Procurement Policies on Minority-Owned
Business." The Review of Black Political Economy, pp. 51.65.
Bates, Timothy (1989): "The Changing Nature of Minority Business: A Comparative Analysis
Asian, Nonminority, and Black-Owned Businesses." The Review of Black Political
Econrny, pp. 25-42.

of

Becker, Gary S. (1971): The Economics of Discrimination, Second Edition, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Blanchflower, David G., and Andrew J. Oswald (1990): "What Makes An Entrepreneur,"
Working Paper, Dartmouth College.
Blau, Francine, and David Graham (1990): "Black-White Differences in Wealth and Asset
Composition." Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 321-339.
Borjas, George (1986): '"The Self-Employment Experience of Immigrants," Journal of Human

Resosgc, 21, pp. 487-506.
Borjas. George and Stephen Bronars (1989): "Consumer Discrimination and Self-employment."
Journal of Political Ecoprny, 97, pp. 581-605.

Brown, Charles, James Hamilton and James Medoff (1990): Employers Large and9ip8ii,
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Cain. Glen G. (1986): '"The Economic Analysis of Labor Market Discrimination: A Survey," in
Handbook of Labor Economics. ed. by Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard,
Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Chen, Gavin M. and John A. Cole (1988): "The Myths, Facts, and Theories of Ethnic, SmallScale Enterprise Financing," The Review of Black Political Econoniy, pp. 111-123.

Coate, Stephen and Sharon Tennyson (1989): 'Labor Market Discrimination, Imperfect
Information and Self Employment." Unpublished Paper.
Evans. David and Linda Leighton (1989): "Some Empirical Aspects of Entrepreneurship."
American Economic Review, 79. pp. 519-535.

28
Evans, David and Boyan Jovanovic (1989); "An Estimated Model
Under Liquidity Constrarnts,"

of Entrepreneurial Choice

ippial of Political Ecoy, 97. pp. 808-827.

Frazier, E. Franklin (1957): The Neero in

the United

2nd

Edition, New York: McMjllan.

Fuchs, Victor R. (1982): "Self-Employment and
Labor Force Participation of Older Males,"
Journal of Human
17, pp. 339-357.

Resçs

Glazer, Nathan and Daniel P. Moynihan (1970): gyp4 the
Meltine Pot, 2nd Edition,
Cambridge: MIT Press.

Kinzer, Robert H., and Edward Sagarin (1950):
Greenberg.

Light, Ivan (1972):

ero in American Business. New York:

c Enterprise in America, Berkeley: University of California Press.

Light, Ivan (1979): "Disadvantaged Minorities in Self-Employment," International Journal of

Comparative Soço, 20, pp. 31-45.

Light, Ivan (1984): "Immigrant and Ethnic Enterprise in
North America,"
flje1, 7, pp. 195-216.

Light, Ivan, and Edna Bonacich (1988): jpimjrant Entrepreneu
California Press.

ic and Racial

Berkeley: University of

Moore, Robert L. (1983): "Employer Discrimination: Evidence from
Self-Employed Workers,"
Review of Economics and Statistics, 65, pp. 496-50 1.
Nucci, AJ (1989): "The Characteristics of Business Owners
(CBO) Database," Center for
Economic Studies Discussion Paper CES 89-9, Bureau
of the Census.

Rees, H. and A. Shah (1986): "An Empirical Analysis of
Self-Employment in the UK,"
ofApplied Econometrics 1, pp. 95-108.
Sowell, Thomas (1981): Markets and Minorities New York: Basic Books.

Stevens, Richard L (1984): "Measuring Minority
of Black Political Ec oniy, pp. 71-84. Business Formation and Failure," The Review

U.S. Bureau of the Census (1986):
Household Wealth and Asset Ownership: 1984, Current
Population Reports, Series P-70, Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Government Printing Office.

U.S. Bureau of the Census (1987): 1982 Characteristics
of Business Owners, Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Small Business Administration
(1988): "Minority Business and Entrepreneurship," in Small
Business in the American

Ecopy, Washington,

D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

29

T.bi.s 1
Self-Employment Rates

of those 15 and Old.o by Ran., Ethnicity and Sax
1960 Cameos of Popalation

American
Total

Whit.

Blank

Indian

Asian

Spanish
Orisim

total
Employed
total Self—employed
Employees of Own Cooporatios
Sale Pooprietooe and Paotsere
Self—employmant Rate 1!)

97659335
6747555
2069664
6677871

84027375
8229522
1969002
6264520

9334008
266015
223808

29012
4771
24241

9.0

9.8

2.9

56000690
6861020
1712339

08843987
6476605
1632220

5140681

12 3

45207

507614

1689070
144317
40402

5656657

260845

102913

59850
205995

3.7

8.5

4.9

4674571
200028
34119

286687
21204
3603

906099
103461
31798

3288208
207699
47979

4844385

160909

17501

71663

159720

13.3

4.3

7.4

10.4

5.3

35183368 4659177
1732917
68967
332702
11088

220927
7608
1168

Males
Employed
total SalE—employed
Employees of Oem Coopooation
Sole Propriators and Partmaos

Solf—employmont Rat. 15)
Females
Employod

Total Self—employed
Employoee of Oem Corporation
Sole Pooprietore and

Oelf—employmant Rat.

Faotneos

(0)

41634665
1086515
357323

752471 2168649
00855
00106
9604
11871

1529190

1420135

57099

6640

31252

46275

4.5

0.0

1.0

3.3

3.2

2.7

Notas: 01) flea oolf-omploymant rate is the p000antaaa of all thom. ooob 000 010 ore self
employed. (2) In the Canaos que.tionoalre, ondividoale are aekod to olaeeify theio ooooeot
job arlivity as employed hyoprioate company, employed by the 000eroment. self-employed,
or morkins mithoot pay in fanoly bo.oneee 00 feom. If a pereon ho. more than one job, they
are aaked to desoribe the one at mhorh they mocked the most boors last meek. the self
employed are ae bad to ohooaa be tmaor oem bosinaaa not onrorpooated, cod omm hosinese
03) Parsons of Spanish origin oan be any rere.
inoorporeted.

30

Table 2

Self-Employment Rates Calculated from Number of Busineas Owners 1982

Total

Total Non-Agrioulture Employed
Number of Business Owners
Self-cmployment Rate (%)

Nonioinority Black Hispanic
Male
Total
Total

97759851
11260739

48907892
7582910

9284907
325461

11.5

15.5

3.5

Women

5622521 42736136
262808 3160031
4.7

7.4

Notes: (I) The self-employment tate is calculated as the number of business owners
divided by nonagricultural employment. (2) Number of business owners comes from
Nucci (1989). which relies on the 1982 Characteristics of Business Owners.
(3) Total nonagricultural employment is calculated by adding the number of employed
Armed Forces from the 1980 Census to the number of employed non-agriculrursl
civilians from the Handbook of Labor Statistics.

*

31
Table 3
Sslfomploymenn Rates

of those

16 sod Older, by here, Othnioity and Oar
1984 Penal of OIPP, Wave 0

Total

Totel
Employed
Self—employed
Employed with side business

Self—employment nets 5)
Self—employment note including
side businesses IX)

22,185

2,076
510

White

19,595
1,956

483

9.4

10.0

2.196)

(0.214)
12.4
(0.236)

11.7

(0.215)

Slaob

1,999
69
13

3 3
(0.408)

4.1
(0.444)

Asian

Hxepanio
Origin

Other

497
42

94

1,062

g

70

13

1

4.6

9

9.3
(1.248)
11.1
(1.407)

(3.033)
12.6
(2.160)

6.6
10.761)
7.4
(0.805)

278
22
8

23
5
1

520
53
4

Melee

Employed
Self—employed
Employed oith side businoe 5

Self—employment nets CX)

Self—employment rate inoludog
dde businesses (5)
Femeles
Employed
Self-employed
Employed with eide hueiooss
Oelf—employmeot nete )O)

Self—employment rete cocludiro
side bueinseees (2)

12,144
1.409

10,889
1,342

229

342

11.6
(2.201)
14.5

12.3
)0,313)
12.0
(0.246)

('2.320)

12,041

567
151
6.5
(2,249)
8.1
)0.273)

924

40
8
4.3

7.9

)0.668)

5.2

(1.619)

10.8

(0.730)

(1.862)

219
20
5

8,706
614
141

1.073

(.1
(0.274)
8,7
10.302)

2.7
(0.494)
3.2

0.1
(1.94))

)0.534)

(2.140)

29
0

9.4

11.4

8.5

(4.115)
11.3
(4.202)

41
4

(1.123)

9,2
(1,162)

442
17

2

0,3

4.534)
3.0
(4

534)

5

3.8

12.915)
5,0

11.034)

Notae: (1) The numbene are semple oounte not universe estimates. (2) The soople consists
of those who coot sore than five hours/week. CS) Persons of eponlsh origin ceo be any
rare.
(4) Sndividuels ore olonsifiod es self—employed er employed on the hasos of ohere
they 000bed the most hours. (2) Those nvployed nIh side ho eioses ore prcoacily ooge and
salon aorbens, hut have none se lf-enploymont hours. (6) Otenderd erroro one in
parnntheees.

32
Table 4
Bomber sad Bet Income

of Bonnircoity Male, Black. and Hispanic Owned Businesses,
by 1—Digit SIC, 1982 Characteristics of Business Owners Oats

Bunker of flows

Mean Bet Inaame

Bleck/ Riepanic/
Blank) Bispanirf
White White
White
White White
Mule Blank Bisperlc Ratio Ratio
Male Black Hispanic Retia Ratio
iflcite

Agniaulture
Construation

264443 3103 7640 0.019

943162 23081 26699 0.024
174613 4171 4364 0,024
290338 24397 13153 0.084
Transportation
Whnleesls Trede
143174
3651 3023 0.025
Retail Trade
1363656 64033 30274 0.062
Manufacturing

Finance

497143

14020 01123 0.032

0.435

0.043

7708 11040 0.291
15960 i3759 15993 0.861
3426 22239 0.156
13372 11215 12888 0.730
354R9
8680 16970 0.163
2531B
4772 i2Bi6 0.306

0.022

32485

9947 00560 0.306

8339 15972 0.326
8280 11186 0.427

0.502

25180
19370
22437

7923 14781 0.353

1.128
0.028
0.023
0.049

0020

Bet Clussified

2549004 147253 99279 0.059 0.039
531930 32709 24963 0.052 0.040

Totsl

0836665 330239 249141 2.049 2.035

Services

26509
21736

i.001
1.023
0.038

0455
0.032
0.610
0.578
0.509

Botes: (1) The nec, income numbers are bused en cutaorical responses to the queatisn What
wee ynur firm's 1982 net income (or lose) before Tanae? Bet lnname (or lose) is equal to
total inra less cparaning expenses. An uppronination tn the mean wee ceiroleted ueing the
midpoint of serb interval and 1.5 times the lower (upper) limit for the category unbounded
shove (below). (2) Ps rears classified as Sispanio can he of an y race.

33

Table 5

Earnings of Full-time, Nonagricultural, Self-Employed and
Wage and Salary Workers, 16 and Over, by Race, Ethnicity and Sex,
1984 Panel of SIPP, Wave 4

Spanish
White

Black

Origin

Males
Wage and Salary
Mean Earnings Cs)
Mean L,n(Earnings) (5)

Median Earnings (5)
Sample Size

22,862

16,564

16,380

(157.17)

(336.02)

(400.75)

9.8172
(0.0085)
20,493
8,540

9.5232
(0.0270)
15,120
759

9.5354
(0.0286)

14.364
511

Self -employed

Mean Earnings (5)

27,928
(833.70)

Mean Ln(Earnings) (5)
Median Earnings (5)
Sample Size
Females
Wage and Salary
Mean Earnings (5)

Mean Ln(Earnings) (5)
Median Earnings (5)
Sample Size

8.9963
(0.0823)
18,000
1,166

20,183
(3,639.97)
8.8349
(0.4785)
13,932
30

25,577
(4,423.65)
9.0345
(0.3511)
15,000

49

13,873

12,693

11.851

(109.07)

(253.13)

(386.11)

9.3070

9.2256

9.1555

(0.0121)

(0.0315)

(0.0460)

12,600
5,640

11,760
781

11,153
308

Self -employed

Mean Earnings (5)
Mean Ln(Earnings) (5)
Median Earnings (5)
Sample Size

9,909
(837.29)
7.0009
(0.1815)

4,662
344

5.719
(1,026.70)
7.6421
(0.5180)
3,675
23

11,015
(4,929.54)
7.5722
(0.8751)
5,940
12

(2) Self(1) Full-time is define as at least 35 hours/week on all jobs.
Notes:
employment income is from the question What was the total amount of income that
received from this business (Read each month)?"

34

Table 6
Earnings Equations for Wage and Salary and Self-Employed Nonagricultural Workers,
16 and Older 1984 SIP? Panel, Wave 4

Specification

Variable
(1)

(2)

(3)

Sample

Years

of Education

Age in Years

Age Squared/lO0

.0788
(.0031)

.0673
(.0022)

.1006

.1015

(.0045)

(.0033)

.0512
(.0376)

- .1147

- 1147

- .0730

1.7939

(.0054)
Self-Employed

.1491

(.0229)

-1. 2458

(.0313)

Male

Black

Hispanic

Other Race

Slack*Se1f Employed

.5606

.4647

(.0175)

(.0122)

(.1680)

- .1356
(.0305)

- .1462

.3156
(.3925)

(.0204)

- .0759

-

.0842

(.0413)

.4359

(.0277)

(.3741)

- .1645

-

.1527

(.0543)

.0518

(.0363)

(.4498)

.2377
(.0180)

(.3028)

.1870

(.1582)
Hispanic*SelfEmp1oyed

.5183
(.1506)

Other Race*Self Employed

.1689
.1858)

Married with
Spouse Present

.2334
(.0262)

Previously Married, or
Spouse Not Present

(.0326)

.1812

1414
(.0225)

.2843
.6130
(.3571)

I

35

Table 6 (continued)

Specification

Variable
(1)

(2)

(3)

- .0311

- .0361

- .0137

(.0084)

(.0059)

(.0707)

yes

yes

yes

Sample Size

17769

16166

1603

R-Square

.2033

.2666

.1272

Number of Children
Under 18

Region, Urban Dummies

(2) All equations include a
Notes: (1) Standard errors are in parentheses.
constant.
(3) The omitted marital status group is never married.
(4) Other race
includes Asians and Native Americans.

36

Table 7

Receipts, Number of Employees, and Legal Form of Organization
Nonminority Male, Black, and Hispanic Owned Businesses

Nonminority Male
Number of Firms

Black

Hispanic

6,856,665

339,239

248, 141

399,841,888

12,443,572

14,976,337

87,483

36,681

60,354

1,288,869
18.80

38,631
11.39

39,917
16.09

1,03

0.53
4.63

0.85

5.46

Sole Proprietorships
Percentage of Firms

6,276,088
91.53

322,975
95.21

233,476
94,09

Partnerships
Percentage of Firms

341,555
4.98

10,166
3 00

9,418
3.80

Corporations
Percentage of Firms

239,022
3.49

6,098
1 80

5,247
2.11

Total Receipts ($1000)
Mean Receipts ($)
Number of Firms with Paid Employees
Percentage of Firms

Mean Number of Employees
Mean Number of Employees of
Firms with Employees

5.28

Legal Form of Organization

Notes: (1) Receipts, number of employees, and form of organization come from the
categorical responses to the SHOBEROB Survey reported in the 080. Approximate
means were calculated for receipts and number of employees using the midpoint of
the intervals, and 1.5 times the lower limit for the category unbounded from above

37

Table 8
tastE Equations for Self Omployia.nE, Nananiacltur.l Workers 16 and Older,
1984 Panel of SIP?, War. 4

Specification
Variable
(5)

All

Sample
Years of Education

M in Y.ars

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

All

All

All

White

Black

0.062530
(0.008331)

0.055345
0,000336
0.054386
0.032446
0.036481
(0,00856?) (0.006469) (0,008418) (0.008757) (0.043056)

0.090508
(0.0 11995)

0.082998
0,127046
0.075632
0.079307
0.084665
(0.012228) (0.012071) 0.012109) (0.012440) (0,071668)

-0,045807

-'0.049280 -0.047455 —0.052625 —0.009370

(0. 0 13 120)

0.093044
(0.013406) (0.013214) (0.013271) (0.013619) (0.075842)

Male

0.515403
(0.051153)

0.536378
0.464222
0.518407
0.517132
0.024122
(0.051580) (0.001304) (0.031303) (0.053290) (0.262641)

Blank

-0.945755

—0.917070 -0.906530 -0,925328

(0. 127507)

(0.127968) (0.127700) (0.127747)

-0.286523

—0,249764 —0.268038 -0,294318 -0.303532 -0.965612

das Squnradf100

Hispanic

(0.

Othar Roan

1318107

-0.198723
(0.153933)

(0.132531) (0,131653) (0.130153) (0,1365360 (1,035451)

-0,167975 -0.156129 -0,219968
(0.154935) (0.154030) (0.154371)

Marniad mith
Sputa. Pconant

(0.097922)

0.749039
0,598944
0.584888
0.655352
0.599531
(0,101463) (0.099090) (0.098741) (0.102726) (0.519498)

Pravinualy Macrind, or
Opoaae Sat Present

0.326900
(0.115158)

0.389008
0,366733
0.754526
0.510975
0,394994
(0.119575) (0.116475) (0.115032) (0.101390) (0.547077)

Sunbar of Children
Ondar 18

0.115982
(0.023182)

0.139401
0.153686
0.124482
0.120444
0.129222
(0.023297) (0.023163) (0.023183) (0.024193) (0,114995)

0.572958

0.243393

Hat Wart), 70100.000.)
(With Bcainena Equity)

(0.0 17059)

0.067073 -0.552776 —0,596824
0.740272
(0.015520) (0.295709) (0.097880) (0.571737)

Nat Worth (0100,000a(
(Mlnun Businena Equity)

Nat Wcrtha
Tap Nat Worth Quartila

0.565110
0,005234
0.526046
(0.093105) 70.095422) (0.524447)

Sum of Coefficients an
?revtrua Tea Vcriables

0.070285
0.745506
0,273270
(0.0135)9) (0.013538) (0.234295)

Anion said Urban
Tndicatcrn

Yen

Yea

0cc

Yea

Yna

One

38

Specification

Variable
(1)

Actual Black SE Rate

Predicted Black SE
Rate ueccg White
Equation and Black
Tharactertetice

Actual White

SE Rate

Prediccad Whit. St
Rete ucina Black

0.034517
(0.004084)
0.082111

0.099921
(0.002142)
0.5447)8

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.034317
0.034507
0034517
(1.004084) (0.004284) (2.004084)
0.073623

0.079482

0.180947

0.099821 0.099821 0.098822
(0.002142) (0.002142) (0.002142)
0.078396

0.069367

0.069388

Equation and Whita

Tharact.nietcue
Sample Suae

22185

22185

22165

22185

19595

1999

Bctea: (1) A 1 cc cab-employed. (2) Standard errore are c parerthaeaa (3) Al).
equatinne incLude a cunetant. (4) The uncttad marital Status 8rcup i.e never married
Other rare cnuLudee Aaians and Betive Anarcuane. (6) ALL cat worth vaniehiae era ic
S100000e, and axcluda businean aqucty ucleae uthareiea noted.

(5)

39

Tahle S

Loit Equations for Transitions to Self Employment, Nonaorioultorol Workers 16 and Older,
1984 Pae.l of SIPP

Sp.rifloation
Variable
(1)

Waves and

Scare

Sample

of Sdoration

4—7 All

(2)

4-7

All

(3)

(4)

(0)

(6)

47 All

47 All

47 All

49 All

3.065643
2067964
0.064272
0.069212
0.066964
0.063997
(0.024868) (0.024905) (0.024901) (0.024931) (0.025381) (2.024240)

Ma in Years

0.036756
0.003663
0.052986
0.062400
0.068182
0008336
(0.037922) (0.036009) (0.337961) (0.039400) (0.036462) (0.034836)

Roe Squared/tOO

-0.073884 —O.80439 -0.079711 —0.084330 —0.072961 —0.013527
(0.046010) (0.046177) (0.046136) (0.0478)8) (0.046900) (0.042142)

Male

0.495321
0.588791
0.594753
0.606290
0.584324
0.590616
/0.142618) a.142784( (0.142749) (0.143246) (0.143225) (0.130603)

Slook

—0.642393 —0.524118 -0.626023 —0.626718 —0.554838 —0.584310

Hiaponio

—0.110066 —0.094157 —0.090120 —0.098140 —0.101249 —0.459561

Othor Rare

—0.236406 —0.229032 —0.230026 —0.236)8) —0.206298 —0.6169)1

(0.329305) (0.329517) (0.329305) (0.329632) (0.531136) (0.329255)

(0.335056) (0.535201) (0.330200) (0.335264) (0.030898) (0.368574)

(0.423796) (0,423921) (0.423909) (0.424030) (0.428860) (0.461820)

Married with
Spouse Present

0.435894
0.459502
(.447008
0.520954
0.425852
0.436660
(0,21)260) (0.216310) (0.216154) (0.220148) (0.220947) (0.208233)

Previously Married, or
Spouse Sot Preeant

0.064174
0.060)9)
0.072411
0.070786
0.420331
0.032012
(0.29457)) (0.290447) (0.290364) (0.297032) (0.500024) (0.273278)

6ter of Children

—0.123656 —0.122962 —0.123000 —0.123345 —0.120054 —0.095580

Under 16

(0.065691) (0.066713) (0.058700) (0.068799) (0.058919) (0.063910)

Nit Worth (0100,000's)
(With Bueinaee Equsty)
Net Worth )0100,000'e)
(Minus Oueonass Equity)

Sat WorthaMe 16-04

0,040145
(0.015720)
0.043493
(0.016041)
0.090300
(0. 04 2006)

Net Worth5Me 35-54

0.006290
(0.0494 10)

Net WortheAge u 54

0.029540
(0,059724)

40

table 9

(continued)

Specification

Variable
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Real Octet. Net Equity

-1.879673 -1.083764
(1.472950) (1.300255)

Aeeetn

-0.507552 —0.036792
(0.250710) (0.125269)

Equity in IBAe and

1.114109 1.547811
(1.018757) (0.624655)

kaogtc'e
Other Aaaete

Regcon & Urban

Indicatore

Predicted Blank

(6)

0.231875
0.220088
(0.105689) (0.095799)

Vehicle. Net Equity

Net Liquid

(5)

0.000077
0.047406
(0.019584) (0.019174)

tee
0.015260

SE Rate cceing White

Yen

0.014981

Yea

0.015009

Yea

0.015013

Yea

0.015365

Yea

0.017744

Equation and Black
Ohanacteniatice
Actual Black 00
Rate
Sample Sine

0.008306
5.008506
0.006306
0.008506
0.00650k
0.009149
(0.002517) (0.002517) (0.002617) (0.002617) (0.0026170 (0.002880)
15296

13265

12296

12266

13296

12715

Nutae: (1) A 1 cc ealY—anplnyad. (2) Otandand erccnn are in pacenthenne, (2) All
equations include a constant. (4) The onitted nacitel etatoe snoop ie never aannied. (5)
Other Race cnclodee Aecane and Native Americana. (6) The net ,enrth vencablan are in
0100,000'e and exclude koeuneee equity ooleee ntterwiee noted. (7) The ahite tccneitcun
rate (atandard error) fcc Wave 4 to 7 ia .0192 (.0012) acid for Wave 4 to 9 ie .0234
(.0014).

41
tabI. 10
Additional

Lo5it Equations for Transitions to 5.1! Employment,
8onororoLtora1 Wonton, 16 and Older

Sperifiostion
Variable

(1)

Waves said Sony)..

Years

of idurstion

Age in Years

Squ.red/lOO

Age

4-7 AlL
0.062618
(0.024843)

(2)

(3)

4-9 AlL 47 White
0.092456

(0.023733)

0.071031
(0.026042)

(4)

47 All
0.045470

(5)

(6)

47 ALL

47 ALL

0 090177

0.067309

(0.030794) (0.023053) (0.027746)

0.100295

0.135626
0.094427
0.087081
(0.038033) (0.034434) (0.041381) (0.03838)) (0.038702) (0.043876)

0.087683

0.013230

-0.085007 -0.020338 -0.129496 —0.107863 —0.115392 —0.157804
(0.046304) (0.041537) (0.050848) (0.04t445) (0.047196) (0.053871)

MaLe

0.900622
0.700279
0.6960)7
0.589046 0.476998 0.627389
(0.142765) (0.130469) (0.149529) (0.162545) (0.154184) (0.173961)

Nlaok

—0.644231 —0.731223

—0.361137 —0.649748

(0.329788) (0.328193)

(0.333254) (0.331175) (0.403175)

0.838291

0.006943
0.084340
0.140713 —0.074490
(0.333498) (0.388148) (0.333613) (0,337148) (0.338190) (0.357416)

8i.panio

—0.103375 —0.489363

other Rare

—0.233551 —0.603025

-0.055083 —0.292275 —0.127333

(0.404211) (0,460486)

(0,426655) (0.431406) (0.436061)

Spouee Prsoent

0.549704
0.662109
0.440333
0.503210
0.571466
0.432299
(0.207430) (0.003896) (0.225654) (0.219800) (0.219463) (0.235729)

Previously Married, or
Spoue. Not Present

0.060088
0.087707
0.115632
0.343043 —0.121786
0.048040
(0.294763) (0.267260) (0.321341) (0.296639) (0.293284) (0.329567)

Number of ChiLdren
Under 19.

-0.113543 —0.087970 —0.245673 —0.121013 —0.122996 —0.178842

Married mitt

(0.068800) (0.063803) (0.072509) (0.089190) (0.069117) (0.077853)

0.037414
)Miouo 9u.cnees Equity) (0.271959) (0,254948) (0.276078) (0.272403) (0.273892) (0.298975)

9t Worth (2100,000'.) —0.396792 —0.498026 —0.341811 —0.328443 —(.284401

0.03)290
0.369231
0.335974
0.383799
0.533429
0.438402
Net Worth°
Top Net Worth Quartile ((.270381) (0.253532) (0.277497) (0.270721) (0.272108) (0.296788)

Sam

of

Coefficients on
Last Two Variables

0.041810

(0.016790)

0.068704
0.031573
0.240788
0.044903
5.043989
(0.015320) (0.016771) (0.017257) ((.006923) (0.019429)

42

Specification

Veriebje
(1)

(2)

)3)

)4)

(5)

(6)

tog)eerninge),
period i—i

-0.340448 —0.277289
(0.050182) (5.065765)

Los)femily iooone)

-0042082 —0.064286

period t—i.

(0.093252) )0.i06275)

Los)hoor. worked)
period t—i

0.752436
0.732574
(0.i97200( (0.224079)

Leee then 25 Srployeee
nt Current Job

0.705223
(0.250687)

Tenure at Current
Job (yeere

—0. 046911

(

(0.013554)

Onion Menber

Region end Sober
Ondiratere

-0.846392
(0.282627)

Yen

Tee

Tee

Induetry end
Snoupetiun Indicators
Prediuted Slenb
SE Ret, acing White
iqcietlon end Slack

See

See

Tee

Ccc

0.015250

0.018072

0.004362

0.0i5367

0.001930

Chereoterietire

Actue). Bleck 10
Rete
Sample Sue,

0.008306 0.009149
(0.002607) (0.002681)
13296

12715

0.008306 0.008308 0.007362
(0.002617) (0.002617) (0.002183)
11749

13296

13296

12671

Nntee: )1) See notee to Table 9.
(5) The chute 'elf-employment rate (etenderd error) ton
epecifucatlen )6) ue .0270 (.0012)

.3

43
Tab).. 11

Logit Equotioos for Treneitione out of Self Employamnt.
Nonegricolturel Worker. 16 end 01d.r

Spooifirotion
Vsoc.bl.
(1)

W.v.. end Ssmple

Y.ers of Eduontioo

io 0.or.

4-7-9

All

(2)
479 All

(3)

4—7-9 Completely

SE or WE
—0.0979

—0.1060

—0.1640

(0. 0 023)

(0.0340)

(0.0809)

0.1260
(0.0976)

0.1951

01546

(0.1039)

(0.1303)

—0.1066

—02439

—0.1769

(0. 1194)

(0.1301)

(0.1394)

0.1576
(0.3367)

0.4119

—0.3885

(0.3921)

(0.6791)

0. 0632

0.0467

0.4398

(0.8290)

(0.8386)

(0.9337)

0.4216
(0,72440

0.4679

0.3072

(0.7345)

(1.0230)

Msrriod eitb

—0. 73 12

—0.7609

Spouse Preosni

(0. 5145)

(00316)

—1.9090
(0.7191)

Previously

tionriod, or

—0. 7332

—14878

-25409

Prsoont

(0,6462)

(0.8044)

(10814)

0.0143

0,1014
(0.2293)

—0.0482

Ag.

Ag. Oquerod/100
tieS..

Black
Siepooin

Spouo. Sot

of Childr.n

Under 18

(0. 1086)

—0.0363
(0.1627)

Net Worth (0100000's)

—0.0370
(0.0700)

—0,0043
(0.0907)

Number

(Minus Business Equity)

(0.0761)

-0.2957

lo(iornno(

(0. 1648)

ln)f.eily

0.3373

crnom.(

(0.2177)

ln)hours

on lest job)

—0. 0 107

(0.3869)

Sample Sine

228

228

133

Notes: (10 All specification. includeanorstart. region irdiceturvecceblee, so
urbers indicator, end en indicstnr for other core which includes Aeieno end Betiv.

(21 Stezcdsrd error. are inperertheees. (3) The dependent verieble
on. if a person cc not ionereslf-emplnyed, i.e. either not e.oployed, or
(41 The eenple Eeclucer.te (standard error)
enployed ananene and celery unrier.
for column (01 and (2) in .3070 (.03051 end for rnlu (3) ie .2353 (.0343).
erirane.

equelo

44

Table 12
Amount of Startup Capital Needed, and Amount Borrowed,
for Norusinority Male, flack, and Hispanic Owned Businesses
1982 Characteristics of Business Owners,

Percentage of Firms

Nonminority
Male

Black

25.5
33.9
10.9
12.4

30.7

Hispanic

Startup Capital Needed
None
$1 to $4,999
$5,000 to $9,999
$10,000 to $24,999
$25,000 to $49,999
$50,000 or more
Not Reported
Total

6.1
5.8
5.5
100.0

39.4
8.2
6.8

2.6
1,9
10.5
100.0

26.8
37.2
12.1
10.9
4.2
2.9
5.8
100.0

Percentage of Capital Borrowed
No Capital Required
None
1 to 20
21 to 40
41 to 60
61 to 80
81 to 100
Not Reported
Total

25.5
40.9

30.7

3.9
2.5
5.8
4.3
12.1
4.9
100.0

5.0
2.1
4.2

38.6

2.4
7.9
9.2

100.0

26.8
40.1
5.2
2.9
6.6
3.1
10.2
5.2
100.0

Notes: The startup capital needed comes from the question reported in the text.
The percentage of capital borrowed comes from the question "What percent of the
capital did you borrow?" which was asked of business owners who responded that the'r
needed at least $1 to start their business.

45

Table 13
Sources of Borrowed Cspitsl and Sources of Equity Capital,
for Nonminority Male, Black, and Hispanic Owned Businesses,
1982 Characteristics of Business Owners

Percentage of Firms
White Male

Sources of Borrowed Funds
No Capital Required or Borrowed
Family
Friends
Government Program

Financed by Former Owner
Commercial Bank Loan
Other
Not Reported

Sources of Equity Capital
No Equity Capital Used
Family
Friends
Government Program
Venture Capital or Former Owner
Commercial Bank
Other (mostly own savings)
Not Reported

66.4
7.3
2.1

0.5
2.7
19.7

2.3
4.1

62.8
8.6
1.0
0.2
4.3
4.3
10.9
9.3

Black

Hispanic

69.3
5.2

66.9
9.5

2.5
1.3
1.3
12.6
3.5
7.9

3.4
1.0
2.5
14.5

59.3

59.7
11.2

9.5
2.1
0.5
2.7
4.0
9.0
15.0

2.8
4.1

2.0
0.3
3.7
4.0
10.1
10. 9

Notes: (1) Numbers may sum to over 100 percent since multiple responses
are allowed. (2) Sources of borrowed funds comes from the question "From which of
the following sources did you borrow money to become an owner of this business?
Mark (x) all that apply." Sources of equity capital comes from the question "From
which of the following sources did you obtain EQUITY CAPITAL (not borrowed) to
become an owner of this business? Mark (x) all that apply."

46
Tehi. 14

Number of Firms, Percentage of Businesses with Primarily Minority Customers.
Percentage roth Startup Capitol Less thor 05,000, for Blocke and Bonminoorty Moles,
2—Digit Industries, 1982 Chereoterretice of Nosiness Goner.
Numher of

Businesses
SIC

Industry

______________
Desoription

0 Not Cleesified
P Agnirultuooi services
8 Forestry
9 Fishing, humtimg, end tcsppro

10 Metel monimg

11 docthrocite mining

12 Bituminous cosi acid lignite mining
13 OiL end gee smtcsctiom
14 BommotolLic mimacols, esnept fuels
15 General building cortroc tons
16 Reovy construction contcoctucs

17 Special toedscortcevtcrs
20 Food end kimdcsd pcuducts
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
52
33
34

OsetiLe eiLL products
Appecsl end other temtile pccducte
lumber end wood products
Furniture end
Pepsi sod ellied pccdurts
Printing end publishing
Chamicele end wIlled pcuduuts
Petroleum end cost products
Rubber end miscelleneous plastros
Leather end leather products
Stone, clay, end glese products
Primary metel industries
Fehnrceted metal pooduots

fietures

30 Menhimery, escepteleutrical
36 Eieotciuei, elertrcncc equipoent
37 trensportetiom equopeent
38 Instruments end related products
39 MiscelLenwous menufecturing

00

Rsilrsad trensportatirn

41 Local, imtsrurben pessenger trensit
42 Touching end mecshousrng

44 Water trueeportotrcn
45 Trensportetion by air

Percent of Firma Pscnsnt of Firms
with C $5,000
sith Primarily
Block! Stortop Capitol Minority Costumers
White

_______________________________________

Stock

White

31034
3101

838827 0.049

82.52

117900 0.026
10231 2.037

80.11
67.04

49213 0.015
1920 0.020

67.33
63.70
56.79

61.23

01.43

570
754

36

1495
108
22

3470
482
17744
28
122
246
1580

116
916
70

170

97
100
26
61
108
26
444

7045
12517
40
01

Satin

Nienk

White

Slack

White

70,03

27.21

04.06
49.35
70.33

0.000

1097 0.005
138827 0.001
4870 0.004
218295 1.216
38821 0.012
741400 2.124
8085 0.000
2423 0.200
0408 0.045
43926 0.036
9328 0.013
1876 0,000
44813 1.021
1700 0.040
210 0.020
1261 0.000
935 0.182
12041 0.006
4854 0.021
11707 0.002
16082 0.004
5095 0.021
2373 0.011
1077 0.000
37263 0.012
340 0.000
19667 0.308
219827 0.057
0312 0.008
7934 0.008

84.46
88.01
87.07

83.80

30.13
50.61
85,03
01,48
81.51
36.80

61.45
03.31

21,50

37.46
73.90

60.55
73.19

61.60
28.00

66.71

71.49
42.49
44,96

47.39

26.40

63.21

78.04

65.68

73.74
52.46

33.22

50.5$
14.99

34.28

67,35
40,50

34.49

47
labia

14 (continued)

Number of
Boeinoeeea
SIC

Industry Description

________________

Whit.

Slack

Ratio

46 Pipe linen, except natural gaa

47
49
49

Traneporiution Service.

Cunicetieo

El.ctnio, poe.

2219
100

and

sanitary eaovica. 1391

SO Wholesale trad.—durakla goods
51 Whole.ale trade-nondurable gooda

52 Building neteciala, eard.n uupplieu
33 Sen.ral aecohandisa store.
34 Food atone.

1027

2247
529
844
9027

50 Auttive dealers, eervio. utatioce 3192
36 Apperel. and accaaeory store.

77 Furniture, bane furni.hcng. store.
59 Eating and drinking pIsces
59 Miscall.aneoue retail
60 Banking

61 Credit egecciee other than banks
62 Saourity and coanodoty brukece
43 Insursncsoarr icr.
84 Insurance agent. and brokers
65 Real estate
66 Cankinad real estate, insurance
67 Holding and

other

73 Bueineas eervicea
75 Auto repeir, aerciree, and gecagee
76 1'tincellanaoun repeor anrvccsn

78
79
80
81
82
83
89
99

2017
1919

12143
50715
221
20
90
5299
8593
144

cnv.stn.nt officen

70 Butela and other lodging placen
72 Pernunal eervicse

Motion pictures
Anuuenect and recreation narvires
Health uervicea
legal service.
Sduc.tional services
Social sciences
Miscellaneous services
Total

Percent of Firma Percent of Firma
with 0 33,055
with Pcieoriiy
Bluckf Startup Capital. Minority Coatonero

1123
39410
28997
5902
3693

349
7394
16693
3941
2529

322
31744
324344

Whit.

850
20753
9742
19405
07958
99297
47254

0.000
0.083
0.010
0.071
0.012
0.023
0.011

___________________________________________

Slack White

Black

70.37

47,99

62.64

38,94
63.71
54.04
61.50

78.44

80.30
70.22
80.21
64.35

19586 0.043 77.05
121115 0.072

39.16

146029 0.009 56,07
45555 0.044 74.91
72033 0.027 77.41
176917 0.009
936911 0.050
17155 0.022
1175 0.017
12040 0.007
1842 0.000
205797 0.026
403251 0.021
4140 0.035
4841 0.000
53790 0.021
290226 0.136
557550 0.044
209174 0.733
145604 0.025
13256 0.076
197012 0.040
252054 0,054
195549 0.000
67107 0.738
2409 0.134
697657 0.046
7584269 0.043

59.93
94.35

44.82
53.19
32.79
39.92
43.21
57.23
27.69
69.97
65.65

Whit.

20.97
21.04

20.36
97.70
62.22
83.91
59.35
92.90
66.51

24.20

21.38
19.94
13.24
25.24
33.18

43,39
90.23
78.29

54.00
79.68
86.58
77.13
77.95

61.94
03,55
17.02

68.97
84.24

15.54
24.63

20.19
70.41

81.16
86.96
57.26
73.53
68.21

24.44
22.89

66.66
57 48
75.04

19.85
23.80

58 15
79.02
71.92
84,94
86.93

67.55
46.13
67.65

63.60
78.55

71.80
62.57

67,45

67.22
90.92

33.17
15.16
18.97

69.60
73,76

23.02
22.90

87. 15

Notes (1) mean nunhere are dunoved Crow upero.l teboletione don. by the Center for tccconoc Studoee,
Bureau of the Census.

48
TaBle 15

for

Regraaecon Equation,

Log

of Black/Whit. Male Ratio of Bunker of Bun crease
By 2-Bigot SIC

Iperification

Variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Full Sample:

Fraction of Black Boeineegee
With

0 23000

Btarting Capital

—0 1329

—0 5392

(0.8414)

(0.9240)

Frartinn of Oflcite Biaineaeaa

0.6945

With n 05000 Starting Capital

04038)

Fraction of Blrri Buninraree
Witi u Sit Minority Custorern

—0.2939

(14218)
0.0454

(0.6809)

Position of White Bueioercee
With u 505 Minority Cuntonece

Sample Sirs

0.1511 —0.0147
(0.6010) (0.6936)
—0 2880
(0 0306)

36

51

26

24

26

26

Redur.d Sample:

Fraction of SInk Bueoneenee
With 0 $5000 Btrrting Capital

0.1048
(0.6317)

Fraction of White Buaoneeoee
With 0 23000 Starting Capitil

—0.li2B
00.3879)

Fraction of Blank Boninaeeae

With 0 50% Minority Cuetonera
Fraotioc of White Borirgeree
With 0 50% MInority Customgce
Sample Sire

0.0312
(0 4517)

34

34

22

Botee: 01) The depondent vnriahlr is tha log of thr ratio of the nunher of blaok owned
boninaee.s in the 2—digit SIC to the nuniac of white male owned iceineneen on thot
icduatry. All empleoatory van ahlen arson logo. (2) ma reduced canple ooneocte of only
three 2dogit 51Cr on nhioh the nurthrr of blurB bueineeeee in
at least 000 and tha number
of chits male husoceeree inn bent 10,000. (3) ma Cull eamplo and redoosd eamnplan are
the same for np0000icrtioca 3, B, and 0. (4) All equations include a ornetect. (5)
Standard scrorn era inperenthanen.

Figure 1
Black / White Ratio of Number of Businesses, for 1-Digit Industries
By Percentage of Black Businesses with <$5000 Startup Capital

.

1RU1AT4

008

I
I

007

TAA. TM4
U

00s

I
I

.
0.AD
U

008

NOT

004 —

1S4E
U.

U

FINME

TRAO€

I

AGPCUL11J
0.01

06

084

058

078

0,72

06 80 84

51

0*

3085w Co58

Figure 2
Black/ White Ratio of Number of Businesses, for 2-Digit Industries
By Percentage of Black Businesses with <$5000 Startup Capital
0.4

030

03

I

02

0,15

I
0.1

I
B 8we.

6I,

508508 C..C158

084

Figure 3
Blactc / White Ratio of Number of Businesses, for 2-Digit Industries,
Excluding SIC 41
By Percentage of Black Businesses with <S5,000 Startup Capital

.

073 1

02

o..J
U

47

001-

545

oo-

U

.

51

5

90

U

U

0G4
S

o—

U

75

0234

•

•9

55

537:

0.

•

5

71

24

179U7
•
1551

27

01

II

U
5

•23

U

U

01

0.9

Pe70147441 77 04 3,.,,r t5 55,23 Coo51

Figure

i

Black / White Ratio of Number of Businesses, for 2-Digit Industries
By Percentage of White Male Businesses with <$5,000 Startup Capitat
04

U

41

0.3

0.23

0.2

0.15 -i
U
72

.

01
54

•

"• U

U

42 U
29

54

47
S
50

U

53

235333

59

440U

24U •

05

70

•32
0,3

0.5

of 75415* M.. 9,l0.

0.1

*751 4$0 S5,c C15

79

U
92

77

0,9

Figure 5
Black / White Ratio of Number of Businesses, for 2-Digit Industries,
Excluding SIC 41
By Percentage of White Male Businesses with <S5000 Startup Capital

:::
0,12

011

0.I

I
'7
007

5'

U

5'

001
001
U

23

U

004

•

7

• ' 273,
I. ••,

003

57_ SIU5'

• •
9 05
3393
•
'5 •
•20, 05103•5'

I

a

70

I

001

.

'

25

'3

0

U

21501

3U

03

0.7

24

07

05

Of 7I MlèU &01n11 *45

Figure

0.5

S01lo CSp01

6

Black/White Ratio of Number of Businesses, tori -Digit Industries
By Percentage of Black Businesses with Primarily Minority Customers
U
TNTAT4

001

0.0?

0,01

secea
001

NOT CSSIF€D

004

U

co4Tcr4
001

-

JFAC•flJ

•

aol
0.45

050

0,55

P**.gs o e 0.o. — PwW hIUI

075
011

Figure 7
Black! White Ratio of Number of Businesses, for 2-Digit Industries
By Percentage of Black Businesses with Primarily Minority Customers

34

'II

02 -

I

12

I

47

I
7

U

40

• U0
I

•$9

73

75

U

s

11

0
04

27

0.4

U

154 31•

I ••U
solo
70 54

SI

0.l

S B4 B4 .w

h404055 Co04,,,

Figure 8
Black / White Ratio of Number of Businesses, for 2-Digit Industries
Excluding SIC 41
By Percentage of Black Businesses with Primarily Minority Customers

014

12

013J

oil —
0.1

0.041
U

001
001U42

51

II

001

U
73

0,04

U

•II

7,

040

U
7

040

17

U
U

76U57
U

10

I

70

0.4

U

4.

U

II

Is

0.05

0.4

U

54

U

OS

m P,rW h40 O.Swl

Figure 9
Black / White Ratio of Number of Businesses, for 2-Digit Industries
By Percentage of White Male Businesses with Primarily Minority Customers

'1

54

0l31
002

—

011

0I
ow
0,0I
0.07

ow

U
4

U

I,

U

.

boo

.

II 73
S

003

I

001 -

•

27

72 •7

U

59

U 07

75

7OU'S.om

•

42 •"

SSoi 0

U

U

79

90

U
03

07

05

PCni 01 w M.4 99fl4 0.00 P0000.N Mk900 Cs0.000,

Figure 10
Black / White Ratio of Mean Net Income, for 1-Digit Industries

By Percentage of Black Businesses with <$5,000 Startup Capital
09

CONSC1O

0I
T4PORTAT

07

06

05

I
I
I

U

04

NOT cLASSIFIED

,

•

5EN0CES

U

0.3

U

4NC€

7R40E

AGc%.TUFE

02 U

U
00
0.6

064

066

PU 06

072

&n

076

000. $0 5666.00 C66

0.6

064

U

Figure 11
Black I White Ratio of Mean Met Income, for 1-Digit Industries

By Percentage of Black Businesses with Primarily Minority Customers
OP

.

a' H
RSPOTAT6Y4

Os

U
NO1C&6SSFED

04

•

UU

SeR1cEs

03

#GJLT7J

02

U

0_I045

065

053

065

075

*01, P,,I,I,0P1 MO',o.,ty C**'

01 SSco

Figure

12

Black / White Ratio of Mean Net Income, for 1-Digit Industries
By Mean Capital Needed to Start Business for Black Businesses
COf45TJC10CN

0I
U
1T41ON

0.7 -J

04

-

U

4OTCL4SSF!
SER%CES

•

j

•

FINANCE

02

U
.7OLES.ALE TRAOX

U

vANuFAriNG
4

I

I

M, C 14.1*65 01* e,. NA 6 e65 III

