                    NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




                    THE MAKING OF EXCHANGE RATE
                        POLICY IN THE 1980S




                        Jeffrey A.   Frankel




                      Working Paper No. 3539




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                           December 1990




This paper was written for the NBER conference on "American Economic
Policy in the 1980s," Williamsburg, Va., October 18-19, 1990,
organized by Martin Feldstein. The author would like to thank I.M.
Destler, C. Randall Henning, Wendy Dobson, Martin Feldstein, Edwin
Truman, Paul Voicker, J. David Richardson, Michael Mussa, William
Niskanen, C. Fred Bergsten and a few anonymous sources, for
providing information, comments on earlier drafts, or both. This
paper is part of NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper #3539
                                          December 1990


            THE MAKING OF EXCHANGE RATE POLICY IN THE 19808


                               ABSTRACT
   This paper, written for an NBER conference on "American
Economic Policy in the 1980s," discusses the dollar from the
standpoint,   not of what moved the exchange rate or what policies
might have been better, but rather of why the political system
adopted the policies that it did. The first half is a chronology of

major exchange rate developments during the decade. The second half

analyzes the actors and interest groups involved, their views on
exchange rate policy, and the system within which they interacted.
       The strong dollar policy of the first Reagan Administration was

less the result of the power of a particular economic ideology or
interest group, than it was the result of Treasury Secretary Donald
Regan's tenacious defense of the desirability of the side-effects of

the  President's economic program. The more pragmatic response of
his successor, James Baker, to the problems of the trade deficit was
to   sanction the depreciation of the dollar from 1985 to 1987. But
here   again, the success of the Plaza strategy was less the result of

a skillful and deliberate manipulation of policy tools to satisfy

important     interest groups, than it was the outcome of a
mutually—reinforcing   convoy of three bandwagons: bandwagons of the
markets, the media, and the makers of policy.

                                          Jeffrey A. Frankel
                                          Department of Economics
                                          University of California
                                           Berkeley, CA 94720
                               Outline
I. INTRODUCTION
II. THE CHRONOLOGY OF U.S. EXCHANGE-RATE POLICY IN THE 80S
1. The First Phase of Dollar Appreciation: 1980-82
2. The Second Phase of Dollar Appreciation: 1983-84
3. The Noninterventionist Policy of the First Reagan Athtinistratjon
4. The Yen/Dollar Agreement of 1984
5. The Bubble": June 1984-February 1985
6. The Plaza Sea-Change: 1985
7. The Apotheosis of International Coordination: 1986
8. The Louvre Accord and the Return of Dollar Stability
9. The Financial Markets Fear a Dollar Plunge: 1987
l0.Dollar Rallies: 1988 and 1989
l1.Exchange Rate Policies in Other Parts of the World
III. COMPETING ECONOMIC THEORIES
1. Trade Balance Equilibration
2. Monetarism
3. Overshooting
4. New Classical
5. Speculative Bubbles
6. Portfolio Balance

IV. COMPETING VIEWS ON DESIRABLE EXCHANGE RATE ARRANGEMENTS
1. Leave the foreign exchange market alone
2. Commit monetary or fiscal policy to helping stabilize the
exchange rate
3. Attempt to de—couple the exchange rate from other macroeconomic
policies
4. Fix the exchange rate

V.   COMPETING INTEREST GROUPS
1.   Manufacturing
2.   Agriculture
3.   Labor
4.   Sectors that Benefit from a Strong Dollar
5.   Banks and Other Financial Institutions
VI. COMPETING POLICY-MAKERS
1. Federal Reserve Board
2. The rest of the Administration
3. Congress
4. The IMP and other international agencies

VII. THEORIES OF THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF EXCHANGE RATE POLICY
1. The switch from benign neglect to activism as a political cycle
2. Proposals for reform of the policy-making structure
3. The Bandwagon as paradigm
I. INTRODUCTION


          Although the 1970s were the decade when foreign exchange
rates broke free of the confines of the Bretton Woods system under

which governments since 1944 had been committed to keeping them
fixed, the 1980s were the decade when large movements in exchange
rates first became a serious issue in the political arena. For the

first time, currencies claimed their share of space on the
editorial and front pages of American newspapers. For the first
time, Congressmen expostulated on such arcane issues as the
difference between sterilized and unsterilized intervention in the

foreign exchange market, and proposed bills to take some of the
responsibility for exchange rate policy away from the historical
Treasury-Fed duopoly.
          The history of the dollar during the decade breaks up fairly

neatly into three phases: 1981-84, when the currency appreciated
sharply against trading partners' currencies, 1985-86, when the
dollar peaked and reversed the entire distance of its ascent, and
1987-90 when the exchange rate fluctuated within a range that --
compared to the preceding roller coaster —— seemed relatively
stable.      It was of course the unprecedented magnitude of the
upswing from 1980 to February 1985, 59 per cent (logarithmically)
in the Fed's trade—weighted index, that made the exchange rate such
a potent issue. U.S. exporters lost price competitiveness on world
markets, and other U.S. firms faced intensive competition from
cheaper imports. Most analysts considered the appreciation of the

                                   1
 dollar (allowing for the usual lag of at least two years in trade
 effects) to be the primary cause of the subsequent deterioration of

 the U.S. trade balance, $123 billion from 1982 to 1987.

        This paper begins with a review of the history of exchange
 rate policy during the 1980s.       It then proceeds to discuss the
 competing philosophical views, proposals, and economic theories,
and the competing objectives, interest groups and policy—makers,
that went into the determination of policy. The paper concludes
with some thoughts on possible generalizations regarding the
political economy of exchange rates.

        It must be acknowledged from the outset that the topic of
"exchange rate policy' differs in at least one fundamental respect

from such topics as regulatory or trade policy: many economists
believe that there is no such thing as exchange rate policy, or, to

be more precise, that there is no independent scope for the
government to affect the exchange rate after taking into account
monetary policy (and perhaps fiscal policy, or some of the
microeconomic policies that are considered by other papers in this
conference).
       There are, on the other hand, many who believe that such

tools as foreign exchange intervention and capital controls g
have independent effects on the exchange rate.     Everyone agrees,
furthermore, that an announcement by government officials regarding
a desired path for the exchange rate or regarding possible changes
in exchange rate regimes (e.g., fixed, vs. pure floating, vs.
managed floating, vs. target zones) can have important effects via

                                 2
perceptions by market participants of its implications for future

monetary policy.
       If this were a paper on the economics of exchange rate
determination, then it would be central to try   to settle   the issue
of whether the money—supply process, and a stable money—demand

relationship, can together explain the exchange rate.           But the
assignment here concerns the political process of policy—
determination rather than the economic process of exchange-rate
determination. There is no question that the exchange rate is a

distinct subject for concern, debate, deliberation, and attempted
influence.
       In exchange rate policy, as in regulatory policy, "do
nothing" is one of the options for the government. Indeed, as we
shall see, this was the option officially adopted during the first

Reagan Administration, 1981—84. Nevertheless, it is by no means a
foregone conclusion that this option is the one that is most
desirable from an economic standpoint, nor that it is the one that

is likely to prevail for long from a political standpoint.


II. THE CHRONOLOGY OF U.S. EXCHANGE-RATE POLICY IN THE 80S


       1. The First Phase of Dollar   Appreciation:   1980-82
       The dollar ended the 1970s in the same fashion that it had
started it, by falling in value. The devaluations of 1971 and 1973

had been deliberate attempts to eliminate the accumulating
disequilibrium of the Bretton Woods years. The depreciation of

                                3
 1977-78 also began with a deliberate attempt by Treasury Secretary
Michael Blumenthal and others in the Carter Administration to "talk
down' the dollar. In the absence of a willingness among trading

partners to expand at as rapid a rate as the United States, a
depreciation of the dollar was at the time viewed as the natural
way of staving of f the then-record U.S. trade deficits that were
beginning to emerge. But the decline soon got out of control. The
depreciation of the late 1970s is now usually thought of, in the
economic arena, as a symptom of excessive U.S. monetary expansion,
and, in the political arena as one of many symbols of the "malaise"
that is popularly associated with the Carter Administration.

       The reversal of this down-phase in the dollar began, not
with the coming of Ronald Reagan, but rather with the monetary
tightening by Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker. In October
1979 the Fed announced a change in its open market procedures,
designed to combat inflation and motivated partly by the need to
restore the dollar to international respectability.        For the
subsequent several years, Voicker showed his determination to let
interest rates rise however far they had to rise to defeat the
inflation of the 1970s. During the 1981-82 period, the U.S. long-
term government bond rate averaged 13.3 per cent, a two—point
increase relative to 1980. Interest rates among a weighted average

of trading partners rose as well, but not by as much: the U.S.
differential averaged 1.9 per cent over 1981-82 compared to 0.6 per
cent in 1979-80. The real (that is, inflation-adjusted) interest
rate differential rose even more, by between 2 and 3 points,

                                 4
depending on the measure of expected inflation used.' The increase

in the relative attractiveness of dollar assets in the eyes of
global investors brought about between 1980 and 1982 an
appreciation of the U.S. dollar by 29 per cent in nominal terms,
and 28 per cent in real terms. Evidence of the textbook-perfect
effects of the monetary contraction was seen not only in the rise
of the dollar, but also more broadly in the recessions of 1980 and

1981-82. The traditional channel of monetary transmission to the
real economy, the negative effect of an increase in interest rates
on the construction industry and other interest-rate-sensitive
sectors, was subsequently joined by the modern channel of
transmission, the negative effect of an increase in the value of
the dollar on export industries and other exchange rate-sensitive
sectors.



         2. The Second Phase of Dollar Appreciation: 1983-84
         The trough of the recession came at the end of 1982; a
recovery began in 1983 that was both vigorous and destined to be

long-lived.        The dollar continued on its previous upward path.
Between 1982 and 1984 it appreciated another 17 percent in nominal
terms and 14 per cent in real terms. The textbooks had no trouble
explaining why global investors continued to find dollar assets
increasingly attractive: the U.S. long—term real interest rate
continued to rise until its peak in mid-1984. The differential
vis-a-vis trading partners during 1983-84 averaged about 1

     1
         Frankel    (1985).

                                    5
percentage point higher than in the previous two years. Nor did
the textbooks have much trouble explaining the source of this
increase in U.S. real interest rates. As the Reagan Administration

cut income tax rates, indexed tax brackets for inflation, and began

a massive build-up of military spending, the budget deficit rose
from 2 per cent of GNP in the 1970s to 5 per cent of GNP in the
mid-1980s. (The sharp increase in the budget deficit in 1982 could
be largely blamed on the recession. But by 1985 the increase was

mostly structural.)   The increased demand for funds that these
deficits represented readily explains the increase in U.S. interest

rates, the inflow of capital from abroad, and the associated
appreciation of the dollar.

       At the same time, the effects of the ever-loftier dollar
began to be felt in earnest among those U.S. industries that rely
on exports for customers or that compete with imports.         The
affected sectors on the export side included particularly
agriculture, capital goods, and aircraft and other transportation
equipment; on the import side they included textiles, steel,
motorcycles and conswner electronics; and on both sides they
included semiconductors and automobiles. Overall, the effects on
exports and imports added up to a $67 billion trade deficit in
1983, double the record levels of 1987-88.        This too was a
prediction of the standard textbook model. The fiscal expansion

was essentially 'crowding out" private spending on American goods,
not only in the interest—rate-sensitive sectors through the
traditional route, but also in the exchange—rate-sensitive sectors


                                6
through the modern route.


3.The Noninterventionist Policy of the First Reagan Administration

       Throughout this period, 1981-84, the Reagan Administration
had an explicitly laissez faire (or benign neglect) policy toward
the foreign exchange market. The policy was non-interventionist in
the general sense that the movement of the dollar was not seen as
requiring any sort of government response, or indeed to be a

problem.    It was also non—interventionist in the narrower sense
that the authorities refrained from intervening in the foreign
exchange market, that is, from the selling (or buying) of dollars
in exchange for marks, yen or other foreign currencies.          The

UnderSecretary for Monetary Affairs, Beryl   Sprinkel,   announced in
the third month of the Administration that its intention was not to

undertake such intervention except in the case of "disorderly
markets."    Lest anyone think that the qualifying phrase was
sufficiently elastic to include common fluctuations in the exchange
rate, he explained that the sort of example of disorderly markets
that the Administration had in mind was the occasion of the March

1981 shooting and wounding of the President.2 The historical data
reveal that this date was in fact almost the only occasion between
1981 and 1984 when the U.S. authorities intervened in the market.
       We shall discuss in Sections III and IV the various
philosophies that gave rise to the laissez-faire stance of the


     2 The source here, as for many other points in this paper, is
the excellent study by Destler and Henning (1989, p.20).
                                 7
first Reagan Administration. For the moment, let us note that the
matter is somewhat more complicated than a simple case of
government regulation versus the free—market.

        For Sprinkel, a long-time member of the monetarist 'Shadow
Open Market Committee' and follower of Milton Friedman, the matter
was a simple case of the virtues of the free market.          Under
floating exchange rates, the price of foreign currency is whatever
it has to be to equilibrate the demand and supply of foreign
currency in the market; it is, virtually by definition, the
"correct price." Attempts by the monetary authorities to intervene
in the foreign exchange market to keep the value of the currency
artificially high or artificially low are unsound gambles with the

taxpayers' money, as likely to be counterproductive as attempts by
the Department of Agriculture to intervene in the market for grain

to keep the price of grain artificially high or artificially low.
       But there were other free-market conservatives in the
starting team at Treasury, the supply siders, who believed in the
need to stabilize the exchange rate, just as firmly as the
monetarists believed in the desirability of leaving it to be
determined by the market. The issue was settled firmly on the side

of non-intervention by the Secretary, Donald Regan. He had neither

a monetarist nor a supply—sider philosophy (nor, indeed, much of an
economic or philosophic framework of any sort). Regan, rather, saw
the issue more in terms of politics and personalities.      In the
absence of any guidance from the White House (and, on exchange rate

policy even more than on other areas of policy, there was in fact

                                8
no guidance forthcoming from the White House3), Regan saw his role
as defending himself and the President from any suggestions that
the status quo with respect to the dollar was a bad thing, or that
it required a response. He subscribed to the "Safe Haven" view
that the pattern of capital inflow, dollar appreciation, and trade
deficit, was the result of the favorable investment climate created

by the Reagan tax cuts and regulatory changes, in opposition to the
textbook view that it was the result of a fiscal expansion and
increase in real interest rates.
       When the heads of state of the G-7 countries met at
Williamsburg, Virginia, May 28-30, 1983, the Europeans complained
to Reagan about America's budget deficit and its effects such as

high interest rates.    But Reagan and Regan responded that the
strong dollar and U.S. trade deficits were not problems, and in any

case were not due to high interest rates and fiscal expansion.'
       Within the first Reagan Administration, the view that the
strong dollar was the result of the differential in real interest
rates was put forward early and often by Martin Feldstein, the
Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers from 1982 to 1984.
His view was that the source of the increase in real interest rates

was the increase in the federal structural budget deficit and
consequent shortfall of national saving.     This explanation was


       Donald Regan (1989).
       Putnam and Bayne (p.179).
        After the Williamsburg Summit, Feldstein told the press
that he hoped that it had increased awareness of the dangers of the
dollar appreciation.
                                   9
 increasingly accepted as the correct one for the appreciating
dollar and widening trade deficit by other members of the
President's cabinet.      Representatives of trading partners'
governments also tended to share this view. But it was rejected by

the Treasury and some White House aides, principally on the grounds
that the emphasis on the "twin deficits" amounted to "selling
short" America and the President's policies. Regan and Feldstein

were frequently described in the press as embattled over the issue.

         In February 1984, the annual Economic Report of the
President, the main text of which is in fact always the report of

the Council of Economic Advisers, was submitted to the Congress.
It contained an estimate that the market considered the dollar to

be "overvalued' by more than 30 per cent, and a forecast that as a
consequence the trade deficit would almost double to approximately
$110 billion in 1984, and that the borrowing to finance these
deficits would in 1985 convert the United States from a net
creditor to a net debtor in the international accounts. Regan in
Senate testimony, when asked to reconcile this pessimistic outlook

with his own, more rosy, forecasts, was quoted as saying that as
far as he was concerned, the Senators could throw the report of the
Council of Economic Advisers into the waste basket.6


     6
       As part of the interagency review process in January, Don
Regan had (unsuccessfully) threatened Feldstein that he would tell
the President not to sign the Report if it did not adopt a more
upbeat tone than the existing draft, abandoning its emphasis on the
bad outlook for the trade deficit and its analysis of the dollar as
the major cause of the problem.    The text was not altered in
substance. Needless to say, the deficit predictions subsequently
caine true.

                                10
  NOMINAL AND PEAL LONG TERM INTEREST RATES
                                                                                   Percent
25                                                                                                     25
                                           United States
20-                                                                                                —20

15 -                                                                                                   15
                                            •:                    ••'. . -
10-                                                                                                    10

                                                   Roal\
                                           I_..•                                 .....
                •
 5

 0
—5
     ---, /v
     1973
         I
               75
                    I    I
                             77
                                  I   I
                                          79
                                               I   i
                                                       81
                                                            i      i
                                                                       83
                                                                         (G—1O)



                                                                             i
                                                                                 85      87
                                                                                              I


                                                                                                  89
                                                                                                       0

                                                                                                       —5



             THE DOLLAR AND REAL INTEREST RATES
Percent                                                 Index, March 1973—100 (Quarterly)
10                                                                                                     160
                                                                 CPI-adjust.d dollar
                                                                against G-1O countries3
 8                                                                   (right scale)                     140
 6
                                                                                                       120
 4
 2                                                                                                     100
 0
                                                                                                       80
-2
-4                                                                                                     60
     1973       75           77           79           81              83         85     87
     Source: Federal Reserve Board macro data base. P. Noopor and C. Mann.
     1 Long-term government or public authority bond rates adjusted for oxpectod inflation
     •Stirnated by a 36-month center.d calculation of actual intlaIlgi. Eoreigrt ind•x uses
     the same tradø weight as described in note 3.
     2 Long-term U.S. intereSt rate minus weighted av.rage or torlg-tdrt?1 reil foreign-country
     interest ralOs.
     3 The CPI adjuslid dollar is a w.ight*d averag index of the sxcharte value of the dollar
     against the currdricies of the foreign Group-of-Ten countries plus Swiizorland. where nominal
     oxchango rates are multiplied by relative levels of consumer price indexes. Weights are
     proportional to each foreign country's share in world exports plus imports during 1978-83.
4. The Yen/Dollar Agreement of 1984

         Complaints about the strong dollar and the effect it was
having    on trade were heard          increasingly,   however,   and
Administration policy—makers became increasingly aware of two
(related) risks: that trade would be a potent weapon that the
Democrats would use in the November 1984 presidential election, and

that such complaints would result in protectionist legislation on
Capitol Hill.    In October 1983, therefore, Regan launched the
Yen/Dollar campaign, an attempt to respond to the political issue
of the appreciating dollar and widening trade deficit, without
abandoning the Administration's free-market orientation. (As was
also true later,      the Treasury continued to resist the
characterization that the dollar was "too high," and preferred to
say that other currencies —-   in    this case the yen —— were "too
low.") Regan, in sub—cabinet and cabinet meetings, succeeded in
setting the request for liberalization as a top U.S. priority in
President Reagan's visit to Japan and meeting with Prime Minister
Nakasone in November 1983.     As a result, a working group of
Treasury and Ministry of Finance representatives was formed, and
its work culminated in the Yen/Dollar Agreement of May 1984.

     I described in my 1984 study7 how the impetus behind the U.S.

campaign for Japanese liberalization was rooted in what I
considered questionable economic logic on the part of Treasury
Secretary Don Regan. This was the notion that Japanese financial


       Published by the Institute for International Economics four
months after I left the staff of the Council of Economic Advisers.

                                11
liberalization would help promote capital flow from the United
States to Japan, rather than the reverse, and would help reduce the

corresponding U.S. trade deficit, through an appreciation of the
yen against the dollar.      Regan acquired this theory from an
American businessman, Caterpillar Tractor Chairman Lee Morgan, in
late September 1983. It was not a theory that had previously had
many adherents in the U.S. Government.9

       The questionable component of the argument adopted by Regan
was the proposition that the Japanese authorities at the time were

using capital controls or administrative guidance to discourage the
flow of capital into Japan and to depress the value of the yen.

Prohibitions against foreign acquisition of most Japanese assets
did in fact exist in the 1970s, but they were formally eliminated
in the Foreign Exchange Law of December 1980.        The de facto
liberalization dated from April 1979.       It is evident from a
comparison of the Euroyen and Tokyo short—term interest rates that



     8 Morgan based his analysis and recommendations on Murchison
and Solomon (1983).     It is quite clear that their goal was
promoting the flow of capital from the United States to Japan,
rather than the reverse;   their list of suggested measures for
Reagan to urge on Nakasone included, for example, "An increase in
the Government of Japan's overseas borrowing with the proceeds
converted immediately into yen to assist Japan in financing its
substantial budget deficits" (p.25-27).
        Undersecretary Sprinkel had testified as recently as the
preceding April that there was no merit to the theory that the
Ministry of Finance was using capital controls to keep the yen
undervalued. A study by the General Accounting Office released the
same month found the same thing. On the other hand, Secretary of
State George Schultz did in private propose something very much
like the yen/dollar campaign in the summer of 1983.         But he
recognized that the State Department was obliged to leave exchange-
rate matters to the Treasury.

                                12
 arbitrage was able to eliminate the onshore—offshore differential

that existed prior to that date. In the early 1980s the objective

of the Japanese authorities was, if anything, to dampen the
depreciation of the yen, not to promote it.1° Thus it could have

been predicted (and was predicted: Bergsten, 1984, CEA, 1984, and
Frankel, 1984) that if the Ministry of Finance were to agree to
U.S. demands to avoid any remaining interference with international
financial flows, the impact would be an acceleration of capital
outflow attracted by higher interest rates in the United States,
rather than the reverse.

       To be sure, other motives for the liberalization campaign
were very relevant as well. From the beginning, the appeal of the

idea to Don Regan and others in the Administration lay in the
political need to be seen beginning to respond to public and
Congressional concerns over the rising U.S. trade deficit
(particularly in a presidential election year), and the desire to
do so in a way consistent with free-market ideology. As the first

instance of the Treasury attempting to respond to the trade deficit
issue via exchange rate policy, in order to fend off protectionist

pressures, the Yen/Dollar campaign anticipated the Plaza Accord by
almost two years;    to this extent, the plan made perfect sense




     10 For evidence that the Japanese government in the early 1980s
sought to resist the depreciation of the yen against the dollar,
not to exacerbate it, see Council of Economic Advisers (1984),
Franke]. (1984, 16—25), Funabashj (1988, 89—92), GAO (1983), and
Haynes, Hutchison, and Mikesell (1986).

                                 13
politically. 11

         Two   varieties   of the free-market argument are potentially

quite sensible.      One is that the point of the exercise was to
promote the internal efficiency of the Japanese economy. This is
apparently one of the things that current U.S. officials have in
mind when they speak of the Yen/Dollar Agreement as having been a
success, and cite it as a model for the 1990 Structural Impediments

Initiative with Japan or Won/Dollar talks with Korea. The typical
reaction of an outsider, however, is that the Japanese would not
appear to need any advice from the United States on how to run
their economy, while the typical reaction of an American would be
that the goal of U.S. policy should be to promote the
competitiveness of the American economy relative to Japan, rather
than the reverse.

         The remaining argument is that the point of the campaign was

to promote better treatment in Japan of U.S. banks, securities
companies, and other providers of financial services.         Several
measures of this sort indeed appeared on the list that Regan
discussed with Finance Minister Noboru Takeshita November 10, 1983,

on the occasion of President Reagan's visit to Japan, and in the

May 1984 Agreement. This component of the campaign is perfectly
analogous to Reagan Administration pressure on Japan at that time
to allow, for example, the free import of beef and citrus products.
There is no question that the initiation of the Yen/Dollar campaign

     '  We describe below the switch in Treasury emphasis toward
bringing down the dollar after James Baker succeeded Don Regan as
Secretary in January 1985. See also Funabashi (1988, p.75 ff).
                                    14
in October 1983 gained political monientwn when New York financial

institutions responded to a Treasury invitation to contribute a
wish—list of proposed measures. There is also little question that
the measures which were adopted worked on U.S. service exports in
the desired direction.'2 But my claim is that the objective of
helping U.S. providers of financial services was secondary to the
objective of affecting capital flows and the exchange rate.




5. The "Bubble": June 1984-February 1985

       From mid-1984 to February 1985 the dollar appreciated
another 20 per cent. This final phase of the currency's ascent
differed from the earlier phases, not only in that the appreciation

was at an accelerated rate, but also in that it could not readily
be explained on the basis of economic fundamentals, whether by
means of the textbook theories or otherwise. The interest rate
differential peaked in June, and thereafter moved in the wrong


     2 Several
               qualifications can be noted.    First, measures to
help U.S. financial institutions were not in the interest of U.S.
manufacturing (and for this reason, did not appear in the original
Murchison-Solomon report).   Second, in contrast to recent U.S.
efforts to include services in the Uruguay Round of GATT
negotiations, these measures may not have been in the interest of
promoting the existing liberal international trade regime, as they
were negotiated bilaterally and the benefits (such as the decision
by the Tokyo Stock Exchange to make seats available) often accrued
more to U.S. financial institutions than those of third countries.
Third, one variety of the "Yanks hoodwinked again" school argues
that the wily Japanese somehow used liberalization to attain more
benefits for their banks in the United States and Europe than they
granted to U.S. banks operating in Japan. Of course, standard
theories of the "gains from trade's say that both countries can
benefit simultaneously from liberalization.
                                15
direction to explain the remainder of the upswing. Two influential
studies were written, to the effect that the foreign exchange
market had been carried away by an irrational "speculative
bubble'3. The trade deficit reached $112 billion in 1984, and
continued to widen.       Many who had hitherto supported freely
floating exchange rates began to change their minds.
         Attitudes in the Administration began to shift subtly in one

respect. Treasury officials (both in public and in private) had
previously denied that the large federal budget deficit and trade
deficit were problems, or that the United States was becoming
dependent on the foreign capital inflow to make up the shortfall in

national saving.'4     But towards the end of the first Reagan
Administration, these officials began (explicitly) to admit that
the budget deficit was a problem, and (implicitly) to admit that
the country did indeed need to borrow from abroad to finance the


     ' Paul                    and Stephen Marris (1985).
              Krugman   (1985)
Contemporaneous statements by economists that the dollar was
greatly overvalued included presentations by Krugman, Bergsten, and
Richard Cooper to a prominent Federal Reserve System conference in
Jackson Hole, Wyoming, just one month before the Plaza meeting.
[Another reference on "the dollar as a speculative bubble" that
dates from this year is Frankel and Froot (1990).]
     '  Some, particularly Destler and Henning (1989, p.29),
attribute the Nay Yen/Dollar Agreement to a desire on the part of
Treasury officials to make it easier for Americans to borrow from
Japan. But this argument dates the borrowing motivation too early
and attributes too much consistency to Treasury behavior. As of
the Spring of 1984, these officials were still claiming that the
U.S. did not need to borrow from abroad to finance a shortfall of
saving. The motivation in the Yen/Dollar Agreement was, rather,
the one noted above: to try to decrease the yen/dollar exchange
rate and reduce the U.S. trade deficit, which is diametrically
opposed to the motivation of increasing the net flow of capital
from Japan to the United States.

                                  16
deficits, and they took steps to facilitate such borrowing.     In

July 1984, Assistant Secretary David Mulford moved to make it
easier for U.S. corporations to borrow from abroad, by eliminating

the withholding tax on payment of interest to foreign residents,
and allowed bearer bonds to be issued in the Eurornarket.       In

September 1984, the Treasury created a new kind of bond that was
specially—targeted so as to appeal to foreign investors, and sent
Undersecretary Sprinkel to Tokyo and various European capitals to
help drum up customers for these bonds. But these measures did not
constitute a decision that the strong dollar and trade deficit
presented a problem. When it was no longer possible to postpone
the choice between allowing the saving shortfall to keep interest
rates high (thereby crowding out the interest—sensitive components
of U.S. demand, so as to protect the exchange—rate-sensitive
components) or allowing it to keep the dollar high (thereby
crowding out net exports, so as to protect the interest—sensitive

sectors), the Regan-Sprinkel team in late 1984 finally opted for
the latter alternative de facto.        Indeed the increase in
attractiveness of U.S. assets that was brought about by the July
policy changes by Treasury furnishes virtually the only change in
economic fundamentals that could conceivably help explain the
appreciation of the dollar over this period when interest rates
were falling.


6. The Plaza Sea—Change: 1985

       The pivotal event in the making of exchange rate policy in

                                17
the 1980s was the shift from a relatively doctrinaire laissez-faire

policy during the first Reagan Administration, to a more flexible
policy of activism during the second Administration.        We will
consider in later sections the extent to which economics, politics,
and personalities combined to produce this shift, and the extent to

which the shift in policy was in turn responsible for the reversal

of the dollar's appreciation.
          An obvious point from which to date the switch is September

22, 1985, when Finance Ministers and Central Bank governors from
the G-5 countries met at the Plaza Hotel in New York arid agreed to

try to bring the dollar down.15   The Plaza Accord was certainly the
embodiment of the new regime. But I would prefer to date the start

of the new era from the beginning of that year.            With the
inauguration of the second Reagan Administration, Don Regan and
Beryl Sprinkel left the Treasury (for the White House and Council
of Economic Advisers, respectively). James Baker became Secretary
of the Treasury, and his aide Richard Darman became Deputy
Secretary.16 Both men had already developed at the White House a

     15
          The story of the Plaza is described in detail in Funabashi
(1988, pp.9—41).
     16
        The Deputy Secretary job that Darman took had previously
been occupied by Tim McNamar. (McNainar did not quite have either
Spririkel's zeal for free—market ideology nor Regan's zeal for the
exercising of power, and in any case did not play a central role on
exchange rate policy.) The position of Undersecretary for Monetary
Affairs was not filled after Sprinkel's departure. Thus Darsuan de
facto succeeded Sprinkel in the area of exchange rate policy.
David Mulford continued in the next-lower rank as Assistant
Secretary for International Affairs throughout the remainder of the
Second Reagan Administration (and was eventually promoted to a new
position of Under Secretary for International Affairs in the Bush
Administration).
                                   18
reputation for greater pragmatism than other more ideological
members of the Administration. In January confirmation hearings,

Baker explicitly showed signs of the departure with respect to
exchange rate policy, stating at one point that the Treasury's
previous stance against intervention was 'obviously something that
should be looked at.. . "'7

       Another reason to date the change from early in the year is
that the dollar peaked in February, and had already depreciated by
13 per cent by the time of the Plaza meeting.        Some (such as
Feldstein) would argue that the gap in timing shows that exchange
rate "policy" in fact has little connection with the actual
determination of the exchange rate, which is instead determined in
the private marketplace regardless of what efforts governments may
make to influence it. But, notwithstanding that official policy

did not change until September,'8 there are two respects in which
the bursting of the bubble at the end of February may have been in

part caused by policy change.

       First, it was widely anticipated that Baker and Darman would
probably be more receptive to the idea of trying to bring down the

dollar than their predecessors had been. As the theory of rational
expectations says, if market participants have reason to believe
that policy changes to reduce the value of the dollar will be made


       Destler and Henning (1989, p.41-42).
     '° A June 1985 meeting of G—1O Deputies in Tokyo, for example,
concluded that there was no need for international monetary reform,
and also endorsed the 1983 finding of the Jurgensen Report that
intervention did not offer a very useful tool to affect exchange
rates. (Obstfeld, 1990, and Dobson, 1990, p.27.)
                                19
in the future, they will move to sell dollars today in order to
protect themselves against future losses, which will have the
effect of causing the dollar to depreciate today.

          Second, some intervention was agreed upon at a G—5 meeting
in London attended by Baker and Darman on January 17, and did take

place subsequently.'9       The U.S. intervention was small in
magnitude.20 But the German monetary authorities, in particular,
intervened heavily to sell dollars in foreign exchange markets in
February and March.2' They, like monetary authorities in other G-7
countries, had largely discontinued efforts to dampen the
appreciation of the dollar earlier, in the absence of a willingness
to cooperate on the part of the United States.         The February
intervention was reported in the newspapers, and by virtue of
timing appears a likely candidate for the instrument that pricked
the bubble. It is in turn likely that the accession of Baker to
the Treasury in January and the London G-5 meeting were the
developments that encouraged the Germans to renew their


        Funabashi (1988, p.10).    Surprisingly, the G-5 public
announcement on January 17 used language that, on the surface at
least, sounds more pro—intervention than was used later in the
Plaza announcement: the G-5 "in light of recent developments in
foreign exchange markets, reaffirmed their commitment made at the
Williamsburg Summit to undertake coordinated intervention in the
markets as necessary."

     20 A total of $659 million in foreign exchange purchases from
Jan. 21 to March 1, as compared to $10 billion by the major central
banks in total. (Federal Reserve Bank of New York quarterly Review
10, Spring 1985, p.60; and Autumn, p.52.)
     21
        Intervention was particularly strong on February 27, and
appeared to have an impact on the market.    (E.g., Wall Street
Journal 9/23/85, p.26.)
                                  20
appreciation of the non-dollar currencies is desirable,' and that

they "stand ready to cooperate more closely to encourage this when
to do so would be helpful," language that by the standards of such

communiques is considered (at least in retrospect) to have
constituted strong support for concerted intervention, even though
the word "intervention" did not appear. A figure of 10-12 per cent
depreciation of the dollar over the near term had been specified as

the aim in a never—released "non—paper" drafted by Mulford for a
secret preparatory meeting of G-5 Deputies in London on September

15, and (according to American government sources) was accepted as
the aim by the G—5 Ministers at the Plaza.24             There was,
apparently, little discussion among the participants as to whether
changes in monetary policy would be required to achieve the aim of
depreciating the dollar.

          On the Monday that the Plaza announcement was made public,
the dollar fell a sudden four per cent against a weighted average

of other currencies (slightly more against the mark and yen).
Subsequently, it resumed a gradual depreciation at a rate similar




     24
            The   "non—paper" also specified the total scale of
intervention to be undertaken over the subsequent six weeks (up to
$18 billion), and the allocation among the five countries.
(Funabashi, 1988, pp.l6—21.) Intervention actually undertaken by
the end of October turned out to be $3.2 billion on the part of the
United States and $5 billion on the part of the other four
countries, plus over $2 billion on the part of G—lO countries that
were not represented at the Plaza, particularly Italy.    (Federal
Reserve Sank of New York Quarterly Review 10, Winter 1985-86,
p.47.)

                                  22
to that of the preceding seven months.25 Interest rates continued

to decline gradually, despite fears of Voicker and many others that

a depreciation might discourage international investors from
holding dollars and thereby force interest rates up.26           Before
long, the Plaza had widely become considered a great public
success.



7. The Apotheosis of International Coordination: 1986

          Baker's ambitions for joint international policy-making
concerned more than just exchange rates. His efforts to get Japan,

Germany and other trading partners to agree to expand their
economies go back to negotiations leading up to the Plaza.27 At
the next Summit of G-7 heads of state, held in Tokyo in May 1986,
the U.S. persuaded the others to adopt a system of so-called
"objective indicators.'        The list of indicators included: the
growth rate of GNP, the interest rate, the inflation rate, the
unemployment, the ratio of the fiscal deficit to GNP, the current

account and trade balances, the money growth rate, and
international reserve holdings, in addition to the exchange rate.
The plan was to expand the existing G-5 Finance Ministers' meetings


     25
          Because   the rate of depreciation after the Plaza, excluding
that four per cent drop, was no greater than before the Plaza,
Feldstein (1986) argued that the change in policy had no effect.
This logic is far from conclusive, however.
     26
       The role of Voicker and monetary policy during this period
is discussed in Part VII of the paper.
     27
       Funabashi (1988, pp.11-12, 36-38), Putnam and Bayne (1987,
p.205), and Wall Street Journal 9/23/85, p1,25.

                                    23
to include Italy and Canada, and to agree in each meeting on a set
of quantitative predictions/goals for each of the indicator
variables. At subsequent meetings, each of the seven economies'
performances would be judged against those goals. In the words of
the Tokyo Economic Declaration, the Finance Ministers and Central
Bankers would "make their best efforts to reach an understanding on

appropriate remedial measures whenever there are significant
deviations from an intended course."

        Mulford, as an unnamed Treasury source, indicated to the
press that G—7 members were supposed to feel substantive "peer
pressure" to modify their policies so as to meet the agreed—upon
goals. The other countries suspected that the U.S. Treasury's aim
in   setting up this system was to pressure them into greater
economic expansion, as a way for the United States to reduce its
trade deficit without itself having to undertake unpleasant fiscal

retrenchment. The Germans spoke out against the "robotization" of

international policy-making.
       The maneuvering that went on outside G-7 meetings in 1986
was more substantive than the maneuvering that went on inside.
Baker was repeatedly quoted in the press as "talking the dollar
down," in large part as a weapon to induce the trading partners to
cut interest rates. This was a tack very much reminiscent of an

earlier Treasury Secretary, Blumenthal. The pitch went something
like: "We would prefer that you expand your economies and thereby
import more from us, so that reduction of the U.S. deficit can be
achieved in a way consistent with growth for all parties. But if

                                24
 you are not willing to go along, then I am afraid we are just going
 to have to let the dollar depreciate more, in which case your
 exports to us will fall."

           The Germans and Japanese intervened in the foreign exchange

market to try to support the dollar, but complained that "these
efforts were in vain, not least because statements by U.S.
officials repeatedly aroused the impression on the markets that the
U.S. authorities wanted the dollar to depreciate further.
Moreover, until then [the Louvre Accord in late January 1987J the

Americans hardly participated in the operations to support their
currency."28 Meanwhile, Fed Chairman Voicker was also being quoted
as favoring the current level for the exchange rate, in apparent
opposition to Baker.

          By September 1986, the yen/dollar rate had declined from its
peak of 260, to about 154. Japanese exporters were feeling heavily
squeezed.      At a secret rendezvous in San Francisco, Japanese
Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa met with Baker.     They made a deal
under which the exchange rate would be stabilized in its current
range, and in return the Japanese would undertake greater fiscal
expansion. The agreement was not announced until October. In the
interim the yen had depreciated back to about 162 Y/$.            The
Americans suspected the Japanese of deliberate manipulation so as
to lock in a more favorable rate, and returned to talking down the

dollar. This episode is an example of the difficulty of enforcing


     28
       Report of the Deutsche Bundesbank for the Year 1986,
                                                            p.63,
quoted by Obstfeld (1988, p.48).

                                  25
an international cooperative agreement if its terms are not made
explicit and public from the beginning to allow participants and
outside observers to judge compliance.


8. The Louvre Accord and the Return of Dollar Stability
       The next meeting of G-7 Finance Ministers was held at the
Louvre in Paris on February 21-22, 1987.       The Baker-Miyazawa
agreement proved to be something of a dry run for the Louvre
Agreement. The ensuing communique showed that the U.S. had agreed
that the dollar should be stabilized "around current levels," and
in return Japan had agreed to expand domestic demand in general,
and Germany and some of the others had agreed more narrowly to cut
taxes. One interpretation as to why Germany and the others were
willing to participate at the Louvre when they had not been
earlier, is that the Baker—Miyazawa Agreement demonstrated the
readiness of the U.S. and Japan to proceed with a G—2," and the
Germans and others did not want to be left out.29

       Two   questions   of importance for evaluating the Louvre
Agreement concern quantitative bands and intervention.         The


     29 Standard economic theories of the gains from coordination
do not readily explain why a country should mind if other countries
enter into an agreement without it.    (Indeed, in many cases, the
excluded countries should in theory be able to reap the benefits
from worldwide economic expansion, enhanced monetary stability, or
some other "public good," without having to bear any of the
burden.) But there may be some loss of political power or prestige
from being left out, because it is a commonly-expressed subject of
concern. Italy, which at the Tokyo Summit of May 1986 had won an
expansion of the G-5 ministers group to the G—7, refused to join in
the Louvre communique, in protest against its exclusion from an
informal G-5 meeting that had already worked out the Louvre Accord.

                                 26
 communique that was released after the meeting, as with all G—7
 meetings, contained little hard information and conveyed the major
 policy change with a few understated words: "The Ministers and
 Governors agreed that the substantial exchange rate changes since
 the Plaza Agreement will increasingly contribute to reducing
 external imbalances and have now brought their currencies within
 ranges         broadly    consistent    with   underlying   economic
 fundamentals.. .Further substantial exchange rate shifts among their

currencies could damage growth and adjustment prospects in their
countries." As with the Plaza Accord, participants denied to the
press that any specific quantitative target range had been set.3°
Subsequent newspaper reports spoke of the range or target zone that
had been set at the Louvre and made guesses as to what it might be.

Most knowledgeable observers surmised that probably no explicit
quantitative range had in fact been agreed upon. This view was
overturned, however, when Funabashi (1988, pp. 183-87) reported
that the Louvre participants had after all set a "reference range"
of 5 per cent around the current level.3'

             The advantage of having kept the target range secret was
borne out when the dollar broke Out of the lower end of the range.

        ° Wall
                 Street Journal 2/23/87, p.3.
        31
        More precisely: a narrower margin of plus—or-minus 2 1/2 %,
after which point intervention would be called for on a voluntary
basis, and a wider margin of plus—or—minus 5 %, at which point a
collaborative policy response would be obligatory. Such meetings
are notorious for each country emerging with its own view as to
what was agreed upon, and there is always the possibility that the
5 per cent target range was a u.s. proposal about which some
countries, such as Germany, were unenthusiastic.       No legal or
quasi—legal documents are signed at such meetings.
                                    27
By April of 1987, the scheduled time of a G-7 meeting, the
yen/dollar rate had fallen 7 per cent from the Louvre baseline.

The Japanese Finance Minister, Miyazawa, was forced to accept
Baker's proposal to "rebase" at the current level of 146
yen/dollar, with the same width of the reference range bands as
before.

          The U.S. commitment at the Louvre to oppose further
depreciation of the dollar might be supposed to show up in three
ways, besides the announcement of the agreement itself: an absence

of statements by the Secretary of the Treasury "talking down the
dollar," purchases of dollars in foreign exchange intervention
operations, and a tighter monetary policy. From then on, Baker did
indeed refrain, for the most part, from talking down the dollar.
For the first time since the heavy dollar sales of 1985, the U.S.
also did indeed intervene substantially in the foreign exchange
market in the aftermath of the Louvre, buying dollars to discourage

further depreciation.    Finally, U.S. interest rates did indeed
begin a gradual rise in February (reversing a three—year downward
trend), although the Federal Reserve was motivated more by a desire

to choke off inflation, which was beginning to edge up slightly
again, than by a feeling of commitment to support the value of the
dollar.     Perhaps as a result of these three steps, the dollar
appreciated, particularly against the mark, from the date of the
Louvre until mid—March (at one point inducing a small amount of Fed
intervention in March to dampen the appreciation).




                                28
9. The Financial Markets Fear a Dollar Plunge: 1987

          Many analysts had been warning for some time of the
possibility of a "hard landing," which could be defined as a fall
in the dollar which, because it is caused by a sudden portfolio
shift out of dollar assets, is accompanied by a sharp increase in
interest rates that have a contráctionary effect on economic
activity.32 Two events shook financial markets in 1987; each of
them began with markings of such a portfolio shift. First, in the
Spring, a fall in demand for U.S. bonds, perhaps led by nervous
foreign investors, led to a depreciation of the dollar (despite
concerted intervention in support of the dollar), and an abrupt
decline in bond prices and increase in interest rates.

          Second, world stock markets crashed in October 19, 1987. Of
the various possible causes that have been proposed for the
bursting of the apparent bubble, several are international in
nature. By the Fall of 1987, the U.S. trade deficit had still not
improved,33 and Jim Baker was again hoping to convince the largest
trading partners to expand their economies. On October 15, the
Commerce Department reported an unexpectedly large August trade
deficit, and the New York stock market reacted with a then—record




     32
          E.g.,   Marris (1985). This was also a major concern of Paul
Voicker' s.

          In retrospect, the trough in the dollar trade deficit
occurred in the third quarter of 1987 (and the trough in the "real
trade deficit," that is the quantity of exports minus the quantity
of imports, in the third quarter of 1986).

                                    29
95 point f all.34 On October 18, Baker again called on the German

Minister, Stoltenberg, to undertake expansion, with renewed dollar
depreciation as the threatened alternative.         When the U.S. and
other stock markets crashed on the next day (508 points in the case
of New York), two possible causes that were identified were the
October 14 trade deficit announcement, and Baker's threat to the
Germans to let the dollar fall. A third hypothesis is that the
markets feared that the Fed would deliberately raise interest rates

to try to keep the dollar from falling through a floor set at the
Louvre .

           Many observers on October 19 at first feared that the hard
landing was at hand. But, in large part due to the rapid reaction
of the Federal Reserve, interest rates fell rather than rose and
there was no subsequent slowdown in economic activity. The Fed was

prepared to allow a sharp decline in the dollar if the alternative
were insufficient liquidity to avert a financial crisis (though the

dollar, surprisingly, did not depreciate on October 19).
           Consultations   among   the   various   governments   began


           Other immediate market reactions that day included a decline
in the dollar and an increase in short—term interest rates,
precisely as in the portfolio-shift/hard--landing scenario. (Wall
Street Journal 11/5/87, p/22.)
     " Feldstein                                             This
                    (1988) and Obstfeld (1988, p.53).
explanation was partly inspired by Chairman Greenspan's move to
raise interest rates earlier in the year.        But Greenspan's
motivation was more likely to respond to incipient signs of re—
emerging inflation, particularly to demonstrate his independence
from the Administration and to earn his tough-guy credentials in
the eyes of the market soon after his appointment to replace Paul
Voicker, than it was to meet any exchange rate commitment made by
Baker at the Louvre.

                                    30
 immediately, but in the absence of a clear idea as to what
 macroeconomic policy commitments could be made, with respect to
 U.S. fiscal policy in particular, no G—7 meeting was scheduled.
 Dollar depreciation was again a concern, with frequent intervention
 in support of the dollar having little apparent effect. Two months
 after the stock market crash, G-7 representatives decided in a
 "Telephone Accord' to try to breathe new life into the Louvre
agreement.   Paragraph 8 of their December 22, 1987, communique
 (which the G—7 leaders were later to repeat word-for—word in the
communique of the Toronto Summit in June 1988) modified slightly
earlier statements in favor of exchange rate stability.          It
included new wording: 'either excessive fluctuation of exchange
rates, a further decline of the dollar or a rise in the dollar to
an extent that becomes destabilizing to the adjustment process,
could be counterproductive.. ' The asymmetry of the language,

describing the undesirability of a rise in a more qualified way
than the undesirability of a fall, was a deliberate signal that the

group wanted to put a floor under the dollar at its current level.
The markets were initially unimpressed, but heavy around—the—clock

intervention in support of the dollar37 in January 1988 was
apparently quite effective at combatting dollar weakness.


     36 Dobson (1990, Table 2.3), and New York Times, 1/8/88, p.26.

       Called the "G-7 bear trap" by Destler and
p.66).   The intent of the intervention was to Henning       (1989,
                                                     "bridge" until
substantial improvements in the U.S. trade deficit materialized, at
which time market sentiment in favor of the dollar could take over.
In the event, this plan worked quite well.    (Dobson, 1990, pages
2.30 and 3.22.)

                                31
          Periodically in 1987 and 1988, Japan's Ministry of Finance
used administrative guidance to encourage Japanese institutional
investors to hold more U.S. assets than they might choose on
profit-maximizing grounds, in order to keep the dollar from
depreciating further than it already had by then. This happened,
in particular, in response to the U.S. bond-market fall in the
Spring of 1987.       Koo (1988, p.8) tells us: "Even though the
imposition of such quasi-capital controls [reporting-requirements

for Japanese banks handling foreign exchange -- and an implicit
threat behind them —- imposed in May 1987 to head off a dollar
collapse] was against the spirit of the Yen/Dollar Committee
sponsored jointly by the Japanese Ministry of Finance and the US

Treasury to deregulate Japanese financial markets, no complaints
were heard from the US."38



10. Dollar Rallies: 1988 and 1989
          The dollar began to appreciate after the intervention of
January 1988. Its strength in mid-1988, leading up to the November

presidential election, led some observers to suggest that the
authorities in Japan and Germany were supporting the U.S. currency
in order to help candidate George Bush win the election and thus
head of f the danger of protectionist trade policies under the
Democrats.

          A new dollar rally followed in 1989.   For the first time
since 1985-86, the official message switched from a desire for

     38
           See also Hale (1989, pp.2—4).
                                  32
 'exchange rate stability around recent levels" back to an
implication that the current strength of the dollar was not
justified:39 In the communique of a Washington meeting in September
1989, the G-7 "...considered the rise in recent months of the
dollar inconsistent with longer run fundamentals." But there is
less evidence in 1989 that foreign exchange intervention succeeded

in moving the market than there was in the 1985—88 period.

          The yen, in particular, weakened against the dollar at the
end of the decade, in association with political scandals in Japan
in 1989 and an investor shift out of Japanese security markets in
early 1990.         Japanese officials apparently thought that, having
supported the U.S. currency earlier, the Americans should now
return the favor and support the yen. U.S. authorities had bought
yen and marks in 1988 and 1989 to dampen the appreciation of the
dollar. But a Paris G-7 meeting in early April of 1990 produced no

support for Japan (beyond a statement that the Ministers had
"discussed.. . the decline of the yen against other currencies, and

its undesirable consequences for the global adjustment process"40).



11. Exchange Rates Policies in Other Parts of the World

          Most political discussion of "the dollar" does not bother to
distinguish what partner currencies are intended, or what their
relative weight is in the basket. Some standard weighted average
of the major industrialized countries is usually used when precise


          Dobson (1990, p. 22).
     40
          Dobson,   Table 2.3.

                                    33
numbers are needed, while the mark and -—     especially   —-   the yen
often come in for extra attention, by virtue of the importance of
Germany and Japan in international trade and finance. The lack of
American concern with other currencies stems in part because the
various dollar exchange rates are highly correlated, and in part
because the less—important currencies are considered esoteric in

the U.S. political sphere.4' Nevertheless, some specific issues
concerning other currencies did arise in the 1980s, and are worth
mentioning both as they relate to the dollar and to the extent that

they shed light on American thinking regarding foreign exchange
markets in general.
         First, after the LDC debt crisis surfaced in August 1982, it

became necessary for many countries in Latin America and elsewhere

to take policy steps to convert their existing trade deficits into

trade surpluses, and thereby earn the foreign exchange to service
their international debts. High on the usual list of such policy
steps is the devaluation of the currency.         The Mexican peso,

Brazilian cruzeiro (later the cruzado), Argentine peso (later the
austral), and many others underwent repeated large nominal and real

devaluations. For the most part these devaluations were components

of policy packages taken under the guidance, indeed insistence, of
the International Monetary Fund and with the full support of the
U.S. government.       But demurs were occasionally heard from two
different sources within the U.S. political galaxy. A few U.S.


     ' Recall the famous quote from the Nixon tapes, "I don't give
a ____   about   the lira.H

                                  34
industries that faced competition from these countries charged that

the devaluations represented subsidies or other unfair trading
practices, and were sometimes supported in these charges by
protectors in the Commerce Department or in the Congress.          (An
example was charges by the U.S. copper industry that they faced
unfair competition from Chile in the form of a devaluation of the
Chilean peso.)

          The other source of protest was more philosophical than
political: the "supply—siders" argued that devaluation, like fiscal

austerity (the twin officially-sanctioned policy for problem
debtors), was not an effective or desirable way to improve the
trade balance, because it had no real effects. The supply—sider
viewpoint deserves attention ——      if for no other reason —- because
it was represented in the Reagan Administration, especially at the

beginning, with sufficient vigor (for example) to produce the 1981-
83 tax cuts.

          Another major non—dollar currency development of the l980s
was the movement toward enhanced monetary and financial unification

within Europe. The founding of the European Monetary System by
Giscard and Schmidt in 1979 had been portrayed at the time as
something of a challenge to the primacy of the dollar, and policy
toward the EMS at the U.S. Treasury had been at best neutral.42
But when "Europe 1992" frenzy caught fire in Europe in 1988 and
generated some fears of a Fortress Europe in the American Congress,

media, and business communities, the attitude of the Administration

     42
          Funabashi   (p.31) explains views within the Treasury.
                                    35
ranged from indifferent to benign.        This benign indifference
particularly characterized the decade's developments on the
monetary side: France's retreat from the go—it-alone expansion and
controls on capital outflow that the Socialists had instituted in

1981, the agreement by EMS members to phase out all capital
controls by July 1990, and the completely unanticipated decision by
East and West Germany in 1990 to undertake monetary unification.43
All three events tended to be welcomed as further signs of the
worldwide free-market revolution that Ronald Reagan had helped
start.

         The Europeans, however, often feel that the U.S. policy—
makers are insufficiently appreciative of EMS concerns, for example

of the way that the long-awaited depreciation of the dollar in 1985

might put strains on the cross—rates between the deutschemark and
the weaker currencies in the EMS. After the Plaza Accord, Treasury

officials thought that the Germans had not done their agreed-upon

share of intervention. (This view was expressed by Mulford at a G—
5 Deputies meeting in Paris in November 1985.)          The Germans
explained that the Bank of Italy had sold over $2 billion in place
of the Bundesbank so as to avoid putting upward pressure on the
lira/mark cross rate; they considered American reluctance to accept
this explanation to be a sign of indifference to the EMS.44
         A third area of the world that featured interesting exchange


         One striking development of 1990 that was presumably in
large part a consequence of the fall of Communism in Central Europe
was the appreciation of the mark and other European currencies.
     " Funabashi
                   (pp.27-30).
                                  36
rate developments was the East Asian NICs (Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong

and Singapore). Here U.S. policy played a determining role.        In
1986 and 1987 there became fashionable the view that the
explanation for the lack of improvement in the U.S. trade balance
since February 1985 was that the traditional indices of the U.S.

"effective exchange rate" vastly overstated the depreciation of the

dollar that had taken place, by giving excessive weight to the yen
and European currencies: that such trading partners as the East
Asian NICs, Brazil and Mexico (newly-important competitors in
manufactures) and Argentina, Australia and Canada (traditional
competitors in wheat and beef in third-country markets) had little

or no representation in the indices, and that their currencies had
jj   appreciated   against the dollar.45

         The two countries that came in for particular attention were

Korea and Taiwan. (Singapore and Hong Kong were relatively exempt
from criticism because both follow free-trade policies. The Latin
American countries had the excuse of difficult debts to service.)
As of 1986, the new Taiwan dollar had only begun to appreciate
against the U.S. dollar, and the Korean won still had not begun to
do so, even though both countries had large trade surpluses. The
U.S. government soon began to apply pressure on the two (as Fred



         Certain economists initially overstated the case by
including the Latin American countries in a comprehensive nominal
exchange rate index and proclaiming that the depreciation of the
dollar had in fact not taken place I        A properly computed
comprehensive real exchange rate index shows that the 1985—87
depreciation of the dollar was less than one would think if the
other countries were not included, but that the difference is not
large.

                                  37
Bergsten first urged in Seoul in July 1986), and the currencies
were in fact allowed to appreciate relatively strongly.      In the
periodic reports to Congress required by the Omnibus Trade Bill of
1988, the Treasury focused heavily on Korea and Taiwan. In the
October 1989 report, the Treasury announced the beginning of
negotiations that went beyond simply pressuring Korea to appreciate
the won, to push for a general liberalization of Korean financial
markets and conversion to a market—oriented foreign exchange
system, presumably meaning a regime of free—floating.'6 There was
a general appeal to the superiority of free-market principles and
a citation of the precedent of the Yen/Dollar talks.




III. COMPETING ECONOMIC THEORIES


         Policies that are adopted are naturally the outcome of the
positions held by various interest groups and policy—makers, and
their interactions through the political process and their relative

power.     The last part of this paper discusses the competing
interest groups and policy—makers. The middle part discusses the

various possible positions regarding exchange rate policy among
which they choose. In the area of exchange rates, the links from
policy tools to the determination of the exchange rate, and even


     46 The Treasury considers as a deadline for these talks to bear
fruit December 1990, when a Treasury report on the treatment of
U.S. financial institutions in countries like Korea is due to
Congress. Frankel (1990).
                                 38
the links from the exchange rate to the economic welfare of various

groups, are not entirely certain. For this reason, the differing
models, or views as to how the foreign exchange market (and the
rest of the economy) operate, can be as relevant as differing
economic interests in determining the positions taken by various
actors.      Thus we begin with a brief discussion of alternative
exchange rate theories.


1. Trade Balance Equilibration

          A regime of purely-floating exchange rates has held roughly
for the United States since 1973, and held precisely in the early
1980s. Under such a regime, the exchange rate is determined in the

private market, and adjusts to clear supply and demand for foreign

exchange without any intervention by the monetary authority. An
old-fashioned view of exchange-rate determination is that the
supply and demand for foreign exchange are dominated by exports and

imports    (respectively),   so that under floating rates the exchange
rate adjusts so as to clear the trade balance.        What makes this
view old-fashioned is that foreign exchange markets today are
dominated by financial transactions, rather than by trade, and have
been ever since the major industrialized countries removed their
major controls on the international flow of capital.              The

importance of international capital flows explains why the record
U.S. trade deficits of the mid-1980s did not immediately produce an

equilibrating depreciation of the dollar: the deficits were easily
financed by massive borrowing from abroad.           Some observers,

                                    39
however, professed to be surprised by this development, and argued
that the magnitude of the U.S. trade deficit in itself was evidence

that floating exchange rates were not operating "as they were
supposed to," and that some reform was therefore called for.47

           One consequence of the trade balance equilibration view is
the implication that if one country adopts a policy change that
differs from that of its neighbors (e.g., the fiscal expansion
adopted by the United States in the 1980s), under a floating
exchange rates the effects are felt entirely within the domestic
economy, rather than being in part transmitted abroad, e.g., via a
domestic trade deficit and foreign trade surplus. It would in turn
follow that under floating rates there is little need for
international coordination of macroeconomic policy of the sort
agreed upon at the Louvre.

           Large international capital flows are the most important of
several ways in which this old—fashioned insulation" result can be

invalidated. Nevertheless, for the case of changes in monetary
policy, leading multi-country econometric models suggest that it is
in   practice not far wrong to think that the exchange rate adjusts
so as to produce little effect on the trade balance and little
international        transmission.48   For fiscal policy, on the other
hand, the trade balance and transmission effects are typically even

greater under floating exchange rates than under fixed rates. Thus
it is no surprise that record U.S. trade deficits and European

      '
           E.g.,   Nurchison and Solomon (1983).
      48
           Frankel   (1988).
                                       40
 trade surpluses emerged beginning in 1983, nor that calls for
 international coordination of policy followed.


 2. Nonetarism

        For many, the most common—sensical modern view of
 international monetary economics was that of the monetarists.
Among the relevant tenets of monetarism are: (i) belief in the
central role of the money supply, particularly for determining the

price level and exchange rate, (ii) a strong preference for low and
stable growth in the money supply, so as to give price stability,
(iii) suspicion of the motives and abilities of the Federal Reserve
Board and an axiomatic belief that the country is more likely to

get the proper sort of monetary policy if the Fed is brought more
directly under the control of the political process (i.e., Congress

or the Treasury), (iv) faith in free markets in general, (v)
extension of the free-market philosophy to include the virtues of

a freely-floating exchange rate, so that any country that prints
too much money has to bear the burden itself in terms of inflation
and currency depreciation.     This last, the belief in floating
exchange rates, was a position that Milton Friedman (1953) had
advanced almost alone, at a time when such a change in the exchange
rate regime seemed a remote pipe—dream.

       The monetarists entered the l980s riding high. Largely as
a response to the inflation of the l970s, and the other failures of

Keynesian economics, the views of Milton Friedman and his followers
had gone from those of an outlandish minority to wide acceptance,


                                41
and had supposedly been adopted as official policy by the Federal
Reserve Board. At long last, a member of the Shadow Open Market

Committee, Beryl Sprinkel, was appointed UnderSecretary for
Monetary Affairs (1981—84), the position in the Treasury that
traditionally has had responsibility not only for monetary affairs
but the exchange rate and other matters of international finance as

well, and another, William Poole, was appointed to the President's
Council of Economic Advisers (1982—85).

       It was downhill from there. Intellectually, the monetarists

were soon faced with the breakdown of their most cherished
relationship, that between money and prices.      The big fall in
velocity in the early 1980s caused the Federal Reserve Board to
abandon its monetarist rule (in mid—1982 de facto, and several
years later explicitly). Politically, their champion Sprinkel, who
duly lectured the Fed from 1983 to 1986 that its rapid rate of
money growth would soon produce a resurgence of inflation, was
overruled by the Secretary of the Treasury who sought to pressure
the Fed for faster growth, for the usual reasons of political
expediency (particularly in the election year, 1984).         This
spectacle must have been an edifying lesson for the monetarists on

the political economy of monetary policy.    (Refer back to tenet
(iii) above.)

       Sprinkel in interagency meetings and public appearances
tried to explain the appreciation of the dollar as due to the
Administration's success at bringing down the rate of inflation.
Such a factor could explain a nominal appreciation, but not the

                                42
real appreciation of the dollar in the early 1980s, which was
almost as big as the nominal appreciation. Nor for that matter,
could the monetarist view explain the clear observed increase in
real interest rates. With both the relationship between money and

prices and the relationship between the price level and the
exchange rate breaking down, the monetarists were in heavy retreat
by the latter part of the decade. Sprinkel was not happy with the

Treasury's 1985 conversion to managed exchange rates, but by then
he was not in a position to affect policy on that topic.



3. Overshooting
       The theory that could readily explain an increase in the
real interest rate and a real appreciation of the dollar was the
mainstream textbook macroeconomic view subscribed to by Feldstein
and Volcker, among others. As explained in Part II above, the two
variables are closely associated: the increase in the real interest

differential signals an increase in the expected rate of return on

dollar securities; international investors respond to the enhanced
attractiveness of dollar securities by increasing their demand for
them, which causes the dollar to appreciate. The elegant seminal
statement of this process was the overshooting model of Dornbusch
(1976). In the overshooting equilibrium, everyone in the market
agrees that the dollar has become "overvalued" in the sense that
its current value is greater than its long—run value and it will
have to depreciate in the future; the market's expectation that the

dollar will depreciate in the future is just sufficient to offset

                                43
the higher interest rate that dollar assets pay, so that investors

view dollar and non—dollar securities as equally attractive in this

equilibrium.

        The overshooting model had some major difficulties of its
own. Although the model could account for the fact of the dollar
appreciation, and for the magnitude (at least as of early 1984), it
could not explain the duration of the appreciation, a long drawn—
out process that lasted until February 1985.        In theory, the
appreciation should have occurred in one jump (e.g., when the
magnitude of the budget deficits became known), or in two jumps
(e.g., beginning with the monetary contraction of 1980), or at most
in four or five jumps (as bits of information on the
monetary/fiscal policy mix came out). It should then have begun
its gradual return to long run equilibrium.       As described in
section 11.5 above, from mid-1984 on the dollar, far from beginning

its return to long—run equilibrium, continued to appreciate at an
accelerated rate, in the face of not only an ever—worsening trade
balance, but of a real interest differential that had begun to
diminish as well. It appeared that the dollar was overshooting
the overshooting equilibrium."       This was definitely fl how
floating exchange rates were supposed to behave, and observers
increasingly began considering alternatives.


4. New classical

       It was clear that the last 20 per cent real appreciation of

the dollar up to February 1985 could not be correlated with readily


                                44
 observable, standard, macroeconomic fundamentals. That left two
 possibilities. The first theory, coming from the new classical
macroeconomic school, says that movements in the real exchange rate
come from fundamental shifts in "tastes and technology" that may

not be observable. Though most proponents of the new classical
school are notorious for omitting to suggest what the specific
fundamental shifts might be in any particular episode, others have
suggested that Reagan reductions in tax rates, especially on
capital income, could be the explanation behind the appreciation of
the dollar in the early l98Os.'

       This school of thought provides the most         respectable
intellectual foundation for the "Safe Haven' view of the strong
dollar that was so prevalent in the first Reagan Administration.
But many observers find it implausible that there could have been
a shift in taste toward American goods or an increase ir U.S.
productivity, or tax effects, sufficiently large to explain an
upswing in the value of the dollar as large as that from mid-1984
to February 1985, only to be reversed rapidly thereafter.


5. Speculative bubbles

       The second possibility is that the final stage of
appreciation of the dollar to February 1985 was an example of a

speculative bubble: a self—confirming increase in the value of the
dollar arising from purchases of dollars by speculators who think

       For example, Dooley and Isard (1985) and Bovenberg (1990).
This view was also put forward by CEA members Niskanen and Poole in
the 1985 Economic Report of the President.

                                45
it will appreciate. The standard theory of speculative bubbles has
the advantage that it can be perfectly consistent with rational

expectations: a speculator cannot necessarily expect to make money
from the knowledge that the market is in a bubble, because he does
not know when the bubble will burst. But the standard version of

the theory has the disadvantage that it has nothing to say about
what gets such speculative bubbles started.
         Recent formulations of fads and speculative bubbles that are

not necessarily rational focus on the existence of different
classes of speculators: one class who forecast based on
macroeconomic fundamentals and another who just try to guess which
way the rest of the market is going.        The apparently-perverse
increase in the demand for dollars in 1984-85, for example, might

be explained by the decreased confidence speculators were placing
in fundamentalists' forecasts of future depreciation, and the
increased confidence they were placing in the extrapolations of
technical analysts .°


6.   Portfolio balance

        For present purposes, the most important aspect of the
portfolio-balance model is that it adds a policy tool: its says

that even sterilized foreign exchange intervention, that is,
intervention that does not change money supplies, can affect the
exchange rate. The reason is that investors are assumed to view



      50Frankel and Froot (1990), Krugman (1985), and Marris (1985).
                                 46
long positions taken in various currencies as imperfect substitutes

for each other, even if they are not holding actual foreign
currency.     Other approaches such as the inonetarist model, by
contrast, are quite firm   that   only to the extent that intervention

changes money supplies (in which case it is just a species of
monetary policy) can it have an effect. This is the position Beryl

Sprinkel took, for example, when his French counterpart NIchel
Caindessus tried to argue the desirability of foreign exchange
intervention in preparations for the 1982 Summit of G-7 heads of
state at Versailles.51

       Another aspect of the portfolio balance approach is that it

implies that trade-balance equilibration, though not operative in
the short run, is operative in the long run. Because a deficit
country must borrow to finance its deficit, the accumulation of
international indebtedness over time will eventually force its
currency to depreciate. Some would say that mounting indebtedness
is what finally forced the dollar down during the period 1985-87.




IV. COMPETING VIEWS ON DESIRABLE EXCHANGE RATE ARRANGEMENTS



       Differing   models as to how the foreign exchange market
operates    translate into different views as to the appropriate
government response. But it is not a one—to-one correspondence.
    ' Putnam
                and Bayne (p.133).
                                   47
1. Leave the foreign exchange market alone
       There are four principal variants of the school of thought
that says that the government should allow the foreign exchange
market to function freely on its own. The most extreme position,
held by monetarists and the new classical school, says that there
is no need to be concerned about exchange rate fluctuations because

they have no real effects. The simplest form of this argument
claims that movements in the real exchange rate are non—existent,
because movements in the nominal exchange rate only serve to offset

differences in inflation rates.      But this view steadily lost
adherents as the l980s progressed, because it was evident that the
nominal appreciation of the dollar was almost fully reflected as a
real appreciation of the dollar. The more sophisticated form of
the argument (the new classical view, mentioned above) holds that,
although there clearly are real fluctuations in the exchange rate,
these are fluctuations due to real changes in productivity or
tastes and would have taken place anyway, even if the exchange rate
had not been freely floating. An increasing number observers also
found this view harder to swallow in 1984-85, but the vote was far
from unanimous.

       Even among the large majority who agree that exchange rate
movements have real effects on the trade deficit and other
important variables, there are other viewpoints that lead to the
conclusion that the government should refrain from interfering.
One is the view that exchange rate movements are the natural result

of changes in macroeconomic policy, and may actually be desirable

                                48
if one takes the changes in policy as given.         In the case of the
1982-84 dollar appreciation, attributed to the widening federal
budget deficit, the question was whether the dollar appreciation
was desirable if one took the budget deficit as a given political
constraint.

           CE.A Chairman Feldstein argued that it was.       The strong
dollar acted as a "safety valve" to distribute the crowding-out

effects of the budget deficit more evenly among sectors of the
private economy. The Feldstein Doctrine (so christened by Fred
Bergsten) held that even if policy-makers were somehow able to
force the dollar down without changing fiscal (or monetary) policy
——   for    example, by sterilized foreign exchange intervention or
capital controls -—    the   favorable effects on the export and import—
competing sectors would be more—than—offset by unfavorable effects:

the lost capital inflow would result in real interest rates even
higher than those prevailing at the time, which would hurt those
sectors of the economy (such as capital goods) where demand is
sensitive to the real interest rate.           The result would be a
lopsided recovery. 52
           One related viewpoint refuses to "take fiscal and monetary

policy as given." It argues that exchange rate targets or other
financial gimmickry can deflect political resolve to deal with
budget deficits and other domestic objectives that ultimately may




           CEA (1984), Feldstein (1984).
                                    49
be more important than the exchange rate or the trade balance.53
Another argues that if central banks are encouraged to intervene in

the foreign exchange market, they will gamble away the taxpayers'
money, to little avail.54 A final viewpoint is that floating rates

allow a greater degree of policy independence among countries than
do fixed rates or managed floating (even if they do not allow
complete insulation as held by the trade-balance equilibration
view), and that such de-centralization of national policy-making is

best because each country is the best judge of its own needs.55



2. Commit monetary or fiscal policy to helping stabilize the
exchange  rate
       Above we mentioned the argument that allowing the full
effect of the mix of monetary and fiscal policies to be reflected
in the exchange rate maximized the chance   that those policies would
be   adjusted appropriately. There is a mirror—image argument on the
other side, that committing countries to exchange rate targets
maximizes the chance that monetary and fiscal policy will be
appropriate.
      Many believe that the government should commit to some

         A counter—argument that places more weight on the exchange—
rate and trade-balance objectives is based on the political economy
point that Congress tends to adopt damaging protectionist polices
when a dollar appreciation increases the trade deficit. Bergsten
(1982, 1984), for example, argued that for such reasons the
exchange   rate objective should be given increased weight.
      ' This concern is common among the monetarists.
         Corden (1983).
                                 50
degree of stabilization of the exchange rate. One of the more
prominent and practical proposals is the Williamson proposal for
target zones. Part of the argument for making such a commitment is

that, even though macroeconomic policies will ultimately have to be

adjusted in order to keep the exchange rate within the band, such
adjustment is desirable. Williamson (1983, 1987) has argued, for
example, that if target zones had been in place in the early l9BOs,

the Reagan Athninistration would have been forced to abandon its
policies that were producing excessive budget deficits."




3. Attempt to de—couple the exchange rate from other macroeconomic

policies
          For anyone aware simultaneously of the trade costs of an
overly strong dollar, the inflationary consequences of an
expansionary monetary policy to depreciate the dollar, and the
political difficulties of cutting the U.S. budget deficit, any sort
of policy instrument that could bring about a depreciation of the
dollar without changing monetary or fiscal policy would be a
godsend. A few such instruments have been proposed.

          Sterilized intervention, though it has no effect on the
exchange rate in the view of many because it by definition does not
change money supplies, can have an effect if it changes
     56
       Feldstein, on the other hand, has countered that if a
serious target zone had been in place in the early 1980s, the
government would not have reacted to the dollar appreciation by
cutting the budget deficit, but would sooner have shifted to an
inflationary monetary policy.
                                 51
expectations regarding future money supplies g if the portfolio-
balance model is correct. At the Versailles Suzmnit of 1982, the
French    argued that foreign exchange intervention did provide an
independent and useful tool; the Americans agreed to form an inter—
governmental working group to study the question (and to enact a
process   of "multilateral surveillance" by the Group of 5). The
findings of the working group, known as the Jurgensen Report, were
submitted to the G-7 leaders at the Williamsburg Summit of 1983.

         Although the Plaza Accord is widely perceived as having
strikingly reversed the position of the G-7, particularly the
United States, on the question of the effectiveness of
intervention, there was in fact no discussion in the Plaza
deliberations or in the communique as to whether the intervention
undertaken should be sterilized or not. Indeed, there was not much

discussion at the major meetings as to what sort of monetary
policies would be appropriate to support exchange rate objectives.
The exception is that the Plaza Accord called for Japanese monetary

policy to 'exercise flexible management with due attention to the
yen exchange rate."57 When the Bank of Japan raised its discount
rate soon after the Plaza, it claimed a reduction in the yen/dollar

rate as its objective, although others were less sure that this was

truly its motive.
         Concerted intervention, that is, by all or most of the G-7
central banks simultaneously, is reported to be more effective.
There is indeed some evidence that the whole may be greater than


          Funabashi, p.265, and Dobson, Table 2.4.
                                  52
the sum of the parts, especially if the intervention is announced
to the public, and if it reinforces a movement that is already
underway. 58

           Capital   controls were used by the United States to lessen
downward pressure on the dollar before 1973, and by Germany        and
Japan to stem upward pressure on their currencies. Some, such as

Tobin (1978), Bergsten (1984), and Dornbusch (1986), proposed in
the early 1980s that the U.S. reimpose controls to stem capital
inflow, or that Japan be urged to strengthen its controls on
capital outflow (rather than being pressured to remove them). It
was also suggested that the Japanese government could and did use
administrative guidance to discourage Japanese investors from
holding dollar assets in the early 1980s, or to encourage them to
hold dollar assets in 1987—88.

           Most economists viewed these various instruments as unlikely

to be very effective, in the absence of changes or monetary or
fiscal policy. Many practioners, however, believed that they could
have an effect, at least in the short run.


4.   Fix the exchange rate

           For some countries (small and open), a fixed exchange rate
may be a practical option. Here one of the major arguments for
fixing the rate is to commit monetary policy to a non-inflationary
policy in a way that is sufficiently credible to workers and
financial markets that reduced expectations of inflation help to

      58
           Dominguez and Frankel (1990).
                                    53
eliminate actual inflation. For a country like the United States,
a fixed exchange rate is no longer a very viable option.59

        Nevertheless, a special case of a fixed exchange rate
system, the gold standard, was frequently proposed by a certain
influential group, the supply—siders. The same Wall Street Journal
editorial-writers that brought us the Laffer Curve in the area of
tax policy, also brought the Mundell-Laffer hypothesis (which
claimed that changes in the nominal exchange rate were one—for—one

and instantly offset by changes in price levels. so that
devaluations had no real effects), and the proposal that monetary

stability could only be restored by returning to a regime where the
Central Bank made a commitment to peg the price of gold. This view

had important adherents in the starting team at the Treasury in
1981.   But in March 1982, the Cold Commission that had been
appointed to investigate such proposals submitted a negative
report. By 1983 only the moderate Manuel Johnson, at the Assistant

Secretary level, was left among the original supply-siders at
Treasury. When Johnson was appointed Vice-Chairman of the Federal
Reserve Board at the beginning of 1986 (joining other recent
appointees perceived as favoring easier money), some feared that
gold standard proponents had taken over. But like Thomas a Becket
after he was appointed Archbishop of Canterbury, the historical
integrity of the institution prevailed, and Johnson became a model
of Central Banker rectitude.


        McKinnon (1988), however, continued to offer specific
versions of his proposal for a return to fixed exchange rates
(among the United States, Germany and Japan).
                                54
         The Administration continued to be susceptible to
penetration by gold bugs, however. Laffer came to meetings of an
academic advisory group in the White House, gold-bug think tanks
like Jude Wanniski's firm Polyconomics and the Lehrman Institute

were heard from frequently, Congressman Jack Kemp was always a
rival for the attentions of Conservative Republican supporters, and

even Vice President George Bush seemed at times to have been
temporarily seduced by visions of gold. Baker, at the October 1987
Annual Meeting of the IMF, proposed that the G—7 add to its list of
indicators the price of 'a basket of commodities, including gold."

This proposal was accepted by the G-7 at the Toronto Summit in June

1988.J




V. COMPETING INTEREST GROUPS



         In this section we consider some of the major economic
interest groups affected by the exchange rate.


1. Manufacturing

         U.S. manufacturers were clearly hurt by the appreciation of
the dollar in the early 1980s, losing export customers around the

world and losing domestic customers to competition from a flood of




                                 55
imports.6° In contrast to smaller, more open, countries, exchange
rate policy in the United States had not traditionally been a high
priority in the list of issues on which the manufacturing sector

would lobby in national politics. But during the period 1983-85,
as the value of the dollar continued to climb to new heights and
the trade balance continued to sink to new lows, an increasing
number of business groups and chief executives from large
corporations lodged complaints in Washington and urged action.
          Lee Morgan, Chairman of Caterpillar Tractor in the early
1980s, stands out as an example of activism on the exchange rate
issue, both in terms of the consistency and the earliness (starting

as early as December 198161) of his efforts, and in terms of their

policy pay-off. The Illinois maker of construction equipment was
engaged in intense competition for customers around the world with
a Japanese rival, Komatsu.      Morgan realized that, as a major
American exporter, his interest lay with outward—oriented trade
policies rather than protectionism.     But he also realized that
taking measures to reduce costs at Caterpillar would not be
sufficient to maintain international competitiveness if they were
offset by appreciation of the dollar.
          Morgan's influence went far beyond that of the CEO of a
typical large corporation. He could claim to be a spokesman for
the business community, heading a task force of the influential

     60
        Branson and Love (1988) provide statistical evidence on the
sectoral effects of the strong dollar.
     61
          Testimony before a House Committee, cited by Funabashi
(p.70).

                                 56
Business Roundtable, which at his behest took a strong position on

the exchange rate beginning in 1983. Furthermore, he personally
had a degree of access to top policy-makers that went beyond that

of a typical political supporter.62     In repeated meetings with
Administration cabinet members (the first one was in the White
House in October 1982), Morgan argued for an activist exchange rate

policy.
          For the first two years, such lobbying by the Business
Roundtable and others (the National Association of Manufacturers
was also vocal on the need for policies to bring down the dollar)
appeared to have little or no effect on policy. But, as described
in Section 11.4 above, Lee Morgan's visit to the White House and
Treasury in late September 1983 (with Murchison and Solomon in tow)

was the impetus for Don Regan's entire Yen/Dollar campaign. By the
beginning of 1985, the number of voices from the U.S. manufacturing

sector protesting the Administration's neglect of the dollar and
the trade deficit had multiplied greatly. This was certainly a
major influence on the thinking of Baker and Darman when they
finally shifted the Administration to an activist position on the
exchange rate.

          The Business Roundtable was usually careful to say that

     62
       The Reagan Administration was said by insiders to owe a
large political favor to Morgan and his company, as one of three
American suppliers that had heavily lost business when the
government instituted an embargo on equipment being used in the
Construction of the U.S.S.R.-Europe gas pipeline beginning in
December 1981. (Caterpillar lost sales of 200 pipelayers: Nollen,
1987, p.7).    it was also relevant that Caterpillar's hometown
(Peoria) had House Minority Leader Robert Michel as its Congressman
and Charles Percy as its Senator.

                                57
measures to try to bring down the dollar should not be taken in
isolation, that measures to reduce the federal budget deficit were

an important part of the package. An interesting question was
whether the economic interest of American manufacturing lay on the
side of efforts to bring down the dollar, if one took the budget
deficit as a fixed political constraint. In the widely accepted
analysis of Feldstein, measures that did not try to work through

macroeconomic policies (say, capital controls, foreign exchange
intervention, or public statements) —— even if effective at
bringing down the dollar and reducing the trade deficit -- would
reduce the capital inflow and raise U.S. interest rates.        The
crowding out would be borne less by exchange—rate-sensitive
industries and more by interest-rate-sensitive industries.

        Neat theoretical distinctions regarding sector sensitivities

tend to break down, however, as soon as one recognizes that many of
the industries that are most sensitive to the exchange rate are the
same as the ones that are the most sensitive to the interest rate:

autos, aircraft, and capital goods in general. This may explain ——
if   one is willing to attribute enough sophistication to business
leaders —— why many of them did not devote much energy to the

exchange rate issue until the bubble period of late 1984 and 1985,
when the dollar seemed divorced from the economic fundamentals:
until then, the tradeoff between high interest rates and a high
dollar had been regarded as inexorable, given the budget deficit.
        The manufacturing leaders who had been complaining about
Administration neglect of the dollar all praised the Plaza

                                 58
Agreement of September 1985. Some, like NAN, continued to call for

a weaker dollar in 1986 and 1987, and in particular to call for
appreciation by Taiwan, Korea, and other NICs. But in the late
1980s the exchange rate was no longer a salient enough issue to
rouse most of the business community to political action.63



2. Agriculture
          The agricultural sector is quite sensitive to the exchange
rate. In theory, the effect on the farmer comes directly through
the price he or she receives for his or her product: a ten per cent

increase in the value of the dollar causes an immediate ten per
cent fall in the world price of the crop when expressed in dollars.

In practice, subsidies and other distortions in almost every
country partially insulate farmers from the international market.

But inflationary monetary policies, together with specific
agricultural policies, encouraged American agriculture to expand
output and exports in the 1970s, so that by the l980s they had
indeed become quite dependent on exports.
          The switch in the monetary/fiscal policy mix in the early
1980s and the appreciation of the dollar put strong downward
pressure on dollar commodity prices.           Existing farm support
programs reduced the impact on the farmer by buying up large
quantities of unwanted crops and making support payments that in
some years were as large as total net farm income.          But the
existence of the large accumulated government holdings of

     63
          Destler   and Henning (1987, pp. 130-131.).
                                    59
commodities kept prices depressed for some years after the
macroeconomic situation began to reverse in the mid—1980s, so that
the effect of the programs was to spread the negative effect out
over time (not to mention inflict high costs on consumers), rather

than just to dampen it. The rural sector considered the 1980s a
disastrous decade for it, and there was much talk of a bifurcated

economy, with service-oriented California and the Northeast doing
well, and everybody in between (both the rust belt' and the farm
belt) doing poorly.
          Farm lobbies came out in favor of a depreciation of the
dollar, and Agriculture Secretary Block was one of the voices in
Cabinet meetings in 1983-85 who were concerned about the policy
mix, dollar, and trade deficit. Agrarian populists consistently
favor easier money, lower interest rates, and a weaker dollar.
Ninety years ago they were championed by Presidential candidate
William Jennings Bryan, who campaigned against the cross of gold,"
the commitment to the gold standard that was keeping money tight.
In the early 1980s, a return to the gold standard was seen as a way

of getting easier money by supply-siders like 1984 presidential
candidate Jack Kemp.64 At the beginning of 1986 agrarian populism

got an easy-money champion, Wayne Angell, appointed to the Federal
Reserve Board. One observer has included the Farm Aid movement as

one of the pressure groups that successfully protested in 1985-86
the high dollar and trade deficit, leading to a switch to policies



     64
          Frankel   (1986).
                                60
of intervention in     the   foreign exchange market and easier money.65
         Although the agricultural sector was clearly in the camp
opposed to the strong dollar, it did not expend a great deal of
lobbying time or expense on this particular issue.              Obvious

explanations include that lobbying resources expended directly on
farm legislation had a greater payoff, and that a serious attack on

the macroeconomic source of the appreciation (the budget deficit)
would likely include cut-backs on farm subsidies.66        But there is
another possible reason why efforts to bring down the dollar, even

taking the budget deficit as given, may not have been clearly in
the farm sector's interest: interest rates. The high real interest

rates that resulted from the l980s switch in macro policy mix were

as much a source of negative pressure on conunodity prices (via low

inventory demand) and of financial distress for farmers (many of
whom were heavily in debt) as the high dollar. Thus the commodity
sector faced the same tradeoff between interest rates and the
dollar as such industries as capital goods, autos, and aircraft: an
effort to bring down the dollar without changing macro policies --
even if successful —— would be a mixed blessing, in that it would
probably lead to even higher interest rates.


3. Labor
         In   classic Hecksher—Ohljn-Samuelson trade theory, the

    65
       Havrilesky (1990, p.57), who sees this episode as fitting
a "public choice theory of how monetary expansion follows after a
period of redistributive policies.
    66
         Destler   and Henning, p. 124.
                                     61
interests of labor and capital (or land), should line up on
opposite sides, according to whether the manufacture of exports and
imports are intensive in their use. In practice, their interests
seem to fit better the "specific-factor" model. Auto workers and
auto capitalists, for example, both have a lot invested in the auto

industry, and thus ally themselves more closely with each other on
questions of trade than with workers or capitalists, respectively,
in other industries. In the case of the strong 1980s dollar, this
means that labor in the manufacturing sector was opposed to the
strong dollar in the same way as managers and owners in that
sector.

            Relative to the agricultural sector, labor had a head-start

in the sense that the trade deficit had already been a priority
concern for some time (particularly in the sectors badly hurt by
import competition in the 1970s: auto, steel and textiles). The
AFL—CIO, for example, came out against the Administration's neglect
of the dollar and its implications for the trade deficit in early
1984. But labor representatives gave less priority to the exchange

rate issue than the business community did, in part because they
tended to be more enamored of industrial policy as an alternative
antidote for the trade deficit.67


4.   Sectors that Benefit from a Strong Dollar
            There   are a number of actors in the economy who benefit from

a strong dollar, most obviously consumers, firms that import inputs

       67
            Destler   and Henning (p.122-24).
                                       62
(such as oil and semi—conductors), and the importers themselves

(including shipping, marketing and retail). The entire segment of
the economy composed of goods and services that are not traded
internationally clearly benefits from an increase in the price of
their output in terms of the price of the internationally traded

segment of the economy.         The strongest case, in theory, is the
construction industry. In the first place, the tradeable component
there is close to zero. In the second, measures to force down the
dollar at the expense of a cut-off in capital flows and an increase

in real interest rates would hurt the construction sector more
clearly than any other.
        All the sectors just named during the strong-dollar period
were silent on the issue.           Part of the explanation is that
constituents with grievances tend to speak louder in the political
process than constituents who are benefiting from the current state

of affairs. Much of the explanation is that the links from the
exchange rate to their economic welfare are less tangible, certain,

and well-understood than is the case for the sectors hurt by the
strong dollar. .merican consumers are notoriously unaware of their
own   fondness   for imports.
         In the case of interest—sensitive industries like
construction, even though their lobbying representatives did not
focus on international factors, they always favored a reversal of
the early—1980s pattern of monetary contraction and fiscal
expansion, and high real interest rates. Furthermore, the monetary

authorities were fully aware that they would become a source of

                                    63
political pressure in the event that a cut—off of foreign capital
inflows forced up interest rates.


Banks and Other Financial Institutions

       At a large 1985 meeting sponsored by Senators Jack Kemp and
Bill Bradley, some representatives of the banking and financial
community were among the few defenders of a laissez-faire exchange

rate regime, against the many industrial executives and other
participants who had gathered to rally around efforts to bring the
dollar down. Lester Thurow declared that the issue was a syndrome
familiar from the United Kingdom, in which the financial community

in the City of London supports a strong currency while the
manufacturing cities support a weak currency. In American terms it
would be "Wall Street' versus "Main Street." But John Bilson, a

self—described currency speculator, responded that the issue is not
a strong dollar versus a weak one, but rather a highly variable
dollar, from which currency traders profit, versus a stable dollar,
which industry finds more conducive.

       Foreign exchange trading is big business for banks, both in
terms of volume (over $110 billion a day in 1989) and profit.
Econometric causality tests suggest that higher exchange rate
volatility leads to higher dispersion of opinion across market
participants (as reflected in survey data), and that higher
dispersion in turn leads to a higher volume of trading.68
Exchange—rate volatility is also clearly in the interest of those

       Frankel and Froot (1990).

                                64
who make their living trading foreign exchange futures and options
on the Philadelphia and Chicago Mercantile Exchanges; these
instruments did not even exist under the fixed exchange rate system

that ended in 1973. In short, one could explain on simple self—
interest grounds a tendency for the financial community to be more

supportive of floating rates than the rest of the country.
       Two representatives of the financial community, in
particular, spoke out against the government's 1985 switch toward
trying to stabilize exchange rates. In 1986 Leo Melamed, Chairman
of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, formed a group called the
"American Coalition for Flexible Exchange Rates, to lobby against

exchange rate management. In 1987 and 1988, the Economic Advisory
Committee of the American Bankers' Association also offered public

statements against interfering with floating rates.69
       The large New York banks, however, for the most part stayed
away from this sort of activity, and there is no reason to believe

it had much impact.7° Exchange rate volatility, even though a boon

to the foreign exchange trading room, can be a headache to bank
divisions that deal with international borrowing and lending, in
the same way as it is to the international operations of
nonfinancial corporations. In any case, lobbying the government in
favor of volatility would be too anti—social a mode of behavior for

     69 Destler and Henning (1988, pp.131-136).

     10 Destler and Henning, pp.133-136. They explain that one
reason that much of the banking community viewed with concern
Baker's attempt to manage exchange rates (at the Louvre, in
particular) is that it would threaten the independence of the Fed
in setting monetary policy.
                                65
most banks to engage in.

          One place where the New York financial community has secured

the help of the government is in putting pressure on countries in
East Asia and elsewhere to open their financial markets to greater

participation by U.S. firms. Such issues would properly fall in
the sphere of trade policy rather than exchange rate policy, but
for the Treasury's linking them to the campaign to appreciate the
yen in 1984 and the won in 1988-90. In the yen/dollar talks Don
Regan put high priority, for example, on the Tokyo Stock Exchange
making some seats available to American securities companies.7'




VI. COMPETING POLICY-MAXERS


          A policy—making agency determines its stand on an issue
based in part on the ultimate goals of its constituents (e.g., low
interest rates or a low dollar) and its perceptions of the link
between policy instruments and the economic goals. Actual policy
is then determined by the interaction of the agencies with each
other, and with the media.


1.   Federal Reserve Board
          In the United States, the Treasury has             primary
      "    The first beneficiary turned out to be Merrill-Lynch, the
company where Regan had previously been Chairman. (Frankel, 1984,
p.47.)

                                  66
responsibility for intervention while the Fed has official
responsibility for monetary policy.      Indeed, the Treasury in
practice usually determines intervention in the foreign exchange
market, even though the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is the
agent that undertakes all intervention in a mechanical sense, and
even though the foreign exchange reserves that are used are the
Fed's own as often as the Treasury's.72 Economic theory says that

it should be virtually impossible to determine exchange rate policy

separately from monetary policy. But the politics of this attempt
at decentralized responsibility have their own logic.

          In 1984 and 1985, Volcker, concerned about the trade
deficit, supported the idea of some amount of foreign exchange
intervention to try to bring the dollar down.       This put him in
conflict with the Treasury, particularly with Regan and Sprinkel in
1984. There was little question of the Fed Chairman trying to
overcome Treasury objections to intervention; Volcker was well—
advised to save most of his ammunition to protect Fed independence

on monetary policy (and a bit to snipe at the fiscal policies that
were at the root of the trade deficit).       But Voicker clearly
welcomed Baker's 1985 abandonment of the position that the strong
dollar was a good thing. He did not view the Plaza as putting
undesirable constraints on monetary policy.


     72
       Fed officials like Paul Voicker disagree with the position
taken by a series of Treasury officials, that the Treasury has the
ultimate legal authority over intervention even when it is
conducted with the Federal Reserve's own money, but agree that the
Fed has never challenged Treasury supremacy in this area in
practice, and is unlikely to do so in the future.
                                67
       Soon after the Plaza, the positions had switched, with the
Treasury in favor of further depreciation of the dollar and Volcker
warning of the dangers of a speculative run. The Fed had no choice

but to go along when the Treasury wanted to intervene. But during
the remainder of the decade, the central bank played the
traditional role of the party more concerned about the dangers of
a free—fall of the currency and an increase in inflation.
       By February 24, 1986, the balance of power at the Federal
Reserve Board had swung away from Volcker, in favor of the recent
easy-money Reagan appointees, who voted a reduction in the discount

rate against the opposition of the Chairman in a famous "palace
coup." Volcker then managed to persuade Governors Preston Martin
and Wayne Angell to defer the discount-rate cut until he could
arrange similar coordinated cuts by the Bundesbank and Bank of
Japan. The explanation offered by Volcker was that a unilateral
U.S. monetary expansion would cause the Plaza—depreciation to turn

into an uncontrolled free-fall of the dollar."      But it appears
clear that Voicker was also looking for a way to avoid having been
outvoted by his Board, a way to save face and thereby retain the
effective leadership. The Chairman retreated into the complexities
of international finance, knowing that this was unfamiliar
territory to the others. Qne lesson here is that the bonds of
fraternity that existed between Volcker and his counterparts at the


     " Funabashi  (pp.48-49) accepts the explanation that Voicker
both knew more and cared more about the exchange rate implications
of such actions than did the other, more domestically—oriented
governors.
                                68
German and Japanese central banks were stronger than the
relationship between him and the recent Reagan appointees. It was
not long thereafter that Vice-Governor Martin resigned from the
Board.

         Greenspan in 1987 inherited Voicker's concern that a weak—
dollar policy would be an inflationary policy, while Nicholas Brady
in 1988 inherited Baker's concern that a strong-dollar policy would

be bad for growth and bad for the trade balance.     Indeed, these
actors were playing out the age—old conflict between central
bankers and treasury ministers over whether or not money should be

tight.

         Vice-Chairman Manuel Johnson had responsibility at the Fed
f or dealing with other countries' central banks (after the death of

Henry Wallich, and especially after the resignation of Wallich's
replacement, Robert Heller). Johnson and Mulford reportedly caine
into more open conflict over the dollar than did Greenspan and
Brady.    One story has it that after a failure of Johnson and
Nulford to iron out differences in l989, Johnson in protest
registered a technical objection to the way the Treasury was
running exchange rate policy: a disproportionately large share of
the intervention was being conducted with the Fed's reserves fund,

rather than with the Treasury's own Exchange Stabilization Fund.
Later, in the aftermath of the Japanese stock market crash of early

1990, the Johnson-Mulford conflict resurfaced over whether the Fed
or the Bank of Japan should be the one to ease. Johnson resigned


         Redburn (1990, p. 63).
                                  69
in mid-1990, however.
       Most other countries, to a greater extent than the United

States, vest responsibility for exchange rate policy and monetary
policy with the same authority. But when it comes to international

discussions, the U.S. "schizophrenia" seems to prevail. As noted
above, the G—5 Ministers at the Plaza and subsequently did not
discuss sterilization of intervention, or even monetary policy,
when deciding to take action to try to affect the exchange rate.
Whether or not intervention in reality offers a tool for affecting

the exchange rate that is independent of monetary policy, the
policy—making apparatus is set up as if it does: exchange rate
policy is discussed by the C-5 and G—7 Finance Ministers while
monetary policy is discussed by central bankers, for example, at C-
10 meetings ten times a year at the Bank for International
Settlements in Basel. Although the G-7 meetings would probably
benefit from the attendance of the Central Bankers, the latter are

not entirely sure they want to be included. A system in which the
politicians can be seen engaging in international economic
diplomacy in the public eye, without binding the monetary
authorities to the policies that would logically be required if the

commitments to manage exchange rates were interpreted literally, is

a system that has attractions for both sets of actors.


2. The rest of the Administration

       In the years 1983-84, the press contained many reports to
the effect that CEA Chairman Feldstein was a lone voice of dissent


                                70
within the Administration, that the White House and the rest of the

Cabinet sided with the Treasury in maintaining that the deficit-
dollar problem was not a problem.           In reality, Secretary of
Commerce Malcolm Baidridge, Secretary of Agriculture John Block,

Special Trade Representative (later Labor Secretary) William Brock,
and Budget Doirector David Stockman all spoke out in cabinet and
sub-cabinet meetings ——     often   more strongly than Feldstein -- on
the damage done by the strong dollar.75 The President did not
himself deal with policy issues as detailed as the value of the
dollar, in the sense of running or attending Cabinet meetings on
the subject.

          Secretary of State Shultz occasionally expressed a view in
private, based on his own background as an economist. In a very
low-key way, he argued within the Administration for dollar
depreciation as early as July 1983, including even investigation of
a possible "interest equalization tax" on capital inf low.76 But
UnderSecretary for International Affairs Allen Wallis, the State
Department representative at Cabinet—level meetings on the dollar
and the trade deficit, sided with the Treasury position that the


          Nor did the President ever "discipline" Feldstein in any way
for failing to toe the line.    This would simply not have been
consistent with Reagan's temperament. David Stockman (1986), for
example, reveals that his celebrated 'trip to the woodshed" for
speaking out on the budget deficit never in fact took place. This
allowed Feldstein to claim, truthfully, that he had as much right
to claim to be speaking for the Administration as Regan did.
     16
       Shultz gave a speech at Princeton in the Spring of 1985 that
some considered an important public reversal of the benign neglect
policy of the first Reagan Administration, setting the stage for
the Plaza.

                                     71
strong dollar was good rather than bad. In any case, as already
noted, Shultz recognized that dollar issues were the Treasury's
turf, not his.      After 1985, with the depreciation underway, the
tendency for other agencies to cede primacy on this issue to the
Treasury was reinforced.



3. Congress
          Throughout the 1980s, Congress evinced far more concern with
the U.S. trade deficit than did the White House. In the political

environment of Capitol Hill, denying that a problem like the trade
deficit or the strong dollar is really a problem provokes strong
attacks. Many hearings were held to underscore that these were in
fact serious problems. Studies were commissioned.77 The November
11—13, 1985, conference on the dollar organized by Congressman Jack

Kemp and Senator Bill Bradley (or, more accurately, entrepreneured
by their former staffers Smick and Medley) was billed as a "U.S.

Congressional Summit," and had pretentions even more far—reaching
in scope: legislators and other representatives from foreign
countries were invited, and the organizers also sought to associate

Baker and Darman with the conference's views on world monetary
reform.      Such activities had the effect of raising public
consciousness of the exchange rate as an issue.
          The Congress was much more limited in the specific policy

     " As was hinted in Section 11.4 above, some of Caterpillar
Tractor Chairman Lee Morgan's impact on exchange rate issues was
exercised via his Congressmen. For example, he persuaded Senator
Charles Percy to ask the GAO to investigate charges of exchange
rate manipulation on the part of Japan's Ministry of Finance.
                                   72
actions it could take, however. The one relevant sphere in which
the Congress did have primacy was trade legislation. Although this
alternative (perceived) means of addressing the trade deficit was

not directly relevant to the exchange rate, there were important
political links. In April of 1985 Senators John Danforth (R) and
Lloyd Bentsen (D) took the position that the Congress should insist

on plans for addressing the exchange—rate problem as a pre-
requisite for granting the Administration the "fast-track
authority' it had requested for (what was to become) the Uruguay
Round of multilateral trade negotiations.78

           This case of specifically tying trade policy to the exchange

rate issue was relatively rare. More often, Congressmen simply
responded to the record trade deficits by proposing trade
legislation which free—traders in the Administration found
unpalatable, unintentionally exerting pressure on the Treasury to
try   to   bring down the dollar and thereby the trade deficit. The
threat of mounting protectionism on Capitol Hill was certainly one

of the major motivations for the Treasury's 1985 turnaround on the
dollar.       The success of the Plaza initiative at forestalling
protectionist legislation is the major respect in which Baker
deserves credit for a political triumph, notwithstanding the open

question whether the Plaza was in fact responsible for the dollar
depreciation, and notwithstanding that the trade deficit did not in

fact improve in dollar terms until 1988 (and did not fall below its
1985 level until 1989).

      78
           Destler   and Henning, pp. 104-105.
                                     73
          The Congress also began to pass resolutions and consider
bills that required specific action on exchange rate policy. Of
several bills submitted in mid-1985, a proposal by Senator Bradley
was the most specific. It would have required the creation of a
"warchest' of intervention funds to be used according to the
following rule: every time four consecutive quarters show a current
account deficit in excess of 1.5 per cent of GNP and a dollar at
least 15 percent above the level corresponding to current account
balance, the Treasury would be required to purchase at least $3
billion in foreign currency over the subsequent quarter. Needless
to say, the Treasury was disturbed by these open assaults on its
right to make exchange rate policy. This threat from the Congress
was another of the factors that contributed to Baker's reversal of

policy in 1985.
          Even after the Plaza, skeptical Congressmen continued to
press for systematic reform of exchange rate policy. More bills

were proposed by others, including Representative Stan Lundine (D)
(who, in the original version of his bill, proposed an explict link

between the exchange rate and negotiating authority for the Uruguay

Round).     The House Banking Committee in December 1985 passed a
compromise bill that did not quantitatively mandate intervention
like the Bradley proposal, but did require the Secretary of the

Treasury twice a year to report to Congress on exchange rates,
among other provisions. As Congress debated various bills to deal
with the still-widening trade deficit over the subsequent three
years, with the twist of increasing emphasis on the East Asian NICs


                                 74
rather than just Japan, proposals regarding exchange rates remained
part of the debate.79

            The outcome, the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of

1988, included a large sub-section on exchange rate policy.        In

four areas it called for Treasury activism and, as in the House

Banking Committee bill, required regular Treasury reports to the
Congress: "An assessment of the impact of the exchange rate on the

current account and trade balance, overall economic performance,
competitive position, and indebtedness of the United States;
recommendations for policy changes necessary to achieve a 'more
appropriate and sustainable' current account balance; reporting of
the results of bilateral negotiations with countries that
manipulated their currencies; and analyses of exchange—market
developments and their causes, including capital flows, and of
intervention, among other things. "° In the first four reports
submitted subsequently, the Treasury understandably evaded as much
as possible the injunction to specify exchange rate and current
account targets. But it took up with relish the mandate regarding

countries that "manipulate" their exchange rate, spending a very
high percentage of the reports on Korea and Taiwan.8


4.   The    IMF and other   international agencies


            Destler and Henning pp.99—ill.
       80
            Destler   and Henning,   pp.111-113.
     81 The results are described in Frankel (1990) and more briefly
in Section 11.11 above.

                                        75
        The International Monetary Fund has always conducted reviews

of U.S. policy in annual "Article IV" consultations, as it does for

any country. But the U.S. pays no attention whatsoever to these
reviews 82

        The IMP did in the 1980s become involved in the G-7 process.

When the G—7 leaders at the 1982 Versailles Summit instructed the
G—5 Finance Ministers to undertake at their regular meetings
multilateral surveillance of the international implications of the
member countries' policies, the Managing Director of the IMF was

invited to participate.
        Previously the OECD had been the body that had seen itself

as providing the technical background for G-7 Economic Summits.
This input in theory took place through a succession of meetings of

country officials that began with Working Party 3. In WP 3, Beryl
Sprinkel in 1981-84 patiently explained to other countries' finance

vice—ministers and central bank governors (as well as to his own
country's delegation) the errors in their view of the chain of
causality that ran: budget -    interest   rate -   capital   flow -   dollar
—   trade   deficit. WP 3 reported to the Economic Policy Committee,
which normally designated as its chair the U.S. Chairman of the
Council of Economic Advisors, in a mostly-futile attempt to get the

American team interested in the deliberations. The EPC in turn


     82 In the 1984 consultation, when the IMF staff wrote a report
that subscribed to the widely accepted view that the strong dollar
and trade deficit were problems caused by the budget deficit and
high real interest rates, Sprinkel responded in terms that
suggested that it was the report, rather than U.S. policies, that
needed to be evaluated.

                                   76
reported to Ministerial meetings, who reported to the G-7 Summit
leaders 83

           The Americans (as well as the British) were reportedly
unhappy with "Keynesian" tendencies at the OECD, and so began to
place more emphasis on the IMF. Since 1986 when the G-7 leaders
formalized surveillance with a system of indicators at the Tokyo
Summit, the IMF Research Department has been entrusted with
compiling the countries' numbers.          The G—7 Ministers' meetings

begin with a presentation by the IMP Managing Director, providing
an overview of the issues and his recommendations. Exchange rate
issues, however, are mostly treated outside of this 'surveillance"
context • 85

           As noted above, the BIS in Basel is the venue for regular

meetings among the G-1O central bankers.          While the tight-knit
group of central bankers operates at a distance from the bright

lights      of   macroeconomic    policy    coordination   and   public
pronouncements on exchange rates, they are able by telephone to
coordinate the timing of intervention operations or changes in the


     ° As CEA Chairman in 1982-84, Feldstein was chairman of the
Economic Policy Committee.   He shared with many of the other
countries a belief in the deficit-dollar chain of causality, in
opposition to Regan and Sprinkel. But Feldstein did not view the
apparatus of international cooperation (the OECD, G-5 or G-7, and
Summit meetings) as a particularly useful forum in which to
mobilize support for correction of the U.S. fiscal deficit. He may
have thought that, within the U.S. policy debate, allying with
other countries' governments was more likely to undermine one's
stance politically than to reinforce it.
      84
           Dobson (1990, p.13).

           Dobson (1990, pages 3.5, 3.24 and 3.28).
                                    77
discount rate more precisely than the finance ministers are able to

coordinate anything.




VII.   THEORIES OF THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF EXCHANGE RATE POLICY-
MAKING


         A number of generalizations have been, or can be, hazarded

regarding the making of exchange rate policy.


1. The switch from benign neglect to activism as a political cycle
         The 1985 switch in Reagan Administration attitudes toward
the dollar was a complete about—face. (Administration spokesmen
initially denied that there had been such a 180-degree change in
course, but as public approval of the Plaza grew, Baker accepted
credit for it as a new policy initiative.) It would be good to
have an explanation for such a shift in policy that went beyond the

specifics of the change in personnel.
         A benign view of the switch has been offered by Cohen
(1988): the political process worked in the way it should, as the

Administration eventually responded to the grievances of groups
adversely affected, by adopting policies to bring down the dollar.
A less benign view would ask, first, whether the Administration
should not have recognized the dollar as a problem much sooner, and

second whether even the Plaza switch was indeed an adequate way to

address the trade deficit, given the lack of simultaneous progress

                                 78
on the   budget deficit and national saving.
         It has been suggested by others that there is a regular
cycle within the term of a given political leader, for many
countries, but especially large countries like the United States

for which international trade historically makes up a relatively
small proportion of GNP. In his initial vision for the country,
the leader ignores concerns of international trade, finance and

exchange rates.    In part this is because he has usually won his

office by courting exclusively domestic constituencies. In part it
is because he is not fully aware of economic relationships such as
that between excessive spending and trade deficits or such as
constraints placed on his country by the need to maintain the
confidence of international financial markets. Later in his term,

problems develop and he switches to international activism, either
because unpleasant international deficits demand a response, or
because the prospect of international economic diplomacy offers a
pleasant diversion of popular attention from domestic problems.
Bergsten (1986) has argued that when the Reagan Administration
switched abruptly from benign neglect of the dollar to activism in

1985, it was following a pattern traced by Johnson in the late
1960s, Nixon in 1971, and Carter in 1978.


2.   Proposals for Reform of the Policy-making Structure
        For those who think that the difficulties stemming   from the
large swings in the dollar in the 1980s could have been handled
better by policy—makers, it is natural to ask if there are not some


                                 79
inherent flaws in the structure of the policy-making process that

could be addressed by institutional reform.
       One view is that the difficulty with the 1981—85 dollar
appreciation, indeed the difficulty with the overall macroeconomic
policy mix of the decade, was lack of coordination between the
United States and its trading partners. In this view, the U.S.
government deliberately chose a policy mix that would give high
real interest rates and a strong dollar, in order to reduce import

prices, thereby "exporting inflation" to its neighbors.        In

technical terms, the Nash noncooperative solution is characterized
by competitive appreciation, each country afraid to lower real
interest rates on its own because of the inflationary consequences

of currency depreciation.    If this diagnosis is correct, the
solution would simply be to strengthen the G-7 coordination
process, and use it to agree to simultaneous reductions in real
interest rates.96     The difficulty with this theory as an
interpretation of the 1980s is that (1) only the U.S., not its
major trading partners, adopted a policy mix featuring fiscal
expansion and (2) if currency appreciation is such an advantageous
means of reducing inflation, then the U.S. policy of the early


     86 Sachs (1985). Another version of the view that the problem
is a lack of international coordination involves beggar-thy-
neighbor "competitive depreciation," just    the reverse of
competitive appreciation. Here the problem with the Nash non-
cooperative equilibrium is that each country is tempted to follow
an overly expansionary monetary policy in order to depreciate its
currency and improve its trade balance, thereby exporting
unemployment to its trading partners. One could view the Louvre
Accord as an attempt by U.S. trading partners to address this
problem.
                                80
1980s was optimal (from a selfish viewpoint), which would tend to
undercut the case for reform.
          A second view is that the difficulty with the 1981-85 dollar

appreciation, and the overall U.S. macroeconomic policy mix, was
lack of coordination between the Treasury and the Fed. The Fed
refused to expand the money supply in the absence of a commitment
on the part of the Administration to raise taxes and cut the budget

deficit, because it would be inflationary.        The Administration
(together with Congress) refused to raise taxes and cut the budget
deficit in the absence of a commitment on the part of the Fed to
allow interest rates to fall sufficiently, because it would be
recessionary. In this view, the high real interest rates and high
dollar occurred simply because the two sides never could get
together on the policy mix.
          it is true that Fed officials tended to be included in
interagency meetings on international economic topics less often in
the Reagan Administration than in previous Administrations. Paul
Voicker and Don Regan, in particular, were often at odds in the
press. Nevertheless, communication was regular, and there is no
evidence that, but for the right institutional arrangement to
promote cooperation, a deal could have been struck.           Rather,
disagreements stemmed either from differing priorities (the Fed
more concerned about inflation, the Treasury about growth), or from

differing perceptions as to the right model.°7
          The leading recent proposal for systematic reform of the

     ei
          Frankel   (1988b).
                                   81
U.S. institutional structure of exchange rate policy—making is that

of Destler and Henning. They argue that exchange rate policy is
made by a very small circle of senior government officials in the

Treasury and Fed, is dangerously divorced from fiscal and monetary
policy, and is frequently unresponsive to the legitimate concerns
of private economic actors. They recommend a broadening of the
process, particularly through three important changes: (1) the
creation in both the House and Senate of new Select Oversight
Committees on the Dollar and the National Economy; (2) the
establishment of a new private—sector Advisory Group on Exchange
Rates to counsel the secretary of the Treasury; and (3) more active

involvement of agencies such as the CEA, USTR, and Agriculture and
Commerce Departments 88

         The view of this author is that, during the period July 1984
—   February   1985, the dollar had appreciated so far that some action

such as foreign exchange intervention to try to bring it down was
indeed warranted, even taking the budget deficit as given. Since
all the groups that Destler and Henning would like to bring in to
the policy-making process were more worried about the dollar and
the trade deficit at this time than the Regan Treasury, it follows

that exchange rate policy during this eight-month period might have
been better had their proposed institutional reforms already been
in place. Under most other circumstances, however, a broadening of



       Destler and Henning, pp.145-164. One of their, quite valid,
purposes in making the proposals was to make the exchange rate a
deliberate policy instrument consistent with macroeconomic policy,
rather than treating it as a residual.

                                    82
the policy process in this way, in the sensitive and relatively
technical area of exchange rates, could make things worse rather
than better.
         Exchange rate policy, like monetary and fiscal policy, is

potentially vulnerable to populist pressures. Policy-makers in the

public eye ——   lacking   forbearance, and sometimes lacking awareness
--   might succumb to the temptation to tinker with international
financial gimmickry so as to seem to be addressing the exchange
rate issue, in place of making hard macroeconomic policy decisions.

Sometimes they will refuse to devalue a currency that needs to be
devalued, out of a stubborn unwillingness to admit      publicly   that

their past policies have failed. Other times they will seek to
devalue a currency that should not be, in order to gain the short—

term advantage of higher output and employment, figuring that the
costs in terms of higher inflation will not show up until after the

next election. For such reasons, I am skeptical of proposals to
democratize the policy—making process for exchange rates and would,

if anything, prefer to see more power concentrated with the Federal
Reserve.    The Fed tends to have more of the historical memory,
technical expertise, and insulation from politics, that are so
lacking elsewhere.


3. The   Bandwagon as paradigm
       I   would like to     propose a common paradigm to fit       the
markets,   the media, and the makers of policy. The paradigm is the
Bandwagon, by which I mean that the typical resident of each of the


                                    83
three worlds bases his actions more on what seems to be "in" at the

moment, than on what makes the most sense viewed in longer-term

perspective.
             Consider first the markets. In theory, speculators should
base their actions on an evaluation of the true worth of the
currency as determined by macroeconomic fundamentals. In practice,
by 1985, only 5 out of 24 foreign exchange forecasting services
were relying on fundamentals. (Fifteen relied on technical
analysis, 3 used both, and 1 did not specify). This is as compared
to 1978 when 19 of 23 services surveyed relied on fundamentals (3
on technical analysis).89           This lack of attention to long-term
fundamentals and increasing reliance on time—series extrapolations

may explain the apparent speculative bubble of 1984-85.
             A speculative bubble would seem to offer some scope for
useful intervention by policy-makers. It is for this reason that
the Plaza and other 1985 policy moves to try to bring down the
dollar could be viewed as a success.            But to favor government
intervention as a regular matter of course, one would have to
believe that the policy-making process is systematically less
liable to bandwagons than the markets, and this may not be the
case.

             Historical memory in both the Treasury and the Congress is
notoriously short.          Official views do not evolve gradually over
time as more information becomes available. Rather views change



        89
             Frankel   and Froot (1990).

                                       84
sharply with the personnel, who turn over every few years, and with

their economic philosophy or perception of political advantage.
The non-interventionist dogmatism of Beryl Sprinkel has come in for
much criticism;   the political pragmatism of a Jim Baker will
usually win out in a popularity contest among newspapermen or
Congressmen, and in 1985 it happened to give what may have been the
right answer as economic policy as well. But pragmatism can often
give the wrong answer.     Trade policy is an example where the
stubbornness of the Treasury and White House in the 1980s was
fortunate, and where greater accommodation to the Congress or
outside interests would have given a less satisfactory outcome,
from an economic viewpoint.

       It may sound undemocratic to reserve exchange—rate policy-
making for a small elite like the Federal Reserve Board.       But
democracy does not mean putting every issue up for a vote every
day.   Our system places some policy—makers under the relatively
frequent and direct control of the electorate, such as the two—
year-termed Congress, and others farther removed, such as the
members of the Supreme Court.    The question is whether exchange
rate policy is a more fitting topic for the former approach or the

latter. Exchange rate policy would seem to be the sort of topic
that is best reserved for specialists removed from political
pressures.

       Although the media were not considered above as a separate
interest group or policy-maker, they are in fact the ultimate
arbiter of policy. Most critics of the tremendous power of the

                                85
media phrase their criticism in terms of the particular bias that

they think the media have (which is usually in truth the mirror
image of the bias held by the critic in question). But the real
problem with the media is that, in its efforts to escape charges of

bias, it does not undertake enough analysis. Journalists cover the

stories that other journalists are covering (so—called 'pack
journalism'). The goal is to describe current trends, rather than

to give opinions.     The arbiters of policy can end up being
arbitrary in their evaluations.

       Success in Washington is often judged in a rather
superficial way.    The system in the aggregate works a bit like
trial by fire or water in medieval times. A policy operation is a
success if it is a political success; it is a political success if

it is a media success; it is a media success if it is a success in

the public opinion polls. The opinion polls often resemble coin-
tosses, because the respondents are not well—acquainted with the
issues that the questions concern.
       It is of course true that the dollar began to depreciate in

1985, as desired. But the policy-makers may have just been lucky.
The initiatives taken by Jim Baker at the Plaza and other G.-7
meetings were, at the time, so tentative that he could, and would,
have disavowed that there had been any change in policy if they had
not been received well. These initiatives were received well, in
large part because Baker's style was such a welcome relief
(especially to the press) after Don Regan. Regardless whether one

believes that the dollar would have come down in 1985-87 even

                                  86
without the initiatives, it is certain that favorable reviews, such

as those in newspaper editorials and congressional testimony, made
them a political success.

       The enhanced stature of Baker and the G—7 in turn meant that

their pronouncements carried more weight with the markets. Foreign
exchange traders in 1986 and 1987 would leap for their terminals
every time a report caine out that Baker had said something. G-7

meetings after 1985 replaced trade balance announcements (or, in
the early l980s, money supply announcements) as the current fad
variable that the markets followed.

       By 1984 the market bandwagon had carried the dollar far away
from a sensible equilibrium. In 1985 the interdependent bandwagons
ridden by the media and the makers of policy carried the dollar
back. Next time, the media/policymaker bandwagons could as easily
be the ones to carry the dollar away from equilibrium.


                     *          *           *




                               87
References


Bergsten, C.Fred, 1982, "What to do About the U.S.-Japan Economic
Conflict, Foreign Affairs, Summer.

Bergsten, C.Fred, 1984. 'The United States Trade Deficit and the
Dollar," Statement before the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing
and Urban Affairs, Subcommittee on International Finance and
Monetary Policy, Washington, June 6.

Bergsten, C.Fred, 1986, "America's Unilateralism,' in Conditions
for Partnership in International Economic Management, C.F.
Bergsten, E.Davignon, and I.Miyazaki, Trilateral Commission Report
32.

Bovenberg, A. Lans, 1989, "The Effects of Capital Income Taxation
on International Competitiveness and Trade Flows," American
Economic Review 79, no.5, December, 1045-1064.

Branson, William, and Love, James, 1988, "U.S. Manufacturing and
the Real Exchange Rate," in Richard Marston, ed., Misalignment of
Exchange Rates: Effects on Trade and Industry, NEER and University
of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Cohen, Stephen, 1988, The Making of U.S. International Economic
Policy, Praeger Press, New York.

Cooper, Richard, 1985, "The U.S. Payments Deficit and the Strong
Dollar: Policy Options." In The U.S. Dollar -- Recent Developments,
Outlook, and Policy Options. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City.

Corden, W.Maxwell, 1983, "The Logic of the International Monetary
Non—System." In F.Machlup et al, eds., Reflections on a troubled
World Economy, MacMillan, London.

Council of Economic Advisers, 1984, Economic Report of the
President, Chapter 2, February, Washington, D.C.
Department of the Treasury, 1989, "Report to the Congress on
International Economic and Exchange Rate Policy," October.
Destler, I. Mac, and C. Randall Henning, 1989, Dollar Politics:
Exchange Rate Policymaking in the United States, Institute for
International Economics, Washington, D.C.
Dobson, Wendy. 1990.    Economic Policy Coordination: Requiem or
First Step?, draft, Institute for International Economics, June.

Dominguez, Kathryn, and Jeffrey Frankel, "Does Foreign Exchange
Intervention Matter? Disentangling the Portfolio and Expectation
                                88
Effects for the Mark," NBER Working Paper No. 3299, May 1990.
Revised, October.

Dooley, Michael, and Peter Isard, 1985, "tax Avoidance and Exchange
Rate Determination," Research Department, International Monetary
Fund, Washington, D. C., November.

Dornbusch, Rudiger,    1976,   "Expectations and Exchange Rate
Dynamics," Journal of Political Economy 84, Dec., pp.1161—74.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1986, "Flexible Exchange Rates and Excess
Capital Mobility," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 209-
226.

Feldstein, Martin, 1984, "The Dollar Exchange Rate," Remarks before
the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia, Feb. 29.

Feldstein, Martin, 1986, "New Evidence on the Effects of Exchange
Rate Intervention," NBER Working Paper No. 2052, October.
Feldstein, Martin, 1988, "Distinguished Lecture on Economics in
Government: Thinking about International Economic Coordination,"
Journal of Economic Perspectives 2, Spring, pp.3-13.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 1984, The Yen/Dollar Agreement: Liberalizing
Japanese Financial Markets, Policy Analyses in International
Economics No.9, Institute for International Economics, Washington,
D.C..

Frankel, Jeffrey, 1985, •'Six Possible Meanings of 'Overvaluation':
The 1981-85 Dollar," Essays in International Finance No. 159,
International Finance Section, Princeton University (December).

Frankel, Jeffrey, 1986, "Comments on Overshooting, Agricultural
Commodity Markets, and Public Policy," American Journal of
Agricultural Economics, 68, no. 2, May.
Frankel,   Jeffrey,   l988a,   "Ambiguous   Macroeconomic   Policy
Multipliers in Theory and in Twelve Econometric Models,'        In
Empirical Macroeconomics for Interdependent Economies, eds., Ralph
Bryant, et al., Brookings Institution: Washington, D.C..

Frankel, Jeffrey, 1988b, "The Implications of Conflicting Models
for Coordination Between Monetary and Fiscal Policy—Makers," In
Empirical Macroeconomics for Interdependent Economies, eds., Ralph
Bryant, et al., Brookings Institution: Washington, D.C..
Frankel, Jeffrey, 1990, "And Now Won/Dollar Negotiations? Lessons
From the Yen/Dollar Agreement of 1984." In Korea's Macroeconomic
and Financial Policies, Korean Development Institute, December
1989.   Forthcoming in Economic Relations Between the U.S. and
Korea: Conflict or Cooperation?, edited by T.Bayard and S.Young,
                                89
Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C., 2nd.
edition, 1990.

Frankel, Jeffrey and Kenneth Froot,     1990,  "Exchange Rate
Forecasting Techniques, Survey Data, and Implications for the
Foreign Exchange Market," IMF Working Paper No. 90/43, May.
Greatly abridged in American Economic Review 80, no.2, May, pp.181-
185.

Friedman, Milton. 1953. "The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates." In
Essays in Positive Economics, ed. Milton Friedman, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 157-203.
Funabashi, Yoichi. 1988. Managing the Dollar: From the Plaza to the
Louvre. Institute for International Economic: Washington, D.C.

Hale, David, 1989, "The Japanese Ministry of Finance and Dollar
Diplomacy During the Late 1980's, Or How the University of Tokyo
Law School Saved America From the University of Chicago Economics
Department," Kemper Financial Services, Inc., July.
Havrilesky, Thomas, 1990, "Distributive Conflict and Monetary
Policy," Contemporary Policy Issues, pp.50-61.
Koo, Richard, 1988, 'Japanese Investment in Dollar Securities after
the Plaza Accord," Statement Submitted to the Joint Economic
Committee of the U.S. Congress, October 17. Published March 1989.
Krugman, Paul, 1985. "Is the Strong Dollar Sustainable?" In The
U.S. Dollar -- Recent Developments, Outlook, and Policy Options.
Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Marris, Stephen, 1985, "Deficits and the Dollar: The World Economy
at Risk,' Policy Analyses in International Economics No. 14,
December, Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C.
McKinnon, Ronald, 1988, "Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies for
International Financial Stability: A Proposal," Journal of Economic
Perspectives 2, Winter, 83—103.
Murchison, David, and Ezra Solomon, 1983, The Misalignment of the
United States Dollar and the Japanese Yen: The Problem and Its
Solution," September 19.
Nussa, Michael, 1981, The Role of Official Intervention. Group of
Thirty Occasional Papers, No. 6. New York: Group of Thirty.

Nollen, Stanley, "Business Costs and Business Policy For Export
Controls," Journal of International Business Studies, Spring 1987.

Obstfeld, Maurice, 1988, 'The Effectiveness of Foreign-Exchange
Intervention: Recent Experience," NBER Working Paper No. 2796.
                                90
Putnam, Robert and Nicholas Bayne. 1987. Hanging Together: The
Seven-Power Summits. Cambridge, Ma.: Harvard University Press (2nd
edition).
Redburn, Tom, 1990 "The Fed Has the Edge on the Economic Policy
Front," in The International Economy, June/July, pp.61-63
Regan, Donald, 1988, For the Record: From Wall Street to
Washington. St.Martin's Press, New York.

Report of the Working Group on Exchange Market Intervention
['Jurgensen Report"], March 1983 (U.S. Treasury: Washington, D.C.).
Sachs, Jeffrey, 1985, "The Dollar and the Policy Mix: 1985,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 117-186.

Stockinan, David, 1986, The Triumph of Politics: Why the Reagan
Revolution Failed, Harper and Row, New York.

Tobin, James, 1978, "A Proposal for Monetary Reform," Eastern
Economic Journal 4, 3—4, pp.l53—59.
Williamson, John. 1983. The exchange rate system.      Washington,
D.C.: Institute for International Economics.

Williamson, John, and Marcus Miller, 1987, "Targets and Indicators:
A Blueprint for the International Coordination of Economic Policy,"
Policy Analyses in International Economics No. 22, September,
Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C.




                                91
