                    NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




                  A CONTRIBUTION TO THE EMPIRICS
                        OF ECONOMIC GROWTH




                        N. Gregory Mankiw
                            David Romer

                           David N. Weil




                      Working Paper No. 3541




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                           December 1990




We are grateful to Karen Dynan for research assistance, to
Laurence Ball, Olivier Blanchard, Anne Case, Lawrence Katz, Robert
King, Paul Romer, Xavier Sala—i—Martin, Amy Saisbury, Robert
Solow, Lawrence Summers, Peter Temin, and the referees for helpful
comments, and to the National Science Foundation for financial
support. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in
Economic Fluctuations and Growth. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3541
                                        December 1990



         A CONTRIBUTION TO THE EMPIRICS OF ECONOMIC GROWTH


                             ABSTRACT
     This paper examines whether the Solow growth model is

consistent with the international variation in the standard of

living. It shows that an augmented Solow model that includes
accumulation of human as well as physical capital provides an

excellent description of the cross—country data. The model
explains about 80 percent of the international variation in income

per capita, and the estimated influences of physical—capital

accumulation, human—capital accumulation, and population growth
confirm the model's predictions. The paper also examines the
implications of the Solow model for convergence in standards of

living-—that is, for whether poor countries tend to grow faster

than rich countries. The evidence indicates that, holding

population growth and capital accumulation constant, countries
converge at about the rate the augmented Solow model predicts.

David Roiner                            N. Gregory Mankiw
Department of Economics                 NBER
787 Evans Hall                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
University of California                Cambridge, MA 02138—5398
Berkeley, CA 94720
David Weil
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138—5398
                               Introduction

     This paper takes Robert Solow aeriously. In his classic 1956

article, Solow proposed that we begin the study of economic growth by

assuming a standard neoclassical production function with decreasing

returns to capital. Taking the rates of saving and population growth as

exogenous, he showed that these two variables determine the steady-state

level of income per capita. Because saving and population growth rates

vary across countries, different countries reach different steady states.

Solow's model gives simple testable predictions about how these variables

influence the steady-state level of income. The higher the rate of

saving, the richer the country. The higher the rate of population growth,

the poorer the country.

     This paper argues that the predictions of the Solow model are, to a

first approximation, consistent with the evidence. Examining recently

available data for a large set of countries, we find that saving and

population growth affect income in the direction that Solow predicted.

Moreover, more than half of the cross-country variation in income per

capita can be explained by these two variables alone.

     Yet all is not right for the Solow model. Although the model

correctly predicts the direction of the affects of saving and population

growth, it does not correctly predict the magnitudes. In the data, the

effects of saving and population growth on income are too large. To

understand the relation between saving, population growth, and income, one

must go beyond the textbook Solow model.

     We therefore augment the Solow model by including accumulation of
human as well as physical capital. The exclusion of human capital from

 the textbook Solow model can potentially explain why the estimated

 influences of saving and population growth appear too large, for two

reasons. First, for any given rats of human-capital accumulation, higher

saving or lower population growth leads to a higher level of income and

thus a higher level of human capital; hence, accumulation of physical

capital and population growth have greater impacts on income when

accumulation of human capital is taken into account. Second, human-

capital accumulation may be correlated with saving rates and population

growth rates; this would imply that omitting human-capital accumulation

biases the estimated coefficients on saving and population growth.

     To test the augmented Solow model, we include a proxy for human-

capital accumulation as an additional explanatory variable in our cross-

country regressions. We find that accumulation of human capital is in

fact correlated with saving and population growth. Including human-

capital accumulation lowers the estimated effects of saving and population

growth to roughly the values predicted by the augmented Solow model.

1oreover, the augmented model accounts for about eighty percent of the

cross-country variation in income. Given the inevitable imperfections in

this sort of cross-country data, we consider the fit of this simple model

to be remarkable. It appears that the augmented Solow model provides an

almost complete explanation of why some countries are rich and other

countries are poor.

     After developing and testing the augmented Solow model, we examine an

issue that has received much attention in recent years: the failure of

countries to converge in per capita income. We argue that one should not


                                        2
expect convergence. Rather, the Solow model predicts that countries

generally reach different steady states. We examine empirically the set

of countries for which non-convergence has been widely documented in past

work. We find that once differences in saving and population growth rates

are accounted for, there is convergence at roughly the rate that the model

predicts.

     Finally, we discuss the predictions of the Solow modal for

international variation in rates of return and for capital movamants. The

modal predicts that poor countries should tand to have highar rates of

return to physical and human capital. We discuss various evidence that

one might usa to evaluate this prediction. In contrast to many recant

authors, we intarprat the available evidence on rates of raturn as

generally consistent with the Solow modal.

     Overall, tha findings raportad in this papar cast doubt on the recant

trend among aconomiats to dismiss the Solow growth modal in favor of

andogenous-growth models that assuma constant or increasing returns to

scala in capital. One   can   explain much of tha cross-country variation in

incoma while maintaining the assumption of decreasing returns. This

conclusion does not imply. howaver, that the Solow model is a complata

theory of growth: one would like also to undarstand the detarminants of

saving, population growth, end world-wide technological change, all of

which the Solow model treats as exogenous. Nor does it imply that

endoganous-growth models are not important, for thay may provida the right

explanation of world-wide technological change. Our     conclusion does
imply, however, that tha Solow modal gives the right answers to tha

questions it is designed to address.


                                           3
                                  L...i!be Textbook    Solov Model

          We begin by reviewing briefly the Solow growth model. We focus on

  the model's implications for cross-country data.



  .Ihe Model
          Solow's model takes the rates of saving, population
                                                                             growth, and

  technological progress as exogenous. There are two inputs,                    capital and
 labor, which are paid their marginal products. We assume a Cobb-Douglas

 production function, so production at time t               is   given by
 (1)          Y(t) —    K(t)°   (A(t)L(t))°                O<a<l,

 The notation is standard: Y is output, K capital, L
                                                                      labor, and A the level
 of technology, L arid A are assumed to
                                                     grow exogenously at rates n and g:
 (2)          L(t) —    L(O)eit
 (3)          A(t) —

 The number of effective units of labor, A(t)L(t),
                                                                  grows at rate n+g.
         The model assumes that a constant fraction of
                                                                    output, a, is invested.
Defining k as the stock of Capital per effective unit of
                                                                            labor, k — K/AL,
and y as the level of output per effective unit of
                                                                    labor, y — Y/AL, the
evolution of k is governed by


(4)          k(t) — s y(t)              (n+gs-6)k(t)

                    —    sk(t)°     -
                                        (n+g+6)k(t)
where 6 is the rate of depreciation. Equation (4)
                                                                    implies that k

                                                                 —(n+g+6)k *
                                             *
converges to a steady-state value k defined by                sk*0              ,   or
(5)          k* —
The
       steady-state Capital-labor ratio is related positively to the                 rate of




                                                 4
saving and negatively to tha rata of population growth.

      The cantral predictions of tha Solow modal concarn tha impact of

saving and population growth on real income. Subatituting (5) into the

production function and taking loga, we find that steady-state income per

capita is


(6)         ln [Y(t)/L(t)] —   in A(0)   +   gt + j2_   in(s) -   y ln(n+g+5).


Because the model assumes that factors are paid their marginal products,

it predicts not only the signs but also the magnitudes of the coefficients

on saving and population growth. Specifically, because capital's share in

income (o) is roughly 1/3, the modal implies an elasticity of income per

capita with respect to the saving rete of approximately 0.5 and an

elasticity with respect to n+g+6 of -0.5.



B. Soecification

      The natural question to consider is whether the data support the

Solow model's predictions concerning the determinants of standards of

living. In other words, we want to investigate whether real income is

higher in countries with higher saving rates and lower in countries with

higher values of n+g+5.

      We   assume that g and S are   constant    across countries. g reflects
primarily the advancement of knowledge, which is not country-specific.
And there is neither any strong reason to expect depreciation rates to
vary greatly across countries nor any data that would allow us to estimate
country-specific depreciation rates. In contrast, the A(0) term reflects
not just technology but resource endowments, climate, institutions, and so
                                                5
on; it may therefore differ across countries. We assume

             in A(O) — a     +   ,
where a is a constant and             is a country-specific shock. Thus, log incore

per   capita at a given time- -time 0 for         simplicity- -is


(7)          ln(Y/L) — a     +        in(s) - j• ln(n+g+6) +              c.

Equation (7)      is   our basic empirical specification in this section.

       We assume that the rates of saving and population growth are

independent of country-specific factors shifting the production function.

That is, we assume that s and n are            independent      of    .        This   assumption

implies that we can estimate equation (7) with ordinary least squares

(5)l
       There are three reasons for Baking for this assumption of

independence. First, this assumption is Bade not only in the Solow model,

but also in •any standard models of economic growth. In any model in

which    saving   and population growth are endogenous but preferences are

ieo.lastic, a      and n   are unaffected by s. In other words, under isoelastic

utility, permanent differences in the level of technology do not affect

saving rates or population growth rates.

       Second, much recent theoretical work on growth has been motivated by

informal    examinations of the relationships between                saving, population
growth, and    income. Many economists have asserted that the                         Solow model
casmot   account for the international          differences in income, and this

alleged    failure of the    Solow model has sti.ulated work               on endogenous-

growth theory. For example,           Paul   Romer (l987,l989a) suggests                that   saving
has   too large an     influence     on growth and     takes   this to be evidence for

positive   externalities     from capital accumulation. Similarly, Robert Lucas

                                                   6
[19881 asserts that         variation   in population growth cannot account for any

substantial variation in real incomes along the lines predicted by the

Solow model. By maintaining the identifying assumption that s and n are

independent of c, we are able to determine whether systematic examination

of    the data   confirms   these informal judgments.
        Third, because the model predicts not just the signs but also the
magnitudes    of the coefficients on saving and         population growth, we can
gauge    whether there are important biases in the estimates         obtained with

OLS. As described above, data on           factor shares imply that,   if the   model
is    correct, the elasticities of Y/L with respect to s and n+g+6 are

approximately 0.5 and -0.5. If OLS yields coefficients that are

substantially different from these values, then we can reject the joint

hypothesis that the Solow model and our identifying assumption are

correct.

       Another way to evaluate the Solow model would be to imoose on

equation (7) a value of o derived from data on factor shares and then to

ask how much of the cross-country variation in income the model can

account for. That is, using an approach analogous to growth accounting,"

we could compute the fraction of the variance in living standards that is

explained by the mechanism identified by the Solow model.2 In practice,

because we do not have exact estimates of factor shares, we do not

emphasize this growth-accounting approach. Rather,            we estimate equation
(7) by OLS and examine the plausibility of the implied factor shares. The
fit   of this regression shows      the result of a growth-accounting exercise

performed with the estimated value of .              If the estimated a differs from
the value obtained a anon from factor shares, we can compare the fit                of

                                                 7
 the estimated regression with the fit obtained by imposing the a orion

 value.




 C. Data and Samoles

      The data are from the Real National Accounts recently constructed by

Robert Summers and Alan Heston [1988]. The data set includes real income

 government and private consumption, investment, and population for almost

all of the world other than the centrally planned economies. The data are

annual and cover the period 1960-85. We meaaure n as the average rate of

growth of the working-age population, where working age is defined as 15

to 64. We measure s as the average share of real investment (including

government investment) in real COP, and Y/L as real COP in 1985 divided by

the working-age population in that year.

     We consider three samples of countries. The most comprehensive

consists of all countries for which data are available other than those

for which oil production is the dominant industry.4 This sample consists

of 98 countries. We exclude the oil producers because the bulk of

recorded GOP for these countries represents the extraction of existing

resources, not value added; one should not expect standard growth models

to account for measured COP in theae countries.5

     Our aecond sample excludes countries whoae data receive a grade of

"D from Suers and Heston or whose populations in 1960 were less than

one million. Summers and Heston use the M0U grade to identify countries

whose real income figures are based on extremely little primary data;

measurement error is likely to be a greater problem for these countries.

We omit the small countries because the datermination of their real income
 may be dominated by idiosyncratic factors. This sample consists of 75
 countries.
     The    third sample consists of the 22 OECD countries with populations

 greater than one million. Thie eample has the advantages that the data

appear    to be uniformly of high quality and that the variation in omitted
country-specific     factors is likely to be small. But it     has the
disadvantages     that it is small in size and that it distards much of the

variation in the variables of interest.

     Table A-I at the end of the paper presents the countries in each of

the samples and the date.



0. Results

     We estimate equation (7) both with and without imposing the

constraint that the coefficients on ln(s) and ln(n+g+6) are equal in

magnitude and opposite in sign.      We assume that gs-& is .05; reasonable

changes in this assumption have little effect on the estimates.6 Table I

reports the results.

     Three aspects of the results support the Solow model. First, the

coefficients on saving and population growth have the predicted signs and,

for two   of   the three samples, are highly significant. Second, the

restriction    that the coefficients on ln(s) and ln(ni-g+6) are equal in
magnitude and    opposite in sign   is   not rejected in any of the samples.

Third, and perhaps most important, differences in saving and population

growth    account for a large fraction of the cross-country variation in
income per     capita. In the regression for the intermediate sample, for

example, the adjusted R2 is .59.         In contrast to the common claim that the
  Solow model explains" cross-country variation in labor
                                                              productivity
  largely by appealing to variations in technologies, the two
                                                                  readily
  observable variables on which the Solow model focuses in fact account for

 most of the variation in income per capita.

      Nonetheless, the model is not completely successful, In
                                                                    particular,
 the estimated impacts of saving and labor force growth are much larger

 than the model predicts. The value of a implied by the coefficients

 should equal capital's share in income, which is
                                                    roughly 1/3. The
 estimates, however, imply an o that is much higher. For example, the         o
 implied by the coefficient in the constrained regression for the

 intermediate sample is .59 (with a standard error of .02).      Thus, the data
 strongly contradict the prediction that a—l/3.

      Because the estimates imply such a high capital share, it is

 inappropriate to conclude that the Solow model is successful just because

the regressions in Table I can explain a high fraction of the variation in

income. For the intermediate sample, for instance, when       we employ the

 growth-accounting" approach described above and constrain the

coefficients to be consistent with an a of 1/3, the adjusted it2 falls        from

.59 to .28. Although the excellent fit of the simple regressions in Table

I is promising for the theory of growth in general- -    it implies that
theories based on easily observable variables may   be   able to account for

most of the cross-country variation in real income- -    it is not supportive
of the textbook Solow model in particular.




        II. Addinm Buran-Cemitel Accurulation to the Solow Model

     Economists have long stressed the importance of human capital to the


                                        10
process of growth. One might expect chat ignoring human capital would

lead to incorrect conclusions: John Kendrick [1976] estimates that over

half of the total U.S. capital stock in 1969 was human capital. In this

section we explore the effect of adding human-capital accumulation to the

Solow growth model.

      Including human capital can potentially alter either the theoretical

modelling or tha empirical analysis of economic growth. At the

theoretical level, properly accounting for human capital may change one's

view of the nature of the growth process. Lucas [1988], for example,

assumes that although there are decreasing returns to physical-capital

accumulation when human capital is held constant, the returns to all

reproducible capital (human plus physical) are constant. We discuss this

possibility in Section III.

      At the empirical level, the existence of human capital can alter the

analysis of cross-country differences; in the regressions in Table I,

human capital is an omitted variable. It is this empirical problem that

we pursue in this section. We first expand the Solow model of Section I

to include human capital. We show how leaving out human capital affects

the coefficients on physical capital investment and population growth. We

then run regressions analogous to those in Table I to ace if proxies for

human capital can resolve the anomalies found in the first aection.7



A. The Model

      Let   the production   function be

(8)         '1(t)   —
                        K(t)m H(t) (A(t)L(t))°.
H is the stock of human capital, and all other variables are defined as


                                           11
 before. Let               be    the fraction of income invested in physical capital and

 sb the fraction invested in human capital. The evolution of the economy

 is determined        by:
 (9a)           k(t) —          5kY'(t)
                                          -
                                              (n-s-g+5)k(t),
                                          -
 (9b)           h(t) —
                                5ht)          (n+g+6)h(t),
where y—Y/AL, k—K/AL, and h—H/a are quantities per effective unit of
 labor. We          are   assuming that the same production function applies to human

capital,    physical capital, and               consumption. In other words, one unit of

consumption can be transformed costlessly into either one unit of physical

capital or one unit of human capital. In addition, we are assuming that

human capital depreciates at the same rate as physical capital. Lucas

 [1988] models the production function for human capital as fundamentally

different from that for other goods. We believe that, at least for an

initial examination, it is natural to assume that the two types of

production functions are similar.

        We assume that ct-fl<l, which implies that there are decreasing returns

to all capital.            (If a-s-fl—l, then there are constant returns to scale in

the reproducible factors. In this case, there is no steady state for this

model.     We discuss           this possibility in Section III.) Equations (9a) and

(9b) imply that the economy converges to a steady state defined by:

                                 1-fl fi 1/(l-o-fl)
            k* —
(10)
                           [k    n+g+6
                                      hJ
                *          -a       1-a -1l/(l-a-$)
            h
                     —[kh J     n+g+6

Substituting         (10) into the production function and taking logs gives an

equation for income per capita similar to equation (6) above:


                                                         12
(11)         ln[Y(t)/L(t)] —    in A(O)   +   gt   -
                                                              ln(n+g+6)

                           +
                               j— ln(s)        +
                                                        jt ln(sh).

This equation shows how income per capita depends on population growth and

accumulation of physical and human capital.

       Like the textbook Solow model, the augmented model predicts

coefficients in equation (11) that are functions of the factor shares. As

before, o is physical capital's share of income, so we expect a value of a

of about 1/3. Gauging a reasonable value of fi, human capital's share, is

more difficult. In the United States, the minimum wage--roughly the

return to labor without human capital- -has averaged about 30 to 50 percent

of the average wage in manufacturing. This fact suggests that 50 to 70

percent of total labor income represents the return to human capital, or

that fi   is between   1/3 and 1/2.

       Equation (11) makes two predictions about the regressions run in

Section I, in which human capital was          ignored.       First, even if             is

independent of the other right-hand aide               variables,   the coefficient on

ln(sk) is greater than o/(l-a). For example, if a——1/3, then the

coefficient on             would be 1. Because higher saving leads to higher

income, it leads to a higher steady-state level of human capital, even if

the percentage of income devoted to human-capital accumulation is

unchanged. Hence, the presence of human-capital accumulation increases

the impact of physical-capital accumulation on income.

       Second, the coefficient on ln(n+g+6) is larger in absolute value than

the   coefficient on ln(sk). If ——l/3, for example, the coefficient on

                                                   13
 ln(n+g+6) would be -2. In this model, high population growth lowers

 income per capita because the amounts of both physical and human capital

 must be spread more thinly over the population.

        There is an alternative way to express the role of human capital in

 determining income in this model. Combining (11) with the equation for

 the steady.state level of human capital given in (10) yields an equation

for income as a function of the rate of investment in physical Capital,

the rate of population growth, and the jgJ of human capital:

 (12)        ln[Y(t)/L(t)} —   in A(0)   +   gt +    j ln(s)
                                                                     *
                                 - j—
                                    0
                                             ln(n+g+fl +
                                                           1-0   ln(h ).


Equation (12) is almost identical to equation (6) in Section I. In that
model, the level of human capital is a component of the error term.

Because the saving and population growth rates influence h*, one should

expect human capital to be positively correlated with the saving rate and

negatively correlated with population growth. Therefore, omitting the

human-capital term biases the coefficients on saving and population

growth.

        The model with human capital suggests two possible ways to modify our

previous regressions. One way is to estimate the augmented model's

reduced form, that is, equation (11), in which the rate of human-capital

&ccumulation ln(sh) is added to the right-hand side. The second way is to

estimate equation (12), in which the level of human capital ln(h) is

added to the right-hand side. Notice that these alternative regressions

predict different coefficients on the saving and population growth terms.

When testing the augmented Solow model, a primary question is whether the

available data on human capital correspond more closely to the rate of
                                                14
accumulation        or to the level of human   capital   (h).




E. Date

       To implement the model, we restrict our focus to human-capital

investment in the form of education--thus ignoring investment in health,

among other things. Despite this narrowed focus, measurement of human

capital presents great practical difficulties.      Most important, a large

part of investment in education takes the form of forgone labor earnings

on the part of students.8 This problem is difficult to overcome because

forgone earnings very with the level of human.capital investment: a worker

with little human capital forgoes a low wage in order to accumulate more

human capital, whereas a worker with much human capital forgoes a higher

wage. In addition, explicit apending on education takes place at all

levels of government as well as by the family, which wakes spending on

education hard to measure. Finally, not all spending on education is

intended to yield productive human capital: philosophy, religion, and

literature, for example, althougi serving in part to train the mind, might

also be a form of consumption.9

      We use a proxy for the rate of human-capital accumulation         that

measures approximately the percentage of the working-age population that

is in secondary school. We begin with data on the fraction of the

eligible population (aged 12 to 17) enrolled in secondary school, which we

obtained from the UNESCO yearbook. We then multiply this enrollment rate

by the fraction of the working-age population that is of school age     (aged
15 to 19). This variable, which we call SCHOOL, is clearly imperfect: the

age   ranges in the two data series are not exactly the same, the variable

                                         15
does not include the input of teachers, and it completely ignores primary
                                                                                    4!
and higher eduction. Yet if SCHOOL is proportional to 5h' then we can use

it to estimate equation (11); the factor of proportionality will affect

only the constant term.1°

     This    measure indicates that investment in physical capital and

population growth may be proxying for human-capital accumulation in the

regressions in Table I. The correlation between SCHOOL and I/COP is .59

for the intermediate sample, and the correlation between SCHOOL and the

population growth rate is -    .38.     Thus, including human-capital

accumulation could alter substantially the estimated impact of physical-

capital accumulation and population growth on income per capita.



C. Results

     Table II presents regressions of the log of income per capita on the

log of the investment rate, the log of n+g+5, and the log of the

percentage of the population in secondary school. The human-capital

measure enters significantly in all three samples. It also greatly

reduces the size of the coefficient on physical capital investment and

improves the fit of the regression compared to Table I. These three

variables explain almost 80 percent of the cross-country variation in

income per capita in the non-oil and intermediate samples.

     The results in Table TI strongly support the augmented Solow model.

Equation (11) shows that the augmented model predicts that the

coefficients on ln(I/Y), ln(SCHOOL), and ln(n+g+6) sum to zero. The

bottom half of Table II shows that, for all three samples, this

restriction is not rejected.          The last lines of the table give the values


                                              16
of a and fi   implied   by the coefficients in the restricted regression. For

non-oil end intermediate samples, a and ft      are about 1/3 and highly
significant. The estimates for the OECD alone are less precise. In this

eample, the coefficients on investment and population growth are not

statistically significant: but they also are not significantly different

from the estimates obtained in the larger samples.

     We conclude that adding human capital to the Solow model improves its

performance. Allowing for human cepital eliminates the worrisome

anomalies- -the high coefficients on investment end on population growth in

our table I regressions- -that arise when the textbook Solow model is

confronted with the data. The parameter estimates seem reasonable. And

even using an imprecise proxy for human capital, we are able to dispose of

a fairly large part of the model's residual variance.



                    III. Endoaenous Growth and Converaence

     Over the past few years, economists studying growth have turned

increasingly to endogenous-growth models. These models are characterized

by the asaumption of non-decreasing returns to the set of reproducible

factors of production. For example, our model with physical and human

capital would become an endogenous-growth model if m+$—l.       Among the

implications of this assumption are that countries that save more grow

faster indefinitely and that countries need not converge in income per

capita, even if they have the same preferences and technology.

    Advocates of endogenous-growth models present them as alternatives to

the Solow model and motivate them by en alleged empirical failure of the

Solow model to explain cross-country differences. For example, Robert


                                           17
Barro [1989] writes,



       "In neoclassical growth models with diminishing returns, such as

       Solow (1956), Cass (1965) and Koopmans (1965), a country's per capita

       growth rate tends to be inversely related to its starting level of

       income per person. Therefore, in the absence of shocks, poor and

       rich countries would tend to converge in terms of levels of per

       capita income. However, this convergence hypothesis seems to be

       inconsistent with the cross-country evidence, which indicates that

       per capita growth rates are uncorrelated with the starting level of

       per capita product."



Our   first   goal in this section is to reexamine this evidence on

convergence to assess whether it contradicts the Solow model.

       Our    second   goal is to generalize our previous results. To implement

the Solow model, we have been assuming that countries in 1985 were in

their steady states (or, more generally, that the deviations from steady

state were random). Yet this assumption is questionable. We therefore

examine the predictions of the augmented Solow model for behavior out of

the steady state.



A.   Theory

      The Solow model predicts that countries reach different steady

states. In Section II we argued that much of the cross-country

differences in income per capita can be traced to differing determinants

of the iteady state in the Solow growth model: accumulation of human and


                                              18
physical capital and population growth. Thus, the Solow model does

predict convergence; it predicts oniy that income per capita in a given

country converges to that country's                steady-state value.     In other words,

the Solow model predicts convergence only after controlling for the

determinants of the steady state, a phenomenon which might be called

"conditional convergence.

        In addition, the Solow model makes quantitative predictions about the
                                           *
speed of convergence to steady state. Let y be the steady-state level of

income per effective worker given by equation (11), and let y(t) be the

actual value at time t. Approximating around the steady state, the speed

of convergence is given by

(13)         d ln(v(t))                  *
                   dt
                           —   A[ln(y        ) -    ln(y(t))J,


where

             A —   (n+g+6)(l.a-).
For example, if a—$—l/3 and n+g+6—.06, then the convergence rate (A) would

equal .02. This implies that the economy moves halfway to steady state in

about 35 years. Notice that the textbook Solow model, which excludes

htan capital, implies much faster convergence. If —O, then A becomes

.04, end the economy moves halfway to steady state in about 17 years.

        The model suggests a natural regression to study the rate of

convergence. Equation       (13)   implies

(14)         ln(y(t)) —    (1e_At)ln(y*)             + etln(y(0)),

where y(0) is income per effective worker at some initial date.

Subtracting ln(y(0)) from both sides:

(15)         ln(y(t)) -   ln(y(0))   —   (l_et)ln(y*)            -
                                                                     (l_et)ln(y(0)).
                                                      19
 Finally, substituting for y*:

 (16)      ln(y(t)) -   ln(y(O))   —   (1et) jSj        ln(sk) +   (let) jj   ln(s)
                                       -
                                           (let)    2     ln(n+g+6) -   (let)ln(y(C)).

 Thus, in the Solow model, the growth of income is s function of the

 determinants of the ultimate stesdy state and the initial level of income.

        Endogenous-growth models make predictions very different from the

Solow model regarding convergence among countries. In endogenous-growth

models, there is no steady-state level of income; differences among

countries in income per capita can peraist indefinitely, even if the

countries have the same saving and population growth rates.12 Endogenous

growth models with a single sector- -        those with the "Y—AX" production

function--predict no convergence of any sort. That is, these simple

endogenous-growth models predict a coefficient of zero on y(O) in the

regression in (16). As Barro (1989) notes, however, endogenous growth

models with more than one sector may imply convergence if the initial

income of a country ia correlated with the degree of imbalance among

aectors.

        before presenting the results, we note one potential aource of bias

in estimating the rate of convergence from equation (16). Suppose

countries have permanent differences in their production functiona, that

Is, different A(O)'s. These differencea would lead to differences in

initial incomes that would be uncorrelated with subsequent growth rates.

Hence, cross-country differences in the A(O)'a would bias the coefficient

on initial income toward zero and thus bias the resulta against finding


                                               20
convergence.



5. Results

     We now test the convergence predictions of the Solow model. We

report regressions of the change in the log of income per capita over the

period 1960 to 1985 on the log of income per capita in 1960. with and

without controlling for investment, growth of the working-age population,

and school enrollment.

     In Table III. the log of income per capita appears alone on the

right-hand side.      This table reproduces the results of many previous

authors on the failure of incomes to converge (Bradford DeLong 1988, Paul

Romer 1987).      The coefficient on the initial level of income per capita

is slightly positive for the non-oil sample and zero for the intermediate

sample, and for both regressions the adjusted R2 is essentially zero.

There is no tendency for poor countries to grow faster on average than

rich countries.

     Table III does show, however, that there is a significant tendency

toward convergence in the OECD sample. The coefficient on the initial

level of income per capita is significantly negative, and the adjusted

of the regression is .46. This result confirms the findings of Steve

Dowrick and Duc-Tho Nguyen [1989], among others.

     Table IV adds our measures of the rates of investment and population

growth to the right-hand eide of the regression. In all three samples,

the coefficient on the initial level of income is now significantly

negative--that is, there is strong evidence of convergence. Moreover, the

inclusion of investment and population growth rates improves substantially


                                           21
the fit of the regression. Table V adds our measure of human capital to

the right-hand side of the regression in Table IV. This new variable

lowers further the coefficient on the initial level of income, and it

again improves the fit of the regression.

     Figure 1 presents a graphical demonstration of the effect of adding

measures of population growth and accumulation of human and physical

capital to the usual "convergence picture," first presented by Paul Romer

(1987]. The top panel presents a scatterplot for our intermediate sample

of the average ennual growth rate of income per capita from 1960 to 1985

against the log of income per capita in 1960. Clearly, there is no

evidence that countries that start off poor tend to grow faster. The

second panel of the figure partials out the logs of the investment rate

and (n+g+6) from both the income level and growth rate variables. This

figure shows that if countries did not vary in their investment and

population growth rates, there would be a strong tendency for poor

countries to grow fester than rich ones. The third panel of Figure 1

partials out our human-capital variable in addition to investment and

population growth rates; the tendency toward convergence is now even

stronger.

     The results in Tables IV and V are notable not only for the finding

of convergence, but also for the rate at which convergence occurs. The

implied values of A, the parameter governing the speed of convergence, are

derived from the coefficient on ln(Y60). The values in Table IV era much

smaller than the textbook Solow model predicts. Yet the estimates in

Table V are closer to what the augmented Solow model predicts, for two

reasons. First, the augmented model predicts a slower rate of convergence


                                       22
than the model without human capital. Second, the empirical results

including human capital imply a faster rate of convergence than the

empirical results without human capital. Hence, once again, the inclusion

of human capital can help explain some results that appear anomalous from

the vantage pbint of the textbook Solow model.

     Table VI presents estimates of equation (16) imposing the restriction

that the coefficients on ln(sk). ln(sh) and ln(n+g+5) sum to zero. We

find that this restriction is not rejected and that imposing it has little

effect on the coefficients.    The last lines in Table VI present the

implied values of a and fi.   The estimates of a range from .38 to .48, and

the estimates of $   are .23 in all three samples. Compared to the results
in Table II, these regressions give a somewhat larger weight to physical

capital and a somewhat smaller weight to human capital.

     In contrast to the results in Tables I through IV, the results for

the OECD sample in Tables V and VI are similar to those for the other

samples. An interpretation that reconciles the similarity across samples

here and the dissimilarity in the earlier specifications is that

departures from steady state represent a larger share of cross-country

variation in income per capita for the OECD than for the broader samples.

If the OECD countries are far from their steady states, then population

growth and capital accumulation have not yet had their full impact on

standards of living; hence, we obtain lower estimated coefficients and

lower 1t2's for the OECD in specifications that do not consider out-of-

steady-state dynamics. Similarly, the greater importance of departures

from steady state for the OECD would explain the finding of greater

unconditional convergence. We find this interpretation plausible: World


                                         23
 War II surely caused large departures from the steady state, and it surely

 had    larger effects          on the OECD than on the rest of the world. With a

 value of A of .02, almost half of the departure from steady state in 1945

 would have remained by the end of our sample in 1985.

        Overall, our interpretation of the evidence on convergence contrasts

 sharply with that of endogenous-growth advocates.             In particular, we

 believe that the study of convergence does not show a failure of the Solow

 model. After controlling for those variables that the Solow model says

 determine the steady state, there is substantial convergence in income per

capita. Moreover, convergence occurs at approximately the rate that the

model predicts.




              IV. Interest Rate Differentials and Cavital Movements

        Recently, several economists, including Robert Lucas [1988], Robert

Barro [1989], and Robert King and Sergio Rebelo [1989] ,           have emphasized an
objection to the Solow model in addition to those we have addressed so

far: they argue that the model fails to explain either rate-of-return

differences or international capital flows. In the models of Sections I

and II, the steady-state marginal product of capital, net of depreciation,

is

(17)          MPK   -   6   —                -   6.
                                a(n+g+E)/s
Thus,   the   marginal product of capital varies positively with the

population growth rate and negatively with the saving rate. Because the

cross-country differences in saving and population growth rates are large,

the differences in rates of return should also be large. For example, if

m—l/3, 6—03, and g—.02, then the mean of the steady-state net marginal


                                                      24
product is .12 in the intermediate sample, and the standard deviation is

 .08.13

     'Two related facts seem inconsistent with these predictions. First,

observed differentials in real interest rates appear smaller than the

predicted differences in the net marginal product of capital. Second, as

Martin Feldstein and Charles Horioka [1980] first documented, countries

with high saving rates have high rates of domestic investment rather than

large current account surpluses: capital does not flow from high-saving

countries to low-saving countries.

     Although these two facts indeed present puzzles to be resolved, it is

premature to view them as a basis for rejecting the Solow model. The

Solow model predicts that the marginal product of capital will be high in

low-saving countries, but it does not necessarily predict that real

interest rates will also be high. One can infer the marginal product of

capital from real interest rates on financial assets only if investors are

optimizing and capital markets are perfect. Both of these assumptions are

questionable. It is possible that some of the most productive investments

in poor countries are in public capital, and that the behavior of the

governments of poor countries is not socially optimal. In addition, it is

possible that the marginal product of private capital is also high in poor

countries, yet those economic agents who could make the productive

investments do not do so because they face financing constraints or

because they fear future expropriation.

     Some evidence for this interpretation comes from examining

international variation in the rate of profit. If capital earns its

marginal product, then one can measure the marginal product of capital as


                                          25
           HPK —   a/(K/Y).
 That is! the return to tapital equals capital's share in income (a)

 divided the capital-output ratio (K/Y). The available evidence indicates

 that capital's share is roughly constant across counties. Jeffrey Sachs

 ]l979, Table 3] presents factor shares for the G-7 countries. His figures

 show thst variation in these shares across countries and over time is

 smallJ4 By contrast, capital-output ratios vary substantially across

countries: accumulating the investment data from Summers and Heston to

produce estimates of the capital stock, one finds that low-saving

countries have capital-output ratios near 1 and high-saving countries ha'-'e

capital-output ratios near 3. Thus, direct measurement of the profit rate

suggests that there is large international variation in the return to

capital.

     The available evidence also indicates that expropriation risk is one

reason that capital does not move to eliminate these differences in the

profit rate. Williams [1972] examines the experience of foreign

investment in developing countries from 1956 to 1972. He reports that,

during this period, governments nationalized about 19 percent of foreign

capital, and that compensation averaged about 41 percent of book value.

It is hard to say precisely how much of the observed differences in profit

rates this expropriation risk can explain. Yet, in view of this risk, it

would be surprising if the profit rates were not at least somewhat higher

in developing countries.

     Further evidence on rates of return comes from the large literature

on international differences in the return to education. George
                                                                               J
Paacharopoulos [1985] summarizes the results of studies for over 60


                                        26
 countries that analyze the determinants of labor earnings using sicro

 data. Because forgone wages are the primary cost of education, the rate

of return is roughly the percentage increase in the wage resulting from an

additional year of schooling. He reports that the poorer the country, the

larger the return to schooling.

     Overall, the evidence on the return to capital appears consistent

with the Solow model. Indeed, one might argue that it supports the Solow

model against the alternative of endogenous-growth models. Many

endogenous-growth models assume constant returns to scale in the

reproducible factors of production; they therefore imply that the rate of

return should not vary with the level of development. Yet direct

measurement of profit rates end returns to schooling indicate that the

rate of return is much higher in poor countries.



                                  Conclusion

     We have suggested that international differences in income per capita

sre best understood using an augmented Solow growth model. In this model,

output is produced from physical capital, human capital, and labor, and is

used for investment in physical capital, investment in human capital, and

consumption. One production function that is   consistent   with our

empirical results is Y—K3H113L1'3.

     This model of economic growth has several implications. First, the

elasticity of income with respect to the stock of physical capital is not

substantially different from capital's share in income. This conclusion

indicates, in contrast to Paul Romer's suggestion, that capital receives

approximately its social return. In other words, there are not


                                         27
substantial externalities to the accumulation of physical capital.

     Second, despite the absence of externalities, the accumulation of

physical capital has a larger impact on income per capita than the

textbook Solow model implies. A higher saving rate leads to higher income

in steady state, which in turn leads to a higher level of human capital,

even if the rate of human-capital accumulation is unchanged. Higher

saving thus raises total factor productivity as it is usually measured.

This difference between the textbook and the augmented model is

quantitatively important. The textbook Solow model with a capital shate

of 1/3 indicates that the elasticity of income with respect to the saving

rate is 1/2. Our augmented Solow model indicates that this elasticity is



     Third, population growth also has a larger impact on income per

capita than the textbook model indicates. In the textbook model, higher

population growth lowers income because the available capital must be

spread more thinly over the population of workers. In the augmented

model, human capital also must be spread more thinly, implying that higher

population growth lowers measured total factor productivity. Again, this

effect is important quantitatively. In the textbook model with a capital

share of 1/3, the elasticity of income per capita with respect to n+g+6 is

-1/2. In our augmented model, this elasticity is -2.

     Fourth, our model has implications for the dynamics of the economy

when the economy is not in steady state. In contrast to endogenous-growth

models, this model predicts that countries with similar technologies end

rates of accumulation and population growth should converge in income per

capita. Yet this convergence occurs more slowly than the textbook Solow


                                        28
 model suggests. The textbook Solow model implies that the economy reaches

halfway to steady state in about 17 years, whereas our augmented Solow

model implies that the economy reaches halfway in about 35 years.

        More generally, our results indicate that the Solow model is

consistent with the internationel evidence if one acknowledges the

importance of human as well as physical capital. The sugmented Solow

model says that differences in saving, education, and population growth

should explain cross-country differences in income per capita. Our

examination of the data indicates that these three variables do explain

most of the international variation.

        Future research should be directed at explaining why the variables

taken to be exogenous in the Solow model vary so much from country to

country. We expect that differences in tax policies, education policies,

tastes for children, end political stability will end up among the

ultimate determinants of cross-country differences. We also expect that

the Solow model will provide the best framework for understanding how

these determinants influence a country's level of economic well-being.




Harvard University

University of California at Eerkeley

Brown   University




                                          29
                                    References



Atkinson, Anthony., The Economics of Inequality, (Oxford: Clarendon Press.

   1975)

Azariadis, Costas and Allan Drazen, "Threshold Externalities in

   Economic Development," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CV (1990),

   501-526.

Earro, Robert J. ,    "Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries."

   HEIR Working Paper 3120, September 1989.

DeLong, J. Eradford, "Productivity Growth, Convergence, and Welfare:

   Comment," American Economic Review, DCXVIII (1988), 1138-54.

Dowrick, Steve, and Duc-Tho Nguyen, "OECD Comparative Economic Growth

   1950-85: Catch-Up and Convergence," American Economic Review, DCXIX

   (1989), 1010-1030.

Easterlin, Richard, "Why Isn't the Whole World Developed?" Journal of

   Economic History, XLI (1981), 1-20.

Feldstein, Martin and Charles Norioka, "Domestic Saving and International

   Capital Flows." Economic Journal XC (1980), 314-329.

Kendrick, John W. The Formation and Stocks of Total Caoital. (New York:

   Columbia University for NBER, 1976).

King, Robert 0. and Sergio T. Rebelo. "Transitional Dynamics and Economic

   Crowth in the Neoclassical Model." NEER Working paper 3185, November

   1989.

Krueger, Anne 0. ,   "Factor   Endowments and Per Capita Income Differences

   Among Countries," Economic Journal DCCVIII, (1968), 641-659.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. ,   "On the Mechanics of Economic Development." Journal


                                            30
    of Monetary Economics, XXII (1988), 3-42.

 Psacharopoulos, George, "Returns to Education: A Further International

    Update and Implicationa." Journal of Human         Resources,   XX (1985),

    5 83-604.


Rauch, James E. "The Question of International Convergence of Per Capita

    Consumption: An Euler Equation Approach." Mimeo, August 1988,

    University of California at San Diego.

Romer, Paul, "Crazy Explanations for the Productivity Slowdown."

   Macroeconotita Annual, 1987, 163-210.

                ,   "Capital   Accumulation in the Theory of Long Run Growth,"

   Modern Business Cycle Theory, Robert J. Barro, ad. , (Cambridge, MA:

   Harvard University Press, 1989 (a)), 51-127.

                ,   "Human Capital and Growth: Theory and Evidanta." NBER Working

   Paper 3173, November 1989 (b).

Sachs, Jeffrey D. , "Wages, Profit, and Macroeconomic Adjustment: A

   Comparative Study." Brookings Paoers on Economic Activity, 1979:2,

   269-332.

Solow, Robert M. ,       "A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth."

   Quarterly Journal of Economics LXX, (1956), 65-94.

Summers, Robert and Alan Heaton. "A New Set of International

   Comparisons of Real Product and Price Levels Estimates for 130

   Countries, 1950-85." Review of Income end Wealth, )OOCIV (1988), 1-26.

Williams, ML. "The Extent and Significance of Nationalization of

  Foreign-owned Assets in Developing Countries, 1956-1972."

  Oxford Economic Paosrs, XXVII (1975), 260-273.




                                               31
                   Table I: Estiaatjon of the Textbook Solos, Model

              Dependent Variable: log CD? per working-age person in 1985

Sample:                Non-oil         Intermediate          DECO

Observations:            98                75                 22


CONSTANT                5.48              5.36                7.97
                       (1.59)            (1.55)              (2.48)

ln(I/CD?)               1.42              1.31                 .50
                        (.14)             (.17)               (.43)

ln(n-+.g+6)            -1.97             -2.01                -   .76
                        (.56)             (.53)               (.84)


                         .59                .59                   .01
s.e.c.                   .69                .61                   .38


Restricted Regression:


CONSTANT               6.87               7.10                8.62
                       (.12)              (.15)               (.53)

ln(I/CD?)-             1.48               1.43                 .56
  ln(n+g+6)            (.12)              (.14)               (.36)


                        .59                .59                    .06
s.e.c.                  .69                .61                    .37

Test of restriction:
  p-value            .38                   .26                    .79

Implied a               .60                .59                 .36
                       (.02)              (.02)               (.15)




Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. The investment and population
growth rates are averages for the period 1960-1985. (g+6) is assumed to be
0.05.




                                                  32
                  Table II: Estimation of the Ausmented Solow Model

             Dependent Variable: log GDP per working-age person in 1965

Sample:                Non-oil         Intereediate         OECD

Observations:            98                75                22



CONSTANT                6.89              7.81              8.63
                       (1.17)            (1.19)            (2.19)

ln(I/CDP)                .69               .70               .28
                        (.13)             (.15)             (.39)

ln(n+g+6)              -1.73             -1.50             -1.07
                        (.41)             (.40)             (.75)
ln(SCHOOL)               .66               .73               .76
                        (.07)             (.10)             (.29)
                         .78               .77               .24
s.e.c.                   .51               .45               .33


Restricted     regression:

CONSTANT                7.86             7.97               8.71
                        (.14)             (.15)             (.47)

ln(I/GDP)-              .73                .71               .29
  ln(n+g+5)            (.12)              (.14)             (.33)

ln(SCHOOL)-             .67                 74               .76
  ln(n+gi-S)           (.07)              (.09)             (.28)
                        .78                 77               .28
s.e.c.                  .51                .45               .32

Test of restriction:
  p-value            .41                  .89               .97


Implied a               .31               .29               .14
                       (.04)             (.05)             (.15)
Implied                  28               .30               .37
                       (.03)             (.04)             (.12)

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. The investment and population
growth rates are averages for the period 1960-1985. (g+6) is assumed to be
0.05. SCHOOL is the average percentage of the working-age population in
secondary school for the period 1960-1985.

                                                 33
                Table III: Tests for Unconditional Conversance

    Dependent Variable: log difference COP per working-age parson 1960-85


Sample:              Non-oil           Intermediate              OECD

Observations:             98                  75                  22


CONSTANT              -   .266                .587               3.69
                      (.380)              (.433)                 (.68)

ln(Y60)                   .0943           -   .00423             - .341
                      (.0496)             (.05484)               (.079)


                           .03                -   .01              .46
s.e.c.                     .44                    .41              .18




Implied A             -   .00360           .00017                 .0167
                      (.00219)            (.00218)               (.0023)




Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Y60 is COP per working-age person
in 1960.




                                          34
                 Table IV: Tests for Conditional Coverence

    Dependent Variable: log difference CDP per working-age person 1960-85


Sample:              Non-oil           Intermediate           OECD

Observations:             98                  75                  22


C0NSTANT              1.93                2.23                2.19
                      (.83)               (.86)              (1.17)

ln(Y60)               -   .141            -   .228            -   .351
                      (.052)              (.057)              (.066)

ln(I/CDP)              .647                .644                .392
                      (.087)              (.104)              (.176)

ln(n-ig+8)            - .299              -   .464            - .753
                      (.304)              (.307)              (.341)


                          .38                 .35                 .62
s.e.c.                    .35                 .33                 .15




Implied .              .00606              .0104               .0173
                      (.00182)            (.0019)             (.0019)


Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Y60 is CD? per working-age persor
in 1960. The investment and population growth rates are averages for the
period 1960-1985. (g+8) is assumed to be 0.05.




                                          35
                 Ib1e Vt Tests for Conditional Convergence

    Dependent Variable: log difference GDP per working-age person 1960-85


Sample:              Non-oil           Intermediate           OECD

Observations:             98                  75                  22


CONSTANT              3.04                3.69                2.81
                      (.83)               (.91)              (1.19)

ln(Y60)               -   .289            -.366               -   .398
                      (.062)              (.067)              (.070)

ln(I/CDP)              .524                .538                   .335
                      (.087)              (.102)              (.174)

ln(n+g+8)             -.505               -   .551            -   .844
                      (.288)              (.288)              (.334)

ln(SCHOOL)             .233                .271                .223
                      (.060)              (.081)              (.144)


                          .46                 .43                 .65
s.e.e.                    .33                 .30                 .15




Implied ).                .0137            .0182               .0203
                      (.0019)             (.0020)             (.0020)




Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Y60 is GDP per working-age person
in 1960. The investment and population growth rates are averages for the
period 1960-1985. (g+6) is assumed to be 0.05. SCHOOL is the average
percentage of the working-age population in secondary school for the period
19 60-1985.




                                          36
         Table VI: Tests for Conditional Convergence. Restricted Reeression

     Dependent Variable: log difference CDP per working-age person 1960-85


 Sample:                Non-oil           Intermediate            OECD

 Observations:               98                   75                  22


 CONSTANT                2.46                3.09                 3.55
                         (.48)               (.53)                (.63)

 ln(Y60)                 -    299            -    .372            -
                                                                      .402
                         (.061)              (.067)               (.069)

ln(I/GDP)-                .500                .506                .396
  ln(n+g+6)              (.082)              (.095)              (.152)

ln(SCHOOL)-                  .238             .266                .236
  ln(n+g+8)              (.060)              (.080)              (.141)


                             .46                 .44                  .66
s.e.c.                    .33                    .30                  .15


Test of restriction:
   p-value                .40                 .42                     .47




Implied A                 .0162               .0186               .0206
                        (.0019)              (.0019)             (.0020)

Implied a                .48                  .44                 .38
                        (.07)                (.07)               (.13)

Implied fi               .23                  .23                     .23
                        (.05)                (.06)               (.11)




Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Y60 is GOP per working-age person
In 1960. The investment and population growth rates are averages for the
period 1960-1985. (g+) is assumed to be 0.05. SCHOOL is the average
percentage of the working-age population in secondary school for the period
1960-1985.




                                             37
APPENDIX
                                     Table A-I

                        Sazyle       GOP/adult   zrowth 1960-85 ia       SCHOOL
number     country     N I 0        1960 1985     GOP working
                                                        age pop

  1   Algeria          1   1   0   2485   4371    4.8     2.6     24.1    4.5
  2   Angola           1   0   0   1588   1171    0.8     2.1      5.8     1.8
  3   Benin            1   0   0   1116   1071    2.2     2.4     10.8     1.8
  4   Botswana         1   1   0    959   3671    8.6     3.2     28.3     2.9
  5   Burkina Faso     1   0   0    529    857    2.9     0.9     12.7    0.4
  6   Burundi          1   0   0    755    663    1.2     1.7      5.1    0.4
  7   Cameroon          1 1 0       889   2190    5.7     2.1     12.8    3.4
  8   Central Afr. Rep. 1 0 0       838    789    1.5     1.7     10.5    1.4
  9   Chad              1 0 0       908    462   -0.9     1.9      6.9    0.4
 10   Congo, Peop. Rep. 1 0 0      1009   2624    6.2     2.4     28.8    3.8
 11   Egypt             1 0 0       907   2160   6.0      2.5     16.3    7.0
 12   Ethiopia          1  1 0      533    608   2.8      2.3      5.4    1.1
 13   Cabon             0 0 0      1307   5350   7.0      1.4     22.1    2.6
 14   Gambia, The       0 0 0       799          3.6              18.1    1.5
 15   Ghana             1 0 0      1009    727   1.0     2.3       9.1    4.7
 16   Guinea           0 0 0        746    869   2.2     1.6      10.9
 17   Ivory Coast       1 1 0      1386   1704   5.1     4.3      12.4    2.3
 18   Kenya             1 1 0       944   1329   4.8     3.4      17.4    2.4
 19   Lesotho          0 0 0        431   1483   6.8     1.9      12.6    2.0
 20   Liberia          1 0 0        863    944   3.3     3.0      21.5    2.5
 21   Madagascar       1 1 0       1194    975   1.4     2.2       7.1    2.6
 22 M.alawi            1   1   0    455    823   4.8     2.4      13.2    0.6
 23 Mali               1   1   0    737    710   2.1     2.2       7.3    1.0
 24   Mauritania       1   0   0    777   1038   3.3     2.2      25.6    1.0
 25   Mauritius        1   0   0   1973   2967   4.2     2.6      17.1    7.3
 26   Morocco          1   1   0   1030   2348   5.8     2.5       8.3    3.6
 27   Mozambique       1   0   0   1420   1035   1.4     2.7       6.1    0.7
 28 Niger              1   0   0    539    841   4.4     2.6      10.3    0.5
 29 Nigeria            1   1   0   1055   1186   2.8     2.4      12.0    2.3
 30 Rwand.a            1 0     0    460    696   4.5     2.8       79     0.4
 31   Senegal          1 1 0       1392   1450   2.5     2.3       9.6    1.7
 32   Sierra Laone     1 0 0        511    805   3.4     1.6      10.9    1.7
 33   Somalia          1   0 0      901    657   1.8     3.1      13.8    1.1
 34   S. Africa        1   1 0     4768   7064   3.9     2.3      21.6    3.0
 35 Sudan              1 0 0       1254   1038   1.8     2.6      13.2    2.0
 36   Swaziland        0 0 0        817          7.2              17.7    3.7
 37   Tanzania         1   1 0      383    710   5.3     2.9      18.0    0.5
 38   Togo             1 0 0        777    978   3.4     2.5      15.5    2.9
 39   Tunisia          1   1 0     1623   3661   5.6     2.4      13.8    4.3
 40   Uganda           1 0 0        601    667   3.5     3.1      4.1     1.1


Note: Growth rates are In percent per year. I/Y Ia investment as a
percentage of GOP, and SCHOOL is the percentage of the working-age population
in secondary school, both averaged for the period 1960-85.

                                            38
                               Table A-I --   continued
                       Samole          CDP/adult     zrowth 1960-85 LLX   SCHOOL
number    country      N I 0          1960 1985       COP   working
                                                            age pop

 41 Zaire              1   0    0     594      412   0.9     2.4    6.5     3.6
 42 Zambia             1   1    0    1410     1217   2.1     2.7   31.7     2.4
 43 Zimbabwe           1   1    0    1187     2107   5.1     2.8   21.1     4.4
 44 Afghanistan        0   0    0    1224            1.6            6.9     0.9
 45 Bahrain            0   0    0                                  30.0    12.1
 46 Bangladesh         1   1    0     846     1221   4.0     2.6    6.8     3.2
 47 Burma              1   1    0     517     1031   4.5     1.7   11.4     3.5
 48 Hong Kong          1   1 0       3085 13372      8.9     3.0   19.9     7.2
 49   India            1   1 0        978     1339   3.6     2.4   16.8     5.1
 50   Iran             0 0 0 3606             7400   6.3     3.4   18.4     6.5
 51   Iraq             0 0 0 4916             5626   3.8     3.2   16.2     7.4
 52   Israel           1   1 0 4802 10450            5.9     2.8   28.5     9.5
 53   Japan            1   1    1    3493 13893      6.8     1.2   36.0    10.9
 54   Jordan           1  1 0 2183 4312              5.4     2.7   17.6    10.8
 55 Korea, Rep. of     1  1 0 1285 4775              7.9     2.7   22.3    10.2
 56 Kuwait             0 0 0 77881 25635             2.4     6.8    9.5     9.6
 57 Malaysia           1 1 0         2154     5788   7.1     3.2   23.2     7.3
 58 Nepal              1 0 0          833      974   2.6     2.0    5.9     2.3
 59 Oman               000                  15584            3.3   15.6     2.7
 60   Pakistan         110           1077     2175   5.8     3.0   12.2     3.0
 61 Philippines        1   1 0       1668     2430   4.5     3.0   14.9    10.6
 62 Saudi Arabia       0 0 0         6731 11057      6.1     4.1   12.8     3.1
 63 singapore          1 1 0         2793 14678      9.2     2.6   32.2     9.0
 64 Sri Lanka          1 1 0         1794     2482   3.7     2.4   14.8     8.3
 65 Syrian Arab Rep. 1 1 0           2382     6042   6.7     3.0   15.9     8.8
 66 Taiwan          0 0 0                            8.0           20.7
 67 Thailand           1 1 0         1308    3220    6.7     3.1   18.0     4.4
 68   U. Arab Emirates 0 0 0                18513                  26.5
 69   Yemen           0 0 0                  1918            2.5   17.2     0.6
 70   Austria         1  1 1         5939 13327      3.6     0.4   23.4     8.0
 71   Belgium         1  1 1         6789 14290      3.5     0.5   23.4     9.3
 72   Cyprus           0 0 0        2948             5.2           31.2     8.2
 73   Denmark          1 1 1         8551   16491    3.2     0.6   26.6    10.7
 74   Finland          1 1 1         6527   13779    3.7     0.7   36.9    11.5
 75   France           1 1 1         7215   15027    3.9     1.0 26.2       8.9
 76   Germany, Fed Rep 1 1 1         7695   15297    3.3     0.5   28.5     8.4
 77   Greece           1 1 1         2257     6868   5.1     0.7   29.3     7.9
 78   Iceland          0 0 0         8091            3.9           29.0    10.2
 79   Ireland          1 1 1         4411     8675   3.8     1.1   25.9    11.4
 80   Italy            1 1 1         4913 11082      3.8     0.6   24.9     7.1



Note: Growth rates are in percent per year. I/Y is investment as a
percentage of GDP, and SCHOOL is the percentage of the working-age population
in secondary school, both averaged for the period 1960-85.

                                                39
                                 Table A-I - -   continued
                        Sample           GOP/adult      zrowth 1960-85 Jfl      SCHOOL
 number country         N I 0           1960 1985        GOP working
                                                               age pop

  81 Luxembourg         0   0     0   9015               2.8             26.9     5.0
  82 Malta              0   0     0   2293               6.0             30.9     7.1
  83 Netherlands        1   1     1   7689 13177         3.6    1.4      25.8    10.7
 84   Norway            1   1     1   7938 19723        4.3     0.7      29.1    10.0
 85   Portugal          1   1     1   2272       5827   4.4     0.6      22.5     5.8
 86   Spain             1    1    1   3766       9903   4.9     1.0      17.7     8.0
 87   Sweden            1    1    1   7802 15237         3.1    0.4      24.5     7.9
 88   Switzerland       1    1    1 10308 15881         2.5     0.8      29.7     4.8
 89   Turkey           1 1 1          2274       4444   5.2     2.5      20.2     5.5
 90 United Kingdom     1 1 1          7634 13331        2.5     0.3      18.4     8.9
 91 Barbados           0 0 0          3165              4.8              19.5    12.1
 92 Canada             1 1 1 10256 17935                4.2     2.0      23.3    10.6
 93 Costa Rica         1    1    0 3360          4492   4.7     3.5      14.7     7.0
 94 Dominican Rep.     1    1    0 1939          3308   5.1     2.9      17.1     5.8
 95 El Salvador        1    1    0 2042          1997   3.3     3.3       8.0     3.9
 96   Guatemala        1    1    0 2481          3034   3.9     3.1       8.8     2.4
 97   Haiti            1    1    0 1096          1237   1.8     1.3       7.1     1.9
 98   Honduras         1    1 0       1430       1822   4.0     3.1      13.8     3.7
 99   Jamaica          1    1    0    2726       3080   2.1     1.6      20.6    11.2
100   Mexico           1    1    0    4229       7380   5.5     3.3      19.5     6.6
101   Nicaragua        1    1    0
                                3195  3978              4.1     3.3      14.5     5.8
102   Panama           1    1    0
                                2423  5021              5.9     3.0      26.1    11.6
103   Trinidad + Tobago1    1    0
                                9253 11285              2.7     1.9      20.4     8.8
104   United States     1 1 1 12362 18988               3.2     1.5      21.1    11.9
105   Argentina         1 1 0 4852 5533                 2.1     1.5      25.3     5.0
106   Bolivia           1 1 0 1618 2055                 3.3     2.4      13.3     4.9
107   Brazil            1 1 0 1842 5563                 7.3     2.9      23.2     4.7
108   Chile             1 1 0 5189 5533                 2.6     2.3      29.7     7.7
109   Colombia          1 1 0 2672 4405                 5.0     3.0      18.0     6.1
110   Ecuador           1 1  0  2198  4504              5.7     2.8      24.4     7.2
111   Guyana            0 0  0  2761                    1.1              32.4    11.7
112   Paraguay          1 1 0   1951  3914              5.5     2.7      11.7     4.4
113 Peru               1    1 0       3310   3775       3.5     2.9      12.0     8.0
114 Surinam            0 0 0          3226              4.5              19.4     8.1
115 Uruguay            1 1 0          5119   5495       0.9     0.6      11.8     7.0
116 Vanezuela          1 1 0 10367           6336       1.9     3.8      11.4     7.0
117 Australia          1 1 1          8440 13409        3.8     2.0      31.5     9.8
118 FIji               0 0 0          3634              4.2              20.6     8.1
119 Indonesia          1 1 0           879   2159       5.5     1.9      13.9     4.1
120 New Zealand       1     1    1    9523 12308        2.7     1.7      22.5    11.9
121 Papua New Guinea 1      0 0       1781 2544         3.5     2.1      16.2     1.5


Note: Growth rates are in percent per year. 1/? ia investment as a
percentage of GOP, and SCHOOL ia the percentage of the working-age population
In secondary school, both averaged for the period 1960-85.

                                                   40
 1. If a and n are endogenous and influenced by the level of income, then

 eatiaates   of equation (7)   using   ordinary   least squares are potentially
 inconsistent. In this case, to obtain conaistent estimates, one needs to
 find instrumental variables that are correlated with s and n, but
 uncorrelated with the country-specific shift in the production function
 Finding such instrumental variables is a formidable task, however.


2. In standard growth accounting, factor ahares are used to         decompose
growth over time in a single country into a part explained by growth in
factor inputs and an unexplained part- -the Solow residual- -which is
usually attributed to technological change. In this cross-country
analogue, factor ahares are used to decompose variation in income across
countries into a part explained by variation         in saving and population

growth rates and an unexplained part, which could be attributed to
international differences in the level of technology.


3. Data on the fraction of the population of working age are from the
World Bank'a World Tables and the 1988 World Develooment Reoort.


4. For purposea of comparability, we restrict the sample to countries that
have not only the data uaed in this section, but also the data on human
capital described in Section II.




                                             41
5. The countries that are excluded on this basis are: Bahrain, Cabon,

Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Oman, Saudi Arabia, and The United Arab Emirates. In

addition, Lesotho is excluded because the sum of private and government

consumption far exceeds COP in every year of the sample, indicating that

labor income from abroad constitutes an extremely large fraction of ON?.



6. We chose this value of g+6 to match the available data. In U.S. data,

the capital consumption allowance is about 10 percent of CUP, and the

capital-output ratio is about 3, which implies that 6 is about .03; Paul

Romer [l989a, p. 60] presents a calculation for a broader sample of

countries and concludes that S is about .03 or .04.   In addition, growth

in income per capita has averaged 1.7 percent per year in the United

States and 2.2 percent per year in our intermediate sample; this suggests

that g is about .02.



7. Previous authors have provided evidence of the importance of human

capital for growth in income. Azariadis and Drazen (1990] find that no

country was able to grow quickly during the postwar period without a

highly literate labor force. They interpret this as evidence that there

is a threshold externality associated with human capital accumulation.

Similarly, Rauch (1988] finds that among countries that had achieved 95%

adult literacy in 1960, there was a strong tendency for income per capita

to converge over the period 1950-85. Paul Romer (1989) finds that

literacy in 1960 helps explain subsequent investment and that, if one

corrects for measurement error, literacy has no impact on growth beyond

its effect on investment. There is also older work stressing the role of


                                        42
human capital in development; for example, see Anne Krueger [1968] and

Richard Easterlin [1981].



8. Kendrick [1976] calculates that for the U.S. in 1969, total gross

investisent in educetion and training was $192.3 billion, of which $92.3

billion took the form of imputed compensation to students (tables A-l and

3-2).



9. An sdditionsl problem with implementing the augmented model is that

 output" in the model is not the same as that measured in the national

income accounts. Much of the expenditure on human capital is forgone

wages, and these forgone wages should be included in Y. Yet measured CDP

fails to include this component of investment spending.

       Beck-of-the-envelope celculations suggest that this problem is not

quantitatively important, however. If human capital accumulation is

completely unmeasured, then measured CD? is (l-s)y. One can show that

this measurement problem does not affect the elasticity of CD? with

respect to physical investment or population growth. The elasticity of

measured CD? with respect to human capital accumulation is reduced by

           compared to the elasticity of true CD? with respect to human

capital accumulation. Because the fraction of a nation's resources

devoted to human capital accumulation is small, this effect is small. For

example, if o—fi—1/3 and shd then the elasticity will be 0.9 rather than

1.0.




                                         43
10. Even   under the weaker assumption that ln(sh) is linear in ln(SCHOOL),

we can use the estimated coefficients on ln(sk) and ln(n+g+6) to infer

values of a and fi;   in   this case, the estimated coefficient on ln(SCHOOL)

will not have an interpretation.



11. As we described in the previous footnote, under the weaker assumption

that ln(sh) is linear in ln(SCHOOL), estimates of a and fi can be inferred

from the coefficients on ln(I/GD?) and ln(n+g+5) in the unrestricted

regression. When we do this, we obtain estimates of a and fi      little
different from those reported in Table TI.



12. Although we do not explore the issue here, endogenous-growth models

also make quantitative predictions about the impact of saving on growth.

The models are typically characterized by constant returns to reproducible

factors of production- -namely physical and human capital. Our model of

Section II with a+$—1 and g—0 provides a simple way of analyzing the

predictions of models of andogenous growth. With these modifications to

the model of Section II, the production function is Y —      AKOHI0.   In this

form, the model predicts that the ratio of physical to human capital, K/H,

will converge to k'h' and that K, H, and '1 will then all grow at rate

A(sk)0(ah)lm .     The derivative of this "steady-state" growth rate with

respect to      is then mA(sh/sk)]m —    a/(K/Y).   The impact of saving on

growth depends on the exponent on capital in the production function, a,

and the capital-output ratio. In models in which andogenous growth arises

mainly from externalities from physical capital, a is close to one, and

the derivative of the growth rate with respect to         is approximately


                                            44
          or about .4. In models in which endogenous growth arises largely

 from human capital accumulation and there are no externalities from

 physical capital, the derivative would be about .3/(K/Y), or about .12.



 13. There is an alternative way of obtaining the marginal product of

 capital, which applies even outside of the steady state but requires an

 estimate of fi and the assumption of no country-specific shifts to the

production function. If one assumes that the return on human and physical

capital are equalized within each country, then one can show that the MPK

is proportional to                   Therefore, for the textbook Solow

model in which o—l/3 and fi—O, the NPK is inversely proportional to the

square of output. As King and Rebelo and others have noted, the implied

differences in rates of return across countries are incredibly large. Yet

if o—$—l/3, then the MPK is inversely proportional to the square root of

output. In this case, the implied cross-country differences in the MPK

are much smaller and are similar to those obtained with equation (17).



14. In particular, there is no evidence that rapid capital accumulation

raises capital's share. Sachs reports that Japan's rapid accumulation in

the 1960s and 1970s, for example, was associated with a rise in labor's

share from 69 percent in 1962-1964 to 77 percent in 1975-1978, See also

Atkinson (1975, p. 167].




                                        45
                Unconditi:nal vs Contonaa Convergence
                                      A. unconditional
      7
LU

0     5
C)
—     4
                                                                   -
a3    3                       —               .t_            —

      2
-                                         -         --   —
                                                                       —


L
=    -1-
                                                                           -
                       65         7:5         6:5         9:5                        10 .5
                       log output per working age adult: 1960
                  B. conditional on saving and population growth
LU
      5
0     5
0
LU

      4.
                                  —

                              —— — —                ——
Q)    3                —
                               —              —:
4)                                      —            —

                                  -                  —



rL
      2
      1                       - -:                    - -:-'           -
                                                —
      0•                                             —
L
0
     —
                      6.5                 7.5                6.5               9.5
                       log output per working age adult: 1960

      C.
      7— conditional on saving, population growth, and human capital
U)    6
0     5

                                              -:'.
LU
                                   -a
C)    4.                      :
      3                               -
L
      2
      1                               - -._' -a-             —




C
      0
L    —1
C)
     -2
          5.5         6.5           7.5         8.5         9.5                      10.5
                       log   output per working age adult: 1960
