NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

CONTRACTS AND THE MARKET
FOR EXECUTIVES

Sherwin Rosen

Working Paper No. 3542

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

December io

This paper was prepared for Nobel Symposium No. 77: Contracts:
Determinants, Properties and Implications, Stockholm, August 1820, 1990. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor
Stucies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3542
December 1990
CONTRACTS AND THE MARKET FOR EXECUTIVES

ABSTRACT
The

paper reviews empirical findings on executive
compensation in light of marginal productivity and contract
theories. The executive labor market performs three functions.
First, control must be distributed and assigned among executives.
The most talented executives are efficiently assigned to control
positions in the largest firms when talent and the marginal product
of control are complements. These gains or rents are partially
captured in larger earnings. In fact, the elasticity of top executive pay lies within a tight band around .25 among industries, time

periods, and countries where it has been estimated.

Second,
executive contracts must provide incentives for managers to act in
the interests of shareholders.
Potential loss of reputation,

bonding and takeovers probably substitute for direct monetary
incentives in this task.
Nevertheless, the elasticity of top
executive pay with respect to accounting rates of return lie near
1.0. The elasticity with respect to stock market returns is much

smaller, though precisely estimated, near 0.1. Differences of
opinion remain on whether the market provides enough incentives to

align interests between ownership and control. Third, the market
must identify new talent and reassign control over careers from
older to younger generations. Competition among executives for top
positions and the diminishing incentive effect of future rewards
with age implies that compensation should increasingly tilt rewards
to current performance over the course of a career.
Available
evidence supports this prediction.
Sherwin Rosen
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
Chicago, Illinois 60637

Revised, November 11, 1990

CONTRACTS AND THE MARKET FOR EXECUTIVES
Sherwin Rosen*

University of Chicago

I. INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY
The vital function of business executives in
the vast amounts of resources under their control makes

efficiently directing
the executive labor

market an especially interesting one to study. Berle and Means raised the
fundamental contractual issue by pointing out possible conflicts of interest

arising from separation of ownership and control. It has taken

many years

for the economics profession to put these matters in proper perspective

The first important response was to identify a market for
corporate control [Manne (1965)], whereby the threat of involuntary
termination would provide incentives for managers to align their actions

with shareholders' interests. The remarkable level of activity in the
American corporate-control market in recent years has dispelled any
lingering doubts about the importance of this mechanism.
remain differences of informed opinion on its

Still, there

efficacy for solving the

problem.

Second generation debates on the managerial theory of the firm
[Marris (1963), Baumol (1967)] focused attention on the firm's objective

function. If managers operated the firm in shareholders' interests then
they would maximize profits, and if they catered to their own interests then

such

things as sales and the amount of assets controlled would enter into

the firm's objectives. An empirical question

was immediately suggested:

did executive earnings respond more to profitability or to sales? The

Paper prepared for Nobel Symposium No 77: Contracts: Determinants,
Properties and Implications, Stockholm, August 18-20, 1990.

2

investigations provoked by this question were among the first empirical
studies of agency.

It would be interesting to report that these studies provided

empirical basis for the extensive theory of agency that has been developed

recently, but that is not the way it happened. Rather, much of that
development paralleled theoretical research on information economics.

Whatever its source, the executive labor market is one of the most importan:

practical applications of the new theory. Theory in turn has provided a
useful framework for thinking about the data and for showing precisely how
various mechanisms may be devised to align the interests of control and
I attempt to join the theoretical and empirical strands of this

ownership.

literature in this paper. It is organized around the three main economic
problems that the executive labor market must solve: the distribution and
assignment of control among executives; providing performance incentives;

and identifying talent and reassigning control in the course of career
development.

Section II briefly takes up the problem of the allocation of

control, given incentives. The idea is that personal power and influence in
an organization depend on the interactions between talent and the

productivity of control. If there is complementarity between the two it is
efficient to assign greater control to more talented persons. In a market
equilibrium, the most talented executives occupy top positions of the
largest firms, whcre the marginal productivity of their actions is greatly

magnified over the many people below them to whom they are linked. This
explains why earnings of top executives in large firms are so large, and why

executive pay is positively correlated with firm size. The empirical

3

elasticity of top executive pay with respect to firm size is approximately
.25 for all industries and time periods for which it has been estimated.

Sections III and IV take up the agency-incentive question, given

the allocation of control. Theory predicts that the structure of pay
strikes a compromise between incentives and insurance. Much evidence
supports that prediction. The direct incentive component is of particular
interest. The elasticity of compensation with respect to accounting rates
of return is in excess of 1.0; and the elasticity with respect to the stock
market rate of return is approximately .10.

However, there exists no

theoretical benchmark to serve as a guide for what size number should be
expected, and disputes remain on whether compensation mechanisms provide
enough incentives to elicit efficient management behavior.

Section V joins the assignment and incentive questions. How are
competent and talented managers identified and how is control reallocated

over the course of careers across successive, over-lapping generations? For
this task the labor market must keep a running score on available talent and

adjust the assignment of control accordingly. Competition is thereby
induced among contenders to influence the scoring process and gain greater

rank and control over their careers. Such competition, of which promotion
to higher paying and more responsible positions is an important part, is the

means by which control is transferred across the generations. Career
incentives serve as better substitutes for current performance incentives at

earlier stages of a career than in later stages, when a rapidly diminishing
horizon reduces any incentive effects of future status on current behavior.

Available data support the idea that compensation is increasingly structured
to reward and weigh current performance more heavily over the course of a
career, as theory suggests.

4
The final section draws out some suggestions for further work.

II.

THE MARGINAL PRODUCTIVITY THEORY

Great power to direct resources and the large earnings that go

with it are what make the executive labor market so interesting. Power and
income are related in a market economy, where remuneration is proportional

to one's marginal contribution to production. Early work began to connect
marginal productivity to business decisions within hierarchical control
structures -- see Reder's (1968) excellent survey for references.

Activities of top management are magnified geometrically because they affect
recursively the productivity of all who work below them in the organization.

This "scale of operations' effect, multiplying little bits over each of many
units, accrues to the more talented managers as economic rent in a

competitive equilibrium, much like a "superstar" effect (Rosen (l98l).
Top management inputs have much in common with local public goods.

consisting as they do of commands and decisions affecting the productivity

of the organization as a whole. What type of goods should be built and on
what scale? What niche should the firm play in the market and how should
its products be priced? Although a detailed theory of the division of labor
in management organization is unavailable, a simple hierarchical model
illustrates the essence of the idea [see Rosen (1982) and Miller (1982) for
more details].

A. The Model
Consider a hierarchy with a fixed span of control, s, throughout

every branch. Then the organization is a strictly triangular tree with s

branches at every node. Production occurs at the bottom layer. Higher
levels are exclusively devoted to "management" activities, which refine and

5

augment production worker output. Decisions made at a higher level get
dissipated somewhat in percolating down the tree, but link in a
multiplicative way to more production workers and have larger marginal
product the higher up they start.
Let z be a worker's talent (measured as output in self-

employment). Assume that a level-j manager produces (kz+mz. l units of
service jointly with each of the s immediately subordinate workers below
him,

where k and m are positive constants independent of j and

m + k < 1.

Then a one management level firm produces output of s(kz1 + mz0). A two
level firm produces s2(k(kz2 + mz1) + mz0) units, and by recursion

an n-

layer organization with sn production workers, produces output of

n-i
Yn — sn(kn z +k
mz
+..
n
n-i

(1)

.+mz )
0

n-i

n

Az'+ L) sn-jj
Amz +smz0
i—i

where j

—

i

ti

0 is the bottom production level layer, j

—

n is CEO and

A — sk > 1.0 is the net span of control. From the second expression, the
CEO contributes A'z to output, a j-level manager contributes A3mz and
production worker contributes inz.

a

That there is one CEO, 5nj level-j

managers and s production workers gives total production in the firm.
The marginal product of talent is larger at higher levels of a

hierarchy, through a chain letter-like effect. The CEO effectively is
"cloned" (sk)'1z times through subordinates itt the chain-of-command. Lower

level managers are cloned only (sk)3mz times (for j<n) because their

input

6

has a shorter distance to travel down the tree and is further discounted (by
m < 1) arising from the need to spend time processing supervisors' orders.

Let W(z) be the wage of a ievel-j manager of talent z.
Additivity of equation (1) implies that output is linear in talent within

levels. Therefore, incremental product accrues as rent to talent within
levels according to:

(2)

W(z) —

Wj

+ Amz, j — 0,

1,

.

. . , n-l

where (wi) are constants, determined by equating market supply and demand in
the assignment of workers by talent to levels.
Total rent accruing to the person at the top of an n-level

organization is the difference between output and costs of lower level
workers. Defining profits as revenue minus costs, using (2) and simplifying

n-i
(3)

I (z) —
n

A z

-

n

'c

L

s

n-j w.
J

i —O

This too is linear in Z, The first term can be interpreted as the unit
toll the CEO collects for each of the An times he is cloned through all

subordinates. The second term is the payment the CEO must make to all
level-j subordinates for that privilege while letting them collect their own
ability rents through their subordinates.

The earnings-talent gradient is linear within levels in (2) and
(3), but is highly nonlinear between levels because the market equilibrium

assigns talents to positions along the upper envelope of (2) and (3). The
envelope is strictly convex, following from the fact that the marginal

7

product of talent is increasing in level in (1). Consequently, a
competitive market allocates talented people to higher level positions in

larger firms. Complementarity between talent and productivity inherent in
hierarchical structures -

- 8Y/8z

increasing in j

in

(1) -

- is

what makes

this so. Scarce talents of the most capable managers are economized

by

assigning them to positions at or near the top of the largest firms, where
their ability is magnified to greater effect by spreading it over longer

chains-of-command and larger scales of operations. These magnification
effects accrue to these executives as rent. This is what sustains

high

average earnings of top level executives in large firms and also implies

that firm size and executive pay should be positively related. Since the
firms we are concerned with here have average assets of $58 and

large

numbers of employees and other stake-holders, multiplicative scale-of-

operations effects loom large: a little extra talent at the top can have
enormous effects on total output. The social gain- to devising efficient
incentive mechanisms and to identifying the most talented managers are
likely to be correspondingly large.

B. The Evidence
Top executive salaries increase with the size of firm. Most of
the evidence relates to the top five ex utives of American corporations as
reported, by law, in annual proxy statements to shareholders. Lower ranking
executives have not been studied very much because no public data

are

available, though a few studies have used proprietary data on such persons.
Most of the evidence on firm size and executive pay comes from
empirical attempts to parcel out executive pay to firm size or growth
"causes" on the one hand, and to the profitability of the firm on the other.
The preceding analysis shows that such attributions of causes are

8

conceptually ambiguous and not mutually exclusive because large firms are
more likely to be headed by more able executives and this has little bearing

on whether firms can be treated as sales or as profit maximizers. Unusual
talents and abilities must earn scarcity rents even in the absence of

agency

and incentive problems.

Many of these studies have encountered multicollinearity problems.

Firms with large assets and sales revenues also have large accounting

profits in absolute terms. The common factor, bigness, is at work. Even in
comparing a giant firm with a merely large one, the sheer effects of scale
dominate comparisons in cross-firm salary regressions and often make the
regressors colinear [Cisel and Carroll (1980), Durtlevy (1985)). There is no
"solution" to a multicollinearity problem and any way they are cut, scale
effects show up powerfully in the data on top executive pay.
The numerous studies that bear on the relation between pay and the

scale of resources controlled represent something of an empirical zoo. The
main problem in assessing the evidence is that specifications vary widely

from study-to-study. Multicollinearity plays some role here and so do such
trivialities as different choice of units of measurement and log transforms

without presenting enough sample information for readers to construct

elasticities. A definitive study will be one that estimates all existing
specifications on one consistent data source.

A start in this direction for scale effects appears in Kostiuk

(1989). His own estimates are based on 73 large U.S. corporations over the
1969-81 period. The elasticity of executive annual-salary-plus-bonus with
respect to sales of the firm is in the .2 to .25 range. Including firmfixed effects does not change things. The elasticity is the same in the
time-series "within" firm comparison as in the cross-section "between" firm

9

comparison. A firm

that

is 10 percent larger than another on average pays

its top executives 2.5 percent more; arid when the latter firm grows by 10

percent, its top executives are on average paid 2.5 percent more in salary

and bonuses. Murphy (1985) reports a similar estimate on a related sample,
but using a broader definition of pay that includes deferred compensation
and stock options: these components of pay are not very sensitive to size

and scale variables. The regression specifications are sufficiently
different between the two studies to suggest that the estimated elasticity
is fairly tnsensitive to specification.

More convincing evidence comes from comparing studies that used

much different data. Kostiuk's and Murphy's estimates are in the vicinity
of Roberts' (1956) early estimate of .35 for selected manufacturing firms in

the U.S. in the late 1940s and 1950. Using American data from 1937-39,
Kostiuk (1989) finds an asset elasticity of .3, close to the .25 elasticity

estimated on U.S. data in 1967-71. Furthermore, Cosh (1975) has estimated
an asset elasticity of .26 for Britain during 1969-71. This is remarkably
close to that found for the United States. Barro and Barro (forthcoming)
find an asset elasticity of .32 for CEOs of U.S. commercial banks in the

1980s. Even those studies for which elasticity cannot be computed [McCuire,
et al. (1962), Winn and Shoerthair (1988), Ciscel and Carroll (1980) --

exceptions are Kokkelenberg (1988) and Lewellen and Huntsman (1970)] find
strongly positive effects of sales or assets on executive pay.
The relative uniformity of the elasticity of executive pay with
respect to scale across firms, industries, countries and periods of time is

notable and puzzling because the technology which sustains control and

scale should vary across these disparate units of comparison. Thus the
uniformity of estimates is a little too good to be true. One suspects

10

copycatting behavior among firms in compensation policy, yet the Conference

board compensation surveys that possibly provide the information for such

comparisons group the data by industry. And copycat behavior cannot accoun:
for the 1930s estimate because the data were scarcely available. It surely
cannot extend from the U.S. to the U.K. conparison. A convincing
explanation is an open question.

III.

INCENTIVE PAYMENTS

Much of the recent interest in executive labor markets comes from
new conceptual developments on incentive aspects of labor supply.

A. Pay and Hours of Work
High ranking executives in large corporations earn large amounts

of money, averaging $500,000 per year in salary and bonus alone. Adding
deferred pay, options, and pensions sometimes changes it by more than one

order of magnitude. Systematic data on the hours worked by high-ranking
business executives are not available, but much informal evidence indicates

that both hours worked and the intensity of work are among the largest of

any specific occupational group in the economy. There is no shortage of
labor supply in the usual sense and in fact salaries are independent of

hours worked. Apparently, self-regulation, peer pressure, and monitoring by
superiors are adequate to maintain great work intensity and long hours.

B. Agency: Nature of the Problem
The interesting question is whether or not executive efforts are

directed toward the proper goals. Do business managers and executives
direct their work to serve the interests of shareholders and other
stakeholders or do they use them in more self-serving ways?

11

At heart this agency problem represents some limitation on
possibilities for decentralizing the functions of management in market

economies. Specialization of knowledge and information, and the capital
requirements of large enterprises virtually dictate a managerial function
that is itself specialized and separated from ownership but tied to the

fortunes of one enterprise. The resources controlled by such firms are so
large that they must be assembled from far and wide. Individual owners
cannot shepherd their resources in that way due to lack of skill, specific

production and market knowledge, and motivation. Instead, they must place a
certain amount of trust in a management team to take proper actions on their

behalf. Herein lies the agency problem.
The formal problem is to design contracts to induce executives to

act in their shareholders' interests. Various mechanisms have been
identified that might accomplish this task. Economists have confined their
attention to an idealized problem where the technology, scope for actions
and outcomes are common knowledge among principals and agents and only the

action taken is private information of the agent. Principals know a great
deal about the business, including what actions should be taken conditional

on circumstances. They simply don't know what circumstances arose in any
given realization: only the agent knows that. This is a far more
constrained view than the idea of Berle and Means or even that of the law on
principal and agent relations, where the agent typically is hired to render
services of exclusive technical or other specialized knowledge that cannot
be known to principals because it is not their business.

12

C. Penalties for Misbehavior
Incentive schemes can either penalize unwanted behavior (negative

feedback) or reward desirable behavior (positive reinforcement). Ambiguity
arises because rewards for good behavior imply, by lack of reward, penalties
for poor behavior and is resolved by adopting some norm of "expected

behavior." The earliest approaches to agency theory suggested penalties as
efficient incentives [Mirrlees (1976)] .

Diminishing

marginal utility of

money makes the monetary reward required to induce good behavior larger than
the monetary penalty needed to discourage bad behavior.

1. Bonding Solutions to Agency Problems
A performance bond is the prototype. Malfeasance is
discouraged by a potential penalty because the agent puts personal wealth in

jeopardy, "up front," as the bond. If the norm of good behavior is
maintained, the agent is paid opportunity costs plus interest on the bond.

If malfeasance is detected, the bond is seized and the worker is fired. The
potential unraveling problem at contract termination is solved by extending
the worker's horizon and not returning the bond until after "retirement" as

a pension (see Becker and Stigler [1974] for a very clear account). There
exists a locus or trade-off of bond, detection-probability combinations that

motivate the agent to adopt good behavior. Since resources used for
monitoring have opportunity costs, it is economical to make the bond as
large as possible and the probability of detection as small as possible
[Becker (1968)1 (ignoring type II errors).

Economists have used considerable imagination in applying this

model. Lazear (1979) interpreted the bond-pension scheme very broadly. In
his model workers are paid less than their value to the firm when young but

more than their value when old. The negative difference between pay and

13

value is a gradual posting of bond, with the worker effectively "investing"

in the firm and becoming a "partner" for all practical purposes. This model

implies a reduction in turnover. Studies of job turnover have established
that after an experimentation period at the start of the life cycle,

permanent attachments are made and turnover drops precipitously. Once a
stable job has been found, it persists for remarkably long periods.
Unfortunately, business executives have not been singled out for study, and

there are serious gaps in the executive data for this purpose. However, a
few conclusions may be warranted:

(i) Executives at or near the CEO rank in large corporations hold
their positions for fairly long intervals and have been employed by the firm

for a very long time. For example, in the samples used by Kostiuk (1989)
and Murphy (1985), the average top level executive was 55-57 years old, had
been in the position for seven or eight years, and had worked for the

company for more than 25 years. In the larger Forbes sample of almost 1300
large corporations over 1974-1986, Jensen and Murphy (1990) report that CEOs
who left office during that period had, on average, served for ten years.
In the case studies discussed by Vancil (1987), 80 percent of "retired" CEOs
remained on their firm's board of directors, and more than one-third served

as Chairman of the Board. Barro and Barro (forthcoming) show a marked
increase in departure probabilities of commercial bank CEOs after 63 years

of age and associated with normal retirement. This is probably true of most
industries.

(ii) There is more turnover below the very top ranking positions
and in smaller firms. Nevertheless, Leonard's (1990) proprietary sample
suggests that the matching process typically is completed by age 34, the
average age at which older executives were hired by their current employers

14

in the sample. Casual evidence suggests substantial lower level executive

turnover upon succession changes of top level management. A study by
Lichtenberg and Siegel (1989) shows elimination of management/white-collar

jobs when plants change ownership in leveraged buyouts. There is evidence
that the same thing happens in unfriendly takeovers, mergers and
acquisitions.

These observations are consistent with bonding and firm-specific
capital accumulation among business executives, but knowledge of magnitudes

is not available to assess their deterrence effects. The deterrence value
of a bond depends on its size compared to the value of resources at risk of

mismanagement and appropriation. Since a person's rank and responsibility
in an organization grow over the life cycle, it is likely that implicit

bonds are more efficacious for younger executives who have not yet gained

control of much of the firm's resources. And since the value of large
corporations exceeds the wealth of top managers by many orders of magnitude,
bonds provide less scope for solving the agency problem at the top.

2. Loss of Reputation as Bond
ReDutational. considerations serve a bonding function in

agency relationships, and though they lurk in the background of agency

theory, formal analysis has proved elusive. An important exception is Fama
(1980), who considered a model where observers use an agent's prior record
and past history of performance to infer some personal trait, such as

honesty. Knowing this, the agent has incentives to act in ways that affect
the market's beliefs. The agency value of reputation arises because current
behavior has an enduring "memory when the legacy of the past is used to update current beliefs. Then current actions have long term consequences if
the discount rate is not too large. Loss of reputation serves as a

15

deterrent when the capital value of these consequences for earnings is
greater than the benLfit of malfeasance, sloth and error in a current
action.

Fama (1980) analyzed market equilibrium for a simple structure
without discounting which converged to first-best efficient managerial

behavior. Holmstrom (1982b) showed that discounting and risk aversion limit
the extent to which reputation polices incentives. For example, finite life
limits the extent to which the legacy of the past persists into the future
(see Telser (1980) for the need for random horizons in self-enforcing
agreements, and Radner (1985) on discounting in multi-agent problems).

Reputation plays an ever smaller role in contract enforcement as the agent

gets older because there is less to lose. At the end of the contract there
is nothing to lose.

This horizon difficulty is reinforced by the fact that
opportunities for misconduct increase as the successful agent's control over

resources increases over the life cycle. One can be sympathetic, as I am,
to the idea that there is much more to loss of reputation than merely
financial opportunities --

social

opprobrium, disapproval from one's peers,

and loss of self-esteem have substantial deterrence value to many people,
yet remain skeptical about their overall role in enforcing agency relations.
Like performance bonds, reputation is likely to be more efficacious earlier
rather than later in the life cycle.

3. The Stock Market and Corporate Control
As everyone knows, changes in ownership and control achieved

new heights in the l980s. The takeover phenomenon has much independent
interest in the field of finance [see Jensen (1988)] and is beyond the scope

of this review. However, a few findings have direct bearing on the subject

16

at

hand. Hostile takeovers and tender offers and attempts have attracted

all of the research attention. Insofar as they represent a difference of
opinion between current and potential new management on the efficient use of
the firm's resources, they serve to check some abuses of current management
in the use of those resources.

Successful hostile takeovers result in wholesale changes in

management of the object firm. Evidence on reemployment opportunities of
displaced top executives is scanty, but displaced executives probably do not

find many doors open to them. It is also known that even unsuccessful
takeovers serve to reallocate resources to the control of others through

divestiture. Evidently the implied penalties to existing management from
both successful and unsuccessful takeovers serve as some discipline for
aligning current stockholder and managerial interests.

Nevertheless, other findings suggest that this discipline is

incomplete. For instance, there is often substantial severance pay to top
executives of object firms in mergers. The stock market views these "golden
parachutes" as productive in converting what wotild otherwise be hostile

reactions to friendly ones in takeover overtures [Lambert and Larcker
(1985)), yet the implied behavior for those seeking such security seems

curious. Second, object firms in takeovers tend to be in declining
industries, where industry effects might be difficult to disentangle from
firm-specific management effects (Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1988),

Lichtenberg and Siegel (1987)). Third, the takeover premium is about 40
percent (Jensen and Ruback (1983)). Thus it appears that existing managers
can squander one-third of the firm's value before the threat of displacement

becomes truly serious. Fourth, the market value of the average acquiring
firm in a takeover shows little or no change. The market apparently puts

17

small

value in finder's fees and reorganization rents that might be expected

from these activities. Perhaps competition among bidders accounts for this
last finding, but it can't account for all of it if these activities are

costly. It is not obvious why, when outsiders eliminate inefficient
managers, practically all of the return should go to the shareholders of the

mismanaged firms. Finally, Bhagat, Shleifer and Vishny (1990) find that
l980s reorganizations "deconglomerized" many of the horizontal mergers

assembled in the 1960s and 70s. Hostile takeovers and attempts resulted in
spinning off business lines to specialist firms and not to other

conglomerates. A convincing theory of why these conglomerates were formed
in the first place is not yet available.

IV.

REWARDS TO ELICIT EFFICIENT ACTION

All of the penalty modes constrain, but do not eliminate self-

serving behavior. Hence there is scope for reward mechanisms to help align
the interests of managers and shareholders.

A. Risk Sharing and Incentives
A fairly general approach was developed by Holmstrom (1979], who

examined the following problem: Suppose an agent is hired by a principal to
produce good x with production function x —

f(1,c),

where 2 is effort and

is a random variable with zero mean and known distribution. The agent is
risk averse with concave utility u —

U(c,i),

where c is consumption. The

principal is risk neutral. All production and utility functions are common
knowledge and outcome x is jointly observed by principal and agent.
However, the action 1 and the random variable

are exclusive private

information, either controlled or observed, of the agent. The principal has
full property rights in x, which has unit price, and, for simplicity,

18

supplies no inputs into the production process. The agent is paid a share
s(x) of the proceeds of x because 2 and e are not separately observed by the

principal: The goal is to characterize the equilibrium determination of
s(x).

The method of solution is interesting. It converts the market
equilibrium problem into a two-stage maximum problem. The first step
analyzes the agent's choice of I that maximizes expected utility given s(x).

This yields a mapping from s(x) to labor supply 2. The second step solves
for the function s(x) that maximizes either the principal's expected profit
or the expected utility of the agent, given the labor supply behavior in the

first step. If profit is taken as maximand, another constraint is that the
worker must expect to receive the known utility level of another job. If
expected utility is taken as maximand, the added constraint is that the
principal receives at least the expected return in some other activity.

These alternatives give two extreme points on the utility-possibility

frontier. Intermediate points are similarly obtained. Competition in the
labor market insures that the equilibrium contract •lies on the utilitypossibility frontier.

There is tension between efficient action and efficient insurance

in this problem. Were everything observable, the two could be unbundled.
Then the risk-neutral principal would supply full insurance to the risk-

averse agent by paying a fixed salary independent of outcome. The agent
would willingly supply optimal effort (expected marginal product equals
marginal cost) and monitoring would eliminate shirking.

if the agent is

risk neutral there are no gains from trade. The agent acquires ownership
rights to x and supplies optimal effort as a residual income recipient in

self-employment. In all other cases, payment based on output alone through

19

s(x) gives only one instrument to perform two real allocative functions.

There aren't enough independent prices and margins to do either one

sufficiently: The principal has to offer less than complete insurance to
give the agent incentives to put forth effort.

It is remarkable that very little more can be said, in general, to

characterize s(x). Payments that are decreasing in x through part of its
range can't even be ruled out [Grossman and Hart (1983)]! This negative
result provides very few restrictions on data and makes the theory difficult

to apply. What's worse, the contracts actually observed in agency
relationships typically are of very simple forms which aren't predicted by
this model.

The reason for these complications is difficult to describe.

However, Holmstrom and Milgrom (1987) prove that s(x) takes the simple
linear form of a two-part tariff when income effects are absent in
preferences and the technology shocks

are i.i.d. An intertemporal version

shows intuitively how it works. Consider an indefinitely repeated problem
when

is white noise and the action 2 is chosen before e is revealed in

each round. With no income effects, the agent is content with the same
amount of insurance each time irrespective of wealth, and similarly for the

risk-neutral principal. Furthermore, i.i.d. production disturbances imply
that each round looks exactly like every other from the production/incentive

point of view. It is efficient for the agent to choose the same action in
every period, because the agent's marginal rate of substitution between
effort and consumption is independent of wealth and the expected marginal

product of effort is constant. In the linear payoff schedule s(x) — a + bx
which implements the scheme,

serves as the insurance component and

as

the incentive component [Stiglitz (1975)]. If s(x) were nonlinear, the

20

dgent would have undesirable incentives not to take the same action each
time; e.g., to accumulate work into a large pile and do it all at once in a
range where s'(x) is increasing.
The Optimal Piece Rate

B.

Following Holmstrom and Milgrom (1989), consider the linear model
for a risk averse agent with constant absolute risk aversion who produces

two inputs, x1 and x2, for a risk neutral principal. Labor supplied by the
agent is the only input. The agent receives a total payment y consisting of
a fixed lump sum

and

revenues from production of x1

and x2, each with

separate piece-rates b1 and b2:

x

y — a +

(4)

u — U(y
where

i

+

—

b1x1

-

+

—

1,2

b2x2

c(21,22))

-exp(-R[y - c(11,22)])

—

R is the coefficient of risk aversion,

is the effort devoted to

activity i, y is gross income, c(i1,12) is the agent's (convex) cost of
effort and

and E2

are random variables with zero means and covariance

matrix
Following the two-step procedure, take parameters (a,b1,b2) as

given and calculate the agent's labor supply to each activity: Substituting
from (4), the agent chooses

(5)

and 22 to maximize

Eu — EU(a +
+
+
+
b111
b222
b1E1
b2€2

-

21

The first order condition is 8Eu/321 — Eu'

[b

•

— 0.

-

Consequently,

b. —

(6)

3c(11,12)/82.

for

,

1,2,

i —

—

from which the labor supply functions

£(b1.b2)

are obtained by

inversion. Comparative statics on (6) yields the familiar

a/ab —

(7)

where

—

c11c22

-

(l)c./
> 0.

c122

It follows that 3e/3bi > 0: an increase in

the payment for an output increases the effort devoted to it. Also,

82/3b

< 0 for i 0

j when

> 0:

an increase in the price of one good

decreases the effort supplied to the other.

In the second step, the risk neutral principal has
profitir —

p1x1

+

p2x2

a

-

-

b1x1

-

b2x2

,

where p is the relative (market)

price of x. Consider the case where the expected return to the principal
is driven to zero. Then (a,b1,b2) is constrained by

(8)

E —

0 —

(p1

-

b1)21

+

(p2

-

-

b2)22

a

The market equilibrium contract (a,b1,b2) is the one that maximizes the
agent's expected utility Eu, subject to the labor supply functions derived
in the first step and to (8).

Substituting (8) into Eu

(9)

Eu —

EU(p111

+

p212

+

b1e1

+

b22

-

22

where L —

,2(b1b2)

satisfying (6) is understood. Differentiating (9) with

respect to b and simplifying gives, for i — 1,2

(10)

3Eu/3b. —

[(p1-c1)3,21/3b.

+

(p2-c2)322/eb.)EU' + EU'€

—

0

where 82/8b. satisfies (7). Finally, substituting the CARA utility
function into (10)

(11)

(p1-c1)3i1/3b. + (p2-c2)3,22/3b1

-

R(biiii

+

b12a.2)

—

0,

i —

1,2,

gives two equations in two unknowns to solve for b1 and b2.

Equation (11) illustrates the balancing between incentives and

insurance in the optimal contract. The marginal costs of effort,
would equal their marginal rewards,

c1 and c2,

p1 and p2, in a first best solution.

In

(11) there is a wedge between the marginal cost and marginal benefit of

efforts in each good. These are weighted by the marginal response of effort
to its internal price to arrive at an average deviation and balanced against

risk considerations in the last term of (11). Relevant risk in the contract
is an average of the variances of each output weighted by internal prices

and the extent of risk aversion. Departures from first-best incentives
increase with risk and the agent's sensitivity to it.

A little more progress can be made by manipulating (11) to

(12)

b —

where D —

(Ro1

(Rfl(cj
+

-

c22)(R22

-

+

Rc(Pc

c11)

-

-

c)

+ 1IiVD

(Rc12 + c12)2.

Even this is

unwieldy, but two special cases suffice for present purposes.

23

(i) Let c12 —

12

— 0.

Then the two activities are independent

of each other and (12) reads as

(13)

i —

b* —

1,2

Piece rates vary inversely with risk aversion, R, the size of the risk, a..,

and the relative responsiveness of labor supply to price, c, and vary
positively with the market value of output produced,

(ii). Let c12 > 0 and a12 — 0.

Now the activities compete with

each other because doing more of one increases the marginal cost of the

other. Substituting into (12), one eventually arrives at

b —

b* plus

a term in (Rcji(c12

- c)

-

1]

*
where b is defined in (13). The second term in this expression is negative
so long as c.. >

c12, that is, if, from (7), the own responsiveness of

effort to price is no smaller than the cross responsiveness. Then b is
smaller .than b*. Piece rates are smaller when activities compete with each
other in the agent's effort. There are negative externalities between the
two activities when c12 is positive. These are effectively "taxed" by
reducing the marginal incentive components in the contract, so substitution
between activities gives rise to relatively insensitive internal incentives,
to "low powered" incentives in the sense of Williamson (1985).

B. Some Qualifications
Another, perhaps more fundamental reason why the optimal contract
might back off from sensitive performance incentives is that output and

performance of managers often are hard to measure. The services rendered by

24

business managers in large firms cannot be assessed on a fixed scale of

attributes. If the list of variables is incomplete, then scoring
performance on such a scale might exaggerate the production of those
attributes that are only imperfectly correlated with the true value of the

service. Important intangibles would not be rewarded sufficiently. Though
the point is an old one, it has been applied only recently to labor market

incentives. Baker (1989) shows that imperfect correlation between the
assessment of performance and true output acts like a reduction in p in the
*
formula for b above. It reduces the weight of marginal incentives in
determining executive pay, and by implication, increases the weight of fixed
salary.

Such considerations are more appropriate for lower level managers

than for those close to the top of the ladder. Contributions of lower level
managers to the success of an organization are difficult to isolate,

submerged, as they are, in the joint output of the team as a whole. Lifecycle considerations also play an important role there (see below).
Incentives can't be so diluted for high-ranking people, who take ultimate

responsibility for the success of the organization as a whole. If they are
rewarded on market valuation and profitability of the firm, there is no need
to assess and price out each of the many activities that contribute to it.

There is no need to reduce the "power" of incentives to them [Lazear
(1986))

An important qualification remains. Rewards that promote good
incentives must be indexed to outcomes that managers can alter. Stock
market values and current profits are only partly affected by managerial

decisions. They also are affected by business conditions beyond any

manager's control. Lazear and Rosen (1981) pointed out that relative

25

comparisons wash out common components of variance among competitors and

isolate specific performance-related components. The idea is analyzed most
completely by Holmstrom (1982a) who showed that relative comparisons
eliminate a source of extraneous risk for agents. Increasing the signal-tonoise ratio makes managerial incentives more effective and contracts more
efficient.
C.

The Evidence

Top executive compensation in a large firm is set by the Board of
Directors, often with the assistance of management consultants [Tosi and

Comez-Mejia (1989)). The contracts themselves are not public information,
but there is little doubt that remuneration is tied to the fortunes of the

firm. There are, however, differences of opinion about how performance is
measured for compensation purposes and about the magnitude of the effects.

The earliest studies on the sales-profits debate summarized above
generally found larger effect of sales than of profits (Roberts (1956),

McGuire, et al. (1962)). Later studies [Lewellen and Huntsman (1970),
Kokkelenberg (1988), Winn and Shoenhair (1988)) tended to find stronger
effects of accounting profits on compensation, but at least an equal number
have found evidence for both [Meeks and Whittington (1975), Kostjuk (1986,
1989), Ciscel and Carroll (1980), Leonard (1990)), with the picture slightly

clouded by multicollinearity. Since size must be an important correlate of
pay if more talented persons control greater resources, posing the agency
question in terms of sales versus profits is not meaningful in the available

data. The managerial hypothesis that size is larger than it otherwise would
is a counterfactual that cannot be answered at the moment. Looking at
all the studies together I cannot see clear winners in the earlier debate.
Both performance and scale are important. I confine attention to those

26

studies where elasticities are presented or can be computed. All of the
estimates refer either to the CEO or to the top five executives. Some use
salary and bonus as independent variable, others a more comprehensive
definition that includes deferred compensation and options.

Kostiuk (1986) estimates a semi-elasticity of the accounting rate
of return on compensation (defined as dlog(compensation)/dr, where r is the
rate of return) of about 1.25 for the United States in both the l930s and

early 1970s. This compares quite well with Cosh's (1975) estimate of 1.0
for Britain in the early l970s. In recent years, empirical studies have
tended to use the stock market rate of return as the performance measure

rather than accounting rates of return. This reduces the elasticity
estimate by almost a factor of 10.

Murphy (1985) estimates a semi-elasticity of compensation with
respect to the rate of return to shareholders of .12 to .16 using a 73 firm

sample of firms during 1969-81. Murphy (1986) produces a similar estimate
on a much larger Forbes sample of about 250 large firms over 1974-84.

Earlier, Masson (1971) estimated statistically significant effects of stock
returns on CEO compensation from a 39-firm sample over 1947-66, though the

coefficients themselves are not reported. Coughlin and Schmidt (1985)
estimated a semi-elasticity of .10 to .15 on a 40-firm sample from Forbes

during 1978-80. The study is notable for using the abnormal stock return
(estimated from CAPM)

instead

of the raw return. Murphy (1985) tried both

abnormal and total returns in a within-firm compensation regression. Most
of the estimated effect goes to the raw return, and it doesn't seem to

matter which one is used, so long as both aren't used together. Again,
there is evidence that this estimate is remarkably uniform from study to

27

study, e.g. ,

consider

that Barro and Barro (forthcoming) report an estimate

of .17 for bank CEOs over 1982-87.
Coughlin and Schmidt (1985) were among the first to use a relative

performance measure, yet Murphy's (1985) empirical competition between
relative and absolute stock returns suggested that relative performance

didn't matter. Relative performance evaluation was principally addressed by
Antle and Smith (1986) using Masson's 1947-66 sample. They found only weak
evidence to support the idea. It was definitely rejected for 15 out of 37
firms studied, while wrong signs on the systematic and firm-specific

components were obtained for many others. Barro and Barro (forthcoming)
find no evidence of relative performance evaluation among bank CEOs, even
though there were marked differences in fortunes among regional economies
and their constituent banks during the period of analysis.

A recent study by Gibbons and Murphy (1990) uses the largest
(Forbes) sample and provides the most evidence supporting relative

performance evaluation. They include the average rate of return on stock in
the firm's industry and the firm's own rate of return in the compensation

regression, rather than abnormal performance, CAPM-measures. They find
positive effects of own return on executive compensation and negative

effects of industry average return. While it is the strongest evidence for
relative performance effects yet found, anornolies remain because industry
effects are larger at the most aggregate level than at the firm's own four-

digit level. The estimated effect may be sensitive to how relative
performance is measured. Hence the overall picture on relative performance
effects is somewhat more on the negative than positive side of the ledger.

Most studies so far have examined whether pay and performance have

positive partial correlation. This is the natural first approximation, but

28

there are only a few more ambitious studies that purport to examine

causation. This program was begun by Masson (1971), who investigated how
various components of pay affect firm performance. The method used is
flawed and has not been pursued. Leonard (1990) regressed the rate of
return on equity on various aspects of pay and incentives for executives

within ten levels of the top in a proprietary sample. No clear general
picture emerges because the effects differ in sign when estimated within and

between firms. Abowd's (1990) study on these proprietary data is notable
for asking whether changes in the sensitivity of pay to performance affects

subseQuent performance. Evidence of such effects is found for stock market
performance indicators, but not for accounting measures. The inventory of
studies is too small to make definitive judgements on causality right now.
Hopefully more studies along these lines will be forthcoming.
Finally, some studies have examined the sensitivity of pay

components to performance. Most studies above conclude that current
performance rewards come about through adjustment of the bonus and

components of compensation other than salary. Salary is a substantial part
of compensation, but acts more like the fixed term

in the development

above. One thinks that salary adjustments should respond to longer term
components of performance and bonus to shorter term components, but this is

an undertudjed point. Eaton and Rosen (1983) consider the difference
between long- and short-term incentives by examining the correlates of

current and deferred pay components. However, Miller and Scholes (1982)
argue convincingly that these forms of compensation are tied up with tax

laws so it is difficult to distinguish the two. For instance, stock options
were not used for compensation until the early 1950g. when upper bracket

marginal tax rates were very high. Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1988a) find

29

a curious nonmonotonic relationship between management stock ownership and
firm performance. Using a cross section of large U.S.firms in the 1980s,
they find that performance measured by Tobin-Grunfeld's Q increases with
stock ownership of Board members (including the CEO) when it is less than 5

percent of total stock, decreases with ownership in the 5 to 25 percent

range, and perhaps increases again above that range. No compelling
explanations have appeared as yet for this unusual finding.

D. Assessment
Though there is little doubt that top executive's incomes vary
with the fortunes of their firms, the picture is mixed relative to theory.
Confirming evidence from several independent studies and samples leaves us
fairly secure that the effect of stock returns on log compensation is in the
0.10 -

0.15 range. The many estimates of accounting rates of return on

compensation don't lend themselves to such ready comparisons, even though

most studies do find positive effects. The best available comparable
estimates are in the range 1.0 -

1.2,

and quite a bit larger than for rates

of return to stock ownership.
I cannot express a clear preference between these two

alternatives. Many economists simply dismiss accounting profits as too
easily manipulatable by top managers to be suitable contractual measures of

performance. Such dismissal is simply wrong. Not only is it known that
explicit provisions of executive contracts are in fact tied to accounting
numbers, but the deeper intellectual question is whether market or
accounting returns are more informative for executive incentives [Lambert

and Larker (1987)]. It cannot be true that accounting information is
worthless in the giant firms in question, since they simply couldn't exist

without it. Finally, accounting numbers are the main source of information

30

not oniy for managerial decisions. They also inform the stock market. Top
executives are in a repeated game, constantly observed by bird-dogs, market

makers and, even worse, raiders. This limits possible misrepresentation for
compensation purposes. For sure, depreciation methods and special charges
can be chosen advantageously on occasion. Yet these manipulations can't
occur very often and have future costs as well as current benefits.
Undoubtedly, stock values are less easy to manipulate in this

sense, but how much information about performance do they contain? The
stock price of a firm changes for many reasons that are independent of its

performance. Some underlying causes such as shifts in industry demand have
similar effects on accounting profits. Others, such as changes in the
market discount rate, are specific to the stock market alone. There are
parallel sources of independent noise for accounting measures. Putting them
side by side, which measure has the greater signal power for managerial
performance?

Strong findings on relative performance evaluation would have

shed light on this, but only one study has found evidence for it. Bonus and
other payment mechanisms are seldom explicitly triggered by stock

performance in executive contracts. Options and deferred stock appreciation
rights are exceptions, but their value depends as much on the general state
of the stock market, which managers cannot affect, as on firm-specific
performance.

Jensen and Murphy (1990) argue that the empirical relationship
between pay and performance, while positive, is too small to provide

adequate incentives for managers to act in shareholders' interests. Using
the Forbes 1974-86 sample, they regress the arithmetic first difference in
annual CEO compensation (including the change in personal wealth tied up in

the firm) on current and lagged arithmetic changes in shareholder wealth and

31

a few other variables. An attempt is made to eliminate the effects of
market noise by using relative performance indicators, though they are
unsuccessful here.

An estimate for dlog(compensation)/dr of .1 estimated in earlier
studies seems "reasonable," so it comes as a considerable surprise that the

estimated values in the arithmetic regression for d(compensation)/dr are

extremely small. The differences are due to the fact that the ratio of CEO
compensation to shareholder wealth is vanishingly small in these giant

corporations (on the order of 6xl04 at the median and l0 at the mean).
In the simplest specification, the first difference regression implies that

annual salary and bonus increase by a mere $l3.50-$21.00 when shareholder
wealth changes by $1M. Adding the effects of own stock holdings, options
and the like increases the estimates to $32.50. Since mean compensation is
more than $.5M per annum and personal wealth is much larger than that, these
are very small sums indeed, small enough to raise questions about the role
for compensation mechanisms to align the interests of managers and owners.

Still, Jensen and Murphy's (1990) estimates are substantially

smaller than those implied by other studies. Considering that both
dividends and the number of shares of stock outstanding hardly changes in a

short time series the rate of return on stock ownership, r, is
approximately equal to the percentage change in total market shareholder

value. Let V represent the arithmetic first difference of total
shareholder value and ty the arithmetic first difference in salary and

bonus. Jensen and Murphy estimate
elasticity estimate discussed above is

.1 serves as lower bound. Now, since
b2

b1 •

V/y

and b1

—

Ay/V
—

log

l.35x105. The semi-

y/r —

(y/y)/Ar

for which

V/V, it follows that

b2y/V, where y and V are evaluated near the mean of

32

the sample. Since y/V —
b2

at

the mean, the implied estimate of , when

.1, is 10 -- or almost eight times larger than their estimate of

l.35xl05. This implies a total effect of at least $100 salary and bonus
change per $lM change in shareholder value, compared to their estimate of

$l3.5-$20.00. Working their estimate the other way round leads to an
implied elasticity near .014 and much smaller than the direct estimate of .1
found by others in these data.

Functional forms must account for these differences. Most
empirical economists would argue for using log rather than arithmetic

differences because the latter are dominated by large firms. Furthermore,
the arithmetic effect is expected to decrease for large firms (as Jensen and

Murphy confirm) because the risks are larger. Since the rate of return is
largely independent of size, the directly estimated elasticity form (b2)
better controls statistically for size effects.

Going out on a limb, the 1O estimate of i

implied

by the log

version suggests that CEO's lose $100,000 in direct pay per $1B decline in

stock value. Now a $1B change is large -• about 20 percent of the average
firm's value in the sample. However, the $100,000 is in the range of 20
percent of average compensation. Considering that CEO personal asset
holdings are almost surely less diversified than the average stockholder
[Lewellen (1968), Deckop (1988)], CEOs risk a considerable portion of their

personal wealth from the actions they take on behalf of shareholders. What
isn't so clear from theory is what a reasonable benchmark would be. Is the
.1- .15 elasticity estimate too small or too large? The theory hasn't
focused enough on that number to provide an answer.

33

V. CAREER INCENTIVES

Much of the literature has analyzed incentives in a timeless

context. Interactions between the selection and incentive problems give
rise to important new issues when the problem is examined over a persons
career. Resources must be reassigned among managers over time, as older
generations retire and are replaced by younger generations. Aspiring
executives start their careers in low level positions and work their way up

through the ladder to higher level positions over the life cycle. How a
career develops depends on the quality of the person's previous work, what
talents were demonstrated in lower positions, and the talent of other people

who are available to be selected. Selection and incentives are intertwined
by competition for promotion to higher-paying positions and by attempts to
affect the selection process.

A. ature of the Problem
Again, the manager's horizon is crucial to this problem. Career
considerations are more important at the beginning of a career than at the

end. Toward the end of a career, if not before, the cards have been dealt
and one's hand is pretty much known. Higher level reassignments are
unlikely, or impossible. At that point the potential influence of future
prospects vanishes and only current incentives matter. Analyzing the very
top level executive labor market with a timeless context is a good

approximation for this reason. However, learning, incentives and aspects of
competition for positions necessarily arise when examining the market as a
whole.

A promising approach is taken by Gibbons and Murphy (1990b), who

extend the linear piece rate model to many periods. The model is
specialized to only one activity but is generalized to include two sources

34

of noise. Uncertainty about the agent's ability is added to the pure
randomness and/or measurement error in the mapping from effort to output in
early periods.

The problem is solved by backward recursion. Consider two
periods. The solution in the last period follows that outlined above, with
the proviso that it is conditioned on whatever is known about the person's

at the end of the previous period. Information
period and there is no investment in it by either

ability

has no value in the

final

principal or agent.

Information acquired in the first period does have value because it can be

exploited later. Given anticipated optimal behavior in the second period,
investments, in information give extra first-period work incentives over and

above the piece rate. Specifically, the agent has incentives to increase
the signal-to-noise ratio in output to enable better assessment of ability.

Raising the first period piece rate isn't so necessary for incentives

because learning and piece rates are substitutes for each other. Such
substitution actually occurs in Gibbons and Murphy (1990b) for risk reducing
reasons, and the piece-rate price b is actually smaller in the first period
than in the second.

Earlier, Murphy (1986) had contrasted pure learning with pure

incentive theories of the executive labor market. In the learning theory
the manager is paid the value of expected productivity estimated from

previous output. Bayesian inference implies that more is learned at the
beginning of a career than at the end because additional samples hardly
affect the posterior distribution when the number of observations is already

large. On the other hand, the atemporal incentive problem looks much the
same from one period to the next. Thus the learning model would imply less

sensitivity of compensation to output for more experienced executives while

35

the pure incentive model would not. When the two forces are combined,
incentives to invest in learning still decline over time and less learning
takes place, but now it is necessary to substitute current performance

incentives for diminishing career incentives over the life-cycle. This
implies that sensitivity of pay to current performance should actually
increase for more experienced executives whose horizon is shorter than the
less experienced.

8. Promotions and Career Incentives
Career considerations loom large in promotion of executives across

ranks in the corporate structure. Evidence exists that much human capital
investment is related to these kinds of job changes [Sicheraian and Galor

(1990)) in the labor market generally. Still, there are reasons to suspect
that these aspects of work are much more important for executives than for

other workers. Advancement in rank in the officer corps of a military
organization is a useful rigid hierarchy version of the process to keep in
mind (though the up-or-out feature usually isn't encountered in firms).

Large firms, such as oil companies with far flung foreign operations, rotate
high level personnel through the system and through the ranks much like the

military. No doubt differences in style and technology make it a poorer
approximation for many firms, yet essential elements remain common to all of
them.

Promotions focus an executive's career attention on those discrete
points when a "window of opportunity" opens for possible advancement.

Typically these windows fit some predetermined rough outline of the firm's
organization structure and there is competition for them from contenders,

both within and without the firm. This process can be modeled as a
tournament (see Lazear and Rosen (1981) for an early analysis). Competitors

36

with the highest scores on some performance criteria are declared winners

and get promoted to a better job. Comparison methods in statistical
experiments come to mind as a possible model, with the crucial difference
that the objects of the experiment can and do take actions to influence the

outcome. Where one gets classified in this competition makes an enormous
economic difference to a person.
It is interesting that within-firm competition sometimes can be
structured to approximate socially optimum incentives by adjusting the wage

structure across job ranks. The idea is simple. Incentives to put forth
effort to win are increasing in the difference in prizes between winning and

losing. Since incentives vanish when the difference in compensation
vanishes and increase without bound in the other direction, there exists a
between-rank wage structure that promotes the optimal amount of effort (in
the sense that the expected marginal product to the firm of such effort

equals its marginal cost). Much has been made of setting the scope and
limitations of this result. Levinthal (1984), McLaughlin (1988), and
Mookerjee (1989) provide excellent surveys to which the reader is referred
for details .

Instead

of providing another review, I use the idea to

illustrate some effects of career considerations on the organizational wage
structure.

Think of a career as stochastically climbing a ladder. Ultimately
the person comes to rest at some rung, perhaps at the top but usually

before. This scheme loosely follows a sequential design-of-experiments,
where "losers" are successively culled from the sample and not allowed to
continue. It economizes sample size and gains information efficiently.

Incentive issues arise from the stopping rule. A person's horizon in this
game falls to zero when being passed over for promotion enough times

37

eliminates opportunities to continue. From that point on current monetary
incentives and monitoring must motivate job performance. However, those who
are still "alive" and contending in the promotion game have a longer horizon

which weighs into their decision to put out efforts to climb higher. Simple
formulations of this problem have been analyzed [Rosen (1986)). The value
of winning at any stage is not only the winner's prize (compensation) at
that level, but also includes the value of an option to compete for larger

prizes at higher levels. The value of this option reflects career
considerations.

The value v of contending in a game in which there are t stages
remaining is

v — max(P(1,2)v

(14)

+ [I -

P(i,2)1W1

-

cC2)}

where P(.,2) is the probability of winning when own effort £ is expended and

efforts 2 are expended by other competitors, W1 is the compensation paid
to the loser and c(s) is the (convex) cost of effort. The first order
condition for this problem is

(vi - W+i)0P/81 —

(15)

Defining

—

(âlog

c'(l)

P/8log )/(8log c/3log 2), manipulating (15) into an

elasticity form and substituting out for c in (14) yields a recursion for v

(16)

v —

+ (l)W

38

where

is

—

evaluated at the Nash equilibrium effort levels and

probabilities. Assuming 0 <

—

W1,

where

< 1 and using the boundary condition that

is the highest ranking prize (the CEO's compensation), the

solution to (16) is

—

(17)

where 5W —

.8)5W1 +

-

is

tw2 + . . . + t6wt +

the difference in prizes between adjacent ranks.

The option value v in (17) is the sure prize W1 if the contest is lost
plus the discounted sum of differences in rewards between ranks in future

rounds. The discount factor

depends on the probability of winning and

the costs and technology of doing so. Subtracting W÷2 from both sides of
(17) and comparing it with (15) shows that the incentives to win are
increasing in the option value, specifically,

(18)

(v1W+i) —

8t 1)6W1 +

.

t-l2

+

.

+

The firm desires that effort expended by people in higher
positions be at least as large as that expended at lower levels, if the

multiplicative effects in section II exist. This is why executives work
such long hours. In a pure incentive game where the contenders are known to
be of similar talent, $ works out to be a constant independent of t and and
it can be shown that compensation differences between adjacent ranks below

the top are necessary to induce nondecreasing effort across ranks. However,
the option to continue plays out at the final round, so the difference in
compensation between the CEO and first Vice President must be increased to

make up for it. There is an extra prize at the top.

39

The economics is that this increment acts to extend the effective

horizon, "as if" the promotion ladder were of infinite length and

competitors were in a game which continued forever. The idea survives many
generalizations. It suggests that the wage structure in a hierarchical
organization should exhibit a certain "convexity;" whereby CEO

compensation

is out of step and elevated above the rest for motivational purposes in the

organization as a whole. More generally, when managers compete to change
their positions over their careers, wages at any given level have spillover
effects on the incentives of contenders at lower levels.

Competition generated by these kinds of relative performance

evaluation can lead to moral hazard problems. Competitors

may collude [Dye

(1984)] and put forth less effort than is appropriate, to the detriment

of

the organization as a whole. Alternativly, there may be opportunities for
destructive activities of competitors to denigrate the work of others and

make one's self look better by comparison [Lazear (1989)]. Such antisocial
behavior can be partially controlled by reducing the stakes and narrowing
wage differentials between ranks, but it comes at the cost of reducing

effort in the organization as a whole. It might also be controlled by
recruiting personnel for these positions from outside the organization. An
alternative view has been little studied: Breton and Wintrobe (1986)
describe a form of competition within a patronage system. The CEO
encouraged competition among his immediate subordinates, who in turn served

as patrons for those lower down the hierarchy. Those further below knew the
game and took actions to improve the standing of their patron in the eyes of
the CEO because that could improve the subordinate's standing. The scheme

has qualities of an "invisible hand," though used to totally corrupt
purposes in their case study.

40

These moral hazards are not specific to tournament structures.
Rather they apply to any incomplete scoring scheme for assessing talent.

Tirole (1986) analyzes collusion between an agent and supervisor, both
against the principal. Milgrorn (1988) considers the effects of socially
unproductive activities taken by an agent to influence the scoring system.

Both considerations appear to generate incentives for more rigid and
bureaucratic rules within an organization relative to using internal prices
to self-regulate behavior.
C. Evidence

Data limitations on executive careers and incomes below the top

have limited empirical work in this area. Some of the implications of these
models have been borne out in experiments and a few have not [Bull, et al.
(1987,1988)], but there is less evidence from the market itself. Rosenbaurn
(1984) documented career paths through promotion in a case study of one

large firm. Proxy statements of large firms often list total compensation
of the highest paid twenty or thirty executives and suggest that top
executives are indeed paid substantially more than those immediately below

them. This is confirmed in Leonard's (1990) proprietary sample, where
differences in pay increase markedly between adjacent levels in moving from

bottom to top. He also reports that pay increments are negatively
correlated with promotion prospects, consistent with requirements for

incentive maintenance when competition is stiffer. Yet, in a single year
cross-firm comparison, O'Reilly et al. (1988) found that pay differences
between CEO and vice presidents were negatively correlated with the number

of vice presidents. A positive correlation is expected if more vice
presidents are contending for the CEO position. Perhaps some of them aren't
competing. The convexity implication within firms is also found by Lambert,

41

et al. (1989) in a large proprietary sample. Differences in pay between
levels increase rapidly with rank in their sample, and the CEO earns on the

order of $100,000 more, compared to $10,000 - $30,000 median differences at
lower levels.

There is evidence supporting direct substitution of current for

career incentives of CEO's as time to retirement decreases. Gibbons and
Murphy (1990b) examine Forbes' sample CEOs who left their firms over 1974-

89. The elasticity of pay to stock market value is the usual .10 when these
people had many years remaining, but rises to .18 when they had few years

left. Previously, Murphy (1986) found that the relation between CEO pay and
stock market rate of return was larger in earlier years of CEO tenure in
both position and in the firm,

and Barro and Barro (forthcoming) found

declining sensitivity of pay to performance with age of CEO. However,
neither studies time-remaining nor controls for CEO stock holdings, which

tend to grow withtenure. Own stock holding in the firm gives immediate
performance incentives and reduces the need for sensitivity in direct
compensation.

Available evidence generally supports some of the life cycle and

other implications of these models. However, more evidence is needed.

VI. CONCLUSIONS
This survey demonstrates great scope for fruitful empirical and
theoretical research in this area. As usual, much remains to be done.
On the empirical side, inquiry must dig deeper into the management
hierarchy. In some ways our preoccupation with top executives is examining

the tip of the iceberg. However, much effort at data development will be
necessary for such endeavors. Empirical investigation also must be

42

broadened beyond the U.S. to other countries. How will these remarkably
uniform estimates compare around the world? It is commonly alleged, for
example, that Japanese business executives earn much less relative to

production workers compared to their American and Zritish counterparts. It
would be very interesting to know if the compensation elasticities of .25
for scale and .10 for shareholder wealth nevertheless hold true in Japanese

firms. In addition, executive ranks recently have opened up to women in
many countries. The marked increase in available supplies of managerial
talent should have large consequences on the executive labor market, which
remain to be worked out and examined empirically.

Of the many theoretical issues on the research agenda, a few stand

out. First, many alternative mechanisms for affecting managerial incentives
have been identified. How should the effects of reputation, bonding,

takeovers and compensation contracts be parceled out? To what extent do
these alternatives act as substitutes for each other, or as complements?
Second, perhaps the idea that shareholders are the only principals in the

executive contracting problem is too simple. There is much to be said for
the view of a firm as a "nexus of contracts." Then control decisions affect
the wealth of many contract holders in the firm. For example, shouldn't
debt holders [Fama and Jensen (1983)] be included as claimants of the firm's
resources and included in the empirical estimates of wealth elasticities?

Furthermore, what limits the scope of control? Labor economists have
increasingly recognized the importance of firm specific human capital; and

firm-specific capital is often involved in contracts with specialty

suppliers and other intermediaries. All of them have a stake in how the
firm is managed. Evidence on this broadened "stakeholder" view of claimants
is hardly to be found, and though it is not compelling for the case of

43

hostile takeovers [Shleifer and Summers (1988), Kaplan (1989)], these issues

are likely to be more generally important. They deserve more attention.
Finally little has been done on executive succession and how
incompetent executives are rooted out, short of the draconian takeover

solution. Vancil's (1987) interesting account of how CEO's are chosen is
necessarily limited by the small selection of firms in its case study

approach. Any executive selection process is subject to error, but little
if anything is known about how mistakes are corrected. If, as I maintain,
competence has extraordinary marginal product for top management positions
in large firms, how incompetence is revealed and handled must be important.

Formally, the job falls to the Board of Directors. Yet there is much
opinion and some evidence (e.g., board compositions change when the CEO
changes [Hermalin and Weisback (1988)]) that Boards are themselves

controlled by the CEO. The implied limits on monitoring would appear to
make the contractual approach more important.

44

REFERENCES

Abowd, John, "Does Performance Based Management Compensation Affect
Corporate Performance?" Industrial and Labor Relations Review 43 (3,
1990): 52s-73s.

Antle, Rick, and Abbie Smith, "An Empirical Investigation of the Relative
Performance Evaluation of Corporate Executives," Journal of Accounting

Research 26 (2, 1986): 1-32,
Baker, George P., "Piece Rate Contracts and Performance Measurement Error,"
Harvard Business School, 1989.
B€rro, Jason R. , and Robert J. Barro, "Pay, Performance and Turnover of Bank

CEOs," Journal of Labor Economics (forthcoming).

Baumol, William J., Business Behavior. Value and Growth, Revised edition
(New York: Harcourt Brace), 1967.

Becker, Gary S., "Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach," Journal of
Political Economy 76 (2, 1968): 169-217.

Becker, Gary S., and George J. Stigler, "Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and
Compensation of Enforcers," Journal of Lezal Studies 3 (1, 1974): 1-18.

Bhagat, Sanjai; Andrei Shliefer and Robert W. Vishney, "Hostile Takeovers in
the l980s: The Return to Corporate Specialization," University of
Chicago, 1990.

Breton, Albert, and Ronald Wintrobe, "The Bureaucracy of Murder Revisited,"
Journal of Political Economy 94 (6, 1986): 905-926.

Bull, Clive; Andrew Schotter, and Keith Weigelt, "Tournaments and Piece
Rates: an Experimental Study," Journal of Political Economy 95 (1,
1987): 1-33.

45

"Assymetric Tournaments, Equal Opportunity Laws and Affirmative
Action: Some Experimental Results, "Wharton School,

University of

Pennsylvania, 1988.

Ciscel, David H., and Thomas M. Carroll, "The Determinants of Executive
Salaries: An Econometric Survey," The Review of Economics and
Statistics 62 (1, 1980): 7-13.

Cosh, Andrew, "The Remuneration of Chief Executives in the United

Kingdom,"

Economic Journal 85 (1, 1975): 75-94.
Coughlin, Anne T., and Ronald Schmidt, "Executive Compensation,

Management

Turnover, and Firm Performance: An Empirical Investigation," Journal of
Accountinz and Economics 7 (2, 1985): 43-66.
Deckop, John R., "Determinants of Chief Executive Officer Compensation,"
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 41 (2, 1988): 215-226.

Dunlevy, James A., "Econometric Issues in the Analysis of Executive
Compensation," Review of Economics and Statistics 67 (1, 1985): 171174.

Dye, Ronald, "The Trouble with Tournaments," Economic InQuiry 22 (1, 1984):
147-149.

Eaton, Jonathan, and Harvey S. Rosen, "Agency, Delayed Compensation and the
Structure of Remuneration," Journal of Finance 38 (5, 1983): 1489-1505.

Fama, Eugene, "Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm," Journal of
Political Economy 88 (2, 1980): 288-307.

Fama, Eugene F., and Michael C. Jensen, "Separation of Ownership and
Control," Journal of Law and Economics 26 (2, 1983): 301-325.

Gibbons, Robert, and Kevin J. Murphy, "Relative Performance Evaluation for
Chief Executive Officers," Industrial. and Labor Relations Review 43 (3,
l990a): 3Os-Sls.

46

________

"Optimum

Incentive

Contracts in the Presence of Career Concerns,"

University of Rochester, 1990b.

Grossman, Sanford, and Oliver Hart, "An Analysis of the Principal-Agent
Problem," Econometrica 7(1, 1983):

Hermelin, Benjamin. and Michael Weisback, "The Determinants of Board

Composition" Rand Journal of Economics 19 (4, 1988): 589-606.
Holmstrom, Bengt, "Moral Hazard and Observability," Bell Journal of
Economics 10 (1, 1979): 74-91.

_______ Moral Hazard in Teams," Bell Journal of Economics 13 (2, l982a):
324-340.

"Managerial Incentive Problems - A Dynamic Perspective," in Essays

in Economics and Management in Honour of Lars Wahibeck (Helsinki:
Swedish School of Economics), 1982b.
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom, "Aggregation and Linearity in the
rrovision of Intertemporal Incentives," Econornetrica 55 (2, 1987):
303-328.

_______

"Multi-Task

Principal-Agent Problems," Yale School of

Organization and Management, 1989.
Jensen, Michael C., "Takeovers: Their Causes and Consequences," Journal

of

Economic Persyectives 2 (1, 1988): 21-48.

Jensen, Michael C., and Kevin J. Murphy, "Performance Pay and Top-Management
Incentives," Journal of Political Economy 98 (2, 1990): 225-264.

Jensen, Michael C., and Richard S. Ruback, "The Market for Corporate
Control: The Scientific Evidence," Journal of Financial Economics 11
(2, 1983): 5-50.

Kaplan, Steven, "The Effect of Management Buyouts on Operating Performance

and Value," Journal of Financial Economics 24 (1, 1989): 217-254

47

Kokkelenberg, Edward C., "The Behavioral Objectives of Firms and Executive

Compensation" Department of Economics, State University of New York at
Binghamton, 1988.

Kostiuk, Peter F., "Firm Size and Executive Compensation," The Journal of
Human Resources 25 (1, 1989): 90-105.

_______ "Executive Ability, Corporate Performance and Managerial Income,"
Center for Naval Analysis, January, 1986.
Lambert, Richard A., and David F. Larcker, "Golden Parachutes, Executive

Decision-Making and Shareholder Wealth," Journal of Accounting and
Economics 7 (2, 1985): 179-204.

________

"An Analysis of the Use of Accounting and Market Measures of

Performance in Executive Contracts," Journal of Accounting Research 25
(Supplement, 1987): 85-123.

Lambert, Richard A.; David F. Larcker, and Keith Weigelt, "Tournaments and
the Structure of Organizational Incentives," Wharton School, University
of Pennsylvania, 1989.
Lazear, Edward P. ,

"Why is There Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political

Economy 87 (6, 1979): 1261/84.

_______

"Salaries

and Piece Rates," Journal of Business 59 (3, 1986):

405-431.

"Pay, Inequality and Industrial Politics," Journal of Political
Economy 97 (3, 1989): 561-580.

Lazear, Edward P., and Sherwin Rosen, "Rank Order Tournaments as Optimum
Labor Contracts," Journal of Political Economy 89 (5, 1981): 841-874.

Leonard, Jonathan S., "Executive Pay and Firm Performance," Industrial and
Labor Relations Review 43 (3, 1990): 13s-29s.

48

Levinthal, Daniel, "A Survey of Agency Models of Organizations," Institute
for Mathematical Studies in Social Science, Stanford University, 1984.
Lewellen, Wilbur C., Executive Compensation in Large Industrial Corporations
(New York: Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of
Economic Research), 1968.

Lewellen, Wilbur C., and Blame Huntsman, "Managerial Pay and Corporate
Performance," American Economic Review 60 (4, 1970): 710-720.

Lichtenberg, Frank R., and Donald Siegel, "Productivity and Changes in

Ownership of Manufacturing Plants," in MN. Baily and C. Winston
(eds.), Brookings Pacers in Economic Activity, Volume 3 (Washington,
D.C.: Brookings Institution) 1987, pages 643-673.
________

"The Effects of Leveraged Buyouts on Productivity and Related

Aspects of Firm Behavior," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper No. 3022, 1989.

Manne, Henry C., "Mergers and the Market for Corporate Control," Journal of
Political Economy 73 (2, 1965): 110-120.

Marris, Robin, "A Model of the Managerial Enterprise," Quarterly Journal of
Economics 77 (2, 1963): 185-209.

Masson, Robert, "Executive Motivations, Earnings and Consequent Equity
Performance," Journal of Political Economy 79 (6, 1971): 1278-1292.
McCuire, Joseph W.; John S.Y. Chiu and Alvar 0. Elbing, "Executive Incomes,
Sales and Profits," American Economic Review 52 (4, 1962): 753-761.
McLaughlin, Kenneth J.,, "Aspects of Tournament Models: A Survey," in

Research in Labor Economics, Vol. 9 (1988): 225-256.

Meeks, Geoffrey, and Geoffrey Whittington, "Director's Pay, Growth and
Profitability," Journal of Industrial Economics 24 (1, 1975): 1-14.

49

Milgrom, Paul, "Employment Contracts, Influence Activities and Efficient
Organizational Design," Journal of Political Economy 96 (1,

1988):

42-

60.

Miller, Fredrick H., Jr., "Wages and Establishment Size," Ph.D.
dissertation, University of Chicago, 1982.
Miller, Merton H., and Myron S. Scholes, "Executive Compet.sation, Taxes and

Incentives," in W.F. Sharpe and C.M. Cootner (eds.), Essays in Honor of
Paul Cootner (Englewood Cliffs, NJ:

Prentice-Hall),

1982.

Mirrlees, James A., "The Optimal Structure of Incentives and Authority
within an Organization," Bell Journal of Economics 7 (Spring, 1976):
105-131.

Mookherjee, Dilip, "Rank Order Competition and Incentives: An Organizational
Perspective," Stanford University, 1989.

Morck, Randall; Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny, "Management Ownership
and Market Valuation," Journal of Financial Economics 20 (

, 1988a):

293-315.

_______

"Alternative

Mechanisms for Corporate Control," National Bureau

of Economic Research, 1988.

Murphy, Kevin J., "Corporate Performance and Managerial Remuneration,"
Journal of Accounting and Economics 7 (2, 1985): 11-42.

________

"Incentives,

Learning and Compensation: A Theoretical and

Empirical Investigation of Managerial Labor Contracts," Rand Journal of

Economics 17 (2, 1986): 59-76.
O'Reilly, C.; Brian Main, and C. Crystal, "CEO Compensation as Tournament
and Social Comparison: A Tale of Two Theories," Administrative Science
Ouarterlv 33 (3, 1988): 257-274.

50

Radner, Roy, "Repeated Principal-Agent Games with Discounting," Econometrica
53 (5, 1985): 1173-1198.
Reder, Melvin W., "The Size Distribution of Earnings," in J. Marchal and B.
Ducros (eds.), the Distribution of National Income (London: Macmillan),
1968.

Roberts, Donald R., "A General Theory of Executive Compensation Based on
Statistically Tested Propositions," Quarterly Journal of Economics 70
(3, 1956):

Rosen, Sherwin, "The Economics of Superstars," American Economic Review 71

(5,

1981): 845-858.

"Authority, Control and the Distribution of Earnings," Rand
Journal of Economics 13 (2, 1982): 311-323.

_______

"Prizes

and Incentives in Elimination Tournaments," American

Economic Review 76 (4, 1986): 701-715.

Rosenbaum, James, Career Mobility in a Corporate Hierarchy (New York:
Academic Press), 1984.

Shlejfer, Andrej, and Lawrence Summers, "Breach of Trust in Hostile
Takeovers,: in Alan J. Auerback (ed.), CorDorate Takeovers; Causes and
Consetuences, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the National
Bureau of Economic Research), 1988.

Sicherman, Nachum and Oded Galor, "A Theory of Career Mobility," Journal of
Political Economy 98 (1, 1990): 169-192.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., "Incentives, Risk and Information: Notes toward a
Theory of Hierarchy," Bell Journal of Economics 6 (Autumn, 1975):
552-579.

Telser, Lester C., "A Theory of Self-Enforcing Agreements," Journal of
Business 53 (1, 1980): 27-44.

51

Tirole, Jean, "Hierarchies and Bureaucracies: On the Role of Collusion in
Organizations," Journal of Law. Economics. and Organization 2 (2,
1986): 181-214.

Tosi, H., and L. Gomez-Mejia, "The Decoupling of CEO Pay and Performance: An
Agency Theory Perspective," Administrative Science quarterly 34 (2,
1989):
Varicil, Richard F. ,

Passing the Baton: Managing The Process of CEO

Succession, (Boston: Harvard Business School Press), 1987.

Williamson, Oliver, The Economic Institutions of Caita1ism (New York: Free
Press), 1985.

Winn, Daryl N., and John D. Shoenhair, "Compensation-Based (Disincentives)
for Revenue-Maximizing Behavior," Review of Economics and Statistics 70

(1,

1988): 154-158.

52

FOOTNOTE

*1 am indebted to the National Science Foundation for financial

support. Many people have contributed helpful comments, criticism and
discussion, including discussants Bengt Holmstrom and Larry Lau; colleagues
Gary Becker, Gene Fama and Edward Lazear; and contributors to the
literature, especially Kevin J. Murphy, Robert Gibbons, and Edward Glaeser.
I take responsibility for interpretations and errors.

