NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

BANKS AND LOAN SALES:
MARKETING NON-MARKETABLE ASSETS

Gary Gorton
George Pennacchi

Working Paper No. 3551

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1990

The data used in this paper were provided by a large bank which
wishes to remain anonymous. We would like to thank the bank for
the data and, particularly, the loan sales desk employees for
their assistance in this study. Also, we are grateful to Mark
Flannery for providing helpful comments on an earlier draft, and
to the Geewax—Terker Research Program in Financial Instruments
for research support for this project. This paper is part of
NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3551
December 1990

BANKS AND LOAN SALES:
MARKETING NON-MARKETABLE ASSETS

ABSTRACT

A defining characteristic of bank loans is that they are not

resold once created. Yet, in 1989 about $240 billion of
commercial and industrial loans were sold, compared to trivial

amounts five years earlier. Selling loans without explicit
guarantee or recourse is inconsistent with theories of the

existence of financial intermediation. What has changed to make
bank loans marketable? In this paper we test for the presence of
implicit contractual features of bank loan sales contracts that

could explain this inconsistency. In addition, the effect of
technological progress on the reduction of information
asymmetries between loan buyers and loan sellers is considered.

The paper tests for the presence of these features and effects
using a sample of over 800 recent loan sales.

Gary Gorton
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104

George Pennacchi
Department of Finance
University of Illinois

Urbana, IL 61801

I. Introduction
In the last decade a market for selling commercial and industrial bank loans has opened.
Since bank loans were previously nonmarketable, this innovation in banking is of critical

importance to both academic economists and public policy makers. The existence of this
new market challenges recent theories of financial intermediation which would predict that

loan selling would be a lemons' market. Loan sales also contradict the presumption that
bank loans are illiquid, which is the underlying rationale for much of bank regulation and

Central Bank policy. Yet, little is known about this new market for loans, in part due to a
lack of data. In this essay we use a sample of over 800 individual loan sales to investigate
the nature of loan sales contracts.

Commercial and industrial loan sales grew tremendously during the 1980s. As
Table 1 indicates, the outstanding amount of commercial and industrial loan sales increased

from approximately $26.7 billion in the second quarter of 1983 to a peak of $290.9 billion in

the third quarter of 1989. This growth has been accompanied by signs of a developing

market. In the early stages of the market, the loans sold were very short maturity claims on
the cash flows of loans to well-known firms. However, as the loan sales market has grown,
the loans sold have increasingly represented claims on riskier firms. Now less than half the
loans sold are the obligations of investment-grade firms. There is also evidence that the
maturities of loan sales contracts have increased. In 1985, 80 percent of the loan sales had
maturities of 90 days or less, while by mid-1987, over half had maturities exceeding one
year.1

A commercial loan sale or secondary loan participation is a contract under which a bank

sells a proportional (equity) claim to all or part of the cash flow from an individual loan to a

'See Gorton and Haubrich (1989) for a complete description of the development and
regulation of the loan sales market.

I
third party buyer. The contract transfers no rights or obligations between the bank and the

borrower, so the third party buyer has no legal relationship with the bank's borrower. Since
many loans sales involve obligations of noripublicly traded firms, third party buyers, most of

whom are other banks, must rely upon the credit assessment of the originating bank. In
addition, bank regulations require that the originating bank not give any type of loan
guarantee to the loan buyer, if the originating bank wishes to remove the loan from its

balance sheet. In other words, the loan buyer has no recourse to the selling bank should a
loan default occur.
Loan sales appear paradoxical because commercial bank lending is thought to involve the

financing of nonmarketable assets. The theory of financial intermediation explains that the
(publicly unobserved) credit evaluation and monitoring services provided by banks require,

for incentive compatibility, that the bank hold the loans it creates. Holding loans until
maturity insures that the bank has incentive to effectively evaluate and monitor borrowers. If
loans were sold, then the bank would lack the incentive to produce an efficient level of credit
information and monitoring since it would not receive the rewards from this activity. Loan
buyers would recognize this lack of incentive and value the loan lower than otherwise.
Therefore, the existence of financial intermediaries implies the creation of bank loans which
banks should be unable to sell.2

The previous inability of banks to sell loans has historically been at the root of deposit
insurance and bank regulation. The non-marketability of bank loans is often taken to imply

that bank depositors have a difficult time valuing loans. It has been argued that such an

2 The explanations for the existence of financial intermediaries offered by Boyd and Prescott

(1986), Campbell and Kracaw (1980), and Diamond (1984) all have the implication that the
assets created by these firms cannot be resold.

3

information asymmetry between banks and depositors is a precondition for banking panics.3

If a large number of depositors seek to withdraw cash from their banks, then banks will be

insolvent if there is no market to sell their assets. Thus, the illiquidity inherent in bank
assets is one justification for government deposit insurance (and the Federal Reserve discount

window). If a well-developed market for bank loans existed, then the rationale for bank
regulation would not exist.

Loan sales are not merely underwriting which involves no special information production

or monitoring services by banks. In fact, most loans that are currently sold are those of
firms which have no commercial paper rating. (See Gorton and Haubrich (1989).) In
addition, absent any services provided by banks, from an investor's point of view a direct

claim on the firm would dominate the indirect claim of a loan sale. Should the firm fail, the
direct claim allows the holders rights which the indirect claim precludes.

The advent of the loan sales market led to a number of papers which address banks'
motivation for selling loans. Pennacchi (1988) shows that loan sales can provide a lower
cost method of financing loans for those banks which face a competitive deposit market. By
raising funds via loan sales, costs associated with required reserves and required bank capital

can be avoided. James (1988) points out that loan sales can mitigate an "under-investment"
problem for banks with previously issued risky debt. Flannery (1989) demonstrates that bank
examination procedures create incentives for banks to hold only certain classes of loans,

profitably selling the remainder. Boyd and Smith (1989) explain loan sales in terms of

For example, Diamond and Dybvig (1983) assume that there is a cost to the bank of
liquidating long term investments. The cost is presumably motivated by the idea that such assets
are nonmarketable. In Gorton (1985, 1986) banking panics are caused by depositor confusion
over bank asset values.

4

efficient allocation of resources across banks specializing in different types of lending.4

In this paper, we attempt focus on the nature of the contract between a bank and a loan

buyer. In particular, we ask what contract features could, if enforceable, explain how the
loan sales market is incentive-compatible. Without recourse, credit enhancement, contractual
guarantees, or insurance, it is not obvious why loan sales are incentive-compatible.

Moreover, the contract itself has not changed for at least fifty years; it is a standard
secondary participation contract. But, this does not mean that no innovation has occurred.
Since the regulatory authorities restrict the explicit contracts that banks may write, contract

innovation may be implicit. Our first goal is attempt to empirically detect the presence of
these (unobservable) contractual arrangements between banks and loan buyers which, if

enforceable, could explain how the loan sales market is incentive-compatible. Our second
goal is to test hypotheses about how implicit contractual features could be enforced.
We consider two possible implicit contract features which could explain the existence of

loan sales. The first feature is the possibility of a bank offering an implicit guarantee on the
value of the loan sold to the loan buyer. Restrictions prevent banks from inserting explicit
loan guarantees in loan sales contracts. However, at times banks do repurchase loans from
loan buyers. If a loan buyer expects the originating bank to buy back those loans which have

deteriorated in value, a means of providing de facto loan guarantees would exist. Gorton
and Pennacchi (1989), using loan sales yields averaged across a sample of banks, find very

weak evidence of implicit bank guarantees on loan sales. In this study, not only are the data
not averaged, but much more detailed deal-specific data are available.

The second feature is a bank's choice of selling only part of a loan, retaining the

Other related papers include Benveriiste and Berger (1987), Cumming (1987), Greenbaum
and Thakor (1987), and Kareken (1987).

rest. so that the bank retains some incentive to maintain the loan's value. The greater the
portion of the loan held by the bank, the greater will be its incentive to evaluate and monitor

the borrower. Notably, no participation contract requires that the bank selling the loan
maintain a fraction, so this contract feature would have to be enforced by market, rather than
legal, means.

How could implicit contractual features be enforced? Loan sales would be incentivecompatible if the fundamental assumption that there is an information asymmetry between

banks and outsiders, either depositors or loan buyers, has been reduced or eliminated by
technological change. That is, loan sales are incentive-compatible if the loan buyer can
verify whether the originating bank has effectively evaluated and monitored the borrower.

This would enable the loan buyer to observe the bank's behavior, so that the potential moral
hazard problem linked to loan selling can be averted. The originating bank can be induced

to monitor borrowers in an efficient manner. The fact that most loan buyers are other banks,
mostly foreign banks and smaller domestic banks, makes this feature plausible if one believes
that banks might have a comparative advantage in monitoring the behavior of other banks.
Recent improvements in technology that have lowered banks' cost of gathering and

transmitting information would suggest that this feature could now be feasible. Our final test
examines the hypothesis that asymmetric information has been reduced or eliminated.

In order to relate observable data to the presence of unobservable contract features, we

develop a model of the loan sales market. The model is one in which banks can improve the
distribution of loan returns by monitoring, but the level of monitoring by the bank may not

be observed by loan buyers. The bank's problem is to choose the optimal fraction of the
loan to be sold, its level of monitoring, and the fraction of the loan to be implicitly
guaranteed. A key assumption is that implicit guarantees are costly because of regulatory

6

constraints. The model provides a relationship between observable variables which we then
test using a large sample of loan sales done by a money center bank.

The paper proceeds as follows. In Section II the data are introduced and some
preliminary empirical analysis is performed. Section III introduces the model of loan sales

and derives the equations to be estimated. In Section IV, a series of tests are carried out
under the assumption that loan buyers cannot verify the monitoring services of the loan

selling bank. In Section V, we provide more empirical analysis that attempts to test the
proposition that loan buyers can verify the activities of the loan selling bank. Section VI
concludes.

11. An Overview of the Data
Since little is known about the loan sales market, it is worthwhile examining the data

which will be used subsequently. The data analyzed in this paper are a sample of 872
individual loan sales done by a major money center bank during the period January 20, 1987

to September 1, 1988. The bank is one of the largest loan sellers.
Table 2 presents some descriptive statistics about the data sample. Included are the mean

values of the maturity of the underlying loans, the maturity of the loan sales, the fraction of

the loan sold, and the interest rates on the loan, loan sale, and LIBOR. Note that the
average difference between the yield on the loan and the yield on the loan sale is

approximately 12 basis points. This is very close to the average spread of 13 basis points
that was found for money center banks during a June 1987 Senior Loan Officer Survey of

Bank Lending Practices performed by the Federal Reserve Board of Governors. We also
constructed a variable to measure the probability of the bank's failure, which will be useful

in our empirical analysis. The level and volatility of the bank's stock market value was used
to infer this failure probability. A description of the method used to construct this variable is

7
given in the Appendix. The data also include the borrower's commercial paper rating, if
any, but not the identity of the borrower (which was not provided to us).
Table 3 presents another summary of the data. It stratifies loan sales by maturity and
commercial paper rating. For each commercial paper rating, and maturity category, the
table provides the average size of the loan sale, the number of observations, the fraction of
all observations falling into that cell, and the fraction of the total dollar volume of sales with

the particular maturity having that rating. Notably, the largest categories of sales (by
number, but also by dollar volume) are those with maturities of 6-15 days and 'No Rating,'

and 16-30 days and 'No Rating.' These two categories account for almost 47 percent of all
loan sales. The next largest category is 31-60 days and 'No Rating' which accounts for ten
percent of the total. Thus, these three categories account for over half the tot.al sales. This
is consistent with the earlier observation that loan sales may not simply be a substitute for
commercial paper.5

Table 4 summarizes data that relates the spread of the yield on the loan sold over UBOR
and the spread of the yield on the loan negotiated with the borrower over LIBOR to the

maturity of the loan and the rating of the borrower. Also given is the average fraction of
each type of loan that the originating bank sells. Casual observation of Table 4 implies that
spreads generally increase as the borrower's rating declines and also, perhaps, as the loan

maturity lengthens. Also, the fraction of the loan sold by the bank appears to decline with
maturity, holding the rating constant. However, there does not appear to be much
relationship between the fraction sold and the rating of the borrower, holding maturity
5Notably, during this period this bank made no loan sales with maturities greater than one
year. In this respect, the bank is not representative, since the mean maturity of loan sales during

the period was approximately one year. See Gorton and Haubrich (1989). The likely
explanation for the shorter average maturities in our sample is that none of the bank's loan sales
involved merger related financing, since these types of loans tend to have maturities in the range
of five years.

8

constant.6

Gorton and Pennacchi (1989) hypothesized that the spread of the loan sale over
LIBOR should be positively related to the risk of the borrowing firm's loan, but negatively

related to a possible (implicit) loan sale guarantee by the loan selling bank. This simple
relationship can be tested if we make the following two assumptions. First, that the spread

of the loan over LIBOR is a measure of the risk of the borrower's loan and second, that the
(implicit) loan sale guarantee by the bank becomes less valuable the higher is the probability

of the bank's failure. The idea behind the second assumption is that if the bank which
originates the, loan becomes insolvent, it will not be able to. fulfill its implicit guarantee to the

loan buyer. Hence, ceteris paribus, we would expect that the spread of the loan sale over
LIBOR should be positively related to the probability of the bank's failure. The following
OLS regression tests this hypothesis. (Standard errors are in parentheses.)

r -r

=

.00061 + .23551 (rb -

(.00004) (.01 196)

r) + .00684 pfail
(.05122)

No. of Observations = 872. R2 = .311.
where r-r is the spread on the loan sale over LIBOR, rb-rf is the spread on the loan to the
borrower over LIBOR, and pfail is the probability of the bank failing by the maturity of the

6

The following OLS regression supports these observations. Letting fr = the fraction of
the loan sale retained by the bank, maturity = the maturity (in days) of the loan, and rate = (4

if no rating, 3 if A3, 2 if A2, 1 if Al, and 0 if A1+}, we have:

fr =

.17890

+ .00151 maturity +

(.02965) (.00046)
No. of Obs. = 872, R2 =

.00742

rate

(.00762)

.012. (Standard errors in parentheses.)

Thus, point estimates suggest the fraction retained increases with maturity and the risk of the
rating, but only the maturity variable is significant.

9

loan.

The loan sale spread is significantly positively related to the spread paid by the

borrowing firm. However, while the coefficient on pfail is of the expected positive sign, it
is insignificantly different from zero. This simple test seems to indicate little evidence of
implicit loan sale guarantees. However, banks might choose to give guarantees on some

loans and not on others. Without a model of the bank's choice of loan guarantees, this issue
may not be resolved. In addition, the regression ignores the possible effects on the risk of
the loan sale of the bank retaining a fraction of the loan.
To see how the fraction of the loan sold by the bank might relate to the spread on the

loan sale, we repeat the above regression adding the fraction sold, denoted by b, to the right
hand side of the regression equation.

r, -

r1

=

.00098

+ .23877 (rb -r1) + .00787 pfail - .00051 b

(.00009) (.01182)

(.05057)

(.00010)

No of Observations = 872. R2 = .329.
A higher fraction of the loan sold is significantly related to a lower spread on the loan sale.
This might seem counter-intuitive, since one could reason that the greater the fraction of the
loan sold, the more likely is the bank to monitor the borrower inefficiently, and hence the

greater should be the spread on the loan sold. But this logic ignores possible reverse
casualty. Profit maximizing banks may choose to sell larger fractions of less risky loans,
those loans that require less monitoring, because by doing so the yield paid by loan buyers
will not rise significantly. The reported negative relation between the fraction of the loan
sold and the spread paid by loan buyers could be picking up this effect.

Clearly, in order to sort out this issue as well as the issue of which loans banks may

10

choose to guarantee, we need to develop a model of bank optimizing behavior. This is the

goal of the next section. It will prepare the way for further empirical tests.

ifi.

A Model of the Loan Sates Market

This section presents a model of the optimal contract between banks and loan buyers.

We allow the contract to possibly involve a number of implicit features. The goal is to
determine the optimal combination of contract features consistent with incentive compatibility

and bank profit maximization. This model will then provide the framework for more detailed
empirical work.

The model extends the analysis in Pennacchi (1988) to allow the possibility of banks

granting implicit guarantees to loan buyers. It considers a setting where banks have an
incentive to sell loans in order to avoid the costs of required reserves and required capital
associated with issuing bank deposits and equity.7 Banks can improve the expected return

on loans by monitoring borrowers. We first adopt the standard assumption that bank
monitoring is unobservable so that banks and loan buyers cannot write contracts that are

contingent on the level of monitoring. Therefore, loan sales involve a moral hazard
problem, namely, that the bank may not monitor at the most efficient level after having sold

its loans. However, we will later directly test this assumption of asymmetric information to
consider the possibility that loan buyers might have the ability to verify the monitoring
activities of the originating bank.

If bank monitoring is unobservable, the consequent moral hazard problem can be
mitigated by contractual features not directly concerned with the level of monitoring.

7More generally, the model of loan sales applies to any situation where the bank's internal
financing is costly. For example, agency costs, rather than reserve and equity restrictions might
motivate loan sales.

11

Because of regulation, these contract features would have to be implicit. We consider two
features of the loan sale arrangement which could be contractually feasible. One feature is
an agreement by the bank to sell only a portion of the loan, retaining the remainder on its
balance sheet. The second feature is an implicit guarantee by the bank to repurchase the loan

at a previously agreed upon price if the quality of the loan deteriorates. We interpret this
second feature as equivalent to a (partial) guarantee against default on the loan sale. These
two contract features can make loan sales incentive compatible because banks retain some of

the risk of loan defaults. Therefore, they would still face incentives to monitor, even though
some or all of the loan has been sold.
The bank's problem is to maximize the expected profits from the sale of a particular
loan.8 The following assumptions are made about the loan characteristics and possible
contract features.

(Al) A bank loan requires one dollar of initial financing, and produces a stochastic

return of x at the end of r periods, where xE [O,L] and where L is the promised endof-period repayment on the loan. The return, x, has a cumulative distribution function

of F(x,a), where a is the level of monitoring by the bank. This distribution function
satisfies:

F(x,Xa+(l-X)a') XF(x,a) + (l-X)F(x,a'), for all a,a'; XE(O,l).
(A2) The bank has a constant returns to scale technology for monitoring loans. The

cost function is given by c(a) = c • a.

8Thjs problem is separable from the bank's choice of loan origination. See Pennacchi (1988)
for analysis of the initial loan portfolio choice.

12

(A3) The bank can sell a fraction, b, of the return on a loan where bE[O,1J, retaimng
the portion (1-b). Risk neutral loan buyers require an expected return on loans

purchased of r. The bank finances its portion with a weighted average cost of deposit
and equity financing given by r1.

(A4) The bank can offer an implicit (partial) guarantee against the default of a loan that

it sells. Let -y refer to the proportion of a loan sale that the bank promises to
guarantee, where -yE[O,1]. Such implicit guarantees carry a potential regulatory cost,

with the expected cost to the bank given by k('y), where k' > 0 and

k" 0. The

bank can fulfill this guarantee only if it is solvent at the time the loan matures. The
probability the bank is solvent, p, is assumed to be uncorrelated with the return on the
loan.

Assumptions (Al) and (A2) provide a real role for banks, namely, as improving the
expected returns on loans by costly monitoring.9 Assumption (A3) constrains the form of
the explicit loan sale contract to that of a proportional equity split between the bank and the

loan buyer. This assumption is due to regulatory constraints which prevent other contract
forms in selling commercial and industrial loans.'0 The cost of implicit guarantees,

specified in (A4) derives from regulatory pressure. Banks are not allowed to offer explicit

guarantees, i.e., they must sell loans without recourse in order to remove them from the

9That the existence of financial intermediaries can be explained by their role as monitors was

first explained by Diamond (1984). Also, see Gorton and Haubrich (1987).

t0The constraints include restrictions on the form of a loan sale that enables a bank to
remove the loan from its balance sheet, thereby avoiding reserve and capital requirements.
Also, loan sales contracts must avoid the appearance of being "securities" in order to avoid
securities laws. These issues are discussed by Gorton and Haubrich (1989).

13

balance sheet.

The optimal loan sales contract involves the bank choosing a level of monitoring, a, the

fraction of the loan to be sold, b, and the fraction of the loan to be implicitly guaranteed, -y.
L

L

m,xf(1_b)xdF(x,a)

-bypf(L-x)dF(xa) - c(a) -k(y) - eZTI

(1)

where

I -

subject

1 - ettt[fbxdF(x,a)

to

(i)

f(1-b+b?P)xdF4(X)

(ii)

b

In problem (1), the first

of the

guarantee

-

c'(a)

1

i

(iii)

portion

bypf(L-x)dF(x,a)]

term in

the bank's objective

function

is the expected

return

on the

loan return held by the bank. The second term is the expected value of the

the bank

gives to the loan buyer. I is the amount of internal (bank

deposit and

equity) funding which the bank provides when fraction b of the loan is sold. Constraint (i) is
the incentive compatibility constraint. Hart and Holmstrom (1986) show that it can be
written in this form when the distribution function, F(x,a), satisfies the convexity-ofdistribution-function condition given in (Al).
Define 0

exp[(r1 - r1)r]

-

1

to be the excess cost of internal bank finance relative to

14

financing at the riskfree rate. Then the first order conditions with respect to the bank's

choices of b, a, and y are

{e(a) + ypO[L-x(a)] -

([1 + b(1—yp)6Jx0

—

A(1-yp)X4

-

c'(a) + X[(1—b(1—yp))x

{bpO[L—(a)J —

k'(y)

+

Abpx

—

-o

—

c''(a)]}a

(2)

—

0

—0

(3)

(4)

where X, , and are the Lagrange multipliers associated with constraints (i), (ii), and (iii),
respectively and where

(a) -

fxdF(x,a)

with subscripts referring to partial differentiation with respect to a.

If b and y are positive in equilibrium, i.e., at least some of the loan is sold and a
partial guarantee is given, then equations (2) and (4) can be combined to yield the following
relation between the optimal choice of b and 'y:
b — (k'(y)+e)(l—yp)
p(OL- J.L)

In addition, using the functional form c(a) = ca assumed in (A2), we can substitute the

incentive compatibility constraint, (i), into equation (3) to eliminate c. The resulting

15

expression can be used to eliminate X in equation (2). This allows us to obtain the
relationship between the bank's optimal share of the loan to sell and its optimal level of
monitoring, given a partial guarantee of y.
O[x(a) + yp(L-x(a))]

b-

—

—

(1- yp)[_——(1 —yp)(l +O)+O[x(a)+yp(L—x(a))] — .i./L]

(6)

L1aa

The

equilibrium relations in (5) and (6) will provide the basis of our first set of

empirical tests. However, as currently written, equation (6) depends on the unobserved level

and derivatives of the expected return on the loan, x(a). These expressions can be replaced
by observable variables or estimable parameters. First, we can substitute for x(a) by noting
that it is directly related to the yield on the loan sold and the fraction of the loan guaranteed.

Since the continuously compounded yield on the loan sale, r, is given by:

r - .!1(!.)
r

(7)

1—1

where 1-I is the amount a loan buyer pays to purchase a share, b, of the loan such that the
buyer's expected return equals r1. Substituting for I from problem (1) into equation (7) and
rearranging, we obtain:
—

Tte_(t_t
1

Second,

—

-

in order to evaluate the ratio x/x1, we need to make an explicit assumption

16

regarding the effect of monitoring on a given loan's expected return. We assume the
parametric form"

x(a) - L(1

—

ae)

(9)

An implication of this function form is

-x/x - Lae - L - x(a)

(10)

This expression, as well as equation (8), can then be used to simplify equation (6) as follows.
—

b—

(11)
(1 —

yp)[l

+

— r1,

0

—

e

—

/L]

—

—

(1

Hence

—

yp)[r1

—

+

— r1

—

we see that when b is less than one, so that /L = 0, the fraction of the loan

sold is approximately proportional to the ratio of the excess cost of internal financing (over

the risk free rate) to the excess cost of internal financing plus the excess cost of funds

received from the loan sale. Thus for a given loan sale guarantee, if the equilibrium yield on
the loan sale greatly exceeds the risk free rate, the bank will be selling a smaller fraction of
the loan it originates.

"The parameters a and are assumed to be positive and loan specific. The parameter a
is also assumed to be less than unity. Note that if no monitoring is done, the expected return

is L(1-a). The parameter 13 is a measure of the marginal increase in expected return on the loan
from additional monitoring. The assumed function implies that as the level of monitoring rises
to infinity, the expected return on the loan asymptotes to the promised payment, L, with the
speed determined by the parameter 13.

17

Equations (11) and (5) are two conditions that define relationships between the bank's

optimal choice of b and -y. Given a parametric assumption regarding the guarantee cost
function, k(-y), in equation (5), the equilibrium values of b and -y can be determined.

However, if one assumes that the bank is constrained to give the jj partial guarantee, -y,
for all the loans it sells, then equation (11) is sufficient to determine the bank's optimal share

of each loan sold given this guarantee. We illustrate this point in the first part of the next
section.

IV. A Test of Implicit Guarantees on Loan Sales
The first of our empirical tests will make the assumption that the loan selling bank has a
policy of making an identical implicit (partial) guarantee, -y, for each loan that it sells.

Later, we will change this assumption to allow the bank to optimize over the value of -y so
that it will make different implicit guarantees on each loan sold.

A) Equal Guarantees on All Loan Sales
If the loan selling bank's partial guarantee, -, is the same for each loan, then it can be
treated as a parameter and estimated using a relationship similar to equation (11). As a
means of empirically implementing our model, we assume that the natural logarithm of the

proportion of a loan sold equals the natural logarithm of the right hand side of equation (11)

plus a normally distributed error term. Our hope is that this error term can capture the
influence of missing factors, assumed to be uncorrelated with the right hand side of (11), that

determine the proportion of each loan sold. Because the natural log of the fraction of the
loan sold, b, has a range between minus infinity and zero, equation (11) with an appended

error describes a Tobit model. Defining b1* as a latent variable for loan sale i, and b,

18

as the observed variable (fraction sold) for loan sale i, we have:

ln(b1*)

- fl[ ee -(r-rt

- hi(lyp) +

•

+

(l2a)

1

b1—b,*

if

—

N(m,a). Since the fraction of the loan sold, b,, can at most be one, so that

1n(b) can at most be zero, the Tobit model is censored at b1 =

1.

Therefore, the likelihood

function is given by'2

In(b1)-m-z.)11
N(.ff_L)
a
a
b1—I

b,<i a

where

(13)

is the standard normal probability density function.

Recall that 0 = exp[(r, - r1)r} -

1,

so that the right hand side of (12a) is a function of r,,

the weighted average cost of deposit and equity finance, which is assumed to be the marginal

cost of the bank's internal financing. If the bank's equity capital constraint isbinding, r,
takes the form'3

r — rj(l—t) + Cr4

l+((l—p)

12 For example, see Maddala (1983) chapter 6.
'3See Pennacchi (1988) for the simple derivation

(14)

19

where r is the cost (yield equivalent) of equity finance, r is the cost of deposit finance, t is
the corporate tax rate,

is the bank's maximum debt-equity ratio, and p is the required

reserve ratio on deposits. Our empirical work assumes a corporate tax rate, t, of 34%.
Also, since most money center banks were very close to their maximum capital to asset ratio

of six percent at the time that these loan sales were made, we assume .06

11(1 -

The bank's marginal cost of deposit funds is assumed to equal the LIBOR yield having the

same maturity as the loan, a measure that was provided to us along with the loan sales data.
Since LIBOR is a nearly risk-free market rate, we assume it is equivalent to the quantity r in

our model. The bank's effective reserve requirement on deposits, p, is assumed to be three
percent, the amount of reserves required on non-personal time deposits such as large

Certificates of Deposit. The bank's cost of equity funds. r,, is probably the most difficult
rate to recover. In our empirical work, we make alternative assumptions that it equals the
risk free rate, rf, or a constant spread over the risk free rate, where this spread or "bank
equity premium" is assumed to be .07, approximately the average difference between the rate

of return on S&P 500 stocks and Treasury bills.
The method of computing the bank's solvency probability, p, is outlined in the Appendix.
It is computed in a manner similar to the analysis of Gorton and Pennacchi (1989) who show

how the risk of the bank can be inferred from bank stock prices.
The estimation of the Tobit model in equation (12) was carried out by nesting it in the
following more general model:

In(b.) — a0 + a1ln[

]
1+0 —e

a2ln(1—yp)

+

20

Equation (12) restricts a0=0, a1=1, and a2=-1. The results of estimating equation (15) is
given in Table 5.
Table 5 presents parameter estimates under the hypothesis that the bank makes the same

level of guarantee, y, on all loans sold. Columns (1) through (3) give estimates of the Tobit
model specified in equation (12) assuming that the cost of bank equity, re, equals the risk

free rate, r. In columns (1) and (5) we restrict the constant term to have a zero mean, while
in column (3) 'y (and a2) was restricted to equal zero, as would be the case if no implicit

guarantee was given by the bank to loan buyers. In each of the first three columns, the
estimated value of a1 was approximately 0.6. Its standard error implies that it is significantly
different from zero at the 10% level, and one can not reject the hypothesis that it equals its

theoretical value of one. However, in each of the cases in which estimates were obtained for
y and a2, their standard errors were very large, implying that they were not significantly
different from zero. In the fourth and fifth columns of Table 5, the model was re-estimated
assuming that the bank equity premium was 7 per cent. Whether the error term in the model
was assumed to equal zero (column 4) or not (column 5) did not appear to make much of a
qualitative difference. In each case the parameter estimate of a1 was approximately 1.3 and
significantly different from zero at the 10% level, but not significantly different from its

theoretical value of one. However, as in the case when the equity premium was assumed to
be zero, the estimated values of y and a2 have such large standard errors, that one cannot
reject the hypothesis that they equal zero.
In summary, the results of this section's tests provide some evidence that the bank
retains a fraction of the loans it originates in the same manner that would be predicted from

our optimizing model. However, under the assumption that the bank offers the same level of

21

an implicit guarantee on each loan that it sells, we find no significant evidence that any

guarantee is being given. We now consider the case in which the bank is assumed to
possibly give a different level of implicit guarantee on each loan it sells.

B) Different Guarantees on Loan Sales
When the bank is assumed to be able to commit to different levels of implicit guarantees
on the different loans that it sells, it will optimize using equation (5) in addition to equation

(11). Using equation (5) to substitute for (l-yp) in equation (11), and rearranging, one
obtains:

k'(y) +

b2p(OL)[18_et_l.LIL]

—

Oe

(16)

—

To solve for the optimal level of the loan guarantee as a function of the loan sold, we need

to specify the form of the marginal guarantee cost, k'('y), on the left hand side of (16).
Since a necessary condition for an interior solution is that the cost function be convex, we
assume a simple quadratic form, k(-y) =

k0

+ k1y +

Solving for 'y in equation (16)

then gives:

-[

b2p(8L_)(1+O_e

OeTthT

TPt) -

-

1/k2

(17)

—

Under the assumption that the optimal level of the loan guarantee is strictly less than 1,

so that can be assumed to equal zero for all loans, we can transform equation (11) along
with equation (17) into a Tobit model. The transformation is again that of equation (12)

above, except that 'y on the right hand side of (12a) can be replaced with its optimal level

given by equation (17). However, since y is a function of b2, b will appear on the right
hand side of equation (12a) as well as on the left hand side. In principle, this equation could
be solved for b in terms of the other variables and parameters, but this involves solving a
cubic equation in b. This would make estimation of the parameters k4 and k2 rather difficult,
since the roots of this equation would be a mixture of real and complex numbers depending

on the parameter values. However, Tobit model estimates of the cost function parameters

can still be obtained without uniquely solving for b. This can be done by using only those

observations for which b is strictly less than 1. (Note i will equal zero.) In this case the
latent variable is always observed, i.e., b,=b,*. Therefore, this model can be estimated as a
standard Tobit model that is truncated (both z, and b1 are unobserved) at ln(bJ=0. The
results of carrying out this estimation is given in Table 6.

Of the 872 loan sales observations in our sample, 360 of these were sales in which the

originating bank retained a positive share of the loan, i.e., 0< b < 1. This subset of
observations was used to produce the estimates in Table 6, where column (1) provides
estimates assuming a zero bank equity premium, and column (2) provides estimates assuming

a 7 percent bank equity premium. The size of the assumed equity premium does not appear
to affect the qualitative results. Basically, all of the relevant parameter estimates have large

standard errors, so that none are significantly different from zero. Hence, these results
provide no evidence of any implicit bank guarantees.

If we use the point estimates for k1 and k2 given in Table 6, we can calculate the
implied value of the bank's implicit guarantee for each observation using equation (17).

Summary statistics of these calculations are given at the bottom of Table 6. What we find is
that the implied levels of implicit guarantees are all negative. When a zero equity premium

23

is assumed, the average value of 'y is -5.34 1. For a 7 percent equity premium. 'y averages .348. Of course, since the point estimates for k1 and k2 have such large standard errors,

these implied values of provide little or no information about bank behavior. Hence the
results of this section's empirical tests provide no indications of the implicit mechanisms used
to market loans.

V. Technolo2ical Progress and Tests of Observabilitj
The previous tests provide little evidence that loan buyers expect to receive implicit
guarantees by the loan selling bank. However, there is some weak evidence that the

proportion of the loan retained by the originating bank contributes, at least partially, to

incentive compatibility. Still, it appears that there is sufficient scope for an alternative
(perhaps complementary) explanation for the emergence of this market.

A critical assumption of the model presented above is that loan buyers could make the

loan selling bank commit to some level of guarantee or force the bank to retain a portion of

the loan. But, as mentioned earlier, there is nothing in the participation contract which
explicitly states that the loan selling bank is committing to give a guarantee or that the bank

is restricted from selling the entire loan. Hence, it is not apparent how either of these
implicit mechanisms could be enforced. Since these implicit contractual features would
require market forces to insure the loan selling bank's commitment, the possibility of a
change in contracting technology that now makes this possible must be considered.

Various sources of indirect evidence suggest that significant changes affecting the

underlying contracting technology have occurred. While it is difficult to measure precisely,
the tremendous advances in computer technology and telecommunications during the past two

decades have undoubtedly led to a drastic reduction in the cost of gathering, analyzing, and

24

transmitting information. This is not to say that this lower cost of collecting and
disseminating information has reduced information asymmetries between all borrowers and

investors in the economy by equal amounts. One would expect that institutional investors
who acquired the necessary computer and telecommunications technologies would have

benefitted more than most individual investors. Intermediaries such as commercial banks,
thrifts, mutual funds, insurance companies, and pension funds were likely to be most affected
by this technological progress, in part because they were positioned to benefit by economies
of scope from investing in computers and telecommunications. Computer and
telecommunications systems are vital to lowering the cost of banks' and thrifts' transactions

services, the cost of mutual funds' servicing of shareholder's accounts, the cost of insurance
companies' accounting and analysis of customers' risks, and the cost of pension funds'
servicing their participants' accounts.

A) Informal Evidence of Technploicpl Change
If institutional investors have benefitted most from technologies that have reduced

information costs, one would expect that they should hold a large proportion of those assets

where information acquisition would be critical to valuation. High yield bonds or "junk"

bonds are assets that would appear to fit into this category. The junk bond market grew
dramatically during the 1980s. Prior to 1981, annual new issues were less than $1.5 billion,
but peaked to over $30 billion new issues in 1986, and settling in the range of $25 to $30

billion through the end of the decade)4 Importantly, as of year end 1988, three quarters of
the stock of junk bonds were held by insurance companies, money managers, mutual funds,

'4See Becketti (1990) for more description of recent developments in the junk bond market.

25

or pension funds. Individual investors owned only 5 percent of the stock of junk bonds.15

Given that financial institutions have invested relatively greater amounts in information
technology and have therefore experienced relatively greater reductions in information costs,

what effect would this have on bank lending? First, if other financial institutions can directly
acquire information about borrowers at low cost, there should be less need for banks to
provide information production and monitoring services for many borrowers. Banks'
comparative advantage in eliminating duplication of information services or free-riding

problems by multiple investors is likely to be reduced when these multiple investors have low

costs of information acquisition. Therefore, if regulations such as reserve and capital
requirements increase the costs of funds of banks who already must pay competitive rates for
deposit and equity financing, these banks would become uncompetitive as a source of

financing for many borrowers. The previously mentioned growth in the junk bond market
might reflect this phenomenon. There is also evidence that banks' comparative advantage

has been reduced even more at the other end of the debt risk spectrum. The ratio of
nonbank commercial paper to banks' commercial and industrial loans rose from less than 10

percent in 1959 to over 75 percent in 1989, indicating a migration of large and medium sized
corporations from bank financing to publicly issued securities.'6
Second, even if many financial institutions could not directdy acquire information about

certain classes of borrowers at low cost, they may be able to inexpensively ver,fy the
information collected by another bank regarding these borrowers. Hence we might expect
that individual financial institutions could verify the accurate production of credit information

'5These figures are from U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (1990). For purposes
of comparison, statistics from the Federal Reserve Bulletin show that individual investors held
more that 10% of all outstanding Treasury securities as of year-end 1988.
'6See Gorton and Pennacchi (1990A,B) for the theoretical rationale and empirical evidence
of a shift from bank financing to direct financing.

26
and monitoring by a bank wishing to sell a single loan that it has originated. This would
explain the ability of banks to sell single commercial and industrial loans to other institutions.

To take this idea a step further, if we make the logical assumption that banking institutions,

being in the same line of business as a loan selling bank, are able to verify the credit analysis
and monitoring of the loan selling bank at lower cost than nonbank financial institutions, this
would explain why over three-fourths of loan buyers are other banks.

B) An Empirical Test of Observability in the Loan Sales Market
A final test is performed that provides some evidence of the ability of loan buyers to

verify the monitoring performance of a loan selling bank. Recalling the model described in
the previous section, note that the incentive compatibility constraint, equation 1(i), makes the
assumption that the bank's level of monitoring is not directly observable by the loan buyer.

If monitoring were observable, the bank and loan buyer could contract to set the level of
monitoring at its most efficient level, namely the level which would satisfy equation 1(i)

where b=O, i.e., the level of monitoring the bank would choose if it had not sold the loan.
Therefore, the possibility of the loan buyers having the ability to verify the loan selling
bank's performance produces the following effect.

xa—

C

, if monitoring unobserved.

- c, if monitoring observed.

(1 8a)

(18b)

This suggests that a direct empirical test of the incentive compatibility constraint might be

able to shed light on the question of whether or not bank monitoring of borrowers is

observable by loan buyers. If we again assume the functional form given by equation (8),

27
we find that

-

(19)

1- yp

Substituting equation (19) into equation (18a) and rearranging, we arrive at

13

-

(20)

(l_ett) 1b(lyp)

The left hand side of equation (20) equals the loan specific parameter i which is a

measure of a given loan's benefit from greater monitoring. On the left hand side are two
multiplicative ratios. The first, which is independent of the fraction of the loan sold. b. and
the fraction of the loan guaranteed, y, is the relationship between the loan sale yield, r15, and

3 that would hold if monitoring were observable. The second term on the right hand side
denotes the effect of unobservability. We propose to test the relationship given in equation

(20) using the borrower's commercial paper rating as an instrument for 3. The empirical
relationship that we test is in the following log form:

ln(131) —

a1ln[

C

a2ln[

l—b(1—yp)

]

v1

(21)

where a1 is a parameter that should equal 1 if the model is correctly specified, a, is a
parameter that should equal 1 if monitoring is unobservable and should equal 0 if monitoring

is observable, and v is assumed to be a normally distributed, independent error term.
Equation (21) was estimated as a probit model using 334 of the 872 loan sale
observations for which the borrower reported a commercial paper rating. The borrowe(s

28

commercial paper rating was assumed to be a discrete measure of the its benefit from bank

monitoring. It was assumed that the fraction of the loan guaranteed (if any) was the same
for all loan sales. so that 'y was treated as a parameter.

The results of this estimation are given in Table 7. Column (1) gives estimates of the
parameters in equation (21) while column (2) does the same but restricts a2 and y to equal

zero. In either case, the estimate of a1 is of the correct sign and significantly different from
zero. However, it is also significantly different from its theoretical value of 1. suggesting
some degree of model misspecification. In column (1), the estimated value of y seems
reasonable, but the estimate of a2 is of the wrong sign. Both estimates have huge standard

errors, so that they are not significantly different from zero. Hence, the results present no
evidence of unobservability in monitoring. Perhaps the significant sign of the coefficient a
might suggest that the monitoring of the loan selling bank is partially observable to loan
buyers.

VI. Concluding Remarks
To investigate the possibility of implicit features combined in commercial and industrial
loan sale contracts, we specified and estimated an optimizing model of bank and loan buyer

behavior. Our empirical tests required making assumptions on the specific form of the
bank's monitoring technology and the form of the bank's expected cost of giving implicit
guarantees. Whether or not these functional forms are reasonable approximations of reality

is difficult to verify. However, if these assumptions can be trusted, our results indicate that
there is little reason to believe that the bank selling the loans in our sample is giving implicit
guarantees to loan buyers. This conclusion is invariant to the alternative initial assumption
that the bank makes equal guarantees or different guarantees on the loans it sells.

29
The equilibrium behavior of the fraction of the loan sold by the bank is somewhat

consistent with our model. Assuming the bank gives no guarantees on loans sold, our results
are in general agreement with the model's implication that the share of the loan sold is a
decreasing function of the spread between the loan sale yield and LIBOR. This is evidence
that certain types of loans may not be perfectly liquid, but that the bank must continue to
convince loan buyers of its commitment to monitoring borrowers by taking a share of the

loan's risk.
Technological change appears to have played an important role in the opening of the

loan sales market. Our tests suggest that the monitoring of borrowers by the loan selling
bank may now be observable by loan buyers. While this development is not yet wellunderstood, it would seem to have an important impact on the way banking is conducted.
The existence of well-functioning markets for bank assets, like those which appear to

be developing, does not mean that intermediation per se is ending. All the explanations for
loan sales considered above imply that banks still offer services for certain classes of
borrowers that cannot be obtained in capital markets via issuance of open market

securities.7 The loan sales contracts mean, however, that it is no longer necessary for
banks to hold loans until maturity, risking their equity during the life of the asset created.
If bank loans can be sold in fairly liquid markets, then the rationale for bank regulation
is called into question since it is fundamentally based on the illiquidity of bank assets.
Deposit insurance was, at least originally, aimed at providing the public with a circulating
medium which did not expose people to losses either due to better informed traders or

because of banking panics. If markets for bank assets open, the market incompleteness
'7There is, however, abundant evidence that the demand for bank provision of these services
has fallen. The rise of the commercial paper market and the medium term note market suggest

that the same technological forces which make loan sales feasible have allowed directly
marketable instruments to compete more effectively with bank loans.

30

necessitating government intervention would seem to be gone. While the loan sales market is
sizeable, it is by no means clear that the requisite volume of bank assets are marketable.

31

Appendix
This appendix outlines the method used to calculate the bank's solvency probability, p.
Similar to Marcus and Shaked (1984), we assumed that the equilibrium value of bank equity
can be modeled as a Black-Scholes call option:
—

a1N(d1)

—

N(d2)

(A.1)

where ; is the market value of bank equity per dollar of bank liabilities, a, is the market
value of bank assets per dollar or bank liabilities, and d1 and d2 equal:

d1-

In(a)+ 1/202t

oV

e, d2—d1-o/ç

(A.2)

where .2 is the variance of the rate of return on bank assets and r is the time until the next

bank examination. Given the value of bank equity in (A.1), Ito's lemma implies that the
instantaneous standard deviation of the rate of return on bank equity, a, is given by:

-

cja1N(d1)

(A.3)

aN(d1)-N(d2)

We used a time series of daily values of; as well as an estimate of the standard deviation of
the rate of return on equity, a, computed over the period January 1987 through September
1988, to infer daily values of a, and a. This was done by numerically solving the nonlinear
system of equations (A. 1) and (A.3).

Given that we now had an estimate of the bank's market value of assets to liability ratio
for any date between January 1987 and September 1988, we could compute the probability at

32

the time that a loan was sold that the bank would remain solvent until the loans maturity
date. This was done by making the (risk-neutral) assumption that the expected rate of return

on bank assets and liabilities were both equal to the risk free rate. Taking the (theoretically
constant) value of a to be the average of our estimates, then the probability of the bank's

solvency at date t+r given that its asset to liability ratio equals a at date t is:

p-N(

ln(a) — 1/za2t
)

(A.4)

33

References
Amemiya, Takeshi (1985), Advanced Econometrics, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
Mass.

Becketti, Sean (1990), "The Truth about Junk Bonds," Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Economic Review 75(4), 45-54.
Benveniste, Lawrence, and Allen Berger (1987), "Securitization With Recourse: An
Investment that Offers Uninsured Bank Depositors Sequential Claims." Journal of
Banking and Finance 11, 403-24.

Boyd, John. and Edward Prescott (1986), "Financial Intermediary-Coalitions," Journal of
Economic Theory 38, 211-32.
Boyd, John, and Bruce Smith (1989), "Securitization and the Efficient Allocation of
Investment Capital," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. Working Paper 408.
Campbell, Tim. and William Kracaw (1980), "Information Production, Market Signalling
and the Theory of Financial Intermediation," Journal of Finance XXV(4) (September).
863-8 1.

Cumming, Christine (1987), "The Economics of Secuntization,' Federal Reserve Bank of
New York Ouarterly Review (Autumn), 11-23.
Diamond, Douglas (1984), "Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring," Review of
Economic Studies LI.
Diamond, Douglas, and Philip Dybvig (1983), "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance and
Liquidity," Journal of Political Economy 9(13).
Flannery, Mark (1989), "Capital Regulation and Insured Banks' Choice of Individual Loan
Default Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics 24, 235-58.
Gorton. Gary (1989), "Self-Regulating Bank Coalitions," The Wharton School, University of
Pennsylvania, Working Paper.
____________ (1985), "Bank Suspension of Convertibility," Journal of Monetary Economics
15(2).

Gorton, Gary and Joseph Haubrich (1989), "The Loan Sales Market," Research in Financial
Services, edited by George Kaufman, forthcoming.
____________ (1987), "Bank Deregulation. Credit Markets and the Control of Capital.
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 26 (Spring).

Gorton, Gary and George Pennacchi (1989), Are Loan Sales Really Off-Balance Sheet?,'
Journal of Accounting. Auditing. and Finance 4(2), 125-145.

34

______________ (1990A), "Financial Intermediation and Liquidity Creation,' Journal of

Finance 45(1), 49-72
_____________ (1990B), "Financial Innovation and the Provision of Liquidity Services,"
Reform of Deposit Insurance and the Regulation of Depository Institutions in the
1990s, ed. by James Barth and Dan Brumbaugh, forthcoming.

Greenbaum, Stuart, and Anjan Thakor (1987), "Bank Funding Modes: Securitization versus
Deposits." Journal of Banking and Finance 11, 379-402.
Hart, Oliver, and Bengt Holmstrom (1986), "The Theory of Contracts,' Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Working Paper No. 418.
James. Christopher (1988), "The Use of Loan Sales and Standby Letters of Credit by
Commercial Banks," Journal of Monetary Economics 22, 395-422.
Kareken, John (1987), "The Emergence and Regulation of Contingent Commitment
Banking," Journal of Banking and Finance 11, 359-77.
Maddala. G.S. (1983), Limited-Dependent and Oualitative Variables in Econometrics,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.

Marcus, Alan, and Israel Shaked (1984), "The Valuation of FDIC Deposit Insurance Using
Option-Pricing Estimates," Journal of Money. Credit, and Banking 16, 446-60.
Pennacchi, George (1988), "Loan Sales and the Cost of Bank Capital," Journal of Finance
43, 375-95.
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (1990), "Recent Developments in the High Yield
Market," Staff Report, March.

Table 1
Quarterly Outstanding Loan Sales of Commercial Banks*
(S billions)
Date

Loan Sales

1953Q2
Q3

26.7
26.8

Q4

291

19S4Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4

32.8

1985Q1

54.6

—

Q2

—

Q3
Q4

59.9
77.5
75.7

1986Q1

65.4

—

Q2
Q3
Q4

81.2
91.3
111.8

—

19S7Q1

Q2
Q3

162.9
195.2
188.9

Q4

198.0

1988Q1

16.64

Q4

236.3
248.4
263.0
286.8

1089Q1

2727

16.16

Q2
Q3
Q4

276.5

2909

1820
1782

25.7

199

1k90Q1

2283

1607

19(12

I 91

Q2
QJ

33.3
35.5

50.2

Loan Purchases
—
—

—

-

—
—

—

-

19.29

Saies re; ort ed are gro and exclude sales of oI iu ii r loans aid nor t gao

loans. A iso excitidtd ar loans subject to rel.urcli agreements or ' it Ii
recourse to the seller

Source FD]C Ca/I J pei-is Scheduk I.

Tab) 2
Description of Data

..

Minimum

Maximum

2S.04

2245

LOU

277.0

27.63

22.44

1.00

277.0

3) Fraction U] Loan Sold

0.76

0.30

0.09

1,00

4) LIBOR Ratc
5) Loan Slc Raic

7.29

0.57

6.19

8.75

41

(1.59

6.28

9.12

6 Loan ijtc

7,53

0.61

6.25

9.18

0.00

0.0171

Vanahl

1ean

1) Maturity of ihc Loan (days)
2) Matuniy of ih Loan Sa]c (das)

7) Probahduv of BarJ Fa:lur

0,0C0047

Standard

De iation

0.000625

Sample Period: January 20. 1987 - Scptmbcr ]. 1988.
Number of Observations: 872.

Source: Moncy Centcr Bank.

Table 3

Summary of the Data: Loan Sales Size, Rating, and Maturity

Rating

Avg. Si z e of Loan Sale

0—5

6—15

5.0
1

Maturity (days)
16—30

31—60

61—90

5.0

25.0

28.3

41.2

0

1

1

(Smillions)

Number of Observations
of All Observatons
% of Observations of

Al
Avg. Si ze of Loan Sale

9Q±

9

3

1

1.0

.3

4.8

.1
.3

7.9

4.9

8.1

0
0
0

28.8

25.8

29.1

35.6

0

8.2

8

34

38.1

3.9
11.6

27
3.1
8.6

20
2.3
10.8

0
0
0

3

.9

13.6

15.8

13.6

12.9

20.4

21.6

19.2

3

41

73

64

.3

4.7

9
1.0

14.0

7.4
34.6

18
2.1

14.3

8.4
23.2

48.6

40.9

0

11.7

15.9

18.8

20.0

0

0
0
0

3
3

8
9

4

1

.1

1.0

25

.5
2.2

2.7

0
0
0

16.1

11.0

13,4

18.9

15.8

14.9

9

210

206

88

15

10

1.0
42.9

24.1
71.9

23.6
65.4

10.1

1.7

11

47.6

40.5

45 5

1

Same Maturity

($rnillions)

Number of Observations
% of All Observations
% of Ob s er v at ions of

Same Maturity

.3

A2

Avg. Si ze of Loan Sale

(Smillions)

Number of Observations
% of All Observations
% of Observations of

Same Maturity
A3

Avg. Si ze of Loan Sale

(Smillions)

Number of Observations
9' of All Observations

% of Observations of
Same Maturity
NR

Avg. Si ze of Loan Sale

(Smillions)

Number of Observations
% of All Observations
of Ob s er v at ions of

Same Maturity

Thble

Summary of the Data: Yield Spreads (in basis points) and Fraction of Loan Sold

Rating

RLS — RLJBOR

basis pt.

—

RLIBOR basis pts
Average Fraction Sold
Number of Observations

0-5

6-

Maturity (days)
16-30
31-60

61—90

— .5

—20

—7.0

.4

— 3.3

—65

00

—5.0

18.6

60.8

1

1
1

1

1

1

.843
9

556

3

9.Q±

0
0

Al
RLS — RLIBOR basis pts.

3.9

—1.4

— 3.5

RLIBOR basis pts.
Average Fraction Sold
Number of Observations

12.4

2.9

8.9

.917

.867

.746

8

34

27

RB —

A2
RLS — RLIBOR basis pts.
RB —

RLJBOR basis pts.

Average Fraction Sold
Number of Observations

1.9
1.8
.455
20

—
—

6.0
30.4
1

0

3

4.8

4.7

3.1

5.8

10.5

12.7

5.1

6.2

9.1

18.4

23.1

22.9

.733

.826

.600

41

.810
73

.746

3

64

18

—

17.5

12.7

12.0

17.5

—

22.8

15.7

14.6

25.0

.608
9

A3

RLIBOR basis pts.
RB — RLIBOR basis pts.
Average Fraction Sold
Number of Observations
RLS —

—

.778

.771

0

3

8

8.3

18 0

15.8

16.1

17.1

17.7

35.2

31.4

31.1

26.7

30.3

51.0

.703
88

.707

.750

15

10

.625
4

1

0

NR

RLIBOR basis pts.
RB —
RLIBOR basis pts.
Average Fraction Sold
Number of Observations
RLS —

.889
9

.784
210

.738
206

Table 5

Parameter Estimates Assuming Bank Gives
Equal Guarantees on All Loan Sales

Dependent Variable: Log of Fraction of Loan Sold

Numher of Observations: 872

—

— -— r

--

.
j c_j''.
* fl
—

Tobit Model Parameter Estimates
(Standard Errors in Parentheses)

(1)

ep=0

(2)

(3)

(5)

(4)

ep = 0

ep=.07

10.1886

.83380

0

(2113.44)

(.10794)

ep=0

ep=.07

Parameters
0

a0

a1

.59463
(.34609)

a2

1.18385
(271.6884)

Y

.506687
(127.37)

Standard
Error
—

Log

1.69070
(.19195)

838.93

.60254
(.34447)

.59890
(.34416)

—5.59434
(2517.72)

0

.81218
(322.90)

0

1.68455

1.68499

(.19058)

838.88

(.19043)

838.93

10.57055
(2324.74)

1.31195
1.30229
(.78109) (.78073)

.50472 —6.06104
(25.881)

(2949.55)

.80840
(72.815)

.79941
(340.51)

1.68707
1.68745
(.19106) (.19113)

839.16

839.11

Like 1 ihood

Note: ep refers to the assumed equity premium used in computing
the excess cost of bank internal finance, 0.

Table 6

Parameter Est:iates Assuming Bank May Give
Different uarantees on Loan Sales

Dependent variable: Log of
NuJ7er

Fraction

of Loan Sold

of Observations: 60
=

a

rere y

ai I +—e
V

=

] - ein(:-y*p)

-

:L(8e'-'

__________________ - k.1

+

X

0e

Tobit

Model Parameter Estimates
(Standard Errors in Parentheses)
(1)

Parameters

ep=0
—.53355
(3.87253)

a0

.00326
(.02547)

a1

(2)

ep=.07
—

.70868

(5.35174)

—.00702
(.05358)

.26724
(1.36110)

(7.47424)

Regulatory Cost
Parameter k.

.01028
(.06360)

.00685
(.09711)

Regulatory Cost

Parameter k

.00191
(.00130)

.01914
(.16057)

Standard
Error

.16955
(.00134)

.16883
(.00137)

a2

—

Log Likelihood

—7631.58

1.08310

—7627.73

Note: ep refers to the assumed equity premium used in computing
the excess cost of bank internal finance, 0.
Values of Loan Sale Guara—tees Implied by k1 and k2 Estimates

Mean of Sample
Standard Deviation
Minimum

—5.341

—.348

.053

.011

—5.385

—.358

—4.938

—.270

