                    NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




                    THE INCIDENCE OF MANDATED
                   EMPLOYER—PROVIDED INSURANCE:
           LESSONS FROM WORKERS' COMPENSATION INSURANCE




                         Jonathan Gruber
                         Alan B. Krueger




                      Working Paper No. 3557




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December 1990




We are grateful to David Bradford, Dan Feenberg, Jim Hines, Larry
Katz, Nancy Rose, Larry Summers, and seminar participants at the
NBER and Harvard Labor Seminar for helpful comments, to John F.
Burton, Jr. for providing unpublished data on workers'
compensation insurance rates, and to Doug Hendrickson for
assistance with data entry. Gruber acknowledges a Sloan Doctoral
Dissertation Fellowship, and Krueger acknowledges financial
support from an NBER Olin Fellowship. The data and computer
programs used in the preparation of this paper are available on
request to the authors. This paper is part of NBER's research
programs in Labor Studies and Tax. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3557
                                        December 1990


          THE INCIDENCE OF MANDATED EMPLOYER-PROVIDED
      INSURANCE: LESSONS FROM WORKERS' COMPENSATION INSURANCE

                             7BSTRACT

     Workers' compensation insurance provides cash payments and
medical benefits to workers who incur a work—related injury or

illness.   Many features of the workers' compensation program

parallel features of proposed mandated employer—paid health
insurance plans. This paper empirically examines the incidence of
the workers' compensation program to infer the likely consequences

of mandated health insurance proposals. In certain industries,
such as trucking and carpentry, workers' compensation insurance
costs are quite large, and vary tremendously within states over
time, and across states at a moment in time. This variation is
used to identify the incidence of the program. Empirical analysis
of two data sets suggest that changes in employers' costs of

workers' compensation insurance are largely shifted to employees
in the form of lower wages. In addition, higher insurance costs
are found to have a negative but statistically insignificant
effect on employment. The implied elasticity of labor demand from
our results is about —.50.



Jonathan Gruber                         Alan R. Krueger
NBER                                    Woodrow Wilson School
1050 Massachusetts Ave.                 Princeton University
Cambridge, MA 02138                      Princeton, NJ 08544
     There are two primary methods that a government can use to provide

universal access to a good or service: it can provide the good or service

directly, as in the case of public education and national parks, or it can

mandate that employers arrange for provision of the good or service for

their workers and dependents, as in the case of workers' compensation

insurance and certain pension safeguards. These two approaches may have

different implications for the efficiency and equity of a public program.

Interest in understanding the economic impact of employer mandates has

risen in recent years as several mandated employer-provided health

insurance proposals have gained support.

     An estimated 15.2 percent of Americans under age 65 (some 33 million
                                          1
people) lack health insurance coverage.       Bills that would requLre

employers to provide the uninsured with a minimum level of medical

insurance are currently pending before the Congress and many state

legislatures, and such legislation has already been enacted in Hawaii and

Massachusetts. These bills are markedly different from national health

insurance plans in most European countries, which are funded by general

revenues and administered directly by the state.

     Several factors explain the current political popularity of mandated

health insurance proposals. More than two-thirds of the uninsured are

full-time, full-year workers or are in families that are headed by a full-

time, full-year worker. Moreover, nearly 80 percent of those with medical

insurance already obtain their insurance from an employer-sponsored plan.2

Consequently, employer mandates have the potential to extend health


     1This estimate was calculated by the authors from the March 1989
Current Population Survey, and pertains to calendar year 1988.

     2These statistics are from Chollet (1987).
                                       2


insurance coverage to a large number of uninsured individuals without

radically restructuring the insurance industry. Furthermore, mandating

that employers provide health insurance for their workers is a way for the

government to expand health insurance coverage without raising taxes. This

feature of mandated benefits takes on added significance in an era of tight

budget constraints.

     Although the government may be able to shed responsibility for the

cost of providing health insurance in a mandated program, there may

nevertheless be substantial societal costs to such a program. In

particular, requiring employers to pay health insurance premiums may

increase the cost of hiring workers and result in lower employment.

Indeed, Dr. Lewis Sullivan, Secretary of Health and Human Services,

recently based his opposition to mandated health benefits on the

presumption that: "By adding overly burdensome mandates on business, we

could retard economic growth and constrict employment opportunities."3

     But will mandated health insurance dramatically reduce employment?

Traditional payroll tax incidence models suggest that some portion of the

rise in employer costs may be shifted to wages, mitigating the fall in

employment. And perhaps more importantly, if employees value health

insurance, the theory of compensating wage differentials suggests that

wages will fall even further than in the case of a pure payroll tax,

further reducing the employment decline. In equilibrium, if the value

employees place on health insurance is equivalent to the employers' costs

of providing insurance, wages will be reduced by the full cost of the

benefit and employment will be unchanged.


     3Quoted from The New York Times, July 24, 1990,   p. AlO.
     Although economic models provide a clear framework for analyzing the

impact of compulsory insurance, the available empirical evidence on the

tradeoff between fringe benefits and wages provides little evidence of wage

offsets. In fact, an impressive number of published papers report the

"wrong" signed coefficient in analyses of the wage-fringe benefit

relationship.4 More generally, the labor economics literature has been

largely unsuccessful in documenting consistent evidence of compensating

wage differentials for a variety of nonpecuniary factors, such as the risk

of unemployment and workplace hazards.0 The findings of this literature

challenge the view that the costs of mandated employer-provided health

insurance will be shifted to employees in the form of lower pay.

     Nevertheless, there are several reasons why the empirical evidence may

fail to find evidence of a tradeoff between fringe benefits and wages even

if such a tradeoff exists. First, available data sets do not permit

researchers to control for all aspects of worker productivity. This is a

problem because more productive employees may prefer to take their

compensation in the form of both higher wages and higher fringe benefits.

Second, most of the literature has examined fringe benefits that are

voluntarily chosen by employers and employees. With voluntary fringes, it

is difficult to identify exogenous variation in benefits that should induce

wage offsets. Finally, the studies that have examined the effect on wages

of mandated benefits (e.g. , unemployment insurance) are identified by

relatively small differences in program costs across states and over time.


     "A good example of this literature is Smith and Ehrenberg (1983).
Additional references are given in Section 2.

     5See Brown (1980) and Abowd and Ashenfelter (1981) for examples.
                                       4

As a result, any tradeoff between fringes and wages could easily be swamped

by greater variation in omitted, state-level factors, such as union power.

     This paper presents new evidence on the incidence of mandated

employer-provided insurance by examining the experience of the workers'

compensation insurance program. Workers' compensation laws require

employers to secure insurance to provide a minimum level of cash payments

and medical benefits in the event of work-related injuries and illnesses.

The laws are exclusively administered by the states, which leads to wide

variation in the generosity of the program across the states a: a point in

time, and within states over time. For example, the insurance rate in the

trucking industry in 1987 rarged from 3 percent of payroll in Indiana to 25

percent of payroll in Montana. We use two data sets to estimate the effect

of increases in workers' compensation costs on wages and employment.

Throughout much of the analysis we focus on five high-risk industries

(truck drivers, carpenters, plumbers, gasoline station employees, and

nonprofessional hospital employees) that have great cost variability.

     The structure of the workers' compensation program enables us to

overcome at least some of the limitations of the past literature. Firs:,

workers' compensation benefits are not voluntary fringe benefits. Second,

we test for insurance shifting in narrowly defined industries and

occupations, so bias due to omitted worker and job characteristics poses

less of a problem. Third, most of the analysis uses the wide variation in

the growth of insurance rates in states over a ten year period to identify

the extent of insurance rate shifting. We are aware of no other payroll

"tax" that varies as much across states or over time as workers'

compensation insurance rates.
                                       5


     Finally, we note that the workers' compensation insurance program has

much in common with proposed mandated health insurance schemes. In both

programs, employers are required to secure a minimum level of insurance for

their workers, and employers directly pay the insurance premiums.

Furthermore, a substantial component (over 35 percent of costs) of the

workers' compensation program is medical insurance for workplace injuries

and illnesses. Consequently, inferences drawn from the workers'

compensation program may be relevant for mandated health insurance.



I. Conceptual Framework and Institutional Analysis

     Summers (1989) argues that, because of wage offsets, the incidence and

welfare costs of employer mandated benefits are different from that of a
                                                                          6
pure payroll tax which is used to finance public provision of benefits.

The basic point of his argument is illustrated in Figure l. The

imposition of an employer mandate will shift the labor demand curve

downward (from DD to D'lD') and, with a fixed labor supply schedule,

employment would fall from     to    and wages from    to W1. However, if

workers value the benefit which they are receiving, labor supply will shift

outwards, and employment will fall by a lesser amount (to      in Figure 1),

whereas wages will fall by an even greater amount (to U2). Thus, wage

offsets in response to mandated benefits have the potential to reduce the




     6Danzon (1989) provides a related analysis, which also nodels the
impact of heterogeneous workers and considers the general equilibrium
implications.

     7We have drawn the labor supply curve assuming the substitution effect
dominates the income effect in the relevant range.
                                                   6

labor cost increases created by mandated benefits.8

       Formally, suppose that labor demand (Ld) is given by:


(1)      Ld —          + C)


and further suppose that labor supply (L) is given by:


(2)      L — f(W       + aC)


where C is the cost of mandated health insurance, oC is the monetary value

that employees place on health insurance, and ¶J is the wage rate. Using

this notation it can easily be shown that:
                            d          s

(3)      —
         dW

         dC
              —
                        r


                            d      s


where 1d and          are the elasticities of demand for and supply of labor,

respectively. From equation (3) it is clear that if c equals one, wages

would fall by the full cost of the mandated benefit. In this situation,

the employer's cost of providing the mandated benefit would be fully

shifted to employees. On the other hand, if employees place no value on

mandated health insurance, which is the case if a — 0, the incidence of

mandated health insurance is exactly analogous to that of a payroll tax.

      As explained below, we rely on inter-state differences in workers'

compensation costs across industrial groups over a ten-year time period in

our empirical work.             If, as seems likely, workers are mobile across states

and/or industries over this time horizon, ,                will   be quite large.   In the


     8As Summers notes, this analysis must be construed differently for
health care benefits, which are fixed with respect to hours of (full.time)
work, and for other types of benefits. This does not affect the analysis
as long as one assumes that employment, rather than hours, are represented
on the horizontal axis.
                                          7



limit, as        approaches infinity the proportion of costs that are shifted
to wages tends to a.

      The effect of mandating benefits on employment is:

        dL
(4)
        —    —
                            d
        L

which indicates that the amount of employment sacrificed because of

mandated health insurance is inversely related to the wage offset caused 5';

the provision of health insurance. Thus, we can summarize the labor market

effects of mandated benefits in terms of the elasticities of supply and

demand for labor, the cost of the benefit, and the fraction of that cost

that is valued by employees.



A. Previous Evidence

      What is the evidence for the shifting of employer benefit costs? A

large empirical literature addresses this question by estimating hedonic

labor market relationships (see Rosen, 1987 for a survey). However, past

efforts to find the expected negative coefficient on fringe benefits in

wage equations have been largely unsuccessful, as is discussed by Triplet:

(1983), Smith and Ehrenberg (1983), Leibowitz (1983) and Monheit, Hagan,

Serk and Farley (1985). Perhaps the failure to find a tradeoff between

fringe benefits and wages should not be surprising in view of the

difficulty establishing compensating wage differentials for a variety of

other nonwage aspects of work, including the risk of layoff. In fact, with

the notable exception of work fatalities, the labor economics literature

has not found consistent evidence of compensating wage differentials for

work disamenities (see Brown, 1981 and Smith, 1979).
                                      8

     One of the difficulties in interpreting this literature, however. is

that most studies of compensating differentials compare wages and working

conditions among workers in different occupations and industries. There is

nothing in the theory of compensating differentials to suggest that lawyers

should receive less generous fringe benefits than manual laborers because

of their higher wage. Indeed, if fringe benefits are a normal good, one

would expect higher-paid workers to take some of their compensation in the

form of better working conditions and fringe benefits. Nevertheless, the

past literature on compensating differentials should challenge researchers

to search for additional evidence before assuming that employee valuation

of fringe benefits will be reflected in the incidence of those benefits.

     Finally, we note that a related empirical literature has developed

within public finance attempting to measure the incidence of payroll taxes.

Unlike research on compensating differentials, most of this research is

based on time-series or cross-country data.   In an early cross-country

study, Brittain (1972) reports evidence which he interprets as showing

payroll taxes are fully offset by lower wages.9 In an analysis of an

unusual natural social experiment, Holmlund (1983) uses time-series data on

payroll taxes in Sweden to examine wage growth in a period when the payroll

tax increased from 14 percent to 40 percent. He estimates that roughly 50

percent of the employer payroll tax is shifted to wages in the short-run.

Finally, Hamermesh (1979) uses the variation in payroll tax rates due to

the social security payroll tax limit to estimate wage offsets; his


     9More specifically, Britain finds that capital's share does not
decline with the imposition of a payroll tax. See Feldstein (1972) for a
detailed critique of Brittain's work, in which he points out that
Brittain's test can be viewed simply as evidence that the gross wage equals
the marginal product of labor.
                                      9

estimates indicate that from 0 to 35 percent of the social security tax is

shifted to wagesJ°

     Although it would be desirable to have estimates of all of the

parameters in equation (3) to forecast the incidence of mandated insurance

benefits, in view of the past literature we have a more modest goal: We

simply would like to examine the empirical plausibility of wage offsets in

response to changes in the employers' cost of providing mandated benefits

in the workers' compensation insurance program. If the evidence suggests

that the employers' cost of providing workers' compensation insurance are

offset by lower wages, then the expectation that mandated health insurance

costs would be shifted to wages will be strengthened.



B. Description of Health Insurance Proposals

     The potential importance of cost shifting of mandated health benefits

is highlighted in Table 1, which summarizes several recent Federal and

state proposals to compel employers to provide health care benefits. The

Federal proposal (The Basic Health Benefits for All .Americans Act) would

mandate that all full-time workers have health insurance, with firms paying

at least 80 percent of the premiums.11 Similarly, the state proposals

include some employer costs, either through a strict provision mandate,

through a payroll tax, or through a "pay-or-play" plan. in which firms that

do not provide a certain minimum level of health care must pay the


     10Hamermesh's range of tax rates is from 0 to 5.85 percent. By
contrast, the range in workers' compensation insurance rates across states
in the industries we examine is from 3 to 26 percent of payroll.

            bill passed the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee, and
is currently being discussed, along with alternative proposals, by a
bipartisan Senate working group.
                                        10

 difference in the form of a payroll tax. For example, in Massachusetts,

 any firm that does not spend an average of 12 percent of the Medical

 Security Wage Base on employee health benefits must pay the difference it-ito

 a fund from which the state will purchase insurance for the uninsured.12

      Table 1 indicates that employers will nominally bear the cost of

providing health insurance for their employees according to the proposed

legislation in each state. In addition, many of the proposed laws would

use tax revenue generated by employer mandates to fund a larger universal

insurance system, which would extend coverage to uninsured individuals who

do not work. If the insurance provided Co nonemployed individuals is

commensurate with that provided through employment, the labor supply curve

depicted in Figure 1 would not shift. More generally, the extent the labor

supply curve shifts is inversely related to the quality of health insurance

provided to nonworkers.13

     The ultimate incidence of mandated employer-provided health insurance

plans is difficult to predict because of the modest experience with such

plans in the U.S. However, the structure of workers' compensation

insurance, which in many respects is similar to proposed health insurance

plans, provides an opportunity to estimate the actual incidence of mandated

employer-provided insurance.




            base is currently $14,000, and is indexed for medical inflation.

     13Notice also that as the quality of health insurance provided to
nonworkers improves, the relative efficiency gains of mandated benefits
vis-a-vis public provision, which Sujnnters (1989) emphasizes, declines.
                                      11

II. Workers' Compensation Insurance

     Workers' compensation insurance is the oldest and largest mandated

employer benefit program in the United States. In 1987 (the latest year

with available data) workers' compensation benefits totalled $27.4 billion,

and employer insurance costs equalled $38 billion.14 The structure of the

program allows for a test of the incidence of mandated benefits. Employers

are required to purchase insurance or self-insure to provide a minimum

level of cash benefits and medical care for workers who suffer a work-

related injury or illness. Employees are covered by workers' compensation

immediately upon being hired.

     The level of benefits that employers are required to provide varies

tremendously across states, and has increased substantially in many states

since the mid-1970sJ5 Table 2 documents the variability in workers'

compensation benefits for a sample of 10 states. In Indiana, for example,

an employee whose arm is permanently disabled in a work-related accident is

entitled to a maximum indemnity benefit of $27,450. The same injury in

Illinois qualifies for a maximum benefit that is more than five times as

generous ($142,112). Similarly, benefits for the other types of injuries

exhibit tremendous variability across states.

     In addition, although it is difficult to quantify, it is widely

believed that some states are more restrictive than others in permitting

certain kinds of claims. This is especially likely to be the case for back

injuries, which are difficult to diagnose objectively, and costly to


     14These statistics are fron Nelson (1987), Tables 1 and 7.

     15In large part, several states increased their workers' compensation
benefits in the l970s to conform with the recommendations of the National
Commission on Workmen's Compensation Laws.
                                      12

 treat.16 Finally, Some states require more generous medical benefits than

 others. For example, states vary in the extent of choice they allow

 employees over their treating physician.17

      In most states workers' compensation insurance rates are established

by a rating bureau. In principle, these rates are based on the actuarial

cost of workers' compensation insurance, which is the expected benefit paid

to each injury times the probability that a worker will incur each type of

injury. A different rate is established for several hundred detailed

industrial/occupational groups, known as activities. In 36 states, a

national rate-making organization known as the National Council on

Compensation Insurance (NCCI) pools information on risks and proposes rates

for each activity. Several other states follow procedures that are similar

to the NCCI. The rates adopted by the states are known   as   "manual" rates.

     Manual rates are the initial rate posted to firms, but they are not

the actual, bottom line cost of insurance in many cases. For many

employers manual rates are adjusted in response to the specific firm's

loss experience (e.g., experience rating), dividends are paid by insurance

companies, and large firms may be retrospectively rated.18 ?ecause manual

rates and the bottom line insurance costs are highly correlated, manual


     16Je also note that there is variability across states in the waiting
period required before benefit payments commence, and in the retroactive
period upon which benefits are paid retroactively to compensate for the
waiting period.

     17See Boden and Fleishman (1990) for an analysis of interstate
differences in medical costs in workers' compensation insurance.

     18The rate making process is described in detail in Burton, Hunt, and
Krueger (1985). Although on net experience rating hardly changes the
average cost of workers' compensation insurance in a state, the other
rating devices tend to reduce employers' costs, on average.
                                       13

rates provide a reasonable approximation of the actuarial cost of benefits

for each activity.19 Furthermore, unlike in unemployment insurance, there

is no cross-industry subsidization in workers' compensation rates.

     Table 3 summarizes the inter-state variability in workers'

compensation rates for 47 states with comparable rating systems in 1987.20

The table focuses on five activities that are the focus of our empirical

analysis on premium shifting (carpenters, gasoline station workers,

nonprofessional hospital employees, plumbers, and truck drivers).21 These

activities were selected because they comprise a large sample of workers in

most states, and because they concord well with the occupational and

industry definitions used by the Census Bureau. Furthermore, we selected

these activities because work-injury rates are high in these jobs. For

example, Table 3 shows that one in twenty truck drivers receives workers'

compensation in a year, as opposed to less than one in fifty workers in all

jobs. Because work injuries are a prominent feature of employment in these

jobs, it is more likely that workers will be aware of their benefits under

workers' compensation insurance and that the cost of providing these

benefits will be shifted onto wages.

     Table 4 further illustrates the variability in insurance costs by

listing the manual rates for truck drivers in each state in 1978 and 1987.


     19For example, the correlation between the average manual rate in a
state and the average manual rates adjusted to reflect dividends,
experience rating. premium discounts, rate deviations is 0.85. (Source:
authors' estimates based on Table 4 and Table 22 of Burton, Hunt and
Krueger, 1985).

     20The insurance rates are described in more detail in the Data Appendix.

     21The rates for carpenters are a weighted average of two carpentry
classes (NCCI class 5403 and 5645), where the weights are the payroll
attributed to each class nationally.
                                      14

The spread in insurance rates for truck drivers across the states is

enormous. For example, in 1987 the rate for truck drivers in Minnesota was

21 percent of payroll, while the rate for the same category of workers in

Indiana was only 3 percent of payroll.22 Furthermore, there is great

diversity among the states in the growth in these insurance rates over the

last ten years. For example, rates soared from 9.7 to 20.3 percent of

payroll in Hawaii between 1978 and 1987, while they fell by nearly 4 points

in New York over the same time period. An important source of variation

for within-state changes in workers' compensation costs over time is

changes in benefit generosity (see Krueger and Burton, 1990 and Butler and

Worrall, 1990).

     We are aware of only one study that uses inter-state variation in

workers' compensation costs to estimate the extent of shifting of mandated

benefits.23 Dorsey and Walzer (1983) use the May 1978 Current Population

Survey to estimate the tradeoff between employer liability for injuries as

measured by workers' compensation costs and earnings. They find a large,

negative effect of workers' compensation costs on wages in the nonunion

sector, and a large, positive effect of workers' compensation costs in the

union sector. Our analysis has several different features than Dorsey and

Walzer's. Most importantly, we estimate the extent of cost shifting for

narrowly defined activities that have wide inter-state variability in


     22lnsurance rates for truck drivers are especially high because they
have a high injury rate, and because their injuries tend to be relatively
costly. Interestingly, data for Minnesota indicate that only 14 percent of
truck drivers' injuries are from highway accidents, while almost half are
from falls or strains and sprains (see Lewis, Meyers and Senese, 1988).

     23Moore and Viscusi (1989; Chapter 2) review several studies that
estimate the relationship between wages and workers' compensation benefit
levels. Most of these studies find a negative relationship.
                                      15

costs, and we incorporate permanent state effects in the analysis. In

addition, we provide estimates of the effect of workers' compensation

insurance costs on employment.



III. Estimates of the Incidence of Workers' Conensatiort Insurance

     We base our initial analysis of insurance cost shifting on micro-data

from the merged outgoing rotation group (OCRG) samples of the Current

Population Survey (CPS). The CPS is a monthly survey of a rotating sample

of over 55,000 households containing approximately 110,000 individuals.

The Outgoing Rotation Group files consist of all individuals who are in

their last survey month. The extracts of the CPS that we use are described

in detail in the Data Appendix. Briefly, our sample Contains privately

employed carpenters, truck drivers, nonprofessional hospital employees,

gasoline station employees, and plumbers. Self-employed workers are

excluded from the sample. The data are taken from the 1979, 1980, 1981,

1987 and 1988 CPS files. For each worker in the sample we merge on the

Corresponding workers' compensation manual rate in the worker's state and

industry/occupation group (activity).24 A worker is observed in only one

year, but we can control for permanent state effects because each year we

have a sample of individuals from a constant set of states.

    The CPS data have several advantages over other micro-data sets for

this analysis. Most importantly, the large samples provided by the CF'S


      24To be precise, we assign the 1978 workers' compensation rates to
individuals in the 1979-81 CPSs, and the 1987 rates to individuals in the
1987-88 CF'S.  Data on workers' compensation rates for most states were
provided to us by John F. Burton, Jr. from his ongoing research on
measuring workers' compensation costs. Tracking down rates for all the
intervening years would be a difficult task, and we suspect that using
rates for 1978 and 1987 does not greatly affect the results.
                                               16

enable us to focus on a narrow set of activities. Furthermore, the CPS

contains information on several employee characteristics, including

education, potential experience, marital status, and apprenticeship
          25
status.

         Using the pooled time-series/cross-section of CPS data, we estimate a

wage equation of the following form separately for each industry/occupation

group:



(5)      In       —
                      fl   + fl1C.   + fl2X.. ÷ a + p. +



where ln W.. is the natural log of the usual hourly wage rate, C is the

appropriate workers' compensation rate, X.,            is a vector of covariates, a

represents a set of year dummy variables (t—1980,1981,1987,1988), p.

represents     a set of state dummy variables, and c. .          is   a stochastic error
                                                           lit
term. The subscript i indicates individuals, j indicates states, and t

indicates years. Coefficient estimates are denoted by fl's.

      In contrast to past studies of compensating differentials that pool

individuals from different occupations and industries and then control for

average injury rates at the three-digit occupation or industry level, we

estimate the wage-cost tradeoff relationship within each three digit

industry/occupation group. Furthermore, since state and year dummy

variables are included in equation (5), the incidence of workers'

compensation costs is identified by varying patterns in workers'

compensation rates within states over time. An estimate -l for fl would



     250ne shortcoming of the OCRC CPS files is that union status is not
available before 1983.
                                      17


indicate that increases in workers' compensation costs are fully offset by

lower wages, while a coefficient of 0 would imply no wage offsets.

    Workers' compensation benefits are not subject to federal income tax.

Therefore, one might expect that the appropriate specification of equation

(5) would utilize the after-tax wage as the dependent variable. However,

if the tax rate for individuals in these activities is proportional to

wages, then because the dependent variable is specified in log form the tax

rate will be absorbed by the intercept term. Furthermore, the assunqLon

of proportional taxes is likely to be approximately correct in this sample

because most workers in these activities are below the earnings ceiling for

the OASDHI payroll tax, and because workers in these activities are likely

to be in a common tax bracket for the federal income tax.

     Estimates of equation (5) are reported for each activity in the first

five columns of Table 5.   In four of the five activities we find a negative

relationship between workers' compensation insurance rates and wages, but

the relationship is statistically significant only for truck drivers.

Also, the wage-costs tradeoff is largest for truck drivers, with an

estimated coefficient of -,97 (t-ratio —   -2.9).   The other results suggest

that approximately half of workers' compensation costs are shifted to wages

for carpenters and gasoline station workers, but these estimates are fairly

imprecise. On the other hand, the estimated tradeoff between wages and

insurance costs for plumbers is positive (1.73), but the coefficient has a

large standard error.

     The other variables in the wage equations generally have their

expected signs. In all of these activities more education is associated

with higher earnings; there is a quadratic relationship between earnings
                                       18

and potential experience; part-time workers earn less per hour than full

time workers; and apprentices earn less than fully trained workers. In

addition, the equations include but do not report year dummy variables.

The estimated coefficients for the year dummies indicate that real wages

fell by roughly 20 percent in these activities between 1979 and 1988,

     Columns (6) and (7) contain estimates for the pooled sample of the

five activities. These equations also include four activity dummy

variables. In column (6) we include 44 state dummy variables. In column

(7) we interact the state dummy variables with the activity dummy

variables. The estimated tradeoff between insurance costs and wages

depends critically on the specification of the state effects. If each

activity is constrained to have the same state effect (Column 6) ,   about   20

percent of workers' compensation costs are estimated to be offset by lower

wages. However, if the activity effect is freed-up by state (Column 7),

fully 86.5 percent of workers' compensation costs are shifted to employees.

Furthermore, an F-test indicates that state-by-activity effects explain a

significant fraction of wage variability over the constrained state

effects.

     Evidently, the fixed state wage effects are also related to the level

of workers' compensation costs. This relationship would occur, for

example, if in some states unions have traditionally been influential in

raising wages in some industry/occupation groups but not in others, and if

influential unions are able to lobby for relatively more generous benefits

for the types of injuries experienced by their members (e.g., back sprains

vs. carpal tunnel syndrome).   In this scenario, the less-restrictive model

in Column (7) would provide a more appropriate estimate of the tradeoff
                                        19

between wages and the employers' cost of workers' compensation insurance.



A.   The Importance of State Effects.

     The discussion above emphasizes the importance of the specification of

the state effects in the pooled sample. It should further be noted that if

the wage equations in Table 5 are estimated with the state effects omitted

from the equation, the estimated wage-cost relationship is positive rather

than negative in each of the five activities, as well as in the pooled

sample of activities. For example, the coefficient on costs in the wage

equation for truck drivers is positive .34 with a standard error of .16

when state effects are omitted.

     There are several reasons to include state effects in the wage

equations. First, state effects will pick-up permanent cost of living

differences between areas. Second, and perhaps more important, omitted

state factors that traditionally have determined the generosity of workers'

compensation benefits are likely to be correlated with the wage level of a

state. As mentioned previously, benefits are likely to be greater in

-states that have a more powerful union movement, and strong unions are also

likely to raise wages for nonunion as well as union members in the state.

Another potential state-by-activity fixed effect is the risk of injury:

Insurance rates will be especially high for an activity in states where

that activity has an unusually high injury rate. Moreover, if there are

compensating wage differentials for injury risk, we would also expect to

find a positive association between insurance costs and wages.26


     26We tried to assess directly the importance of :his explanation by
including the car accident rate in the wage equations for the truck
drivers, as a measure of injury risk. Without including state effects, the
                                        20

      To the extent that injury risk is permanently greater in some states

than in others (e.g. ,   roads are always icier in Minnesota than in Florida,

which affects truck drivers but not plumbers), including state-by-activity

effects will control for within-industry state-level injury rate

differences. Furthermore, the recent growth in workers' compensation costs

is not likely to be due to union power, since unions influence has waned

considerably in the 1980s. Instead, recent growth in insurance costs is

likely to be due exogenous changes in medical costs, and to changes in

benefit levels in response to the 4ational Commission on Woren's

Compensation Laws' recommendations. In view of these considerations, the

within-state variation in costs is probably a more appropriate source of

identifying information.



B, Analysis of BLS Industry-Level Wage and Employment Data

      In addition to the CPS, we analyze state-level, employer-reported data

collected by the Bureau of Labor     Statistics.   This data set is based on

employers' quarterly ES-202 reports, which are filed by all establishments

covered by unemployment insurance laws. In 1988, these data contained

information on 87J.   million   private sector workers in 5.6 million

establishments nationwide, or 99 percent of the private sector workforce.27

The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) compiles state-level averages of


car accident rate has a positive and statistically significant effect, but
its inclusion only slightly reduces the positive wage-cost relationship.
Because the vast majority of truck drivers' injuries are unrelated to
driving accidents, the car accident rate may be a poor measure of injury
risk for these workers.

     27The ES-202 data and the publicly available state-level data are
described in BLS (1988). We are grateful to Michael Buso of the BLS for
creating an extract of these data for us.
                                      21

employment and wages by four-digit Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)

from the ES-202 reports. Thus, we can use the BLS data to examine both

wage and employment effects of workers' compensation insurance.

     In comparison to the CPS, the BLS data have the advantage of being

based on a virtual census of employers in the state. A disadvantage of the

BLS data, however, is that the NCCI activity definitions do not match as

well with the BLS data as they do with the CPS data because the SLS data

are classified by industry alone. Therefore, to some extent the BLS data

blur the occupational distinctions in the NCCI activity classifications.

     We matched the state-level data for 1979 and 1988 to workers'

compensation rates in the preceding year for four of the five activities in

the sample. Unfortunately, it was necessary to exclude non-professional

hospital employees because the SIC classification system does not

distinguish between professional and nonprofessional employees. However,

another six high-cost industries that can be matched between the NCCI and

SIC classifications were added to the sample. The additional industries

are: agricultural machinery, excavation, gas and oil dealerships, lumber

yards, masonry, and road and Street construction.28

     Figure 2 presents a scatter plot of the change in iog average wage

versus the change in insurance rates from 1978 to 1987 based on the BLS

state-level data. The size of each observation in the plot is proportional

to the number of truck drivers employed in the state. The graph also

displays the fitted line from an employment-weighted regression of change

in log wage on change in costs. A strong negative relationship is


     28These activities were excluded from the micro analysis either
because they do not match well with the three-digit census classifications
and/or because the CPS sample sizes are too small to give precise estimates.
                                           22

apparent. The slope of the regression line is -1, which is very close to

the estimated extent of shifting in the trucking industry based on CPS

data. Furthermore, most of the states (especially the large ones) tend to

cluster fairly close around the regression line.

        Table 6 reports estimates of regressions of the ten-year change (1979-

1988) in the log of the average wage on the change in insurance rates for

the pooled sample of activities. In levels, this specification is

analogous to the within-state-by-activity specification shown in Column 7 -

of   Table 5, only we do not have controls for individual characteristics in

the state-level analysis. We estimate a similar equation with the change

in log employment as the dependent variable. In the first two columns we

limit the sample to the original sample of activities (excluding non-

professional hospital workers), and in the last two columns we use the

expanded set of ten activities. The regressions are weighted by the number

of reporting establishments in 1988.

        For the original sample, the wage regression yields virtually the same

coefficient on the workers' compensation cost variable as was found in the

CPS micro data (compare column 7 of Table S with column I of Table 6). The

results indicate that 86 percent of increases in workers' compensation

costs are shifted to workers. The results for the expanded set of

activities indicate a smaller tradeoff between wages and insurance costs

(-   .56),   but the estimate is still statistically significant and sizable.

The similarity between the aggregate results based on ELS data and the

micro-level wage regressions based on CF'S data is reassuring, especially in

light of their different unit of observation and industry definitions.

       Columns 2 and 4 report results of regressing the change in log
                                         23

employment on the change in insurance rates. Because insurance costs

appear to be only partially offset by lower wages, one would expect a

negative coefficient on insurance rates in these regressions. The results

provide some evidence of a negative effect of higher workers' compensation

rates on employment growth, but the estimated coefficient is less than half

its standard error in each sample.29 If one assumes that 85 percent of

workers' compensation costs are shifted to wages and that the remaining 15

percent are borne by employers, then the coefficient estimate in Column 2

suggests that the elasticity of labor demand is - .75.     On the other hand,

if we assume that employers bear 44 percent of workers' compensation costs

(1- .56), then the estimate in Column 4 implies an elasticity of labor

demand of -   .56.   Although these estimates are extremely imprecise, they are

within the range of typical estimates of the elasticity of labor demand in

(see Card, 1990 and Clark and Freeman, 1981).

     The following calculation gives an indication of the magnitude of the

effect on employment of recent increases in workers' compensation insurance

costs. Between 1972 and 1987, nationwide workers' compensation costs

increased by about one percent of payroll, from.O.722 percent to 1.785

percent (see Burton and Schmidle, 1989). If 85 percent of this increase

was borne by labor and .15 percent by employers, and if we assume an

elasticity of labor demand of - .75, then this increase in program costs

would have reduced employment by .11 percent. Since approximately 90


     29We note, however, that the estimated wage tradeoff and employment
tradeoff for the sample of 10 activities is sensitive to the weight used.
The estimated wage-cost coefficient ranges from - .50 to - .89 depending on
whether the equation is weighted by number of reporting units in 1979,
employment in 1980, or average employment in 1979 and 1988. The
coefficient on costs in the employment equation ranges from -0.03 to
-0.50, depending on the weight used.
                                         2L.


million workers are covered by workers' compensation insurance, this means
                                                 30
a loss of a little over 100,000 covered jobs.



III. Application Health tnsurance

     What can we infer about the likely consequences of mandatory employer-.

provided health insurance from the estimated incidence of the workers'

compensation insurance program? Because employers who already provide

health insurance are unlikely to be affected by a mandate to provide hea.a

insurance, it   is   useful to consider the sectors of the workforce that have

a low rate of coverage by health insurance. Table 7 reports the percent of

various subgroups of the population that was covered by some form of health

insurance in 1988. The relatively low rates of coverage for workers in

the construction and agricultural industries, in small firms, and in low-

wage jobs have been documented previously (e.g., Chollet, 1987).

     The low rate of health insurance coverage in low-wage jobs is

potentially important for our purposes because the floor established by the

minimum wage may impede wage offsets that would otherwise result from

mandating health insurance. The jobs we have examined in the workers'

compensation program typically have wage rates well above the minimum wage.

If an uninsured worker's wage is at or slightly above the minimum     wage,   the

minimum wage may prevent wage offsets from occurring in response to benefit

mandates. The existence of this kind of an institutional impediment would

cause a greater employment reduction than suggested from our analysis of




     30.ccording to Nelson (1990), in 1987 approximately 88.4 million
workers were covered by workers' compensation insurance.
                                      25

workers' compensation insurance.31 Several authors have noted that the

minimum wage may inhibit wage offsets in response to mandated health

insurance (see Reinhardt, 1987, Monheit, Hagan, Berk and Farley, 1985 and

Chollet, 1987). An important question is: How large is the share of

uninsured workers that is potentially constrained by the minimum wage?

     In an influential study based on the 1986 March CPS, Chollet (1987)

claims that as many as 50 percent of uninsured workers earn less than 125

percent of the minimum wage, and that 35 percent of uninsured workers earn

the minimum wage or less. Although we will present evidence suggesting

these figures exaggerate the impact of the minimum wage, if a great many of

the uninsured earn the minimum wage it is hard to imagine that important

wage offsets would occur in response to mandated benefits.

     To explore the impact of the minimum wage on health insurance

shifting, we use the March 1989 CPS to estimate the earnings distribution

of uninsured workers. Je restrict the sample to non-self employed

individuals between age 16 and 65 who worked for pay in 1988. For each

worker in the sample, an average hourly wage rate is calculated by dividing

annual earnings by the product of annual weeks worked and usual weekly

hours. To trim outliers, we exclude observations on individuals whose

derived hourly earnings are below $1 per hour, or greater than $100 per

hour.32 This sample is used to calculate the share of uninsured workers

that is likely to be affected by the minimum wage.


     3e note, of course, that insurance costs could be shifted by means
of non-wage elements of the compensation package for minimum wage workers.
Holzer, Katz, and Krueger's (1990) analysis of application rates suggest
incomplete rent dissipation in minimum wage jobs, however.

     32Eliminating outliers in this fashion does not qualitatively affect
the results once the self-employed are excluded from the sample.
                                         26

    The first row of Table 8 gives the fraction of JJ. uninsured workers

who fall into various wage intervals.33 The second row gives the fraction

of workers who are not covered by an employer-sponsored insurance plan who

fall into each wage interval. The second panel contains the same set of

estimates for full-time, full year workers (i.e. those who worked at least

26 weeks in the year and usually worked 18 hours or more per week). The

results indicate that 19.4 percent of all uninsured workers in 1988 earned

the minimum wage or less. The estimate is 16.8 percent when we limit the

sample to full-time, full-year workers, which is the group most likely to

be covered by a mandated health insurance law.

     For several reasons, we prefer estimates that place a window around

the minimum wage, rather than   the   open-interval estimates in Column 1.

First,   the annual average hourly wage rate is likely to be measured with

considerable noise because it is based on self-reported annual hours of

work, which is notoriously poorly measured (See Duncan and Hill, 1985).

Second, some workers who earn more than the minimum wage may be constrained

by the minimum wage because their earnings are prevented from falling below

the wage floor in response to mandated health insurance. Finally, we wish

to put a lower bound below the minimum wage because there is a tremendous

amount of noncompliance with the minimum wage.34 If some individuals are

paid less than the minimum   -- either   legally or illegally --   there   is no

reason to suspect that their wages will not be reduced if their employers


     33The various sources of health insurance coverage are Medicare,
Medicaid, CHANPU'S/VA care, employment-based insurance, and private health
insurance. Coverage may be in one's own name or as a dependent.

     34The extent of noncompliance with minimum wage was first documented
by Ashenfelter and Smith (1979).
                                      27

are required to provide them with health insurance.

     Column (2) places a 35 Cent window around the minimum wage, and Column

(3) places a 60 Cent window around the minimum wage. Since the estimated

hourly Cost of meeting the Federal health insurance mandate is 55 cents for

a full-time, full-year worker (see U.S. Congress (1989)), the wider

interval in Column (3) is probably a slight overstatement of the percent of

uninsured workers who are constrained by the minimum wage. No matter how

the wage intervals are defined, however, the results in Table 8 are quite

different from Chollect's estimate that 50 percent of uninsured workers

will be constrained by the minimum wage. According to our estimates, less

than 20 percent of uninsured workers earn within 60 cents of the minimum

wage. Although this is a nontrivial share of the uninsured, it suggests

that for the majority of uninsured workers there is scope for wage offsets

engendered by mandated employer-provided health insurance.

     Why are our estimates considerably lower than Chollett's, even though

both are based on March CPS data? The discrepancy is mainly due to the

fact that we exclude self-employed workers. For example, including the

self-employed raises the estimate of the number of uninsured workers below

the minimum wage by nearly 10 percentage points. However, we believe that

three reasons justify excluding the self-employed from these tabulations.

First, the proposals outlined in Table 1 do not apply to self-employed

workers. Second, self-employed workers are typically exempted from State

and Federal minimum wage laws. Third, the earnings of the self-employed

reflect returns and losses to capital investments.

     Finally, we note that Table 8 may give an overestimate of the impact

of the minimum wage for mandated benefits because many of    the proposed
                                      28

mandated health insurance laws provide subsidies to small employers. Since

relatively many low-wage workers are employed by small establishments,

these subsidies would reduce the employers' costs of providing health care

to low-wage workers. Tabulations from the March 1989 CPS indicate that 42

percent of uninsured individuals who earn less than the ininimuni wage are in

firms with 25 employees or fewer.

      On the other hand, the real minimum wage has increased since March

1989, and thus may be more of a constraint. Nevertheless, our results

suggest that the minimum wage may not be as much of an impediment to wage

adjustments in response to mandated benefits as previously believed.



IV.   Conclusion
      This paper has analyzed the impact of cost shifting in response to

increases in mandated workers' compensation insurance costs. The results

suggest that a substantial portion of the cost to employers of providing

workers' compensation benefits are shifted to employees in the form of

lower wages. Given the similarity between workers' compensation insurance

and many proposed employer-mandated health insurance plans, our findings

suggest that a large share of the employers' cost of meeting health

insurance mandates may be borne by employees. Furthermore, our tabulations

of the share of uninsured workers whose earnings are near the minimum wage

suggest that in 1988 less than one-fifth of uninsured workers were likely

to be constrained by the minimum wage. Although the nominal burden of

mandated employment-based health insurance will be borne by firms, if the

experience of health insurance is similar to that of workers' compensation

insurance, our estimates suggest that employees will ultimately bear a
                                      29

large fraction of the burden of financing mandated health insurance through

lower wages.

     In spite of our main conclusion that at sizable portion of the cost of

mandated benefits are likely to be shifted to employees, we should also

stress that the shifting of workers' compensation costs is incomplete.

Employers bear at least some additional cost because of mandated work-

injury insurance. As a consequence, we find that increases in workers'

compensation costs are associated with reduced employment growth. Althou;h

extremely imprecise, our estimates suggest that every one percentage point

increase in workers' compensation rates is associated with an employment

decline of .11 percent. The adverse employment effects of mandated health

insurance may well be larger than those in workers' compensation insurance

because the minimum wage is likely to be more of a constraint for uninsured

workers, especially in light of recent increases in the real minimum.
                                      30

                               Data Appendix

1. Workers' Compensation Insurance Rates. The workers' compensation

insurance rates used in Tables 3-6 and Figure 2 are state manual rates,

collected from each state's rate pages. Manual rates are expressed as a

proportion of payroll. Manual rate data were generously provided to us by

John F. Burton, Jr. In some cases, if manual rates were not available for

a state we used the rate for the assigned risk pool, less 10 percent. The

rate for the Minnesota trucking industry in 1987 is from Lewis, Myers and

Senese (1988), and is based on insurance industry data. Data are available

for a maximum of 44 states and the District of Columbia in both 1978 and

1987. The states in the sample use the NCCI rating classification system.

or a comparable system. The NCCI codes for the 5 activities used in the

analysis are: truck drivers (NCCI 7219); plumbers (NCCI 5183); gasoline

service station employees (NCCI 8387); nonprofessional hospital employees

(NCCI 9040); and carpenters (weighted average of NCCI 5403 and 5645).



2. CPS Data.    The CPS data used in Table 5 are from the outgoing rotation

group files for 1979, 1980, 1981, 1987 and 1988; The sample was limited to

individuals between age 18 and 65 who were privately employed. The sample

only includes individuals from the 45 jurisdictions that have manual rate

data in 1978 and 1987. The 1978 manual rate was merged to observations in

the 1979, 1980 and 1981 CPS samples; the 1987 manual rate was merged to

observations in the 1987 and 1988 CPS samples. The "usual hourly wage" is

the ratio of usual weekly earnings to usual weekly hours. Individuals with

allocated weekly earnings were deleted from the sample, as were those who

earned less than $1.67 per hour or more than $150.00 per hour in 1988
                                         31

dollars.

     The "married" dummy variable equals one if the worker is married with

his or her spouse present. The "part-time" dummy variable equals one if

the worker usually works less than 35 hours per week. "Potential

experience" is age minus education minus 6. The 'apprentice" dummy

variable equals one if the worker's occupation code is an apprentice.

     The following 1970 Census industry (CIC) and occupation (COC) codes

were used to define the activities: truck drivers (dC 417; COC 715),

plumbers (CIC 67-78, COC 522 or 523), gasoline station employees (CIC 648),

nonprofessional hospital employees (CIC 838; COd 630, 690, 694, 762, 901-

903, 912-916, or 950), carpenters (dC 67-78, COC 415 or 416). The

following 1980 Census industry (CIC) and occupation (COC) codes were used

to define the activities: truck drivers (CIC 410; COC 804 or 805),

plumbers (CIC 60, COC 585 or 587), gasoline station employees (CIC 621),

nonprofessional hospital employees (CIC 831; COC 435-437, 439, 443-444,

449, 453, 748, 777, 883), carpenters (CIC 60, COC 567 or 569).



3. 8LS Data. The BLS data are annual totals derived from quarterly ES-202

reports. The BLS data consist of state-level averages for 3 and 4 digit

Standard Industrial Classifications (SIC) groups. The dependent variable

in columns (1) and (3) of Table 6 is the change in the log of the

arithmetic average annual wage in each industry. The annual wage is in

1988 dollars. The dependent variable in columns (2) and (4) is the change

in log employment. The SIC codes for the four activities in the basic

sample in Table 6 are: truckers (SIC 421), plumbers (1711), gas stations

(SIC 5541), and carpenters (SIC 1751).
                                             32

                                        Re ferences

Abowd, John M. and Orley Ashenfelter. 1981. Anticipated Unemployment,

     Temporary Layoffs, and Compensating Wage Differentials. In Studies in

     Labor Markets, ed. Sherwin Rosen. Chicago: University of Chicago

     Press.

Ashenfelter, Orley, and Robert S. Smith. 1979. Compliance with the Minimum

     Wage Law. Journal of Political Economy 87: 333-350.

Boden, Leslie, and Charles Fleishman. 1988. Medical Costs in Workers'

     Comnensation. Cambridge, HA: Workers' Compensation Research

     Institute.

Brittain, John A. 1972. The Payroll Tax for Social Security. Washington,

     D.C. : The Brookings Institution.

Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1988. EmDloyment and Wages: Annual Averages.

     Washington, D.C.: BLS.

Butler, Richard, and John Worrall. 1990. Claims Reporting and Risk Bearing

     Moral Hazard in Workers' Compensation. Mimeo. ,   Brigham Young

     University (July)

Burton, John F., Jr., H. Allan Hunt, and Alan B. Krueger. 1985. Inter-state

     Variations in the Employers' Costs of Workers' Compensation, with

     Particular Reference to Michigan ad the Other Great Lakes States.

     Mimeo. ,   Cornell   University.

Burton, John F. ,   and Timothy Schmidle. 1989. Inter-state Variations in

     Workers' Compensation Costs. John Burton's Workers' Compensation

     Monitor 2: 1-15.

Brown, Charles. 1980. Equalizing Differences in the Labor Market. Ouarterlv

     Journal of Economics 94: 133-134.
                                        33

Card, David. 1990. Unexpected Inflation, Real Wages, and Employment

     Determination in Union Contracts. Forthcoming, American Economic

     Review.

Chollet, Deborah. 1987. Public Policy Options to Expand Health Insurance

     Coverage among the Nonelderly Population. In Government Mandating of

     Employee Benefits. Washington, DC: Employee Benefits Research

     Institute.

Clark. Kim and Richard B. Freeman. 1980. How Elastic is the Demand for

     Labor? Review of Economics and Statistics 62(4):509-5l9.

Danzon, Patricia. 1989. Mandated Ernplovment.Based Health Insurance:

     Incidence and Efficiency Effects. Mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.

Dorsey, Stuart and Norman Walzer. 1983. Workers' Compensation, Job Hazards.

     and Wages. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 36(4): 642.654.

Duncan, Greg, and Daniel Hill. 1985. An Investigation of the Extent and

     Consequences of Measurement Error in Labor-economic Survey Data.

     Journal of Labor Economics 3, No. 4: 508.32.

Feldstein, Martin. 1972. Comment on Brittain. American Economic Review:

     735-738.

Hamermesh, Daniel 5. 1979. New Estimates of the Incidence of Payroll Tax.

     Southern Economic Journal 45(4): 1208-1219.

Holmiund, Bertil. 1983. Payroll Taxes and Wage Inflatior.: The Swedish

     Experience. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 85(1): 1-15.

Holzer, Harry, Lawrence Katz, and Alan Krueger. 1990. Job Queues and

     Wages. Quarterl'.' Journal of Economics forthcoming.

Krueger, Alan B. ,   and John F. Burton, Jr.   1990. The Enployers Costs of

     Workers' Compensation Insurance: Magnitudes, Determinants, and Public

     Policy. Review of Economics and Statistics 72, No. 2 (May): 228-240.
                                      34

Lewis, John, Nancy Myers, and Michael Senese. 1988. The Minnesota

     Trucking Industry and Workers' Compensation. Report to the

     Legislature on Workers' Compensation in Minnesota: Background Research

     Studies Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Department of Labor and Industry.

Leibowitz, Arleen. 1983. Fringe Benefits in Employee Compensation. In The

     Measurement of Labor Cost, ed. Jack E. Triplett. Chicago: University

     of Chicago Press.

Monheit, Alan, Michael Hagan, Marc Berk, and Pamela Farley. 1985. The

     Employed Uninsured and the Role of Public Policy. InQuiry 22

     (Winter) :   348-64.

Moore, Michael, and W. Rip Viscusi. 1990. Compensation Mechanisms for Job

     Risks. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Nelson, William J. 1990. Workers' Compensation: Coverage, Benefits, and

     Costs, 1987. Social Security Bulletin 53 (April): 2-11.

Reinhardt, Uwe E. 1987. Should All Employers Be Required by Law to Provide

     Basic Health Insurance Coverage for Their Employees and Dependents?.

     In Government Mandating of Employee Benefits. Washington D.C. Employee

     Benefits Research Institute.

Smith, Robert S. and Ronald C. Ehrenberg. 1983. Estimating Wage-Fringe

     Trade-Offs: Some Data Problems. In The Measurement of Labor Cost, ed.

     Jack E. Triplect. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Smith, Robert. 1979. Compensating Wage Differentials and Public Policy.

     Industrial and Labor Relations Review (April): 339.52.

Summers, Lawrence H. 1989. Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits. In

    American Economic Association. Papers and Proceedings 79(2): 177-183.

Triplett, Jack E. 1983. An Essay on Labor Cost. In The Measurement of Labor

     Cost, ed. Jack E. Triplett. Chicago. University of Chicago Press.
                                     35

U.S. Chamber of Commerce. 1990. 1990 Analysis of Workers' Compensation

            Washington, D.C.: U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
U.S. Congress. 1989. 8asic Health Benefits for All Americans Act: Renort

    Toether with Minority Views. Washington, D.C.: U.S. GPO.
</ref_section>
           a
           CD
           U)




           U
     LI)


P1




                C
P1              CD
0


P1

D
.0

CD
:3
     .198i33 -




aJ
             -           0


ci
                 0

0
-J
                                         00
C
ci
0'
C
C
0


             -
 —.698076
            —.0508                                           .1713
                                     Change in Rate
                     Figure 2: Trucking Industry, 1979—88
                                                            ! dl
          Table 1: Selected State and Federal Health Insurance Proposals


State           Coverage                 Funding                 Other Features


U.S.        Full time workers;        Firms pay 80% of           Federal subsidies
Sen         May be extended to        premiums, but pay 100%     for small firms;
Bill        all workers above         if worker earns less       new small firms
768         185% of poverty line      than 125% of mm. wage;     may offer less
                                      comprehensive coverage     protection

CA          All employees,            Employers pay 75% of       Tax credit of 25% of
Ass,        except new hires and      individual premiums,       Cost for small
Bill        those covered by          and 50% of family prem.    firms; insurers
3032        workers' comp             Part time workers are      must accept small
(1)                                   pro-rated;                 groups & must set
                                                                 "comparable" rates
                                                                 across groups

(2)         Low profit firms;         Redirected employer tax    Firms with low
"Cal-       Low income/               credits and other          profits are
Care"       uncovered workers         state funds - reduced      subsidized; low-wage
                                      benefits                   workers are
                                                                 subsidized

CT           Small firms              Employers pay 100%         Limited loss ratios
Sen.                                  for small firms;
Bill 342                              Waive premium tax

HI           Employees >20 hrs/wk     Employers pay 50%
Prepd.       and above O.867*rnin.    of premiums, but a
Health      wage                      limit on worker expense
Care Act                              of 1.5% of wages

MA          Universal                 12% payroll tax capped     Tax credit for
Health                                at Medical Soc. Sec.       small firms (under
Security                              Wage base, minus firm's    50 employees)
Act                                   current medical benefits

MI          Minimum wage employees    3% tax on workers not
Sen.        and low-wage workers      covered and firms not
Bill 97     who work more than        covering (if more than
            17.5 hrs./week            10 employees) - state
                                      contributes 3% also

NJ          All full time workers     12% payroll tax up to      Study measures to
Ass,        at firms with at least    Medical Soc. Sec. Wage     help small firms
3382        6 employees               Base (currently $14,000)


OR        Firms with less than        Firm pays 75% of worker     Tax credit of 50% of
Health    25 workers                  premium and 50% of          Cost for small firms
Partnership                           dependent premium           could expand covg.
Ac:                                                               to all workers
                                          Table 2

     Maximum   Indemnity   Benefits Paid to Selected Types of Work Injuriesa
                                    12 States in 1990



                              Type of Permanent Impairment                     Temporary
                                                      b                         Injury
State                 Arm        Hand        Finger         Leg      Foot     (10 weeks)


California         $58,975     $43,450      $3.360        $64,575   $33,740   $2,660

Georgia             39,375      28,000       7,000         39,375    23,625    1,750

Illinois           142,112     114,899      24,189        120,946    93,733      047

Indiana             27,450      21,960       4,392         24,705    19,215    2,741

Hawaii             119,496      93,452      17,618        110,304    78,515    3,830

Massachusetts       20,402      16,132        NA           18,504    13.760    4,745

Michigan           114,863      91,805      16,226        91,805     69,174    4,270

Mississippi         42,516      31,887       7,440         37,202    26,573    2,126

Missouri            40,333      30,424       7,823        35,987    26,947     2,898

New Jersey          89,539      54,390       4,933        85,469    45,386     3,700

1ew York            93,600      73,200      13,800        86,400    61,500     3,000

Texas                7,600      35,700      10,710        47,600    29,750     2,380


Notes:

a.   Source: Deri.'ed from 1990 Analysis of Workers' Compensation Laws
     (Washington, DC: U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 1990), Chart 6 and 7.

b. Eenefit is for loss of       use   of index finger.
                                    Table 3

         Characteristics of State Workers' Compensation Insurance Ratesa
                          Selected Activities, 1987



                            (1)      (2)        (3)      (4)          (5)


      Activity            Meanb                 Miri.    Max.      Incidence
                                     Std.b
                          Rate      Dev.                             RateC


1.   Carpenters          11.32     4.86       3.35      26.25      3.28

2. Gasoline               5.18      1.85      1.73      11.09      2.16
     S tat ions

3.   Plumbers             6.02      2.45      1.74      15.05      3.34

4. Truck Drivers         10.76     4.69       3.01      25.40      5.64

5.   Non-professional     4.43      2.32      1.42      13.00      2.93
     Hospital Workers

6.   All Activitiesd      2.12       NA         NA         NA      1.72




Notes:

a. The insurance rates described in the first 4 columns refer to the
"manual' rate for each state. No adjustments have been made for premium
discounts, experience rating, dividends, and other competitive devices.

b. Means and standard deviations are weighted by each industry's
employment in the state. The sample consists of 46 states and the District
of Columbia.

c. The incidence rate measures the percent of private, non-self employed
workers who received income from workers' compensation insurance in
calendar year 1986 and 1987. These estimates were derived from the March
1987 and 1988 Current Population Survey tapes by the authors.

d. The average manual rate for all activities is a payroll-weighted
average of 44 activities, which account for 61 percent of payroll covered
by workers' compensation insurance. This estimate is taken from Burton and
Schmidle (1989, Table 1).
                       Table 4
 Workers' Compensation Rates as a Percent of Payroll
        in the Trucking Industry (Class 7219)

                                          Change
State                 1978      1987     1987-1978


Alabama              4.49       10.07       5.58
Alaska              10.55       17.41       6.86
Arkansas            15.94       10.86      -5.08
Arizona             11.68       11.22      -0.46
California          10.04       17.26       7.22
Colorado             5.88       11.91       6.03
Connecticut          6.78       12.91       .6.13
Deleware            10.45        9.79      -0.66
D.C.                15.04       16.04       1.00
Florida             17.71       15.12      -2.59
Georgia              4.70        7.73       3.03
Hawaii               9.71       20.29      10.58
Idaho                6.39       15.50       9.11
Illinois             6.01       11.45       5.44
Indiana              2.39        3.01       0.62
Iowa                 5.89        8.77       2.88
Kansas               4.59        6.85       2.26
Kentucky             7.04        8.05       1.01
Lousiana            10.66       10.65      -0.01
Maine                7.05        9.16       2.11
Maryland             5.85       11.09       5.24
Massachusetts        5.50        8.48       2.98
Michigan             9.24       15.05       5.81
Minnesota            11.5       20.93       9.43
Mississippi          6.27        7.98       1.71
Missouri               NA        5.16         NA
Montana              8.27       25.40      17.13
Nebraska             5.04        6.47       1.43
New Hampshire        4.16       12.55       8.39
New Jersey           7.36        7.89       0.53
New Mexico            8.6       12.23       3.63
New York             9.62        5.97      -3.65
North Carolina       2.42        5.16       2.74
Ohio                 5.32       12.20       6.88
Oklahoma             7.81       11.55       3.74
Oregon              14.68       23.46       8.78
Pennsylvania           NA       15.97         NA
Rhode Island         5.15        7.27       2.12
South Carolina       3.68        8.12       4.44
South Dakota         5.87        8.22       2.35
Tennessee            2.88        4.37       1.49
Texas                6.83        9.98       3.15
Utah                 4.92        9.23       4.31
Vermont              3.11        6.53       3.42
Virginia             4.28        6.51       2.23
West Virginia          NA        5.67         NA
Wisconsin            3.41        8.86       5.45
      Table 5: OLS segresalon Estit,.            of .g. Ej.tions. D.p.re.nt       variable: Log Usual NrIy U.g.


                                                     0ccç.tionhlrd.t ry Grow.                       AlL Activities

                              Carpenters     Ga*ol In.      Hoepi tat   Pt.acs       Truck
                                             StatI          Workers                 Drivers
      Vsriable                  (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)            (7)


1. Work.rs Caup.               -.517          -.651         -.119        1.729      -.966        -.187        -.565
      Insurance ti             (.327)         (.539)        (.577)      (1.050)     (.331)       (.136)       (.15'.)

2. Nate                         .021           .096           029         .191       .075         .049            .050
    (l.yes)                    (.065)         (.020)        (.016)       (.355)     (.059)       (.014)       (.014)


3.    Black                    -.108          -.098         -.005        -.197      -.082        -.067        -.075
      (ly.s)                   (.027)         (.027)        (.014)      (.041)      (.022)       (.011)       (.011)

4. Other do       Edt.          -.022         -.049         -.045        -.149      -.108        -.064        -.056
    (l'yes)                     (.037)       (.039)         (.032)      (.076)      (.064)       (.021)       (.021)

5.    years of                      .036        040          .021         044        .031         .035            .033
      Ecxstion                  (.002)       (.003)         (.002)      (.005)      (.003)       (.001)       (.001)

6.    Potential                     .026       .021          .008         .032       .022         .022            .021
      ExperIence                (.002)       (.002)         (.001)      (.003)      (.002)       (.001)       (.001)


7.    Potential Exp.            -.400        -.382          -.075       -.476       -.329        -.327        -.323
      Squared    / 1000         (.030)       (.039)         (.029)      (.063)      (.043)       (.018)       (.015)

8.    ApprentIce
                                -   .075                      --        -203          --         -.163        -
                                                                                                                  .158
      (lyes)                    (.039)                                  (.040)                  (.027)       (.027)


9. Psrt-Ti                      -.199        -.126          -.092       -.240       -.081        -.128            .122
      Worker (l-yss)            (.021)       (.015)         (.015)      (.056)      (.029)      (.010)       (.010)


10. Metropolitan                    .113       .087          .068        .123        .131         .109            .111
      Dunly   (lyes)            (.012)       (.014)         (.014)      (.022)      (.014)      (.007)        (.007)


11. Married                     -.040          .033         -.004        .091       -.015       -.017         -.015
      (lsyes)                   (.108)       (.026)         (.013)      (.435)      (.083)      (.015)        (.015)


12. Married x                       .160       .055          .120        .035        .095         .139            .126
      Nat.                      (.109)       (.029)         (.023)      (.435)      (.084)      (.011)        (.017)

13.   44 Stat. Dt...i..             Yes         lea           Ye.         Yes         Yes           Yea           Yes


14. 44 Stat. birusies x                         --             -.          --         --            MO
    4 Activity Duesies


14. R-Square                        .395       .294          .332        .433        .213         .514            .532

15. Sanpl. Sit.                4,784         2,708          1,928       1,556       4,268         15,244     15,244



      Motes: Each equation       also iricln.des en intercept and 4 year duiruies. CoLirns 6-7 also inct.e S _uy
                variables    for each activity. Data    are fr the 1988. 1987, ¶981, 1980, end 1979 FuLl-year CPS
                flies;    se, the   Data Appendix for adtionaL details. Standard errors are in parentheses.
                  Table 6: Aggregate Wage/Employment Data
                 Coefficients with Standard Errors in Parentheses




                            Sample and Dependent Variable

                          4 Industries                    10 Industries
                    (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
                   Wage          Employment        Wage         Employment
Variable          Change           Change         Change          Change


Intercept         -0.065            0.182         -0.062            0.163
                  (0.011)          (0.025)        (0.008)          (0.019)

Change in         -0.863           -0.112         -0.561           -0.248
Rate              (0.289)          (0.664)        (0.209)          (0.503)

R-Square           0.05             0.0002         0.018            0.001

Sample Size          176                 176         388              388



notes: Equations are estimated by weighted least squares, where the
weights are the number of reporting units in 1988.
         Table 7: Percent of Varioui Groups Covered by Health Insurance


                                          Percent Covered by
                       Health        Private      Insurance       Insurance
                       insurance     health Ins, through own      through own
                                                  or den. lob     lob
Characteristic!
Sex
                         84             83             76                 65
Male
                         87             84             75                 50
Female


                         78                            59                 31
16-24
                         85             82             77                 64
25-35
35-45                    90             88             83                 67
                         90             90             83                 70
45-55
                         92             91             80                 68
55-65


                         87             86             77                 58
White
                         78             72             64                 53
Black
Other                    82             79             69                 54

Hours
>35 hrs, 48 wks.         90             90             85                 77
>18 hrs, 26 wks.         87             86             80                 67


Wares
                          71            62             45                 11
W<$3.35/hr.
                          73            68             55                 26
$3.35 W <$5/hr.
      W <$10/hr.          86            85             76                 58
$5
W                         95            95             91                 81
    $10/hr.

Education
Less than HS              73            68             60                 36
Finished HS               85             83            75                 58
                          89             88            76                 58
Some College
Post-Collage or More      94             94            87                 75

Emolover Size
                          74             71             56                30
<25 employees
25.100 employees          83             80             72                54
100 + employees           91             89             83                70

Industry
                          69             65             52                 37
Agriculture, Mining
Construction              74             73             65                 50
                          90             89             85                 77
Manufacturing
                          91             90             86                 77
Transportation
Trade                     81             78             66                 39
Services                  87             85             75                 55

Source: Authors' calculations from the March 1989 Current Population Survey.
                                       Table 8

    Percentage of Uninsured Workers Falling into Various Wage Intervals


                                   A. All Workers



                                      Wage Between      Wage Between
                Wage     3.35       $3.00 and $3.70    $2.75 and $395


Uncovered               19.4              10.5             18.6


Uncovered by            19.5               6.4             17.1
employer plan




                           B,     Full Time. Full Year Workers



                                       Wage Between     Wage Between
                 Wage      3.35      $3.00 and $3.70   $2.75 and $3.95




Uncovered               16.8               9.0             16.9


Uncovered by            15.2               8.3             14.8
employer plan



Note: Sample excludes self-employed workers, and those who earn less than
$1.00 per hour or more than $100 per hour. Sample size for is 8,506 for
Panel A, and 6.482 for Panel B.

Source: authors calculations from the March 1989 CPS.
