                     NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




                   THREE MODELS OF RETIREMENT:
        COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY VERSUS PREDICTIVE VALIDITY




                         Robin L. Lumsdajne
                           James H. Stock
                           Davis A. Wise




                      Working Paper No. 3558




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December 1990




Financial support was provided by the National Institute on Aging,
grant numbers R37 AG08146 and T32 AGOO186, the Hoover Institution,
the National Science Foundation, and the Sloan Foundation. This
paper is part of NBER's research program in Aging.
                                                      Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper #3558
                                          December 1990

                    THREE MODELS OF RETIREMENT:
         COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY VERSUS PREDICTIVE VALIDITY
                              ABSTRACT

      Empirical analysis often raises questions of approximation to
 underlying individual behavior. Closer approximation may require
more complex statistical specifications, On the other hand, more
complex specifications may presume computational facility that is
beyond the grasp of most real people and therefore less consistent
with the actual rules that govern their behavior, even though
economic theory may push analysts to increasingly more complex
specifications. Thus the issue is not only whether more complex
models are worth the effort, but also whether they are better.
      We compare the in—sample and    out-of—sample predictive
performance of three models of retirement —— "option value,"
dynamic programming, and probit -- to determine which of the
retirement rules most closely matches retirement behavior in a
large firm.  The primary measure of predictive validity is the
correspondence between the model predictions and actual retirement
under the firm's temporary early retirement window plan.       The
"option value" and dynamic programming models are considerably more
successful than the less complex probit model in approximating the
rules individuals use to make retirement decisions, but the more
complex dynamic programming rule approximates behavior no better
than the simpler option value rule.

Robin L. Luxnsdajrie                     James H. Stock
Department of Economics                  Kennedy School of
Harvard University                         Government
Cambridge, MA 02138                      Harvard University
                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
David A. Wise
Kennedy School of
  Government
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
                          ThREE MODELS OF RETIREMENT:
              COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY VERSUS PREDICTIVE VALIDITY


            Robin   L. Lumsd.ajrie, James H. Stock, and David A. Wise*




     Empirical analysis often raises questions of approximation to underlying

individual behavior. Closer approximation may require more complex

statistical specifications. On the other hand, more complex specifications

may presume computational facility that is beyond the grasp of most real

people and therefore less consistent with the actual rules that govern their

behavior, even though economic theory may lead analysts to increasingly

complex specifications. Thus the issue is not only whether more complex

models are worth the effort, but also whether they are better. The answer

must necessarily depend on the behavior that the analysis is intended to

predict. We consider in this paper the relationship between computational

complexity and the predictive validity of three models of retirement behavior.

     Retirement has been the subject of a large number of studies over the

past decade. Most have emphasized the effect of Social Security (SS)

provisions on retirement age, but have used a wide range of methods. The

earlier studies in this time period were based on regression or multinomial

logit analysis.1 Subsequent analysis relied on non-linear budget constraint

formulations of the retirement decision2 and on proportional hazard model


     *Financjal support was provided by the National Institute on Aging, grant
numbers R37 AC08146 and T32 AGOO186, the Hoover Institution, the National
Science Foundation, and the Sloan Foundation.


    1See Hurd and Boskiri [1981], for example.

    2See Burtless [1986] and Gustman and Steinmejer [1986], for example.
                                      (2)




formulations.3 More recently, several authors have developed models that

focus on forward-looking comparison of the advantages of retirement at

alternative ages in the future and on the updating of information as persons

age. Although the spirit of these latter models is basically the same, they

vary widely in computational complexity. The potential advantages in

predictive validity of the computationally more complex versions of these

models is the primary motivation for this study, although to broaden the scope

of the comparison we consider a much simpler model as well.

     We compare the predictive validity of three models of retirement. The

first is a simple probit model. The second is the "option value" model

developed in Stock and Wise [1990a, 1990b]. The third is a stochastic dynamic

prograsuning model. We experiment with two versions of this model: one is an

adaptation of the extreme value distribution formulation proposed by gerkovec

and Stern [1988] and the other is the normal distribution formulation proposed

by Daula and Moffitt (1989]. A related but still more complex model has been

developed by Rust (1989], but we have not attempted to implement his

formulation in the analysis in this paper.

     The analysis is guided by several key ideas. First, all of the models

are theoretical abstractions; none of them can be reasonably thought of as

"true." The important consideration is which decision rule is the best

approximation to the calculations that govern actual individual behavior. In

this paper, judgments on which rule is best are based on empirical evidence on

the relationship between model specification and predictive validity.


    3See Hausman and Wise [1985], for example.
                                        (3)




      Second, the models vary substantially in the computational complexity of

 the decision rules that they attribute to individual decision makers. The

 option value and the dynamic programming rules are both intended to capture

 the same underlying idea, but implementation of dynamic programming rules

 typically implies considerably more computational complexity than

 implementation of the option value rule. The option value model makes a

 simplifying assumption that substantially reduces complexity. The probit

model is much simpler than either of these.

      Third, although the mathematically correct implementation of some

decision rules requires dynamic programming, there is no single dynamic

programming rule. The implied computational complexity depends importantly on

specific assumptions, in particular the disturbance term correlation

structure. It is easier to incorporate more flexible correlation
                                                                     assumptions
in the option value than in the dynamic programming formulations. Thus, for

example, the option value specification may be a suboptimal solution to a

dynamic programming rule that implies computational complexity difficult to

implement even with a computer.

     Thus a question of practical importance is whether different decision

rules yield significantly different results.

     The comparisons in this paper are made by estimating the models on the

same data. The data, which pertain to the retirement decisions in    a large
Fortune 500 firm, have two important advantages for our purposes: first, the

retirement decisions can be related to the provisions of the firm's pension

plan, so that it is possible to simulate the effect of changes in the pension

plan provisions. Second, the firm offered an unanticipated window'     plan in
one of the years covered by the data.
                                      (4)




     The principal measure of the predictive validity of the models is how

well they predict the effects of the window plan. Like the typical defined

benefit pension plan, this firm's plan provides substantial incentives to

retire early. In addition, the window plan provided further incentive to

retire early. Window plans, which have been offered by many firms in recent

years, provide special bonuses to workers in a specific group -.    often   defined

by age, occupational group, or even a division within the firm --    if   the

worker retires within a specified period of time, typically a year or less.

The window plan allows a unique external test of the predictive validity of

the models; it is possible to compare model predictions against actual.

retirement rates under the window plan.

     We begin by obtaining model parameter estimates based on retirement

decisions in a year (1980) prior to the window plan. We then use these

estimates to predict retirement in a later year (1982) under the window plan.

The estimates and predictions are based on male non-managerial employees.

     A brief description of the firm plan, the special window plan, and the

data is presented in section I. A more detailed description, borrowed in

large part from Lumsd.aine, Stock, and Wise [l989a], is provided in appendix A.

The models that are compared are explained in section II.   The parameter

estimates and window plan predictions are presented in section III. Section

IV presents simulations of the effects of eliminating the Social Security

early retirement option. Conclusions are presented in section V.



I.   The Data, the Firm Pension Plan, and the Temporary Window.


     The analysis is based on a random sample of 993 male non-managerial

office employees at a Fortune 500 firm. They were employed at the firm and
                                          (5)




were at least 50 years old on January 1, 1980, and had been employed by the

firm   for   at least three years prior to 1980.   (The criterion that they be

employed three years facilitates the forecasting of future wage earnings on an

individual basis.)4

       The data, obtained from firm records, include the earnings history of

each employee from his year of employment or from 1969 if he was employed

before then, to retirement, or to 1983 if he had not retired by then. The

data allow determination of whether the employee continued to work at the firm

in successive years from 1980 through 1984. The data do not include the

employment status of workers who left the firm; some employees probably took

another job after departure from this firm.        Thus strictly speaking, the data

pertain to departure from the firm rather than retirement, but because we have

no information on post retirement employment we treat departure as retirement.

       The firm's employees are covered by a defined benefit pension plan. The

plan provides substantial incentive for the typical employee to remain in the

firm until age 55 and then an additional incentive to leave the firm before

age 65. The plan provisions are described in detail in appendix A. It has

four key features:

       1. The "normal" retirement age is 65.

       2. Workers are vested after ten years of service.

       3. The early retirement age is 55: a worker who departs before age 55
          receives benefits that are reduced actuarially (approximately 7
          percent per year) from the normal retirement age benefits, but the
          benefits of an employee who rvtires at 55 or later are reduced only
          about 3 percent per year, thus creating an incentive to stay until 55
          and then an incentive to leave the firm.



     4Employees who died between 1980 and 1982 before retiring were not
included in the sample.
                                       (6)




     4. The benefit formula incorporates a social security offset - - a
        reduction of firm benefits based on social security benefits -• but
        the offset is waived until age 65 for persons who retire at 55 or
        later, thus creating an additional incentive for workers to retire
        between 55 and 65.


In addition, an employee accrues a benefit entitlement from Social Security

(SS), with early retirement at age 62 and normal retirement at 65.

     Particularly important for this study is the firm's 1982 window plan.

Under the window plan, the firm offered non-managerial office employees a

temporary retirement incentive. The window plan applied to employees between

55 and 65 who were vested in the firm's pension plan, and to all employees

over 65. Employees who retired in 1982 were offered a bonus equivalent to 3

to 12 months salary. Although the exact bonus varied by years of service, it

was typically largest for employees who were between 58 and 62 years old and

was smallest for those 55 and 65. Of the 993 employees in our sample, 800

remained in the firm until 1982. The actual 1982 departure rates of these 800

employees are used to assess the out-of-sample predictive validity of the

three retirement models.



II. The Models


     Three retirement models are described, beginning with the "option value"

model. The simple probit model is explained next and then the dynamic

programming   specification.

     5For   a detailed description of this window plan and a discussion of the
design of efficient window plans, see Lumsdaine, Stock,   and Wise [l989b.
                                       (7)




     A.   The Option Value Model.

     The conceptual model is discussed in some detail in Stock and Wise

(1990aJ. It is described only briefly here. At any given age, based on

information available at that age, it is assumed that an employee compares the

expected present value of retiring at that age with the value of retiring at

each age in the future through age 70, which is the mandatory retirement age

in this firm. The maximum of the expected present values of retiring at each

future age, minus the expected present value of immediate retirement is called

the option value of postponing retirement. A person who does not retire this

year maintains the option of retiring at a more advantageous age later on.             If

the option value is positive, the person continues to work; otherwise he

retires. With reference to appendix figure A-i, for example, at age 50 the

employee would compare the value of the retirement benefits that he would

receive were he to retire then --   approximately   $28,000 --   with   the value of

wage earnings and retirement benefits in each future year. The expected

present value of retiring at 60 (discounted to age 50), for example, is about

$184,000. This calculation is repeated as the worker ages, using updated

predictions of future wage earnings, and related pension and Social Security

benefits. Future earnings forecasts are based on the individual's past

earnings, as well as the earnings of other persons in the firm.6 The precise

model specification follows.

     A person at age t who continues to work will earn Y in subsequent years

s. If the person retires at age r, subsequent retirement benefits will be

B5(r). These benefits will depend on the person's age and years of service at


     6See Stock and Wise [1990a] for a description of the earnings forecasts.
                                                       (8)




retirement and on his earnings history; thus they are a function of the

retirement age. We suppose that in deciding whether to retire the person

weighs the indirect utility that will be received from future income.

Discounted to age t       at   the rate , the value of this future stream of income

if retirement is at age r is given by



(1)         V(r) Z'w('s) + _8sUr(Bs(r)),

where U(Y5) is the indirect utility of future wage income and Ur(Bs(r)) is

the indirect utility of future retirement benefits. It is assumed that the

employee will not live past age S.

       The gain, evaluated at age t, from postponing retirement until age r is

given by



(2)         G(r) —     EV(r)      -
                                      EtVt(t).

Letting r* be the age that gives the maximum gain, the person will postpone

retirement if the option value, Gt(r*), is positive,



(3)         Gt(r*) —     EtVt(r*)     -
                                              EtV(t)   >   0



       The utilities of future wage and retirement income are paranieterized as



(4a)        IJ(Y5)
                     —     +


(4b)        Ur(Bs) —     (kB5(r))7        +
                                           (9)




where      and       are individual-specific random effects, assumed to follow a

Markovian (first order autoregressive) process



(Sa)             —        +       , E51(e)   — 0


(Sb)         s —     s-l s+        E5_1(5) — 0


The parameter k is to recognize that in considering whether to retire the

utility associated with a dollar of income while retired may be different from

the utility associated with a dollar of income accompanied by work.

Abstracting from the random terms, at any given age s, the ratio of the

utility of retirement to the utility of employment is [k(B5/Y5fl7.

       Given this specification, the function Gt(r) can be decomposed into two

components



(6)          G(r) —   g(r)    +



where g(r) and (r) distinguish the terms in Gt(r) containing the random

effects, w and , from the other terms. If whether the person is alive in

future years is statistically independent of his earnings stream and the

individual effects        and .     g(r)   and (r) are given by



(7a)         g(r) —

                      + t,(sIt)[E(kB(r))Y]
                      -
                          _tt1t)EEtBst]
                                          (10)




(7b)       (r) —     lflStl(It)E()
where (sIt) denotes the probability that the person will be alive in year s,

given that he is alive in year t.    Given the random Markov assumption, (r)
can be written as



(8)        (r) —

                  — K(r)v

where K(r) —   p)tr(slt)           and      —       -          The simplification

results from the fact that at time t      the    expected value of         —     -     is
         for all future years s.    (The term K(r) cumulates the deflators that

yield the present value in year t    of   the future expected values of the random

components of utility. The further r is in the future, the larger is K(r).

That is, the more distant the potential retirement age, the greater the

uncertainty about it, yielding a heterosked.astic disturbance term.)                 G(r)   may

thus be written simply as



(9)         G(r) —   g(r) + K(r)v

                                                               must be less than zero for
       If the employee is to retire in year t,          G(r)
every potential retirement age r in the future. If 4               is   the r that yields

the maximum value of g(r)/K(r). the probability of retirement becomes
                                            (11)




(10)        Pr[Recire in year t]     —
                                         Pr[g(r)/K(r)             < -vs]



If retirement in only one year is considered, this expression is all that is

needed.

       More generally, retirement decisions. may be considered over two or more

consecutive years. In this case the retirement probabilities are simply an

extension of equation (10). The probability that a person who is employed at

age t   will   retire at age r >   t is given   by



(11)        Pr[R—r] —
                        Pr[g(r)/K(r)        >
                                                -v
                                                              >


                                  g(rj)/K(r)       < -I',.]



The probability that the person does not retire during the period of the data

is given by



(12)        Pr[R>T] —
                        Pr[g(r)/K(4)        >
                                                -i
                                                              >

                                                   >


This    is a multinomial discrete choice probability with dependent error terms

V5.

       Finally,   we assume that      follows a Gaussian Markov process, with



(13)              —      +   E'       i.i.d.
                                               (12)




where the initial value, v, is i.i.d. N(O,c72) and is independent of                            The

covariance between           and          is pvar(I'), and the variance of           for r >     t
j   (p2(Tt))2 +     (f•t-l2i)2
     The estimates in this paper are based on retirement decisions in only one

year and the random terms in equation (5) are assumed to follow a random walk,

with p —   1.   In this case, the covariance between &'             and         is var(l/r), and

the variance of i      for   r     t    is 2 + (r-t)u2.    Prior estimates show that

one- and multiple-year estimates are very similar.7


     3. The Probit Modal.

     The option value model proposes that a person will continue to work if

the option value of postponing retirement -             - given   by Ct(r*) —    EtVt(r*)   -



EtV(t)   in equation (3) -       - is   greater than zero. In that model, the option

value is determined by estimation. That is, the observed retirement decisions

are described in terms of Pr(G(r *) >           0],   which in turn is described by a

particular parameterization of Vt(r). The maximum likelihood estimation

procedure determines these parameters -               ', k, ,   and a (and a if two or more

consecutive years are used in estimation). Thus one can think of this

procedure as estimating the option value, based on how employees value future

income and leisure.

    An   alternative   approach is to specify retirement in terms of the gain

from continuing to work, but to calculate the gain based on an assumed


     7Estimates based on several consecutive years and with p estimated are
shown in Stock and Wise [1990a]. These generalizations have little effect on
the estimates.
                                         (13)




valuation of income (determined by -y and k) and an assumed discount rate (a),

instead   of estimating them. Assuming that retirement depends on this

calculated option value, as well as other unobserved determinants of

retirement, a standard specification of retirement is


(14)       Pr(Retire in year t] —   Pr[60 + 6lGt(r*) +   c   > 0]


where Gt(r*) is the option value calculated under the presumed parameter

values, and assuming the random components of G(r) ((r) in (6) and (7b))

are all zero. This is a probit formulation, assuming that           has a normal

distribution.

       In this case, the effect of the assumed gain from retirement is estimated

by the parameter 81. This formulation is the closest probit counterpart to

the option value model. In addition to this specification, several others are

also estimated. The alternative specifications predict retirement on the

basis of SS benefits, pension benefits, the present value of SS benefits (SS

wealth), the present value of pension benefits (pension wealth), the change in

the present value of SS benefits from working another year (SS accrual), the

change in the present value of pension benefits from working another year

(pension accrual), predicted earnings in the next year, and age.


       C. The Stochastic Dynamic Programming Model.

       The key simplifying assumption in the Stock-Wise option value model is

that the retirement decision is based on the maximtlm of the expected present

values of future utilities if retirement occurs now versus each of the

potential future ages. The stochastic dynamic programming rule considers

instead the expected value of the maximum of current versus future options.
                                       (14)




The expected value of the maximum of a series of random variables will be

greater than the maximum of the expected values. Thus to the extent that this

difference is large, the Stock-Wise option value rule underestimates the value

of postponing retirement. And to the extent that the dynamic programming rule

is more consistent with individual decisions than the option value rule, the

Stock-Wise rule may undervalue individual assessment of future retirement

options. Thus we consider a model that rests on the dynamic programming rule.

       As emphasized above, it is important to understand that there is no

single dynamic programming model. Because the dynamic programming decision

rule evaluates the maximum of future disturbance terms, its implementation

depends importantly on the error structure that is assumed. Like other users

of this model, we assume an error structure - -   and   thus a behavioral rule - -

that   simplifies the dynamic programming calculation. In particular, although

the option value model allows correlated disturbances, the random disturbances

in the dynamic programming model are assumed to be uncorrelated, except for a

random individual effect that is used in some specifications. Thus the two

models are not exactly comparable. Whether one rule is a better approximation

to reality than the other may depend not only on the basic idea, but on its

precise implementation.

       In fact, we implement two versions of the dynamic programming model. In

the first model, disturbance terms are assumed to follow an extreme value

distribution. This model is adopted from Berkovec and Stern [1988], with two

modifications: first Berkovec and Stern consider three outcomes (full time

work, part time work, and retirement) whereas we consider only two (full time

work and retirement, the only states for which we have data). Second, the way
                                         (15)




that we accotmt for individual-specific effects differs from the Berkovec and

Stern formulation.

        In the second dynamic programming model, the disturbances are assumed to

be normally distributed. This formulation is adopted from the Daula and

Moffitt (1989] dynamic programming model of retention in the military. Our

model generalizes their specification by allowing for additive individual-

specific disturbances and by specifying retirement in terms of a parameterized

utility function. With the additional assumption that the unobserved

individual-specific effects are normally distributed across employees, the

error structure in this dynamic programming specification is similar to the

structure in the option value model. In both cases, future errors are

normally distributed with non-zero covariances. In the option value model the

covariance structure derives from the random walk assumption; in the dynamic

programming model, the covariances derive from a components of variance

structure, with an individual-specific effect.

        A more general dynamic programming model of retirement has been developed

by Rust [1989]. Unfortunately, comparison with his model is beyond the scope

of this study. He assumes that an employee optimizes jointly over both age of

retirement and future consumption. By admitting continuous and discrete

choice variables, his model poses substantially greater numerical complexity

than the ones we implement.

        In most respects our dynamic programming   model is analogous to the option
value    model. As in that model, at age t   an   individual   is   assumed to derive

utility   U(Y) + lt from      earned income or Ur(Bt(s)) +     E2t from retirement
benefits,   where s is the retirement age. The disturbances              and     are

random   perturbations to   these age-specific utilities. Unlike the additive
                                              (16)




disturbances in the option value model, these additive disturbances in the

dynamic      programming model are assumed to be independent. Future income and
retirement benefits are assumed to be nonrandom; there are no errors in
forecasting future wage earnings or retirement benefits.
       Individuals        presumably will have different preferences for employment

versus retirement. Variation in preferences is allowed for in the extreme

value distribution version of our model by including individual-specific

effects in                and U(.). They are assumed to be fixed for each person, but

vary randomly from person to person. Berkovec and Stern modeled these

individual-specific effects as additional additive errors. In the extreme-

value    distribution version       of our model they enter multiplicatively. In the

normal distribution version of our model, the random fixed effects enter

additively, as explained below.


        1.    The Model.
       The dynamic programming model is based on the recursive representation of

the value function. At the beginning of year t, the individual has two

choices: retire now and derive utility from future retirement benefits, or

work for the year and derive utility from income while working during the year

and   retaining the        option to choose the best of retirement or work in the next

year. Thus the value function              at time t is defined as


(15) W —       max(E[U(Y) + lt + t+l1' Et(_tTt(Ur(3r(t)) +
with           —
                       max(E+1[U(Y÷i)   + lt+l +

                                         Et+l[Et+ltl(TJr(Br(t+1)) +
        etc.   .   .
                                           (17)




where fi    is   the discount factor and, as in the option value model, S is the

year beyond which the person will not live.

   Because the errors Eit are assumed to be i.i.d. Eci+—O for r>0. In

addition, in computing expected values, each future utility must be discounted

by the probability of realizing it, i.e. ,        by   the probability of surviving to

year r given that the worker is alive in year t, (rJt). With these

considerations, the expression (15) can be written as



                  —
                      max(Wi + 'it, 2t + £2t) , where

(16)         lt —     U(Y)   + (t+lIt)EWt+1




   The worker chooses to retire in year t if lt÷lt < 2t'-2t otherwise he

continues working. The probability that the individual retires is

Pr[Wl+El < W2+Et]. If a person works until the mandatory retirement age

(70), he retires and receives expected utility W2.


       2.    Recursions and computation.

       With a suitable assumption on the distribution of the errors              the

expression (16) provides the basis for a computable recursion for the

nonstochastic terms           in the value function. The extreme value and normal

distribution versions of the model are considered in turn.

       a.    Extreme Value Errors. Following Berkovec and Stern [1988}, the

are assumed to be i.i.d. draws from an extreme value distribution with scale

parameter .        Then, for the years preceding mandatory retirement, these

assumptions together with equation (16) imply that
                                             (18)




             EtW÷1/ —     t+l
                —
(17)                1e + ln[exp(W1+i/a) + exp(W2t+i/)]

                —     +                                              + exp(W2t+i/o)]



where        is Euler's constant. Thus (17) can be solved by backwards recursion,

with the terminal value coming from the terminal condition that               —

  The extreme value distributional assumption provides a closed form

expression for the probability of retirement in year t:



(18)         Pr[Retire in year t] —       Pr[1t   + lt <    + 2t1

                                      —
                                          exp(2t/a)/(exp(W1/c) + exp 2t"

        b.   Gaussian Errors. Following Daula and Moffitt [19891 the              are

assumed to be independent draws from an N(O,a2) distribution. The Gaussian

assumption provides a simple expression for the probability of retiring:



(19)         Pr(Retire in year t] —                        < (W2t-Wlt)/J) —


where at —     (2t-lt)/Ja.        Then the recursion (16) becomes:



(20) EtWt+i/a —       t+l   —
                                (1t+i/c)(1-(at+i))    + (W2+1/ci)(a+t) +



where (.) denotes the standard normal density, and (.) denotes the

cumulative normal distribution function. As in (19), (a) is the probability
                                                (19)




that the person retires in year t            and receives utility W2, plus utility from

E(E2t I             <   W2W1.           The latter term, plus a comparable term when

the person continues to work, yields the last term in equation (20).



        3. Individual-specific effects.

        Individual-specific terms are modeled as random effects but are assumed

to be fixed over time for a given individual. They enter the two versions of

the dynamic programming models in different ways. Each is discussed in turn.



        a.    Extreme Value Errors. Single year utilities are



(21a)              1J(Yt) —


(2lb)                         —



where        is constant over time for the same person but random across

individuals. Specifically, it is assumed that ,            is   a lognormal random

variable with mean one and scale parameter A:              — exp(Az+½.X2), where z is

i.i.d. N(O,l). A larger A implies greater variability among              employee tastes
for retirement versus work; when A—0 there is no variation and all employees
have    the same taste.

        b.   Normal Errors. In this case, the unobserved individual components

are assumed to enter additively, with



(22a)             U(Yt) —         + c


(22b)             U(B(s)) — (kB(s))7
                                         (20)




where 'y and k are nonrandom parameters, as above, but      is a random additive

taste for work, assumed to distributed N(0,A2). When A —      0, there is no taste
variation.

     In summary:    the   dynamic programming models are given by the general

recursion equation (15). It is implemented as shown in equation (17) under

the assumption that the Eit are i.i.d. extreme value, and as shown in equation

(20) under the assumption that it are i.i.d. normal. The retirement

probabilities are computed according to equations (18) and (19) respectively.

The fixed effects specifications are given by equations (21) and (22). The

unknown parameters to be estimated are (-y,k,$,o,A).     Because   of the different

distributional assumptions, the scale parameter       is not comparable across

option value or dynamic proramminz models, and A is not comparable across the

two dynamic prorammirtg models.




III. Results.


        The option value and the dynamic programming specifications yield quite

similar results and both provide rather good predictions of retirement

behavior under the window plan. The probit specifications yield very poor

predictions of retirement under the window plan, although some specifications

fit the sample data well. The parameter estimates are discussed first,

together with standard measures of fit. We then graphically describe the

correspondence between predicted versus actual retirement behavior, with

emphasis on out-of-sample predictions of retirement under the 1982 window

plan.
                                      (21)


     A.   Parameter estimates.

     1. The Probit Model.

     The parameter estimates for several probit specifications are shown in

table 1. The variables are defined as follows:

     Option value: Ct(r*) calculated as described in Section II.A with -y — 1,
     k — 1, and fi — .95.
     Age: age in years.

     Income: the predicted wage earnings in the following year, if the person
     continues to work.

     SS pv (present value): the predicted present value of entitlement to
     future SS benefits, were the person to retire at the beginning of the
     year, SS wealth.

     Pension pv (present value): the predicted present value of entitlement
     to future firm pension benefits, were the person to retire at the
     beginning of the year, pension wealth.

     55 accrual: the predicted change in the present value of entitlement to
     future SS benefits, were the person to continue to work for another year.

     Pension acc (accrual): the predicted change in the present value of
     entitlement to future firm pension benefits, were the person to continue
     to work for another year.


     The parameter estimates are with respect to the probability that a person

will retire. Thus the negative option value coefficient in specification 1

indicates that the greater the option value of continuing to work the less

likely the person is to retire. To interpret this specification, recall that

the principal difference between this probit specification and the option

value model is the use of assumed parameter values to calculate the option

value variable used in the probit model. If this probit specification were

estimated using the optimized option value model parameters discussed below

(table 2) and if the intercept were forced to be zero, then the probit model
                                     (22)




would essentially reproduce the option value model, except for the

heteroskedastic disturbance term incorporated in the option value model.

     The addition of age (specification 2) substantially improves the model

fit, but as is shown in the graphical comparison below, this specification has

little behavioral relevance.

     Specifications 3 through 9 are intended to parallel the specification

used by Hausman and Wise [1985) in their proportional hazard model of

retirement. The probit model is a one period counterpart to the Hausman and

Wise analysis that followed older workers for ten years, covering 5 two-year

periods. Their analysis relied solely on SS wealth and SS accrual (plus other

personal attributes), however; they had no firm pension data. Specification S

shows that both SS and pension accrual are associated with continued

employment, but the estimated coefficients would suggest substantial

difference in the magnitude of the effects; the SS accrual coefficient is two

and one-half times as large as the pension coefficient (-21.43 versus -8.64).

(When the SS and the pension wealth and accrual variables are combined

(specifications 5 and 7), however, the estimated effects are much closer to

the pension than the SS effects.) Neither the SS nor the pension wealth

coeffthient is significantly different from zero, although both are positive.

     The exclusion of the SS variables has little effect on the estimated

effects of pension wealth and accrual (specification 9 versus 8), but the

exclusion of the pension variables has a substantial effect on the estimated

SS effects (specification 10 versus 8). This suggests that other estimates of

the effects of SS on retirement, such as those in Hausman and Wise, nay be

biased because they do not control for firm pension benefits. Hausman and

Wise, for example, find a strong estimated effect of both SS present value and
                                      (23)




SS accrual, but they do not have data on the corresponding pension values. In

addition, the x2 sample statistics show that the specifications with the

pension variables fit the sample data much better than the specification with

only SS variables (specifications 8 and 9 versus 10). And with only SS

variables, the effect of the window plan cannot be predicted, except by

assuming that the effect of pension accrual or wealth is the same as the

corresponding SS effect. Specification 8 shows that this is far from accurate

in this case.

     Higher expected wage earnings prolong labor force participation,

according to these results.

     Likelihood values and two x2 statistics are shown at the bottom of the

table. Aside from the specification that explicitly includes age, the highest

likelihood value is obtained using expected wage earnings for the coming year

and SS and pension wealth and accruals (specification 8). The sample

statistic compares predicted versus actual departure rates by age, based on

the 1980 data used in the estimation. The window x2 statistic compares

predicted versus actual departure rates by age under the 1982 window plan.


     2. The Option Value Model.

     Parameter estimates from the option value model are shown in the first

two columns of table 2. The income parameter y   (the   risk aversion parameter

in U(Y5) —      + w5) is 0.612, suggesting essentially risk neutral
preferences. The estimated value of k in Ur(Bs) —
                                                    (k35(r))7   +     is   1.477,

implying that a dollar without working is worth more than a dollar with work,

although the estimate is not significantly different from 1. The estimated
                                         (24)




value of , 0.895, suggests that future expected or promised income is rather

highly discounted relative to income now.


     3.   Dynamic Programming Model.

     The estimated parameters based on the dynamic programming decision rule

are shown in the remaining columns of table 2. In general, the estimates are

similar to those based on the option value rule. The estimated value of -y     in
the extreme value version (specification 2) is close to, and not significantly

different from, one, implying that individuals are risk neutral (that utility

is linear in income). The normal version (specification 5) also yields an

estimated y   that   is not significantly different from one, but is substantially

larger than the option value estimate (1.19 versus 0.61). Like the option

value results, the dynamic programming results suggest that the value of

income together with retirement is substantially greater than the value of

income together with work, although the dynamic programming models yield

larger estimated values of k. And like the option value estimates the dynamic

programming estimates indicate that future income is substantially discounted

relative to current income in the determination of retirement. The normal

specifications yield discount factors close to the option value estimates; the

extreme value specification implies larger discount rates.

     Estimates of the models including randqm individual components are

reported as specifications (3) and (6). In neither case does inclusion of

random individual effects significantly affect other parameter estimates. In

the normal version, the variance of the individual effect is not significantly

different from zero, implying no variation in taste for retirement versus work

among these employees. The extreme value version suggests variation that is
                                     (25)




significantly different from zero and the specification fits the data somewhat

better than the specifications without the individual component. In neither

case does the individual component noticeably improve the prediction of the

window plan effects.

     Based on the likelihood values the more forward looking models fit the

data better than the probit specifications, with the exception of the probit

with age. Overall, there is little difference in the likelihood values of the

option value and the dynamic programming specifications.

     The most informative x2 statistics pertain to the prediction of departure

rates under the 1982 window plan. In this case the forward looking models

predict actual departure rates substantially better than the probit

specifications.


     B.   Graphical Comparisons.

     1.   The Option Value versus Dynamic Programming Results.

     The easiest way to compare the models is by graphing their implied

departure rates. The option value results (model (2) in Table 2) are used as

a base for comparison and the relevant results are shown in figures la and lb.

Figure la shows the within sample fit. Departure (hazard) rates by age are

shown in the top panel. The cumulative departures implied by the departures

by age are shown in the bottom panel. For example, according to the observed

departure rates, 72.0 percent of persons employed at age 50 would have left

the firm by age 62; based on the predicted departure rates the cumulative

percent is 77.7. In general, the predicted departure rates correspond closely

to the actual rates. For example, like the actual rates, the predicted rates

show substantial jumps at 55, 60, and 62, all of which correspond to specific
                                       (26)




pension plan and SS provisions as described in appendix A. A noticeable

exception occurs at age 65; among the small proportion of employees still in

the firm at that age a much larger proportion leaves the firm than the model

predicts. This finding is common to all employee groups and to all versions

of the option value model that we have estimated to date. It is apparently

due to an "age-65-retirement-effect" that is unrelated to earnings or

retirement benefits.

      As a test of the predictive validity of the model, the estimates based on

1980 departure rates have been used to predict departure rates under the 1982

window plan. The departure rates of persons offered the window plan bonus

were typically about twice as high as they were without this special

incentive.     Predicted versus actual rates under the window plan are shown     in
figure   ib, together with 1981 actual rates. Like the actual rates, the

predicted rates under the window plan are much higher than the 1981 rates.

Thus in general the model predicts an effect that is comparable in order of

magnitude to the actual effect. The option value model, however, tends to

overpredict departure rates for persons between 55 and 58 and to underpredict

rates for those between 63 and 65. Because departures between 55 and 58 are

overpredictad, the predicted cumulative departures are higher than the actual

cumulative rates through age 62, as shown in the bottom panel of the figure.

(The actual and predicted departure rates used in figures la and lb are shown

in   appendix tables B-la and B-lb.)

       For comparison, the same graphs are reproduced in figures 2a and 2b, but

with the extreme value dynamic programming (specification 2) predictions

added. The two models yield very similar results. Although the likelihood

values from the two models are about the same,   the   dynamic   programming within
                                      (27)


sample     measure of fit is better than the option value measure (as shown in

table 2) and this is reflected in figure 2a. In particular, the dynamic

programming model fits departure rates between 55 and 59 somewhat better than

the option value model does. Thus the implied cumulative rates from the

dynamic programming model track the actual rates better than the option value

model predictions do.

     On the other hand, departure rates under the window plan (figure 2b) are

predicted better by the option value than by the dynamic programming model,

although the differences are not large. The dynamic programming

overprediccion of departure rates between 55 and 59 is greater than the option

value overprediction at these ages. In addition the dynamic programming model

overpredicts departure rates through age 63 as well, while the option value

model underpredicts departure rates beginning at age 61. (The actual and

predicted departure rates used in figures 2a and 2b are shown in appendix

tables Z-2a and B-2b.)

     The extreme value and the normal versions of the dynamic programming

model are compared in figures 3a and 3b. As the figures show, there is little

difference between the predictions from the two   specifications,   although the

normal version fits actual departure rates under the window plan somewhat

better than the extreme value version. The normal model       sample statistic

is slightly larger than the extreme value statistic, but the normal x2 window

statistic is lower than the corresponding extreme value statistic, as shown in

table 2.

     The three models are compared in figure 4.   The figure shows the

difference between the 1982 and 1980 predicted departure rates based on the

three models, versus the difference between the actual 1982 and 1980 rates.
                                        (28)




As the previous figures suggest, the three models yield very similar results,

although the option value model tends to underestimate the effects of the

window plan whereas the dynamic programming models tend to overestimate the

effects.

        In summary: in accordance with the actual effect of the window plan,

both the option value and the dynamic programming models predict a large

increase in departure rates under the window plan. This comparison does not

suggest to us that one model is noticeably better or worse than the other.


        2. Selected Probit )(odel Results.

        The graphs confirm that the probit models are typically inferior to the

more behavioral forward-looking models. But probit specifications that

include forward-looking variables capture some of the important features of

the option value and the dynamic programming rules. The results of the probit

model using the calculated option value variable (computed with —l, k—l and

fi—.   95) are graphed in figures 5a and Sb. This specification shows very little

variation in retirement rates with age, as shown in the top panel of figure

5a, and the implied cumulative rates yield a poor approximation to the actual

rates. The model predicts very little response to the window plan.

        By using both the calculated option value variable and age it is possible

to fit the observed departure rates well, as shown in figure 6a. But this

specification has essentially no behavioral implications: as revealed in

figure 6b, there is almost no predicted response to the windnw plan.

        The probit specification with the best fit (excluding the specification

with age) is based on the current present value of SS and pension benefit

entitlements (accumulated SS and pension wealth), the accrual in SS and
                                      (29)




pension wealth if the person works another year, and expected wage income if

the person works another year (specification 8 in table 1). This model fits

the sample data about as well as the forward looking models; indeed it yields

a lower within sample x2 statistic than these more behavioral models.

Essentially the same results are obtained when the SS and pension wealth

variables are excluded (specification 6 in table 1).

     But both of these probit specifications greatly overpredict retirement

rates under the window plan, as shown in figures 7b and 8b. The window

statistics also show that the forward looking models predict the window plan

departure rates much better than the probit models do. Aside from the details

of functional form, the basic difference between the models is that the probit

specification assumes that retirement decisions are based on a rule that

involves looking ahead only one period, whereas the option value and the

dynamic programming rules consider all future potential retirement dates. In

this instance at least, a rule that incorporates evaluation of events in the

foreseeable future is more consistent with individual behavior than one that

limits consideration to events in the next year only.



IV. A Simulation: the elimination of the Social Security early retirement.


     As a further comparison of the models, we have simulated the effect of

removing the SS early retirement option, so that SS benefits are only

available beginning at age 65. A comparison of predicted retirement rates

with and without the SS early retirement is shown in Table 3 by model for ages

60 through 65.

    According to the simulation based on the option value model, eliminating

Social Security early retirement reduces predicted retirement rates among
                                           (30)




 persons 62 through 64 by about 23 percent. The extreme value dynamic

 programming specification shows noticeably larger effects, but the effects

based on the normal dynamic programming specification are smaller than the

option value estimated effects.

      Because a large proportion of employees in this firm have already left

the firm before 62, the reduction applies to only the small proportion of

employees who are still working and thus the effect on the overall retirement

is small. To the extent that these reductions generalize to workers not

covered by defined benefit plans .with incentives for early retirement, these

estimates suggest that an increase in the SS early retirement age would have a

very substantial effect on labor force participation. A large proportion of

retired persons rely almost exclusively on SS benefits for retirement income.

According to these estimates, substantially fever of these employees would

leave the labor force if they could not collect SS benefits.

     Because of data limitations, it has been common to use parameter

estimates from models that exclude firm pension plan data to simulate the

effect of changes in SS provisions. To demonstrate the potential effect of

the exclusion of firm plans, we have estimated the. dynamic programming normal

model (specification 5) using only SS benefits -     - instead   of SS and the firm

pension benefits - -   and   these estimates have been used to simulate the effect

of the elimination of SS early retirement. The results are shown in table 4.

compared to the dynamic programming normal estimates. The estimated effect of

the elimination of SS early retirement is much greater when the firm pension

is not accounted for. For example, the retirement rate at 62 is reduced from

.291 to .081; the base model yields a reduction from .241 to 205.
                                        (31)




 V.     Summary.


        We have compared the in-sample and out-of-sample predictive
                                                                    performance
of three models of retirement. The goal was to determine which of the

retirement rules most closely matched observed retirement behavior in a large

firm.    The primary measure of predictive validity was the correspondence

between the model predictions of retirement behavior and actual retirement

under the firm window plan. Model parameter estimates were obtained based on

retirement in 1980. These estimates were then used to predict retirement in

1982 when the window plan was in effect. Retirement rates of persons eligible

for the window plan bonus typically doubled in 1982,   compared to earlier (and
later) years.

      The option value and the dynamic programming models fit the sample data

equally well, with a slight advantage to the normal dynamic programming model.

Both models correctly predicted a very large increase in retirement under the

window plan, with some advantage in fit to the option value model. In short,

this evidence suggests that the option value and dynamic programming models

are considerably more successful than the less complex probit model in

approximating the rules individuals use to make retirement decisions, but that

the more complex dynamic programming rule approximates behavior no better than

the simpler option value rule. More definitive conclusions will have to await

accumulated evidence based on additional comparisons using different data sets

and with respect to different pension plan provisions.
                                      (32)




                                  Appendix A

                           The Firm Retirement Plan



     To understand the effect of the pension plan provisions, Figure A-i shows

the expected future compensation of a person from our sample who is 50 years

old and has been employed by the firm for 20 years. For convenience, Figure

A-l assumes a 5 percent real discount rate and zero inflation. In the

estimated model reported in Section III, the discount rate is estimated and

the inflation rate is assumed to be 5 percent. Total compensation from the

firm can be viewed as the sum of wage earnings, the accrual of pension

benefits, and the accrual of Social Security benefits. (This omits medical

and other unobserved benefits that should be included as compensation, but on

which we do not have data.) As compensation for working another year the

employee receives salary earnings. He also receives compensation in the form

of future pension benefits. The annual compensation in this form is the

change in the present value of the future pension benefits entitlement, due to

working an additional year. This accrual is comparable to wage earnings. The

accrual of Social Security benefits also may be calculated in a similar

manner, and is also comparable to wage earnings. Figure A-i shows the present

value at age 50 of expected future compensation in all three forms. The line

labelled wage earnings represents cumulated earnings, by age of retirement

(more precisely, by age of departure from the firm, since some workers might

well continue to work in another job). For example, if the person were to

retire at age 62, his cumulated earnings between age 50 and age 62, discounted

to age 50 dollars would be about $144,000. The slope of the earnings line

represents annual earnings discounted to age 50 dollars.
                                          (33)




      The solid line shows the accrual of firm      pension   plus Social Security

 benefits, again discounted to age 50 dollars. The shape of this profile is

 determined primarily by the pension plan provisions. The plan's normal

 retirement age is 65 and the early retirement age is 55. Cliff vesting occurs

at ten years of service. Normal retirement benefits at age 65 are determined

by age times years of service, multiplied by some constant factor. The most

important additional provisions -    - those   that determine the shape of the

profile in Figure A-i -   - are   described here; full details of the plan

provisions are presented in Kotlikoff and Wise [1987]. The present value of

retirement benefits increases between 50 and 54 because        years of service, and

possibly earnings, increase. An employee could leave the firm at age 53, for

example. If he were to do that, and if he were vested in the firm's pension

plan he would be entitled to normal retirement pension benefits at
                                                                          age 65,
based on his years of service and current dollar earnings at age 53. He could

start to receive benefits as early as age 55, the pension early retirement

age, but the benefit amount would be reduced actuarially. Thus in present

value terms, the stream of benefits received beginning at 55 would be equal to

the stream of benefits beginning at 65; the annual benefit amount would be

reduced just enough to offset the receipt of benefits for ten more years. If

he started to receive benefits at age 55, they would be only 36 percent of the

dollar amount he would receive at age 65. If, however, he were to remain in

the firm until the early retirement age, the situation would be quite

different. He would be entitled to normal retirement benefits based on his

years of service and salary at age 55. But, if he were to start to receive

them at age 55, the benefits would be reduced less than actuarially, about 3
                                           (34)




percent for each year that retirement precedes age 65, instead of 6 or 7

percent.

       In addition, the plan has a Social Security offset provision. Pension

benefits are offset by a specified amount, depending on the firm estimate of

Social Security benefits. But if the person takes early retirement, between

55 and 65, the Social Security offset is not applied to benefits received

before age 65. These two provisions create the large discontinuous jump in

retirement benefits at age 55 --      from about $33,000 to $56,000. This increase
is equivalent to more than 130 percent on his annual wage earnings at 55. Thus

there is an enormous bonus for remaining with the firm until that age. After

age 55, however, the person who does not retire foregoes the opportunity of

taking pension benefits on very advantageous terms. Thus the minimal change

in the discounted value of benefits between 55 and 60.

       If a person has 30 years of service at age 60, he is entitled to full

normal retirement benefits. No early retirement reduction is applied to

benefits if they are taken then. That is, by continuing to work he will no

longer gain from fewer years of early retirement reduction, as he did before

age 60. Thus the kink in the profile and the decline thereafter.

       The top line shows total compensation. For example, if the employee were

to leave the firm at age 60, his wage earnings between 50 and 60 would be

$126,000, shown by the wage earnings line. Thereafter, he would receive firm

pension plan and Social Security retirement benefits with a present value - -

at   age 50 --   of   about $58,000. The sum of the two is about $184,000, shown by

the top line. The large jump at 55 reflects the early retirement provisions

of the pension plan. Total compensation declines modestly each year through

age 60 and very rapidly thereafter. After age 62 or 63, annual total

compensation is close to zero.
          Figure A-i. Present discounted values of
          future earnings and retirement benefits,
            as a function of date of retirement.

T   200
h
0
U
S
a   150
n
d
S

    100
0
f
d
0   50

a
r
S    0
      50     52   54   56   58     60   62   64    66   68
                                 Age
                                          (35)




                                     Appendix B

              Tabulations of Predicted and Actual Retirement Rates



      This Appendix presents tabulations of the values presented graphically in

Figures 1-2. These figures are the predicted and actual retirement rates, or

hazard rates, for the employees in the data set, and the associated cumulative

retirement rates.

      The actual retirement rates for each age group are the fraction of

workers of that age who retire during the indicated year. The predicted

retirement rates are the aggregate rates predicted by the indicated model;

that is, the predicted retirement rate is the average predicted probability of

retiring for all workers of the indicated age.

      The cumulative retirement rates are computed from the single-year

retirement rates by following a cohort of 100 50-year olds at the firm for the

next 20 years, assuming that the annual retirement rates for this cohort are

the same as the annual retirement rates for the indicated year, predicted or

actual as the case may be. For example, in 1980 the actual retirement rates

(in our sample of 993 workers) of 50, 51. and 52 year olds were respectively

.00, .022, and .054. Thus the cumulative retirement rate for 52-year olds is

1 -   (l-.00)(l-.022)(l-.054)   — .075.

      The numbering of the tables in this appendix corresponds to the numbering

of the figures in the text: the values plotted in Figure la appear in Table B-

la, etc.
                                       Table 3-la
                                     Figure   1* data.



                         Cumulative Retirement Rates     Aimua]. Retirement Rates
            Number of
Age       Observations    Actual        Predicted        Actual         Predicted

 50            83           .000           .023           .000            .023
 51            89           .022           .042           .022            .019
 52           74            .075           .055           .054            .014
 53           64            .133           .067           .063            .012
 54           77            .133           .079           .000            .013
 55           64           .174           .167            .047            .095
 56           64           .212           .246            .047            .095
 57           61           .277           .324            .082            .104
 58           81           .340           .419            .086            .141
 59           74           .366           .506            .041            .149

 60           85           .530           .621           .259             .233
 61           37           .594           .698           .135             .204
 62           42           .720           .777           .310             .262
 63           39           .784           .847           .231             .313
 64           35           .846           .902           .286             .360

 65           20           .977           .936           .850             .346
 66            4           .988           .954           .500             .283



Note: The actual   retirement rates were computed for the 1000 persons in the
sample.    The predicted retirement rates are based on option value model 2.
                                Table B-lb
                              Figure lb data.



         Cumulative Retirement Rates              Annual Retirement Rates

        Actual    Actual    Predicted       Actual        Actual    Predicted
Age      1981       1982       1982             1981       1982       1982


 50      .000       .000       .023             .000       .000       .023
 51      .036       .022       .042             .036       .022       .019
 52      .036       .022       .053             .000       .000       .012
 53      .036       .044       .059             .000       .023       .006
 54      .052       .044       .062             .017       .000       .003

 55      .139       .126       .192             .091       .085       .139
 56      .195       .163       .323             .066       .043       .162
 57      .249       .251       .480             .066       .105       .232
 58      .276       .382       .635             .036       .175       .299
 59      .286       .600       .758             .014       .352       .335

 60      .366       .770       .860             .113       .425       .424
 61      .467       .887       .923             .159       .508       .448
 62      .617       .951       .961             .281       .566       .498
 63      .723       .983       .978             .276       .652       .444
 64      .824       .995       .988             .367       .714       .445

 65      .930       .999       .993             .600       .895       .454
 66      .953       1.000      .996             .333       .700       .449




Note: Based on 1980 option value model 2 parameter estimates, reported in
table 2. The simulation is described in the text.
                                    Tabi. 3-2a
                                  Figure 2a data.

                       Cumulative Retirement Ratea      Annual Retirement Rates
        Number   of            Option     Dynamic              Option
Age   Observations    Actual    Value                                     Dynamic
                                        Programming   Actual   Value    Programming


51                                                              .023       .021
           89          .022    .042        .043        .022
52        74
                                                               .019        .022
                      .075     .055        .065        .054     .014       .023
53        64          .133     .067        .090        .063
54                                                             .012        .027
          77          .133     .079        .117        .000    .013        .029
55        64          .174     .167       .179         .047    .095       .070
56        64          .212     .246       .240         .047
57                                                             .095       .074
          61          .277     .324       .303        .082     .104
58        81
                                                                          .082
                      .340     .419       .381        .086     .141       .112
59        74          .366     .506       .461        .041     .149       .129
60        85          .530     .621       .562        .259     .233
61
                                                                          .188
          37          .594     .698       .639        .135     .204       .176
62        42          .720     .777       .736        .310
63
                                                               .262       .269
          39          .784     .847       .819        .231     .313
64        35
                                                                          .314
                      .846     .902       .874        .286     .360       .305
65        20          .977     .936       .914        .850     .346
66         4
                                                                          .320
                      .988     .954       .940        .500     .283       .295
                                          Table 1-2b
                                       Figure 2b data.



               Cwiulative Retirement Rates                Annual Retirement   Rates

                                      Predicted                                  Predicted
                         Predicted     Dynamic                     Predicted      Dynamic
      Actual    Actual     Option Programming     Actual Actual     Option      Programming
Age    1981       1982   Value 1982     1982       1981     1982 Value 1982           1982


 50    .000       .000      .023        .021       .000     .000      .023            .021
 51    .036       .022      .042        .043       .036     .022      .019            .022
 52    .036       .022      .053        .062       .000     .000      .012            .020
53     .036       .044      .059        .082       .000     .023      .006            .022
 54    .052       .044      .062        .103       .017     .000      .003            .023

55     .139       .126      .192        .199       .091     .085      .139            .107
56     .195       .163      .323        .329       .066     .043      .162            .162
57     .249       .251      .480        .506       .066     .105      .232            .264
58     .276       .382      .635        .696       .036     .175     .299             .384
59     .286       .600      .758        .827       .014     .352     .335             .430

60     .366       .770      .860        .917       .113     .425     .424             .524
61     .467      .887       .923       .967        .159     .508     .448             .604
62     .617      .951       .961       .990        .281     .566     .498             .703
63     .723      .983       .978       .997        .276     .652     .444             .693
64     .824      .995       .988       .999        .367     .714     .445             .622

65     930       .999       .993       .999        .600     .895     .454         .543
66     .953      1.000      .996       1.000       .333     .700     .449         .457
                                      (36)




                                   References



Berkovec, James and Steven Stern. 1988. "Job Exit Behavior of Older Men."

     Mimeo.

Burtless, Gary. 1986. "Social Security, Unanticipated Benefit Increases, and

     the Timing of Retirement," Review of Economic Studies 53, October, pp.

     781-805.

Daula, Thomas V. and Robert A. Moffitt. 1989. "A Dynamic Model of Enlisted

     Retention Behavior in the Army." Mimeo, April.

Custman, Alan and Thomas Steinmeier. 1986. "A Structural Retirement Model,"

    Econometr.Lca, Vol. 54, pp. 555-584.

Hausman, Jerry A. and David A. Wise. 1985. "Social Security, Health Status,

     and Retirement," in D. Wise (ed.), Pensions. Labor, and Individual

     Choice. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 159-191.

Hurd, Michael and Michael Boskin. 1981. "The Effect of Social Security on

    Retirement in the Early 1970s," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 46,

    November, pp. 767-790.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and David A. Wise. 1987. "The Incentive Effects of

     Private Pension Plans," in Z. Bodie, J. Shoven, and D. Wise (eds.),

     Issues in Pension Economics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.

     283-339.

Lumsdaine, Robin L., James H. Stock, and David A. Wise. l989a. "Windows and

    Retirement." Forthcoming in Annales d'Economie et de Statistique.

__________________     1989b,   "Efficient Windows and Labor   Force   Reduction."

     Forthcoming in Journal of Public Economics.
                                                            Table 1
                                              Probit     parameter estimates

                                                  SpciZicsttan
 Vaxiabi.         (1)        (2>        (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)        (7)        (0)        (9)        (10)


 Constant         -0.3$      —7.16      —1.00      —0.62      —1.10     —0.11      —0.71      —0.6)      —0.71       —1.63
                  (0.11)     (1.06)     (0.10)     (0.06)     (0.10)     (0.11)     (0.10)     (0.46)     (0.12)     (0.24)

 0ptio vi.tu.     -0.61      -0.30
                  (0.09)     (0.09)


 Aj.                         0.11
                             (0.02)

 Inc.                                   0.70       3.i1        3.0?     —1.71       1.$1       2.66       3.21        0.94
                                       (0.28)     (0.70)     (0.70)     (0.34)     (0.33)     (0.79)     (0.16)      (0.31)
 53 pv                                             0.69                                        0.90                  2.79
                                                  (0.08)                                      (1.09)                (0.71)
 P.nsion pv                                        1.39                                        0.32       0.53
                                                  (0.16)                                      (0.25)     (0.24)
33+Pan pv                                                     1.38
                                                             (0.17)
35 •CCIU&J.                                                            —26.47                —21.43                —27.34
                                                                        (2.44)                (0.64)                (3.66)
         aGo
                                                                       —10.63                 -8.86      -7.39
                                                                        (1.1$)                (1.73)     (1.38)
SS+?SD 5CC
                                                                                  -10.86
                                                                                   C1.11)

 in Z           219.22     277.73     339.89     298.32     296.38     262.62     284.22     281.38     284.83     321.98

                59.1        33.3      179.3       64.6       65.3      29.1       31.1       28.2       38.2       143.9
 2
                180.3      108.2      312.2      191.2      164.9      76.4       13.6       67.3       37.3       229.7



Notes:  Estimation is by mimuui likelihood. All monetary values are in $100,000
(1980 dollars). The x2 salII)le               statistic
                                        is the chi-squared statistic relative to
the predicted versti.s actual ntamber of retirements by age in the estimation sample;
the x window
              statistic is the corresponding statistic for predicted versus actual
retirement under the window plan. Standard errors are in parenthesis.


*The window plan bonus is treated as a one-time addition to income.
                                              Table 2
                 Paraa.t.r •stimatsa for the option value end the dynamic
                                      programming models.



                                                                  Prosrammine Kodd,
              Ootion Vclue Models              Extreme Value                        Normal
Parameter       (1)        (2)          (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)


   7            1.00*      0.612        1.00*       1.018    1.187         1.00*      1.187      1.109
                           (0.072)                 (0.045) (0.215)                   (0.110)    (0.275)

   k            1.902       1.477       1.864       1.881   1.411          2.592      2.975      2.974
               (0.192)     (0.445)     (0.144)     (0.185) (0.307)        (0.100)    (0.039)    (0.374)

                0.855      0.895        0.618       0.620   0.583          0.899      0.916     0.920
               (0.046)    (0.083)      (0.048)     (0.063) (0.105)        (0.017)    (0.013)    (0.023)

                0.168      0.109        0.306       0.302    0.392        0.224       0.202     0.168
               (0.016)    (0.046)      (0.037)     (0.036) (0.090)        (0.021)    (0.022)    (0.023)

                 .           .          0.00*      0.00*        0.407     0.00*      0.00*       0.183
                                                               (0.138)                          (0.243)


Summary Statistics
-in .C        294.59     280.32       279.60     279.57    277.25        277.24     276.49     276.17
x2 sample      36.5       53.5         38.9       38.2      36.2         45.0       40.7       41.5
   window      43.9       37.5         32.4       33.5      33.4         29.0        25.0       24.3




Notes: Estimation is by maximum likelihood. The option value model is described in
Section II.A and      the ztochatic
                               dynamic programming model is described in Section
II.C. All monetary values are in $l00000 (1980 dollars). See the notes to Table 1.

*Parameter   value imposed.
                                          Table 3
            Retirement    rates in 1980 with and withont SS      early retir.ment



                                        Dynamic    Progrsittg
            0tion Value          Extreme Value               Normal                Probit
Age        With    Without      With    Without       With      Without    With       Without


60         .233     .229         .188     .172        .214        .199      .249        .242
61         .204     .197         .176     .142        .190        .170     .206         .201
62         .262     .218        .269      .177        .241        .205     .175         .136
63         .313     .258        .314      .214        .277        .240     .227         .155
64         .360     .296        .305      .230        .284       .258      .281         .175

65         .346     .346        .320      .320        .314       .314      .375         .375



Notes: The entries are  the predicted retirement rates from maxiaum likelihood
estimates of option value model (2). dynamic progra.ing model (2). dynamic
programming model (5), and probit specification (8). See notes to tables 1 and
2. With refers to the base (current) specification. Without estimates are
from a simulation that eliminates th. possibility of SS receipt as early as age
62. Under the simulation, SS benefit receipt begins at age 65. Details are
provided   in the text.
                                      Table 4
P..tiransnt rates in 1980 with and without SS sarly r.tirement comparison vith
  sstizatss based on SS only, using dynamic progrsing normal specification.

                          Dynamic Pro grains     Normal
            8ase (SS & Pension D,ta)                    SS    Only
  Age        With            Without             With            Without

  60          .214             .199              .114             .057
  61          .190             .170              .167             .067
  62          .241            .205               .291             .081
  63         .277             .240               .310             .118
  64         .284             .258               .334             .191
  65         .314             .314               .356             .356
Figure la. Predicted versus actual 1980 departure
rates and implicit cumulative departures, by age:
              option value model (2).




     0
     60   62   64   56   58    60   62   84   66
                         Age




                         58
                         Age
   Figure lb. Predicted versus actual departure rates and
implicit cumulative departures under the 1982 window plan,
 based on 1980 parameter estimates, and 1981 actual rates:
                    option value model (2).
       I


     0.8


     0.6



     0.4



     0.2



      0
       50   62   54    66   68    60    62   64    66
                            Age




      0
       60   62   54    66   68    60   62    64    66
                            Age
 Figure 2a. Predicted versus actual 1980 departure rates
 and implicit cumulative departures, by age: option value
model (2) and stochastic dynamic programming model (2).
        1




      0.8


      0.6



      0.4


      0.2



       0
        60   62   64   66   68    60   62   64   66
                            Age

        1




      0.8


      0.6



      0.4


      0.2


       0
        50   52   64   66   58    60   62   64   66
                            Age
Figure 2b. Predicted versus actual departure rates and implicit
 cumulative departures under the 1982 window plan, based on
 1980 parameter estimates, and 1981 actual rates: option value
  modelI (2) and stochastic dynamic programming model (2).
            — Actual 1981
                Actual 1082
      0.8
            -— Pr lot.dOV
                                     .   ...
                Pr.dlet.d SOP
                                                           /




        1
                                         Age

                                                                _
            — Actual ieei
            - - Actusi 1982                      7'        /
      0.8
            rodlotsd OV                                  //
      0.6
                Pradloted SOP
                                                       //
      0.4                   .        .       1
                                         /

      0.2
                                                                    1




                          54    56       58      60   62       64   66
                                         Age
Figure 3a. Predicted versus actual 1980 departure rates and
implicit cumulative departures, dynamic programming model,
      by age: extreme value distribution (model 2) and
                normal distribution (model 5).




       0
           60   52   54   56   58    60   62   64   66
                               Age

       1




     0.8



     0.6


     0.4


     0.2



      0
       60       52   54   56   58    60   62   64   66
                               Age
   Figure 3b. Predicted versus actual departure rates and
implicit cumulative departures under the 1982 window plan,
 based on 1980 parameter estimates, and 1981 actual rates:
dynamic programming model 2 (extreme value distribution)
             and model 5 (normal distribution).
       1


            — tusI iGel
            - -. tu.I 1982
     08- — Pr.d. Ext. WI. 1982            ..•...




       I

     0.8
                              1982
               Pred. Normal 1982

     0.6



     0.4



     0.2




       60        52      64          56     68     60   62   64   66
                                           Age
 Figure 4. Actual and predicted increases in retirement rates
under the 1982 window plan: option value model, SDP—extreme
          value model (3), and SDP-normal model (6).


    1

         — Actual
  0.8        Opt!oa!u
         - - SDP-Extreme Valua(3)
             SDP-Normal (6)
  0.6


  0.4                                          -—



  0.2


   0
                    I    I          I          I

    65            57          59          61        63   66
                                        Age
Figure 5a. Predicted versus actual departure rates and
implicit cumulative departures, by age: probit model (1).




                            Age




      • 60   62   64   56   58    60   62   64   66
                            Age
Figure 5b. Predicted versus actual departure rates and
implicit cumulative departures under the 1982 window
  plan, based on 1980 parameter estimates, and 1981
             actual rates: probit model (1).




     60   62    64   56   58    60   62   64    66
                          Age




    0
     50   52   54    56   68    60   62   64    66
                          Age
Figure 6a. Predicted versus actual departure rates and
implicit cumulative departures, by age: probit model (2).




      0
       60   52   54    66   68    60   62   64   66
                            Age




      0
      60    52   64   56    58    60   62   64   66
                            Age
Figure 6b. Predicted versus actual departure rates and
implicit cumulative departures under the 1982 window
  plan, based on 1980 parameter estimates, and 1981
             actual rates: probit model (2).




      0
          60   62   64   66   68    60   62   64   66
                              Ago




    0.8


    0.6


    0.4


    0.2




      60       52   54   66   58    60   62   64   66
                              Ago
 Figure 7a. Predicted versus actual departure rates and
implicit cumulative departures, by age: probit model (6).




      0
       60   62   64    66   68    60   62   64   66
                            Age
      1




     0.8



     0.6



     0.4



     0.2



      0
       60   62   54    66   68    60   62   64   66
                            Age
Figure 7b. Predicted versus actual departure rates and
implicit cumulative departures under the 1982 window
  plan, based on 1980 parameter estimates, and 1981
            actual rates: probit model (6).




    0
    60    52   54    56   58    60   62   64   66
                          Age




    0
    60    62   54   56    68    60   62   64   66
                          Age
 Figure 8a. Predicted versus actual departure rates and
implicit cumulative departures, by age: probit model (8).
          I


     0.8


     0.6


     0.4


     0.2


      0
          60   62   64   66   68    60   62   64   66
                              Age




      0
      60       52   64   56   68    60   62   64   66
                              Age
Figure 8b. Predicted versus actual departure rates and
implicit cumulative departures under the 1982 window
  plan, based on 1980 parameter estimates, and 1981
            actual rates: probit model (8).
      1




    0.8


    0.6



    0.4



    0.2



     0
      60   52   54   66   58    60   62   64    66
                          Age




   0.8



   0.6



   0.4



   0.2



     60    62   54   56   58    60   62   64    66
                          Age
