NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

(I):

LECTURE NOTES ON ECONOMIC GROWTH
INTRODUCTION TO THE LITERATURE AND NEOCLASSICAL MODELS

Xavier Sala—i-Martin

Working Paper No. 3563

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1990

These notes were develops while I was assisting Robert J. Barro to
teach the first year graduate macroeconomics class at Harvard in
1988-89 and 1989-90. The two vintages of first year students
suffered the first draft of these notes and made all kinds of
useful couunents/amendments. Thank you kids. I am especially
grateful to Susan Guthrie for carefully reading them and helping
me think about section 1. I also received comments from Serge
Marquie, and (Kid) Casey Mulligan from Harvard, and Julie Lee from
Yale. First draft completed: November 1988. This revised version
completed: December 17, 1990. This paper is part of NBER's
research program in Growth. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #3563
December 1990
LECTURE NOTES ON ECONOMIC GROWTH (I):
INTRODUCTION TO THE LITERATURE AND NEOCLASSICAL MODELS

ABSTRACT

This

is a survey of the literature on Economic Growth. In

the introduction we analyze the main differences between exogenous
and endogenous growth models using fixed savings rate analysis.

We argue that in order to have endogenous growth there must be

constant returns to the factors that can be accumulated. A
graphical tool is then developed to show that changes in the
savings rate have different effects on long run growth in the two
kinds of models; we show that only endogenous growth models are

affected by shifts in the savings rate. We then explore two
versions of the Raasey—Cass-Koopmans neoclassical model where
savings are determined optimally; one with exogenous productivity
growth and one without.

Xavier Sala-i-Martin
Department of Economics
Yale university
28 Hillhouse
New Haven, CT 06520

"The consequences for human welfare involved in questions like
these are simply staggering: once one starts to think about them, it is hard
to think about anything else". Lucas (1988), p. 5.

(1) INTRODUCTION TO GROWTH )IODELS.

(a)

Exogenous versus Endogenous Growth models: An Introduction

Most of the recent economic growth literature deals with
"optimizing growth models" where consumers choose a consumption path by

maximizing some kind of utility function subject to some intertemporal
budget constraint'.

The complicated mechanics of dynamic optimization,

however, obscures some of the important points apd issues.

Hence, before

studying such models it will be convenient to start with the assumption that

the savings rate is an exogenous constant: people save a constant fraction

"s" of their income. This is what Solow (1957) and others, following the
Keynesian multiplier hypothesis, do. Within an intertemporally optimizing
framework, there is a configuration of parameters that will yield a constant
2
savings rate .
Hence, economists that do not believe in Keynesian

1

Early economists used to confine the intertemporal optimization
analysis to normative issues. The celebrated Ramsey 1928 paper (which deals
with intertemporal optimizing economies) starts with the sentence "The first
problem I propose to tackle is this: how much of its income should a nation
save?" (p.543).
Contemporaneous economists use intertemporal optimizing
models for descriptive or positive analysis as well.
Following Barro

(1974), the representative agent is assumed to be a family or group of
individuals linked to each other through bequests.
2

Kurtz (1968) showed that if the production function is Cobb
Douglas, necessary and sufficient conditions for constant transitional
optimal savings rates are

(1) the utility fu11ct1o,p) be Constant Elasticity of Intertemporal
Substitution of the form c

/(1-(1/s)), where s is the savings rate,

3

multipliers may want to think of an economy described by such configuration.

Suppose also that the only asset in this (closed) economy is something we

call K. You may want to think of K as being physical CAPITAL but it may
also include other inputs that can be accumulated, such as knowledge or
skills. Now imagine that the production function is Cobb-Douglas and that

there are two aggregate inputs.

One of them, I(, can be purposely

accumulated and the other L, cannot be accumulated, or it grows at a rate
which is independent of individual choices (think of L as labor but Ut may
also include other unreproducible resources such as land or energy).

(1.1) Y —

KL
The increase in K over time, which we will call3 K—dK/dt is

aggregate net INVESTMENT In a closed economy net investment must equal to

SAVINGS minus DEPRECIATION. Using (1.1) and the fixed savings rate
assumption:

(1.2)

—

sKL

-

6K

Where 6 is the (constant) depreciation rate.

Population is
assumed to be equal to employment (so we abstract from unemployment and
labor force participation issues) and is assumed to grow at an exogenous
constant rate, L/Ii—n. Let us define lower case k as the capital-labor ratio

(or capital per worker) K/L. By taking derivatives of k with respect to

(2) the discount rate be related to the parameters of the model through
p—a-s, where p
the discount rate, and
is the share of capital in the
production function.
See also Barro and Sala-i-Hartin (1990) chapter 1 for an extension
of this result.

is

3

Throughout these notes we will denote time derivatives by "dots"
on top of variables.

4

time we can rewrite (1.2) in per capita terms as4

(1.2)'

—

skL'

-

(5+n)k

Let us divide both sides of (1.2)' by k and define the growth rate of
capital per worker kt/ktwyk. We will call STEAD? STATE the state where all
variables grow at a constant (possibly zero) rate. Thus, in steady state
is constant. Take logarithms and derivatives of both sides and get

(1.3) O_(PI)k+n(fl)
This KEY equality deserves further attention.

In the original

Neoclassical growth model (Solow (1956) and Swan (1956)) the production
function is assumed to exhibit Constant Returns to Scale in capital and

labor (ie, a+—l) but Decreasing Returns to Capital alone (<l). Notice
that by virtue of the CRS assumption (a4-—l), the second term in the right
hand side of (1.3) is zero so we are left with

(1.3)'

but due to the Decreasing Returns to Capital assumption (fl<1), equality

(1.3)' says that the only sustainable steady state growth rate is

That is, in the CRS neoclassical model, the only possible steady state
growth rate is zero. If the only possible growth rate is zero, how did the

neoclassical theorists of the SO's and 60's explain long run growth?. They
basically assumed that the economy gets (exogenously) more productive over
time.

In other words, they extended the technology in (1.1) to a more

Notice that the difference between expressing the accumulation
equation in levels or in per capita terms is the term nk added to 6k. We
can in fact think of nk as some extra depreciation since it represents the
loss of capital per person due to the fact that, when population grows, we
have to share capital with an increasing number of people.

S

general

—

(1.1)'

A(t)KL

where A(t) reflects the level of the technology which is assumed to be
growing at the constant rate g, so A(t)..A(O)et

The parameter "g" is often

referred as the "exogenous productivity growth rate"5.

In section 1.3 we

will present an optimizing version of this model. We will see that income

per capita, capital per capita, and investment per capita will end up
growing at this exogenously given rate.

We will also expand on the term

A(t) and on different ways to model productivity growth.

A second (and possibly more interesting) way to read equation
(1.3) is the following: "In a CONSTANTS RETURNS TO SCALE model (a+fl—1) in

order to have positive steady state growth (ik>O), the production function
must exhibit CONSTANT RETURNS TO THE INPUTS THAT CAN BE ACCUMULATED,
This

simple

fact underlies the CONSTANT RETURNS ENDOGENOUS GROWTH models

developed In the late 80's.

The implied production function is the

following:

(1.1)''

—

The simplest growth model using this type of production function
(Rebelo (1990)) is outlined in section 1.4.
Notice that this type of

production function does not give any role to exhaustible or non
reproducible resources such as raw labor or land. One could argue, however,

that what matters for production is not raw labor but, rather, quality

5

It

is called exogenous because it is unaffected by any of the

parameters of the model such as the capital share or the savings rate.

Notice that we are saying CR to K and noç ctj Scale. The distinction

is important: the production function Y—K'L " with 0<fl<1, exhibits
constant returns to scale (if we multiply all inputs by A>l we get A times
as much output) but Decreasing Returns to Capital (since if we multiply
capital by A we get less than A times as much as output).

6

adjusted labor. The quality of the labor force (often called Human Capital)
is accumulated as each generation is more knowledgeable than the one before.

When one combines physical and human capital into some broad measure of
capital, the aggregate production function will look like the linear AK
function postulated above. This is the approach taken by Lucas (1988) and
Uzawa (1956). A version of these models is presented in section 1.7.
Barro

(1990)

and its extensions outlined in Barro and

Sala-i-Martin (1990) assume that the two inputs of production are private
physical capital and publicly provided inputs such as roads, infrastructure

or law enforcement. Output exhibits constant returns to both inputs.

In

section 1.5 we will show that this setup ends up being similar to
postulating an AK production function where K must again be interpreted as a
broad measure of capital.
Notice that (as can be seen from equation (1.3)', the steady state

derived from these models is positive without assuming
growth rate
exogenous productivity growth. As we will see in the next subsection, the
parameters of the model (in particular the savings rate) will determine this

growth rate.

Because the growth rate is determined within the modal, (in

other words, it depends on the other parameters of the model) these are
often called WENDOGENOUS GROWTH MODELSU.

Finally, equation (1.3) allows for one more possibility. If the

population growth rate is zero (n—O), we can have nonreproducible inputs
if there are CONSTANT RETURNS

(c>O) together with ENDOCENOUS GROWTH
TO THE INPUTS THAT CAN BE ACCUMULATED (fl—i).

But notice that this implies

OVERALL INCREASING RETURNS TO SCALE (a+fl>l). This possibility gives rise to
the so called TMINCREASING RETURNS ENDOGENOUS GROWTH MODELS"7.

Of course, if we plainly postulate an Increasing Returns to Scale
(IRS) production function we run into trouble since we cannot find a set of

As can be seen from equation (1.3), when the population growth
rate is positive, the increasing returns to scale models (a+fl>l) run into
that satisfies the key equality. What happens
trouble since there is no
in this circumstances is that the growth rate is never constant but, rather,
it increases over time.

7

prices to support a general competitive equilibrium. There are at least two
ways to get around this problem.

(a) The first one (due to Alfred Marshall) is to introduce IRS at

the aggregate level but CRS at the firm level. This can be formulated
through production externalities or spillovers: each firm's decision affects

all other firms output, but none of the firms takes this into account.

Hence, all the firms face a "concave" problem which has a competitive
solution. The economy as a whole, however, faces an IRS production function

which, under some conditions that we will mention in a second, generates
endogenous growth. The Cobb Douglas version of this production function is

(1.1.)''

—

where K is private capital and

is the aggregate capital in the economy.

Individual firms do not think they can affect

so they take it as given.

Notice that under these circumstances firms face a perfectly defined concave

problem so the Kuhn-Tucker theorems apply. In the aggregate, however, total
capital will equal the sum of individual capitals and therefore sc—K.

Thus

the aggregate production function will be

(1.1)''''

—

Notice that if the size of the externality is "correct" (that is
if +—1) we will have CONSTANT RETURNS TO CAPITAL in an INCREASING RETURNS

TO SCALE world. Thus, by modeling IRS through externalities we get around
the problem of inexistence of competitive equilibrium. As it is well known,
however, these competitive equilibrium models with externalities will be NON
OPTIMAL.

In section 1.6 we show how Roster (1986), following Arrow (1962)

and Sheshinski (1967). postulates capital spillovers (externalities) in the

aggregate production function and finds that the model generates steady
endogenous growth when fl+—l.

(b) A second way to get around the existence of the competitive
equilibrium problem is to drop the assumption of competitive behavior. This

is sometimes called the Chamberlinian approach to increasing returns. This

8

approach is interesting for a variety of reasons, one of the main ones being

that under imperfect competition the rewards to all inputs of production
does not exhaust total output. Hence, there are rents that can be assigned

to activities not directly productive but that may contribute to the
expansion of the frontiers of knowledge such as R&D.

Not surprisingly,

therefore, this approach has been extensively used by economists that think
that R&D is an important source of economic growth. In section 8 we explore
a model of R&D and growth taken from Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1990,a)8 where

firms invest in R&D in search of new varieties of capital goods. In that
model, there are NO decreasing returns to the introduction of new varieties

so the incentive to perform R&D never diminishes, which keeps the economy
9

growing

Of course one could have models with both imperfect competition
and externalities.

In fact there is an important line of research that

combines R&D (with imperfect competition) with externalities. It emphasizes

R&D as some activity exercised by firms in search for new varieties of
products or higher quality products. As a side product, R&D increases the
general stock of knowledge which has two effects. First, it decreases the
cost of further research (so the incentive to perform R&D remains positive

and Knowledge grows at a constant rate forever). And second it increases

the productivity of other inputs (such as labor) in the production of a
manufacturing good.

Therefore, given that the stock of knowledge grows at

constant rate, so does the manufacturing good. Models of this type include

Aghion and Howitt (1989), Grossman (1989) and Grossman and Helpman (1989 d
and e).

Before showing the mechanics of all these models, let us introduce

8

This model, in turn, is an extension of Romer (1987) and Grossman
and Helpman (1989, a).
9

There is a third way to model increasing returns in a model of
perfectly competitive firms and that is to introduce imperfect financial
markets. This approach has been taken by Greenwald, Salinger and Stiglitz
(1990).

9

a graphical device that will further clarify the basic difference between
exogenous and endogenous growth models. It will also help us understand why

the savings (or investment) rate does not affect long run growth in the
first one and does so in the latter.

(b) The Role of Saving and Investment: a Graphical Exposition.

We can often hear economic advisors to third world countries say
that one of the necessary conditions for economic growth and development is

the increase in national savings rate. Higher savings viii lead to higher

investment (since in a closed economy the two must be equal) and higher
investment will lead to more rapid economic growth. In this section we will
analyze under what conditions this policy recommendation is valid.
Let us keep assuming that people save a constant fraction of their

income and that the government can influence it (for instance through

Suppose that, for whatever reason, the

distortionary income taxes).

government manages to increase the economy's savings rate. What will the
long run effects of such policy be?.

In order to answer this question, let us start by assuming that
the production function is constant returns to scale (+p—l) and dividing
both sides of the (per capita) capital accumulation equation (1.2)' to get

(1.4) k/kt —

SAka

-

(6+n)

The left hand side of this equation is the instantaneous growth
rate.

Equation (1.4) says that the growth rate is the difference between

sAk and (6+n).

We depict these two functions in Figure 1.

The

function 6+n is independent of k so it is a flat line. In the neoclassical

model 8<1 applies.

This implies that the function sAk is downward

sloping in k, and approaching zero asymptotically.

Notice that the two

curves cross at a point k*, the steady state capital labor ratio. Let us
now consider an economy with an initial level of capital k0 lower than k*.

The initial growth rate of capital will be very large (notice that,
according to (1.4), the growth rate is the vertical difference between the
two curves) and it will be decreasing over time. Imagine for a second that

10

we are in the steady state and, suddenly, the savings rate s, increases.

Figure 1 suggests that the curve sAk will shift to the right and
nothing will happen to the (+n) line. We can see that the following things
are true:

(a) the growth rate will immediately increase.
(b)

the growth rate will be falling over time until, eventually, it

goes back to zero.

(c) the steady state capital labor ratio is higher.

Hence, an increase in the savings rate generates a short term

of

increase in the growth rate and an increase in the steady state LEVEL

It does not affect, however, the long run or steady
capital per worker.
state growth rate, which is still zero. Under normal parameterizations. the

speed of convergence towards the new steady state is quite fast.

For

instance, Barro and Sala-i-Hartin (1990) suggest that the model predicts
that half the distance between k0 and k* disappears in less than 6 yearsl.

As it was mentioned above, Figure 1 suggests that the growth rate

for an economy which starts below the steady state is high and decreasing.

This, of course, implies that if economies differ ONLY on the initial
capital labor ratio, we should observe poor economies grow faster than rich

ones (in Figure 1, different economies would be represented by different

stocks of k0 but all of them would have the same steady state k*).
Economists call this the "convergence hypothesis". This hypothesis is
certainly true, but notice that there is a big ONLY on it.

That is,

economies may differ NOT ONLY in the capital labor ratio but also In the
level of techno.ogy (A), the savings rate (s), the depreciation rate (5), or

the population growth rate (n). If countries differ in one or more of these
parameters, they will end up in different steady states.

In Figure 2 we show the behavior of two economies, one called P

(poor) and one called R (rich).

The poor economy has a lower initial

capital stock kOp<kOR, (that is why it is called poor). We assume that the

poor economy also has a smaller savings rate so it converges to a smaller

steady state capital labor ratio, k<k. Notice that in this particular
example, it happens that the

poor

economy grows less than the rich one so

11

there is no convergence in the absolute sense.

Yet there is CONDITIONAL

convergence in the sense that each country converges to its own steady state

at diminishing growth rates.

Empirically, this means that if we hold

constant the steady state, poor countries will grow faster than rich ones.

If we don't, however, we will not see poor economies growing faster unless

they are very similar (In the sense that they converge to similar steady
states).

Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1990) find that this feature of the
neoclassical model can be found in the data. They find that the States of
the U.S. display absolute convergence while countries in the world do not.

Holding constant the steady state, however, there is convergence across
countries also. This makes sense if we think that the states of the U.S.
are similar in the sense of having the same tastes and technology so they
converge to the same steady state. This is certainly not true for the large

cross section of countries, so they display conditional convergence only.
For related studies on convergence see Bauinol (1986), Delong (1988), Dowrick

and NGuyen (1989), Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1990). and Sala-i-Martin (1990).

Let us now expand the neoclassical production function by
introducing exogenous productivity growth.
function now looks like

(1.1)' y —
where

Recall that the production

A(t)k
Notice that, in terms of Figure 1, this specification

implies that the curve sAk"' keeps shifting over time at a rate g.
This implies that the steady state capital labor ratio k* keeps shifting at
the same rate. This is how the neoclassical model explains long run growth.

In Figure 3 we show that the implications from changing the
savings rate are very different when we consider a simple endogenous growth

model. If the capital share is 1 (fl—l), the sAk curve is a flat line
at sA.

If we assume that the economy is productive enough so as to have

sA>6+n, then the growth rate (difference between the two lines) is constant.

In other words, the economy grows at a constant rate equal to sA-(6+n).
Notice also that in this case, an exogenous increase in the savings rate

12

increases both the short run and the steady state growth rates.

Hence,

contrary to the neoclassical predictions, policies directed to increases in

the savings (and investment) rates will have long run growth effects.
Further, notice that if economies differ in the initial capital stock ONLY.

it is not true anymore that poor ones will grow faster than rich ones.
Finally, this model predicts that a temporary recession will have permanent
effects. That is, if the capital stock temporarily falls for some exogenous
reason (an earthquake, a natural tragedy or a war that destroys part of the

capital stock), the economy will not grow temporarily faster so as to go

back to the prior path of capital accumulation.

The endogenous model

described here predicts that after such a temporary reduction in the capital

stock, the growth rate will still be the same so the loss will tend to be
10

permanent
Figure 4 depicts the case where p>l (IRS in the inputs that can be
11
is upward sloping (and if fi>2 its slope
accumulated ). The curve sAk

is increasingi). Notice that this implies growth rates that increase over
time. We will refer to this case again in section 6 (Rower (1986)).

(c) The Harrod-Domar Model.

Long before the neoclassical theory came to life in the mid 50's,
the most popular model of economic growth was the so called the Harrod-Domar

model (developed by Harrod (1939) and Domar (1946)).

We can use the

graphical tool developed in the last subsection to learn about this older

10

There are unbelievable amounts of papers on the existence of a
There seems to some
unit root in macroeconomic aggregates such as GNP.
evidence that, for the United States, GNP is non stationary, which is what
this simple model would predict. See Blanchard and Fischer (1989) Ch. 1. for
discussion of these issues.
11

In this case the assumption of CRS a-I-fl—I. must be dropped since a
negative labor share has little economic sense. Think of this case as one
where a—0 (so all inputs can be accumulated) and fl)'l (so there are both IRS
and IR to capital.

13

growth model.

Harrod and Domar tried to put together two of the key features of the

Keynesian economics -the multiplier and the accelerator- in a model that

We have been using the multiplier
explained long run economic growth.
assumption (savings is a fixed proportion of income) all along so let us

describe the differential feature of the Harrod-Domar model: the
accelerator. The increase in capital required to produce a given increase

in output is assumed to be a constant number.

In particular, It is

independent of the capital labor ratio. That Is

(1.6) AY—AoX
where A is constant.

Notice that one production function that satisfies

this relationship is the linear AX production function used by the CRS
Endogenous Growth models.

Thus one could be tempted to identify the

Harrod-Domar model with the new Endogenous Growth Models. Yet that would be

a mistake. The reason is that Harrod and Domar were very concerned about
the effects of growth on long run employment and unemployment'2 (their study

could be though to be an explanation for the then existing long run
unemployment of the Great Depression).

Although they never Introduced a

specific production function, the fact that they worried so much about
employment seems to• indicate that they were not talking about a function
such as NAXW, where there is no role for inputs such as labor.

Another production function which satisfies the accelerator
principle and which is closer to the spirit of what Harrod and Domar had in

mind is the Leontief Fixed Coefficients function. Output is assumed to be
produced by a fixed proportion of capital and labor. Given this proportion,

an increase in the level of one of the inputs without a corresponding
increase In the other leaves output unchanged. Thus, we should replace the

12

In fact, Domar's paper is called "Capital Expansion, Rate of
Growth, and Employment".

14

production function (1.1) by

—

(1.1)

min(AK.BL)

where A and B are exogenous production parameters.

After rewriting this

function in per capita terms .y—inin(Ak,B)- we plotted it in Figure 5. We

see that there is a capital labor ratio k*_B/A that has the following
property: for capital labor ratios smaller than k*, Ak is smaller than B so

output is determined by Ak. For capital labor ratios larger than k*, Ak is
larger than B so output is determined by B. In other words, this production
function can be rewritten as

f

(1.1) y—

Ak

for all kc<k*_B/A

B

for all k>k —B/A

*

Notice that this technology is similar to the Ak model but only for
small capital labor ratios. For large ones, however,the production function

is flat so the Marginal Product of Capital is equal to zero. We can now
apply the basic savings equal investment equality (1.5) to this technology
to get.

(1.7) k÷i —

I

I.sB

for kt<k*_B/A

+(lS.n)k

*

for k)k —B/A

As Harrod and Domar pointed out, there are three possible
configurations of parameters each of which will yield different implications
for growth and employment.

CASE 1: sA<6+n
When the savings rate and/or the marginal productivity of capital
are very small compared to the aggregate depreciation rate (which includes

population growth), there is no possible steady state. This is pictured in
Figure 6. Notice that the economy converges to a point where the logarithm

of the capital labor ratio is minus infinity (so the capital labor ratio

Is

converges to zero).

In this case not only there will be unemployment

(because AX(BL) but it will grow over time. Harrod and Domar thought that
this was a good description of the observed large and growing unemployment
rates of the 30's.

CASE 2: sA—6+n

When, by chance, the exogenously given savings rate and marginal

product of capital are such that aA—6+n, the economy will reach a steady
state where all the per capita variables grow at a zero rate. In Figure 7

we show that, in this case, the initial capital labor ratio will be the
steady state one.

CASE 3: sA>5+n

The third case, depicted in Figure 8, is one where the marginal
product of capital or/and the savings rate are very large relative to the
depreciation rate. We see in Figure 8 that, for small capital labor ratios,

this case looks very much like the Rebelo model. But as the capital labor

ratio grows, the labor requirement gets binding (that is we hit kB/A at
some finite point in time).

After this point, the marginal product of

capital is zero and the per capita growth process stops. The steady state

capital labor ratio,

will be one where there will be unemployed

machinery.

Two out of the three configurations of parameters yield long run
equilibria were there are idle resources and the only that does not, would
be achieved only by chance: remember that all the relevant parameters -A. s•

S and n- were given by mother nature.

The question is why in the world

would mother nature be so kind as to give us exactly that configuration of
parameters?.

In other words, the chance of them being such that the

equality above is satisfied are quite small.

At the time, the Neoclassical approach was seen as a way of
solving this knife edge property of the Harrod-Domar model. That is, the
neoclassical production function achieves the equality between sA and 6+n by

allowing for A (the marginal product of capital) to be variable in k13. We

13

And we know that there will be a level of capital k such that the

16

should just mention that there are other non neoclassical ways of achieving
this equality. One of them, proposed by the old Cambridge School in England

was to argue that the savings rate was endogenous.

They thought that

workers had a different marginal propensity to save from capitalists.
Hence, so they argued, in the process of economic growth there will be
changes in the distribution of income that will lead to changes in the
aggregate savings rate in such a way that the equality between sA and 64-n
will be guaranteed14. We will not talk about the Cambridge school of thought
anymore.

(d) The NSobelow Production Function.

Finally, with this graphical approach we can see that the growth
paths are not limited to the cases seen up to now. We could find functions

that behave in some other ways, we may discover new growth models and new
transitional dynamics towards steady states. Consider Figure 9: The steady

state is similar to the one described by the Rebelo model but the
transitional dynamics are different. One production function that exhibits
such dynamics is the following:

+

(1.9)

This production function was first proposed by Kurtz (1968) and
Gale and Sutherland (1968) and later reintroduced in the endogenous growth

marginal product of capital is equal to (6+n)/s since the marginal product

is assumed to range from zero (f'(.o)—O) to infinity (f'(O)a) in a
continuous fashion.
14

This was one of the main differences between the Cambridge (U.S.) and
the Cambridge (U.K.) school of thought. The other main difference was that

the british rejected the Neoclassical production function and,

in

They
particular, they rejected the notion of aggregate capital stock.
thought of capital as a number of different machines which, combined with
Such a
different types of workers yielded different types of output.
heterogeneous set of objects, they argued, is impossible to aggregate into a
single variable called Aggregate Capital stock. See Robinson (1954).

17

literature by Jones and Manuelli (1990). Notice that this function is half

way between Solow (BK) and Rebelo (AX)15.

It has all the nice properties

required by the Kuhn Tucker theorem so we can apply straightforward
optimization techniques to find solutions.

In per capita terms the Solow production function is concave and,

as k tends to infinite, the marginal product of capital approaches zero.

The Rebelo production function in per capita terms is linear with slope
equal to A for all values of k.

The Sobelow production function is also

concave for all capital-labor ratios. As k goes to infinity, however, the
slope of the production function does not go to zero but to A.

For large

levels of k, therefore, it gets arbitrarily close to the Rebelo production
function.

Hence, the only difference between the Solow and the Sobelow

functions is the latter does not satisfy the Inada condition.

We observe in figure 9 that sf(k)/k now is not going to zero
asymptotically but to A. As Kurtz (1968) noted, if A is sufficiently large

(in this case this means if sA>S+n), then the steady state growth rate is

positive, even though there is a transition period where growth rates are
decreasing monotonically.

It is worth noticing that if the economy has

been going on for a while, the decreasing returns part of the production

function will be almost irrelevant so we might as well deal with the
(simpler) linear technology described above.

(e) Poverty Traps.

Another possibility could be the one in Figure 10.

Here we see

the function sf(k)/k crossing the horizontal line (64-n) twice so there are

two steady states. The lower crossing represents a "stable poverty trap.

That is, countries whose initial "capital" (here we define capital in a
broad sense that includes all inputs that can be accumulated) is very low
will tend to this zero growth-low income trap. In fact all countries whose

15

That we call it the Sobelow production function.

18

initial capital lies to the left of k will fall into this trap. Countries
that start to the right of this trap will tend to a constant growth steady
state a

Ia

Rebelo.

In the next two sections we will present the optimizing versions
of the Neoclassical models we have been talking about in this introduction.

In sections 4 through 7 we present the "new" growth models of the 80's. It
is useful to think about them in terms of being optimal saving versions of
the —l model we just presented in this section.

(2) The R.ainsey-Cass-Koopmans model

(a) The Model.

All optimizing growth models we will assume that consumers choose
a path of consumption so as to maximize a utility function of the form:

(2.0) U(0) —

J e1tu(ct)Ltdt

—

I e.Pt[c10.l]Ldt.

Where p is the discount rate, c is consumption per capita at time
t and Lt is population. We can think about horizons being infinite (despite

the fact that, obviously, lifetimes are not) if, following Barro (1974) we
think that individuals care about their utility AND about their children's

utility. In this sense, we must think of the agent as being a dynasty or

family the number of individuals of which grows over time. Under this
interpretation, the discount rate (which was described by Ramsey (1928) as

"ethically indefensible and arises only from the weakness of the
imaginatIon"16, (P. 543) at the individual level) represents the fact that
individuals care more for their own utility than the one of their children.

16

Ramsey was considering the optimal choice from a government's

He thought that introducing a discount rate was ethically
point of view.
indefensible because that meant that the government was giving a larger
weight to current than to future generations.

19

Since c is consumption per capita, u(c) is the instantaneous per capita
felicity. Hence, the instantaneous felicity for the whole family is equal to
the individual times the number of people in the family.

We assume that there is only one good (cookies).

We will assume

that households OWN the firms (or that there is only household production17)

so they can consume this good or they can nail it to the floor. The reason

why anyone would do such a horrendous thing is that cookies nailed to the

floor can be used to produce more cookies in the future. For lack of a
better name, all cookies nailed to the floor will be called "capital" and

will be represented by Kt. We assume that there is nobody else in the
universe, so all the cookies produced will have be consumed or nailed. Hence

the increase in existing capital (called investment) must be equal to
saving. If we let k be per capita capital (K/L), the following resource
constraint must be satisfied:

(2.O) k —

f(k)

-

c

-nk -6k

Notice that n is like a "depreciation rate" because it represents

the fraction of resources that we need to give to new generations. The key

Neoclassical assumption is a production function that expresses NET output
in per capita terms as a function of capital per capita with the following

properties: twice differentiable, with f(O)—O, f'(k)>O, f''(k)<O, f'(O)—
and f'(o)—O'8. A simple Neoclassical production function that we will be

using throughout is the Cobb Douglas: f(k)—k with O<l. Population is

17

As we will show in the next section, the results will be the same
we would get if we assume that households own capital and labor and sell
their services to competitive firms in exchange for wages and rents.
18

The last two conditions (the Inada conditions) are often swept
under the rug.
They are of crucial importance because, as Kurtz (1968)
showed,
the mathematical difference between an endogenous and exogenous
growth model is the condition lim f(k)—O. This point has been emphasized
k -

also

by Jones and Manuelli (1990).

20

assumed to grow at the (exogenously given) rate n so we can rewrite the
program as:

(2.1) MAX U(0) —

J

e1t[cC1)dt

k —

s.t.

f(k)

-

c

6k

-nk -

k(0) >0 given

For U(0) to be bounded (U(0)<, and the program to be meaningful

at all) we need the term inside the integral to go to zero as t

goes

to

infinity. This implies

etc0——urn e
t[c17l]
—— — lim

Lim e

I-a

(jti)t1/(1

)—

I-a

In steady state c will be constant (we will show later). Hence.
if this limit has to be zero, it must be the case that

(2.2) p>n.

To solve the model, we set up the corresponding Hamiltonian

where .,

-

e

(2.3) HO —

(P_n)t{cl-al} + i[f(k)

is

c

-

nkSki

the dynamic Lagrange multiplier (or shadow price of

investment). The first order conditions are the following:

(2.4) H — 0 * e

(2.5)

Hk —

(2.6) TVC

•i'

Pfl)tcO

-

—o

v — -v(f'(k)-n-S)

lim (kv)

— 0

Equation (2.4) says that at the margin, the value we will give to

21

consume one more unit will be equal to the value we will give to invest one

more unit (that is, we will be indifferent between consuming and investing

Take logs of (2.4) to get (.n)t.olog(c)_log(l/). Now

the unique good).

take the derivative with respect to time to get:

(2.7) -(p-n)-a(c/c) —

so

(2.7)' c/c —

a4(-p+n-&'/v)

We can now plug this in (2.5) to get the traditional condition for
consumption growth:

(2.8) '.c/c —

This

equation can be rewritten as p+a(c/c)—f'(k)-5 and interpreted

as follows: The left hand side represents the return to consumption. The
discount rate represents the gain in utility from consuming today since we

prefer consumption for ourselves rather than for our children. The return
to consumption also includes cc/c.

If we want to smooth consumption over

time (c>O), then we want to increase consumption today, whenever we expect

consumption to be higher in the future (ie, when c/c>O).

The return to

saving (and investment) is the marginal product of capital minus the
depreciation rate, 6. Optimizing individuals should, at the margin,

be

indifferent between consuming and investing. This indifference is the one
represented by equality (2.8).

Using the Cobb-Douglas technology, (y—k), equation (2.8) can be
written as

(2.8)'

22

If we define steady state as the state where all the variables grow at a
constant (and possibly zero) rate, equations (2.8) together with the capital
*

accumulation equation (2.0)' say that there is a unique steady state k
which ensures that capital and consumption per capita do not grow'9. Hence
this model says that, in the steady state, all variables in per capita terms

do not grow at all. Alternatively, all "leveP' variables grow at the same
rate as population, which is assumed to be exogenous.

(b) Competitive Solution.

Since this model is concave (concave preferences and technology)

and there are no externalities of any kind, the OPTIMAL PROGRAM (command
economy solution) will yield the same solution as the COMPETITIVE

EQUILIBRIUM PROGRAM, provided that consumers and firms have RATIONAL

EXPECTATIONS (since these models do not have uncertainty, rational
expectations implies PERFECT FORESIGHT). We can show that the competitive

solution is the same as the one we solved. On the consumption side,
individuals maximize (2.0) subject to

(2.9)

—

w+

rk -

c

19

We can show that the only sustainable growth rate is zero:
take the constraint k—k-c-nk-6k and divide it by k. Define k/kvk

which

in

steady state will be a constant (by definition of steady statel!). Realize

that k1—(yc+p)/p. Rearrange to get c/k_(ya+p)/fl.yk.fl&_CoflStaflt. Take
logs and derivatives to conclude that c/c_k/k7k—i. Now consider again the
—(yo+p)/fl. The RIIS is a constant. Take logs and derivatives
of both sides to conclude that (l)1kO. This is another way to show what

equality

we saw in section 1: if there are DR to k (<l), then the steady state
growth must be zero. The only way to achieve nonzero growth rates is to have
CR to k (ft—i).

23

where

is the return to labor (wage) and rk is the return to

capital (we are abstracting again from depreciation and population growth).

In the other side, competitive firms will price factors at marginal costs
so:

(2.10) r —

—

f'(k).6k

f(k).kf'(k)

Notice that w+rk— f(k)-kf'(k)+kf'(k)-5k—f(k)-Ek so substituting
(2.10) into the individual budget constraint will give the original resource
constraint (2.0)'.

(c) Transitional Dynamics, Golden Rule, and Dynamic Efficiency

The neoclassical model just outlined is NOT a very interesting
model, of steady state growth (because steady state growth is zero). It is

nevertheless an interesting model of the transition towards the steady
state. This transition is shown in Figure 11. The vertical line is the c—0

locus. The upward sloping line is the k—0 locus representing the resource
constraint (2.0)'. Notice that the economy can converge to the steady state
from below or from above. The interesting case is the one where we converge

from below so we actually grow. Along this path k/k>0. Per capita capital

grows, but it does so at a decreasing rate (which ends up being zero in
steady state). As the capital labor ratio increases, the marginal product
of capital falls and, therefore so does the interest rate.

It is worth noticing that, in Figure 11, there is a level of

capital called kid (for Golden Rule).

This is the capital level that

maximizes steady state consumption. From the budget constraint we see that

when k—0, steady state consumption is equal to c*_f(k)(5+n)k. The capital

labor ratio that maximizes c is the one that satisfies
This level capital divides the set of capital labor ratios in two. Capital

levels above the Golden Rule have the property that in order to achieve

higher steady state consumption, the economy needs to get rid of some

24

In other words, in order to achieve higher consumption in the

capital.

future the economy would need to dissave (which of course means higher
consumption today). Therefore, if the economy were to find itself in one of

such capital levels, everybody could increase consumption at all points in
time.

The points above k

are called the DYNAMIC INEFFICIENT REGION

gold

because some generations could be made better off without making any
generation worse off.

Notice that for capital levels below the Golden

Rule, if the economy wants to increase the steady state consumption, it
needs to accumulate or save: higher consumption tomorrow would have to be
traded for lower consumption today. This region is called DYNAMIC EFFICIENT
REGION.

We can integrate (2.5) forward between 0 and t and get
t
-

'o e

(2.5)'

1(f'

which, after substituting in the TVC

yields

t
-

(2.6)' lim &'0e

>

f(f' (k)-8-n)ds

k —

0

t -

Since

is positive, it must be the case that the second term in

(2.6)' is equal to zero.

Notice also that this implies that in the steady

state, the marginal product of capital must be larger than £+n.

This

condition is always satisfied in steady state if we assume that utility is
bounded.

Recall that this condition required p>n and the steady state

implies f'(k)—p+6 so this ensures that f'(k)>n+6.

Notice how this

inequality implies that the capital per capita in the steady state will be
dynamically efficient (to the left of the golden rule)20.

20

25

(d) Ruling out explosive paths.

It just remains to be shown that, given the saddle-path stability

property of the model, the economy will find itself on the stable arm. To
show this we must rule out all other possible paths. Suppose that we start

with the capital stock k0 in Figure 11, Let c0 the consumption level that
corresponds to the saddle path.
Let us imagine first that the initial

consumption level is c>c0. If this is the case, the economy will follow
the path depicted In Figure 11: at first both c and k will be growing. At

some point the economy will hit the k—O schedule and, after that,
consumption will keep growing yet capital will be falling.

Hence, the
economy will hit the zero capital axes in finite time. At this point, there

will be a jump in c (because with zero capital there is zero output and
therefore zero consumption) which will violate the first order condition
(2.8).

In order to show that the economy will hit the k—O axes in finite

time just realize that k can be rewritten as

(2.11) kt_+Jk5ds

Suppose that T is the time at which we hit the k—O schedule.
After that moment, k evolves according to (2.11). If we show that dk/dt is

negative, we will have that k is negative and falling so k is falling at
increasing rates. This, of course implies that there is a time T' at which
it will be zero. The derivative of k with respect to time is ((from 2.0)')

Recall that k* is such that fD(k*)_p+5 and that the bounded
condition
utility
(2.2)
that
implies
p>n.
f'(k )_P+6>fl+6_fkgold• Since the production function is
it follows that k <k
gold

26

Therefore
concave (f''<O)

(2.12) dk/dt —

[f.(k)

-

c

-

(n4-6)]k

notice that since k<kt, we know that f'>ri+6. We also know that k<O and c>O
so overall, (2.12) is negative which implies that k is falling at increasing

rates. Hence, if we are in this region in finite time (ie if we hit the k—O
schedule in finite time), then

will hit zero in finite time. Therefore,

it ONLY remains to be shown that we will hit the k—O schedule in

finite

time). We can show that this is the case because around the k—O schedule,
consumption increases at increasing rates so it will reach the k—O schedule
in finite time. Notice that the derivative of c with respect to time is

(2.14) dc/dt -

(l/o)[f'(k)-(5+)Jc

+

(c/c)[f''(k)]k

notice that the first term is positive and, around the k—O schedule it
dominates the second term so overall dc/dt>O. Hence, if initial consumption
is larger than the one required by the stable arm we will first hit the k—O
schedule in finite time and then hit the k—O axes in finite time. This will

imply a finite time jump in consumption which will violate the first order
condition (2.8). Hence, it is not optimal to start above the stable arm.

Let us imagine next that we start below the stable arm.

dynamics in Figure 11 tell us that we will converge to k

**
.

Notice

The
that

this path will violate the transversality conditions since k**>kld. That

t
I

lim
t -

>

which

**

** -I(f'(k
k et

)-6-n)ds
>0

is positive since the term inside the integral is negative.

27

Hence, initial consumption levels below the stable arm are not optimal
either. We are left, therefore, with the stable arm as the UNIQUE optimal
path of this model.

(e) Convergence and Convergence Regressions.

The Neoclassical model just described has the additional
implication that, if all countries share the same production and utility

parameters, then poor countries tend to grow at a faster rate than rich
In other words, income or output levels will converge over time.

ones.

Following Sala-i-Martin (1990), we can show this important implication we

can linearize the two key differential equations (2.8) and the capital
accumulation equation (2.0) budget constraint around the steady state

21
.

If

we express all variables in logarithms the system becomes

ln(c) —

(l/a)(aet.(p+8))

ln(k) —

e1'1t eflt

(2.15)

(kr)) -

-

(n+6)

In steady state the two equations are equal to zero so

e1h1*)

—

(2.16)

e(1c*mm*

—

e*)

-

(n+6) - h >0

where c and k* are the steady state values of c and k respectively and
h—(p+6(1-a)-an)/ We can now Taylor-expand the system (2.15) around (2.16)

21

See King and Rebelo (1990) and Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1990) for
a discussion of convergence when the economy is far away from the steady
state.

28

and get

ln(c) —

p[1n(kt).ln(k*)]

ln(k) —

h[ln(ct)1n(c*)I

(2.17)

+

(pn)[ln(kt).1n(k*)j

where p—(l-a)(p+6)/a>0. or

0

ln(c)

ln(ct)ln(c*)

-p

—

(2.18)

ln(kt)

-h (p-n)

ln(kt)ln(k*)

notice that the determinant of the matrix is detA—-hp<0 which implies
that the system is saddle path stable. The eigenvalues of the system are

(l/2)(p-n

-A1 —

(l/2)

2

-

) <0

+4hJ

(2.19)

A2 —

(1/2)(p-n

+

((.n)

(1/2)

2

+4h)

) >0

The solution for 1n(k) has the usual form

(2.20) ln(k) -

where

and

ln(k*)

#lelt +

—

are two arbitrary constants. To determine them, we notice

that since A2 is positive, the capital stock will violate the transversality

condition unless

The initial conditions help us determine the other

constant since at time 0 the solution implies

(2.20)' ln(k0) -

ln(k*)

—

29

Hence the final solution for the log of the capital stock has the form

(2.21) ln(k) -

ln(k)

—

[ln(k0)

-

ln(k)Je

If we realize that ln(k)_ln(yc)/a and we subtract ln(y0) from both

sides of equation (2.21) we will get what is known as the "convergence
equation"

(2.22) (ln(y)ln(y0))/t — a

-

iln(y0)

where a_ln(y*)(1eAlt)/t and 3_(leAlt)/t. This equation says that if a
set of economies have the same deep parameters (discount rate, coefficient
of intertemporal elasticity of substitution, capital share, depreciation and
population growth rates, etc) so they converge to the same steady state, the

cross section regression of growth on the log of initial income should
display a negative coefficient. In other words, poor countries should tend
to grow faster.

The reason for that is that countries with low initial

capital would have high initial marginal product of capital.

That would

lead them to save, invest and therefore grow a lot.

If countries converge to different steady states, however, there should

be no relation between growth and initial income, unless we hold constant
Sala-i-Marcin (1990) and Barro and

the determinants of the steady state.

Sala-i-Martin (1990) use a slightly more complicated22 version of (2.22) to

show that the states of the U.S. (which we may think are described by
similar production and utility parameters) converge to each other exactly

the way equation (2.22) predicts.

They also show that, once they hold

constant the determinants of the steady state, large sample of countries
ALSO converge to each other the way equation (2.22) predicts.

22

It is a slightly more complicated version because they include
exogenous productivity growth.

30

(3) EXOGENOUS PRODUCTIVITY AND GROWTH

(a) Classification of Technological Innovations.

As we just mentioned, the simple neoclassical model predicts that

the long run growth rate is zero.

In order to explain observed long run

growth neoclassical economists amended the model and incorporated exogenous
productivity growth.

In section 1 we saw that, in the fixed saving rate

models, the introduction of productivity growth lead to long run economic
growth.

The question is what kind of technological progress should be

introduced.

Some inventions "save" capital relative to labor (capital

saving technological progress), some save labor relative to capital (labor
saving technological progress) and some do not save either input relative to
the other (Neutral or unbiased technological progress).

Notice that the definition of neutral innovations depends on what we
mean by "saving". The two most popular definitions of unbiased or Neutral
technological progress are due to Hicks and Harrod respectively.

Hicks says that a technological innovation is Neutral (Hicks-Neutral)

with respect to capital and labor if and only if the ratio of marginal
products remains unchanged for a given capital labor ratio. Consequently, a

technological innovation is labor (capital) saving if the marginal product

of capital (labor) increases by more than the marginal product of labor
(capital) at a given capital labor ratio.

amounts to renumbering the isoquants.

Notice that Hicks neutrality

Production functions with Hicks

Neutral technological progress can be written as

(3.1)

—

A(t)F(K,L).

where A(t) is an index of the state of technology at moment t evolving
according to

gt (ie, A/A—g) and were F() is still homogeneous of

degree one. The second definition of technological unbias is due to Harrod.

He says that a technical innovation is neutral (Harrod Neutral) if the
relative shares (KFk/LFL) remain unchanged for a given capital OUTPUT ratio.

Robinson (1938) and Uzawa (1961) showed that this implied a production

31

function of the form

(3.1)'

—

F(K,

A(t)L)

where, again, A(t) is an index of technology at time t, A/A—g and F is
homogeneous of degree one. Notice that this production function says that,
with the same amount of capital, we need less and less labor to produce the

same amount of output.

Therefore, this function is also known as labor

augmenting technological progress.

By symmetry we could have thought of

technological change as being "capital augmenting". ie Y_F(BK,L). This

would mean that, for a given number of hours of work (Lu), we need
decreasing amounts of capital to achieve the same isoquant.

The reason why we care about what kind of technological progress

we should postulate is that, as Phelps showed, a necessary and sufficient
condition for the existence of a steady state in an economy with exogenous

technological progress is for this technological progress to be Harrod
Neutral or Labor Augmenting. Notice, however, that when we work with Cobb
Douglas utility functions the two types of progress are identical since

Y(K,AL) —

K(AL)1

— BY(K,L)

—

(b) The Irrelevance of Embodiment.

All types of technological change we have been talking up to now
are "DISEMBODIED" in the sense that, when a technological innovation occurs,

ALL existing machines get more productive. An example of this would be
improvements in computer software: it makes all existing computers better.
There are a lot of inventions, however, that are not of this type. When one

invention occurs, only the NEW machines are more productive (as it is the
case with computer hardware). Economists call this, "EMBODIED TECHNOLOGICAL
PROGRESS".

In the 60's, when the neoclassical model of exogenous productivity

growth was being developed, there was a debate on the importance of

32

embodiment in economic growth.

Proponents of what at the time was called

'New Investment Theory" (embodied technological progress) said that
investment in new machines had the usual effect of increasing the capital
stock and the additional effect of modernizing the average capital stock.
Proponents of the "unimportance of the embodiment question" argued that this

new effect was a level effect but that it did not affect the steady state
rate of growth.

In a couple of important papers Solow (1969) and Phelps

(1962) showed the following:

(1) The neoclassical model with embodied technological progress and

perfect competition (so the marginal product of labor is equal for all
workers no matter what the vintage of the machine they are using is) can be

rewritten in a way that is equivalent to the neoclassical model with
disembodied progress (Solow (1969)).

(2) The Steady State growth is independent of the fraction of progress
that is embodied (it depends on the total rate of technical progress but not
on its composition) (Phelps (1962)).

(3) The convergence or speed of adjustment to the steady state growth
rate is faster the larger the fraction of embodied progress (Phelps (1962)).

Thus, the distinction between embodied and disembodied progress seems
unimportant when studying long run issues but might be crucial when studying

short run dynamics23. The modeling of embodied technological progress is

quite complicated because one has to keep track of all old vintages of
capital and associated labor.

Yet a simple way to think about it is to

postulate a technology-free production function Y—F(K,L) and an accumulation

function of the form K_A(t)(YC) where A(t)/A(t).g and K(t) is a measure
of aggregate capital. This function reflects the fact that a unit of saving

23

The importance of embodiment in modeling business cycles can be
seen from the fact that an embodied shock affects the marginal product of
capital but does NOT affect the marginal product of labor or current output

supply. This is a key difference with respect to a disembodied shock,
especially as far as the implications for the procyclicality of real wages
and real interest rates is concerned.

33

(Y-C) in a later period generates a larger increase in capital than a unit

of saving in earlier time.

This is like saying that later vintages of

capital are more productive.

(c) The Neoclassical Model with Technological progress.

Let us go back to the labor augmenting form as depicted in
equation (3.1)'. To solve this model it is going to be useful to define the
concept of "effective labor", L.

(3.2)

—

Ltet

and L —

L0et - - -> Lt_LOet

In words, for a given size of physical population we get more
effective labor as time passes by. Since, on the other hand, the number of
physical bodies increases at the constant rate n, the effective labor force

grows at rate g+n. Notice that using this definition we can rewrite the
production function as follows.

(3.3) Y —

F(K.L)

Let's divide both sides of (3.3) by Lt, define y—Y/(L) and
k-.K/(L). The CRS assumption implies:

(3.4) y —

f(k)

Again, the closed economy assumption implies that domestic savings

equal gross domestic investment so Y—K+C-6K. Divide both sides by L and get

y—(K/L)+c-k. By the definition of k, we know that k—K/L -

(n+g+8)k, which

we can plug in savings equal investment equality to yield:

(3.5) k -

f(k)

-

(n+g-f5)k

-

c

Consumers maximize a utility function

3"

of the form

(2.0) subject to

(3.5). Notice that the utility function is defined in consumption per capita

(per physical body) while the budget constraint is defined in terms of
consumption per effective labor unit (ce). We can transform the utility
function using the equality

(3.6) U(0) -

J et[(tet)101]Lodt

We have to choose c so as to maximize (3.6) subject to (3.5) and
subject to t(o, L0 and A0, Set up the Familtonian:

(3.7) HO -

e

t[(t)Iol} + ii[f(k)

c

-

-

(n++5)kJ

The F.C.C. are the following:

(Pn)tgt [etJ

(3.8)
(3.9)

— •&, * v —

(3.10) TVC lim

-

o

-v(f'(k)-n-g-8)

(ktv)

— 0

By following the same steps as in the previous section, we will
find that:

(3.11) v/v —

-(p-n)

+ g -cc/c - og

-

f'(k)

+

ii + g

+6

by setting c/c—C we will get the steady state condition:

(3.12) f'(k) — p+cg+6

Observe

that this result is exactly parallel to the one in section

two (equation (2.8)).

The difference here is that the growth rate relates

to consumption per unit of efficient labor.

35

This means that, since

variables in efficiency units do not grow, variables in per capita terms
grow at the constant rate g.

(c) Bounded Utility Condition.

For U(O) to be bounded, again, we need the expression inside the
integral to tend to zero as t goes to infinity.

-

(3.14) urn

urn

e)t/(la)

Note that if p > n-fg(l-a) > n, the second term goes to zero. Since c
will end up growing at rate g, the first term also goes to zero if the above

condition holds. Notice, finally, that this condition implies that the TVC

is satisfied and that we will end up at a point to the left of the golden
rule (dynamically efficient region).
Finally, let's analyze the saving rate.

(3.27) s/y—(k/y)+(nk/y)—(k/k)(k/y)+n(k/y)—(y+n)(k/y)—

(p+o)/1—(g+n)/(p+gc).
A patient society (low p) will save more and end up with a higher

output LEVEL along the balanced path than an impatient one. She will not,
however, grow at a faster rate. We have seen that the growth rate depends
on g and n only. This is an important implication of the neoclassical model
of economic growth.

36

,6+n

6+n

sAk

13-1

/

fr

\A"
1

k*

Growth Rate

13<1

Figure 1: The Neoclassical Model

3-1

kt

13-1

ó+n

sAk

\

bp

I,

"

r\ØR

I,

rp

Rich Country-High Growth Rate

Poor Country-Low Growth Rate

13-1

k

Figure 2: Conditional Convergence in the Neoclassical Model

6+n

sA

sA, 6+n

k0

V

Growth Rate

(3=1

Figure 3: The Rebelo-Ak model

kt

13-1

,6+n

6+n —

sAk

*

—

Increasing Growth Rates

--

(3>1
-

kt

Figure 4: Increasing Returns and Increasing Growth Rates

0

B

f(K/L)

0

f(k)=Ak

k=B/A

f(k)=B

Figure 5: The Harrod-Domar Production Function

K/L

sA

ó+n

sf(k)/k, ó+n

/
fr
/

B/A

Growth Rate
Negative
/

Case 1: sA<(cS+n)

sf(k)/k

Figure 6: The Harrod-Domar Model

k

t

6+n=sA

sf(k)/k, 6+n

k0

B/A

---v

sf(k)/k

Figure 7: The Harrod-Domar Model
Case2: sA=(6-I-n)

kt

6+n

sA

sf(k)/k, ó+n

k0

V

*1

//

B/A

Growth Rate
/

k*

sf(k)/k

Figure 8: The Harrod-Domar Model
Case 3: sA>(ó+n)

k

t

6+n

sA

sf(k)/k, 6+n

0

k

Current Growth Rate

Figure 9: The °Sobelow Model

BF)

kt

6+n

1

k*
2

1

/

Threshold Point

i___________

NY

Stable Poverty Trap

sf(k)/k, ó+n

Figure 10: Stable Poverty Trap

k

t

c

Co

t

C

k0

ô=O

kgold

k**

Figure 11: The Ramsey-Cass-Koopmans Phase Diagram

k

