                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




              LECTURE NOTES ON ECONOMIC GROWTH (II):
            FIVE PROTOTYPE MODELS OF ENDOGENOUS GROWTH




                      Xavier Sala-i-Martin




                     Working Paper No. 3564




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December 1990



These notes were develops while I was assisting Robert J. Barro to
teach the first year graduate macroeconomics class at Harvard in
1988-89 and 1989-90. The two vintages of first year students
suffered the first draft of these notes and made all kinds of
useful comments/amendments. Thank you kids. I am especially
grateful to Susan Guthrie for carefully reading them and helping
me think about section 1. I also received comments from Serge
Marquié, and (Kid) Casey Mulligan from Harvard, and Julie Lee from
Yale. First draft completed: November 1988. This revised version
completed: December 17, 1990. This paper is part of NBER's
research program in Growth. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and no€ those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3564
                                        December 1990
              LECTURE NOTES ON ECONOMIC GROWTH (II):
            FIVE PROTOTYPE MODELS OF ENDOGENOUS GROWTH

                             ABSTRACT

     This paper explores the five simplest models of endogenous
growth. We start with the AK model (Rebelo (1990)) and argue that
all endogenous growth models can be viewed as variations or
microfoundations of it. We then examine the Barro (1990) model of
government spending and growth. Next we look at the
Arrow-Sheshinskj-Romer model of learning by doing and
externalities. The Lucas (1988) model of human capital
accumulation is then considered. Finally, we present a simple
model of R&D and growth.

                                        Xavier Sala-i-Martin
                                        Department of Economics
                                        Yale University
                                        28 Hillhouse
                                        New Haven, CT 06520
           "A view of Economic Growth that depends so heavily on an exogenous
variable, let alone one so difficult to measure as the quantity of
knowledge, is hardly intellectually satisfactory. From a quantitative,
empirical point of view, we are left with time as an explanatory variable.
Now trend projections, however necessary they may be in practice, are
basically a confession of ignorance, and, what is worse from a practical
viewpoint, are not policy variables" (Arrow (1962), p.155).




           INTRODUCTION


           In Section 1 of the first part of the notes we saw that the key to
endogenous growth was the inexistence of diminishing returns to the inputs
that can be accumulated. This implies that the "return to investment" (RI)
in all these types of models ends up being a constant A*


(1) r —   A*

       Endogenous Growth models combine this return to investment with the
usual return to consumption schedule, which was derived from a constant
intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES) utility function


(2) r — p +    of

which states that the return to consumption (RC) is a premium on the
discount rate. The premium is larger the larger the economy is expected to
grow (larger y) and the more willing people are to smooth consumption (large
ci).   In steady state the growth rate -y is constant so equations 1 and 2 can
pictured as in Figure 1.      Notice that the crossing point determines the
steady state growth rate of the economy. In order to interpret this figure,
it will be useful to compare it with Figure 2, which represents the
Neoclassical model with exogenous productivity growth.         The return to




                                       3
consumption is the same as in Figure 1 and the return to investment is a
vertical line at -y—g, where g is the exogenous productivity growth rate.
     Figure 2 says that changes in the parameters that affect the savings
rate such as the discount rate p and the coefficient of IES    (these changes
are represented by shifts and twists of the Return to Consumption line)
affect the steady state interest rate but not the steady state growth rate.
The reason is that the long run growth rate in these models is exogenously
determined at g. Notice, on the other hand, that the same shifts in a and p
in Figure 1 imply changes in the long growth rate of the economy. Changes in
the return to investment A* also have effects on the long run growth rate.

          Almost all the endogenous growth literature is concerned with the
parameter A*l.      If we find the determinants of A* and how policy affects
them, we will know what determines long run economic growth. In this second
part of the notes we will start with the simplest model of endogenous growth
where the production function is assumed to be linear in the only input,
capital. This simple model is very important since all the other endogerious
growth models can be though of as extensions or microfoundations of the
basic linear one.

          In section (5) we will explore the Barro model of government
spending, distortionary taxes and growth. In section 6 we will show a model
of learning by doing where the return to investment is kept constant by
agents that constantly improve technology (learn) as they work (do).        In
section 7 we explore a model of human capital accumulation where people
become more productive as they invest in their human capital (study). In




1

          Paradoxically, almost no work has been done in trying to
understand the determinants of the discount rate and the elasticity of
intertemporal substitution. Notice that if we knew why some countries are
more impatient or more willing to intertemporally substitute consumption
than others, we sould know what determines long run growth given the return
to investment A . The parameters in the utility function, however, have
always been taken as given and, therefore, not subject to policy actions.
One exception is the work on fertility choice by Barro and Becker (1988) and
others, where discount rates are linked to income through the willingness
and ability to raise children.




                                       4
the final Section we present the simplest model of R&D, where growth is kept
alive through the constant introduction of new varieties of capital goods.


          (4) CONVEX ENDOGENOUS GROWTH MODELS: REBELO (1990)


          (a) The Model.


          The simplest possible endogenous growth model is the so called
"AK" model developed by Rebelo (1990). The production function is assumed
to be linear in the only input, capital. Hence, the production function is
both constant returns to scale and constant returns to capital.


     (4.1) Y —   F(K,L) —   AK.


where A is an exogenous constant and K is aggregate capital broadly defined
(so not only it includes physical capital but it may also include human
capital as well as stock of knowledge and maybe other types of capital such
as financial capital, etc.). Assume for simplicity that the population does
not grow at all (n—0) and that the depreciation rate is zero (none of the
results depend on these two assumptions). The utility function is the usual
constant Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution.



     (4.2) U(0)— e c1-l dt
                             l.a


          As we did in the last section, we will start thinking about a
model of household production and then we will show that the market economy
will yield the same solution.      In the household production model, the
dynamic capital accumulation constraint is



     (4.3) k —   Ak-c

where use of (4.1) has been made.         Households maximize (4.2) subject to




                                      5
(4.3). The Hamiltonian is the usual:



     (4.4) Ho —                     + V       - C)
                        et[cci.iJ
     And the FOG are:


     (4.5)    etc       — V

     (4.6)    v — -vA
     (4.7) TVC



             Take logs and derivatives of (4.5) to get v/v —   -p-u   where, again

i—c/c is the balanced growth rate of per capita consumption.            By
substituting this in (4.6) we can get the growth rate as a function of the
"first principles" parameters:



     (4.8) c/c —        — (A-p)/a

     We can rewrite (4.8) as


     (4.9)   a+p—A.


          Again, the left hand side is the return to consumption and the
right hand side is the return to investment. The return to consumption
depends n the discount rate (maybe because people like their children but
they like themselves better) and it depends on the growth rate for smoothing
reasons: if a>O, people like to smooth consumption. If consumption is
growing people want to smooth their consumption paths by bringing some
future consumption to the present.        The return to investment is simply A
(there are no adjustment costs or diminishing returns to capital so the
return is independent, to the growth rate or the capital stock). To find the
steady state growth rate of per capita capital, divide both sides of the




                                          6
dynamic constraint by the capital labor ratio and call k/k—-y':



       (4.10) k/k —   '—A            -
                                             c/k     > y'-A   -i9 —   -c/k

       Taking logs and derivatives of both sides of (4.10), and given that y
is constant in the steady state, we get



       (4.11) c/c —   -y   —   k/k       —


       That is, in steady state capital and consumption grow at the SANE
constant rate -y.     Finally, by taking logs and derivatives of the production
function (2.1) we see that output will also grow at the same rate y.


            (b) Transitional Dynamics


           We just showed that, in the steady state, consumption, capital and
output grow at the same constant rate.                          Equation 4.8 tells us that
consumption will always grow at a constant rate given by c(A-p) so
consumption is always in steady state.  Given this, equation (4.10) says
that IF CAPITAL GROWTH is constant, then all variables grow at the same
rate. Can we say that capital always grows at a constant rate?. To answer
this question let us start by taking the budget constraint (4.3) and
integrate it between o and T (pre multiply both sides by the integrating
factor et and take into account that c grows at a constant rate (A-p)/a so
c —c
 tO

       (4.12) J(ktAk) Atdt —
                                                   c0Jetkdt
       the solution of which is


       (4.14) kT —
                      [k0c0o/(p(la)A))eAT + [c0a/(p(la)A))eT



                                                      7
     or


     (4.15) kT — aeAT +   je)T/0
     where a._{k0c0J/(p(la)A)) and _[c0o/(P-(1-a)A)). We can now put
in the transversality condition and let T go to infinity


     (4.16) k.u'(cT)eT — (meAT +
                       — (meAT +

                               —(me   AT
                                                $eT)ce
                                               +e (A-p)T/a -        -AT—
                                                                             T/JePT   —


                                                            )c0 e
                                   (m +    eT)cT0ePT
          For the limit of this expression to be zero as T goes to infinity
we need two things:
          (a) A(1-a)-p<O which we know is satisfied (this is the "bounded
utility condition" that we imposed at the outset)
          and (b) a—O


          But if a—O, kT can be rewritten as


     (4.17) kT —


          which is equivalent to say (just take logs and derivatives of both
sides) that k/k — (A-p)/a at all times. Hence, capital also grows at a
constant rate all the time so there are no transitional dynamics in this
model.


          (c) Savings, Growth and, Convergence.


          Finally, it is interesting to analyze what this economy predicts
about the interaction between the savings and the growth rates.                           Let us
write the savings rate



(4.18) savings rate —    s/y   —   k/y     —   (k/k)(k/y)   —   i(1/A)   —   (l-p/A)/ct


                                                  8
          The growth rate of a country depends on its saving rate2 and on
how productive its technology is (-)'-(s/y)A). Determinants of the saving rate
are p and ci. The more patient a society is (low p), the larger the saving
and growth rates. The more willing to substitute intertemporally (low ci),
also the larger the saving and growth rates. What determines A remains
unexplained and it will be the subject of the next few models.
          This is the first model that does not predict convergence. Suppose
that countries have the same parameters (A, a, p) but for some reason, they
differ in their initial k(O). Since they will all grow at the same constant
rate y, the poor countries will always be poorer iii levels. Suppose that
countries differ also in their productivity parameters (Ai#Aj for i#j). This
implies that "low growth" countries will remain "low growth countries"
forever, independently of initial income or product      (this contrasts with
the neoclassical result where poorer countries tend to grow faster to their
steady state level of income). An alternative way to see this is to use the
linearization around steady state developed in section 2 and to let the
capital share, a, go to one. Notice that in this case       so the "negativeTM
eigenvalue is     -'p-n-(p-n)—O.   The convergence equation (2.19) says that
the coefficient on initial income predicted by this model is exactly zero.
Again, this convergence implication has been used by a heterogeneity of
authors to test validity of the neoclassical.


          (d) The "market" model.


          In solving the model the way we did in Section (a), we implicitly
assumed that households do the production at home. Alternatively we could




2
          If population and depreciation rates were not set equal to zero we
would have that s—S/y—(k+(6+n)k)/k—(k,'k+(6+n))(k/y)—(7+(6+n))/A which implies
that y—sA-(6+n).    This is the growth rate we found in the introductory
section of the first part of these notes when we were dealing with a
constant savings rate.




                                       9
have modeled households maximizing utility subject to a financial constraint
of the form



(4.12) b —       rb   -
                          c
where b is financial wealth and r is the return to financial wealth.
Financial wealth is made out of physical capital plus bonds. Because it is
assumed that the economy is closed, the net supply of bonds is zero so, at
the aggregate level b is equal to k.            The first order condition of this
problem is the usual


(4.14) r — p + ay


which can be interpreted as the return to consumption (RC). In steady state
(that is when y    is     constant), this relation is an upward sloping line in the
r, -y   space.   Firms, on the other hand, are assumed to produce output with
the linear technology (4.1). They also take the interest rate as given and
choose inputs and outputs so as to maximize profits.               The first order
conditions require the equalization of interest rate and marginal product of
capital


(4.15) r — A


which, in the r--y space is represented by a flat line at A. Notice that the
combination of (4.14) and (4.15), which is depicted in Figure 1, yields the
sane steady state we found for the household production model of Section
(a).     It just remains to be shown        that the growth   rates of capital and
consumption are the same.         We can do that by substituting (4.15) in (4.12)
to get



(4.16) k — Ak-c



we can divide both sides by k, realize that, in steady state k/k is a




                                           10
constant.     Put all constant in one side of the equation, take logs and
derivatives of both sides and conclude that the growth rate of consumption
is the same as the growth rate of capital.            Hence, the solution to the
market model is the same as the solution to the household production model.


             (5) THE BARRO (1990) MODEL OF PUBLIC SPENDING


             (a) The Model of Household Production.


             This is a growth model that tries to link growth to fiscal
variables.      If we think Rebelo's k as representing a BROAD MEASURE OF
CAPITAL we could read this model as a particular version of Rebelo's.
             Barro assumes that some inputs are publicly provided private
goods. It is hard to think what these goods really are in actual economies.
Two natural extensions of the Barro (1990) model are developed in Barro and
Sala-i-Martin (1990). The first one considers pure non rival public good in
the Samuelson (1954) sense.        This model, however, ends up having the
unappealing implication that economies with large population will grow
faster. The second variation considers public goods subject to congestion
(such as highways, airports or courts of law).          This second model is the
most realistic of the three and it does not have the scale effect that the
pure public goods model has. In these notes, however, we will show how to
solve the original Barro model, the other two being straightforward
extensions of it.

     The key assumption is that the production function is CR to government
spending (g)3 and capital (k) together but it is DR to k and g separately.
In its Cobb-Douglas specification the aggregate production is


     (5.1) y —   f(k,g)   —   Ak(lgm


3

             In a slight abuse of notation we are denoting government
spending by g. Thus, g does NOT correspond to exogenous productivity growth
as it did in previous sections.




                                        11
            As usual, we will assume that individuals choose a consumption
path so as to maximize the traditional CIES utility function subject to the
dynamic constraint. We assume that every individual is a very small part of
the society so each of them takes public spending as given. For simplicity,
we will assume that the government has to balance its budget at all times
(no public debt is permitted) and that the only public source of income is
an income tax. The program, therefore becomes:



       (5.2) MAX 1.1(0)— J
                             et[ccl]dt
       (5.3) Subject to k —   (lr)Ak    ga -c and k(0)
                            (1-a) a
       (5.4) where g—ry—rAk      g


where r is the constant average and marginal income tax rate. Notice that
for the first time we find a model that could potentially yield a
non-optimal competitive equilibrium.        That is, the "private" equilibrium
will have to be solved assuming that individuals take g as given. Individual
choices, however, affect everybody's output.             "When I increase my
production, I increase public income (because the government maintains a
fixed ratio of public expenditure to output or, equivalently, a fixed income
tax) which, in turn, increases productivity for everybody". This externality
could potentially be a source of non optimality in the sense that if the
model is solved by a planner, he will take the externality into account and
yield a solution that may not be the same as the competitive equilibrium
one.



       (b) Equilibrium


           Since individuals take government expenditures as given to
them, the problem they face is a concave one (constant returns to the inputs
they can choose, namely labor and private capital). Hence, there will be a
set of prices that support the competitive equilibrium.       To find such an
equilibrium, we have to optimize taking g as given. The Hamiltonian,



                                       12
therefore is:



                    -
                                                /{(1r)Ak(1 a)ga
     (5.5) Ho                               +
                        et[c1iJ
     The FOC of the program are:


     (5.6)e         c —v
               -pt -a

             v —                                   -
     (5.7)
                    v((lr)A(la)kga)
     (5.8)   TVC


             By taking logs and derivatives of (5.6) and substituting in (5.7)
we will get the usual growth condition that states that the balanced growth
rate is proportional to the difference between the MPK and the discount
rate, p.



     (5.9) c/c — 1 —                                      -
                                 a((lr)A(l.a)(g/k)m           pJ

             We can now manipulate the government budget constraint (5.4) to
get the size of the government r_g/y_g/(Ak                         )ga)_(g/k)(A* Let's
substitute for (g/k) to get:


     (5.10) g/k —           (rA)
             Plug (5.10) in (5.9) to get the growth rate as a function of the
parameters r,      p,   ,   a,   A and a.

                      *
     (5.11) y — a-ii1A -            p

       *
where A — (1-a)A1/(1-a) (l-r)ra/(l-a) .                  As usual, by dividing the dynamic
constraint by k, taking logs and derivatives of both sides we will see that
the growth rate of capital is the same as the growth rate of consumption

(k/k—c/c—i). Suppose now that a benevolent government tried to maximize the




                                                    13
growth rate of the economy taking into account that people behave
competitively4. In other words, what is the r that maximizes       in (5.11)?
Just take derivatives, set them equal to zero and get that the optimal r is
r*—a. We can calculate the saving rate in the usual way:



     (5.12) s/y -   k/y - (k/k)(k/y)       -   -yAr'
          Finally, the usual condition for U(O) to be bounded (take limits
of the term inside the integral when t tends to infinity and let them go to
zero):


     (5.14) lim etc - e0t              —    lim etc(O)el)t

          The condition p>y(l-ci) ensures that this limit is zero and,
therefore, that U(O) is bounded.


          (c) The Command Economy.


          The command economy solution will take into account the fact that
private output affects public income and (through the production function)
other people's marginal product of capital. In other words, to solve for the
command economy we have to substitute the public budget constraint into the
Haniiltonjan and take the FOC from it. The new Hamiltonjan is:



     (5.15) HO -                + v[(1 r)kA1"1 /Q)
                    et[c17l}                                 c)



4

          It is not clear that this is what a benevolent dictator would like
to do.   It would seem more reasonable to assume that he wants to maximize
the utility (not the growth rate) of the representative consumer. For the
Cobb Douglas production and CIES utility assumptions assumed here, however,
the two are the same (see Barro (1990)).




                                               14
     The FOC are:


     (5,16) e_stc —            V

                                             cx/(1-a)     -
     (5.17)    '   — v[(lr)Ah/(1                                )

             By substituting in the usual way we will get the "command growth
rate",


     (5.17) .C_
                         l((l      )Au/(lm)a/(l0) -
                                                                    )
             Since O<a<l, It is clear that the competitive growth rate (5.11)
is smaller than the command rate for all values of r. A decentralized
economy involves too little growth. The reason is that it also involves too
little savings5.             Notice, finally, that the growth rate is maximized at
         the same result as in the competitive equilibrium.
             Growth in this model is achieved through the government action:
when private individuals decide to save one unit of consumption and purchase
a unit of capital with it, the government is forced (because he wants to
maintain a constant r) to provide one more unit of public input.                           This
avoids diminishing returns capital so individuals keep investing forever at
constant rates, which is the ultimate source of growth.


     (d) Market Equilibrium


     As we did in Section 4, we have implicitly assumed that households in
this economy produce their own output.                        As before, the same results would
obtain if they operated in a perfectly competitive market. Again, the first
order conditions from the consumer side can be represented by equation
(4.14). In steady state, this can be depicted as an upward sloping line in
Figure 3. Firms, once again, maximize profits subject to the constraint that




5

             5 —   S/y   -   k/y   -   (k/k)(k/y)   -    cAll(la).a/(la)

                                                    15
net output is given by


     (5.18) (1-r)Akg

             The first order condition will entail the equalization of marginal
product to the real interest rate.           After substituting in the government
budget constraint this return to investment is


     (5.19) r —    a(1r)Al/mr)
which corresponds to the horizontal line called RI       in Figure 3.  The
                                                 private
intersection of the two lines yields the growth rate in (5.11). It remains
to be shown that the growth rate of capital and consumption are the same.
We can verify that by plugging (5.19) in the household's budget constraint
(4.3) to get


(5.20) k —    (l-r)aAr°"°k        -   c


     We can divide (5.20) by k,           Realize that in the steady state k/k is
constant, put all the constants in (5.20) in one side and take logs and

derivatives to find that c/c—k/k. Hence, the market solution is equivalent
to the household production solution.
     The planner, on the other hand, would take into consideration the
government budget constraint before calculating first order conditions.
That is it would maximize profits subject to the constraint that net output
is given by


     (5.20) (1-r)A1"r"°k

     The equalization of real return to the marginal product of capital
yields


     (5.21) r —




                                            16
which is larger than the r in (5.19) since a<l. This social rate of return
is pictured as a horizontal line called Rlpianner in Figure 3.    Notice that
the intersection between (5.21) and (4.14) in Figure 3 yields a superior
steady state growth rate for the planner economy. This is, again, because
the planner takes into account the fact that when firms raise output they
raise government revenue and, given the public budget constraint, raise
productive public spending and everybody else's productivity.      Since
competitive firms do not take into account such an externality (je their
perceived return is smaller than the planner) they underinvest so the
competitive growth rate is lower than optimal.


          (6) LEARNING BY DOING, EXTERNALITIES AND INCREASING RETURNS.


          (a)   The Model.

          In the paper that started   the literature on   endogenous economic
growth, Romer (1986) follows Arrow (1962) and Sheshinski (1967) in solving
the —1 problem by postulating increasing returns to scale at the economy
wide level but CRS at the firm level.      That is, in order to support the
equilibrium with a set of competitive prices he needs to assume that the
Increasing Returns are external to the firm.     This externality, however,
will yield non optimal equilibria.
          Arrow argues that the acquisition of knowledge (learning) is
related to experience. He cites examples from the airframe industry where
there is strong evidence of the interplay between experience and increasing
productivity.    He argues that a good measure of increase in experience is
investment because "each new machine produced and put into use is capable of
changing the environment in which production takes place, so that learning
takes place with continuous new stimuli" (p. 157). It follows that an index
of experience is cumulative investment or capital stock. More formally, let
the production function for firm i be a function of its capital stock, its




                                      17
capital labor corrected by the state of knowledge at time t,      A(t)

             —
(6.1)
                  F(Ki,A(t)Lj)
and let experience be a function of the past investments of ALL the firms in
the economy which, under the assumption of no depreciation is equal to the
aggregate capital stock ?c(t)



C(t) _JI(v)dv -           K(t)


        Based on the experience of the airframe industry Arrow further
assumes that the relation between experience and the state of knowledge is


A(t) —


where    ,7<l.      It follows that the individual production function can be
rewritten as


Y — F(Ki,L,?c)        —


             This production is CR in K. and Li holding      fixed and IRS if we
consider the three "inputs" at the same time.           We will assume that the
number of firms is a large constant number N. Since H is large, every firm
                                                                         M
will take the aggregate stock of capital as given even though — Z              k —   Mk.
                                                                         i—i
This, again, will give rise to an externality that will make the competitive
equilibrium non optimal in the sense that a command economy would achieve a
larger growth rate in the steady state and a larger utility. By aggregating
across firms, the aggregate production function is


(6.1)' Y —       F(K,L,,c)   —


where KMki and L—ML..            It is convenient to work in per capita terms so




                                           18
let's divide both sides of (6.1)' by L to get


     (6.2) y —


where k—K/L and y—Y/L. Households maximize a typical CIES utility function
subject to the dynamic constraint (assume again no population growth6):



     (6.3) k —        k,c'   -   c


             (b) Competitive Equilibrium


             Households in a competitive economy will take the aggregate stock
of capital as given. To solve the program we have to set up the familiar
Hamiltonian



     (6.4) Ho —                 +                   -

                        e't[c1i} i[k'1                  C)


     The First Order Conditions are:

         -pt -a
     (6.5)e   c —
     (6.6)    v   —


     (6.7)    TVC


             Equilibrium         in the capital market requires that total capital be
equal to the sum of individual capital stocks: ,c — Lk.    By using this
condition, taking logs and derivatives of (6.5) and plugging in equation




6

             As shown in Section 1, this assumption is crucial for this
particular type of model.




                                               19
    (6.6) we will, once again, get the growth rate for consumption:




         (6.8) c/c -   -                      -




which states that the growth rate of consumption is proportional to the
difference between the marginal product of capital and the individual
discount rate. We can divide both sides of the dynamic constraint (6.3) by k
and then take logs and derivatives to show that the capital stock will      grow,
in the steady state, at the same rate as consumption. Notice that equation
(6.8) has the implication that countries with a lot of population experience
large growth. This "Scale Effect" is certainly counter factual (see Backus,
Kehoe and Kehoe (1990) for an empirical study of scale effects). This scale
effect is due to the assumption that the externality is captured          by the
aggregate capital stock.         If the externality was captured by the average
capital stock instead, the growth rate would be -y—C8-p)/c, which is
independent of total labor supply.

             Is this model capable of generating positive steady state growth
(y>O)?. Suppose first that            < 1. If this is the case, the model is
exactly equal to the Ramsey-Cass-Koopmans model (only that the relevant
capital share is not       but        The steady state implies y—0. This gives an
important insight7: IRS by themselves are not enough to generate persistent
growth!. What we need is VERY increasing returns. That is, we need , to be
large enough so as to satisfy -i-q—l. In this case, the model looks very much
like Rebelo's (in fact, let's define A* as being equal to        and condition
(6.9) in this model exactly matches condition (4.8) in the Rebelo one)8. The




7

             This is the familiar result that in order to have sustainable
growth, we need CRS in all inputs that can be accumulated!.
8

             The difference between the two models is that the private and
social marginal products of capital are different for the Romer model but
not for the Rebelo one.




                                         20
steady state rate of growth will be

                         -l *
     (6.9)    -y —   a    (A -p)


where A*_L1. Romer shows how a technology that exhibits IRS of the form
      can generate increasing growth rates (as opposed to decreasing rates
when +,<l or constant rates when +,—l). We will not deal with that case in
here but we can mention that it corresponds to the explosive growth case
depicted in figure 3 where there are IRS in the inputs that can be
accumulated.
             A planner confronted with a production function of the form (6.1)
would take into account that when a firm invests, it increases the stock of
knowledge from which ALL other firms in the economy may benefit.        Hence,
when calculating first order conditions, it would take derivatives with
respect to all capital (including the part that is external to the firm) and
find a growth rate of the form


     (6.10)
                planner
                            —   a1((+ti)k'L'   -




which is larger than the competitive one.          In other words, competitive
household producers would achieve a lower than optimal growth rate because
they fail to internalize the knowledge spill over in production. This leads
them to underinvest and, therefore, undergrow.
             An interesting extension of this model to the open economy is
provided by Young (1989). He sets up a two country world with one developed
(the North) and one less developed (the South) countries.        There are two
goods, high-technology and low-technology.         When trade between the two
regions occurs, the North specializes in high-technology and the south does
the opposite (like in a comparative advantage model). Since the production
of high technology is assumed to lead to more rapid learning by doing, the
effect of free trade is to increase growth in the North but decrease it in
the South.




                                        21
          (e) Market equilibrium


          Again we can show that the household production model just shown
corresponds to an equilibrium in which households and firms interact through
competitive markets. As usual the main first order condition for private
households is equation (4.14) which, in steady state, corresponds to the
upward sloping line called RC in Figure 4.        Firms maximize profits subject
to the production function


     (6.11) y —


and taking k'7 as given. The first order conditions entail the equalization
of the private marginal product of capital to the real interest rate


     (6.12) r —


which corresponds to the horizontal line RI                 in Figure 4.    The
                                                   private
intersection of RC and RI             yields the competitive equilibrium steady
                         private
state growth rate. Notice, in turn, that a planner would take into account
that investment in firm i has an effect on the aggregate stock of capital so
the social rate of return is


     (6.14) r —


which corresponds to RI             in Figure 4. Notice that as long as there is
                          planner
a positive externality (,pO), the competitive return and therefore the
competitive growth rate is smaller than that of the planner.
          To close the model, it remains to be shown that the capital stock
grows at the same rate as consumption. This can be done by substituting
(6.12) into the household budget constraint (4.3) to get



(6.15) k —        -c


          We can divide both sides by k, note that in steady state k/k is




                                         22
constant, and put all the constants in the same side.         Take logs and

derivatives and conclude that c/c—k/k.


          (f) The Relation Between Increasing Returns and Endogenous Growth.


          Although some people relate endogenous growth to increasing
returns we are now in a position to say the Increasing Returns ARE NEITHER
NECESSARY NOR SUFFICIENT TO GENERATE ENDOGENOUS GROWTH.    We saw that they
were not necessary in the Rebelo (1990) and Barro (1990) models of Constant
Returns to Scale.        In the other hand we just saw that they are not
sufficient since, the Romer model where ti<l-, failed to generate endogenous
growth.


          (7) HUMAN CAPITAL ACCUMULATION: LUCAS (1988)


          (a) The Model.


          The first model in Lucas (l988) argues that we can have CRS in
inputs that can be accumulated by arguing that ALL inputs can be
accumulated. Hence, we do not need government externalities (Barro 1990) or
private capital externalities (Romer 1986). To this end, he introduces human
capital instead of plain "number of physical bodies" in the production
function. As opposed to the "exogenous" productivity model of section 2,
human capital here can change through investment (individuals will choose
how much time they invest in their studies). Hence, we can accumulate all
inputs of the production function. If we postulate a CRS production
function, we will have a version of the Rebelo model in which the broad
measure of capital includes human and physical capital.      All we need to
generate growth is to have the incentive to invest in human capital be




9
          We will not talk about the second one which deals with acquired
comparative advantage.




                                      23
nondecreasing in human capital. That is we need to postulate a production
function of human capital which is constant returns to human capital so its
marginal product (which determines the incentive to spend time studying) is
constant.
            Let u be the fraction of non-leisure time individuals spend
working (producing output Y), h be a measure of the average quality of
workers and L be the number of bodies so uhL is the total effective labor
used to produce Y. The production function, therefore is something like:


     (7.1) Y —   AK[uhL]
            The term uhL is often called human capital.      This production
function exhibits constant returns to physical and human capital since
doubling K and uhL doubles final output10.      Notice that if we think of
K[uhL] as being a broad measure of capital (capital is capital is
capital no matter whether it is human or it is physical), we are back to the
Rebelo model (again, this is provided that the incentive to study does not
decrease over time so we end up not accumulating any human capital). The
production function in (7.1) would be enough to generate endogenous growth.
Yet Lucas postulates an externality in human capital to reflect the fact
that people are more productive when they are around clever people. If we
let ha be the average human capital of the labor force, the production
function becomes


     (7.1)' Y —    AK[uhL]1h'
where h represents the externality from average human capital.             This
externality increases the degree of homogeneity of the production function




10

          The production function exhibits sharply increasing returns since
the doubling of K, h and L more than doubles output.         That is    this
production function is homogeneous of degree 2- in K, h and L. Notice that
2- is larger than one as long as 13<1.




                                     24
to 2-4-->2-fl>l. Yet as we just mentioned, this externality is not essential
for endogenous growth but Lucas assumes it in order to get some other
results on population movements11.    Individuals choose a stream of
consumption so as to maximize the standard intertemporal utility function
subject to the capital accumulation constraint:



      (7.2) K —   AK[uhL]    1h -      c


            To complete the model we need to specify how individuals
accumulate knowledge. Of course they do it by studying! We can write this
semi universal truth in a differential equation format12:



      (7.3) h —   h(l-u)
           Under this particular functional form, there are constant returns
to scale in the production of human capital. That is, the growth rate of

knowledge (h/h) is proportional to the time spent in studying (1-u). The
constant of proportionality is some "studying productivity" parameter, .




11

          The implications for migration depend on whether the externality
comes from aggregate or average human capital. There are arguments in favor
of both types of externalities: we could say that people go to lunch with
the person they happen to find in the corridor every day so what matters is
the quality of the average person they happen to find.                     In this case the
externality would come from average human capital.                   Notice that this
specification implies that adding a person with lower than average education
lowers everybody's productivity. An alternative specification would be that
people benefit from everybody around them, no matter what the quality of
that person is.        This would imply an externality from aggregate, not
average, human capital.   Although providing microfoundations to the Lucas
production function seems a reasonable and interesting exercise, I will not
pursue this line of research here and I will just assume that the
externality comes from average human capital.
12

           I say semi universal rather than universal because people may
learn when they work as we saw in section 6.




                                            25
The assumption of non-diminishing returns in the "production of knowledge
technology" is crucial. We will see that it is this sector that drives the
economy to a sustained positive growth rate. To keep things simple let's
assume again that L is constant and let's normalize it to one.


             (b) Market Solution.


             Individuals choose a stream of consumption c and the proportion
of time they want to spend working (u) as opposed to studying (1-u) subject
to the two constraints (7.2) and (7.3). They take ha as given. The
Hamiltonian is:



     (7.4) Ho -                      +                        -                +
                         et[c1i]         (AK[uh]                      c)           A[h(lu))

             The four FOC (wrt C, u, K and h respectively) are:


     (7.5) e0t c —
     (7.6)                    )(lp)uhA) -Ah4 — 0
              L/{Akflh

     (7.7) v —      -v
     (7.8)    A —   -i, (l-)Akuhh                   A{(lu))
             As a consistency condition we require that


     (7.9) h—h.


             We can start, as usual by taking logs and derivatives of (7.5) and
using (7.7) and (7.9) to get:



     (7.10)               —                                       -
                                                                           )
             By     dividing the         dynamic     constraint of physical                   capital




                                               26
accumulation by K we will find that



     (7.11) K/K —     — AKu)h( *)                   - c/K

          Now realize that the first part of the second term is (from eq
(7.10)) equal to (ya+p)/. Let's put all the constants on the Right Hand

Side, take logs and derivatives of both sides to get that c/c —          1 —   k/k   —
    So capital and consumption grow at the same rate 1. Now we have one more

growth rate to go: the growth rate of human capital (h/h—yb). Take eq
(7.10), put all the constants on the Left Hand Side to get:


     (7.12) (7a+p)/Afl —


     Let's take logs and derivatives of both sides to get



(7.14) O--(1-)K/K +      (l+-fl)h/h

which implies



(7.14)' h- 1h (l)/(l+-)

proportion (growth rate of h is smaller if there is an externality, ('>0). In
the absence of an externality (—0), the two growth rates are the same. Now
we have to find the value of either 1 or        as a function of the parameters
of the model. We can start with (7.6):


     (7.6)' '/A -
                    /(
    we can again take logs and derivatives of both sides and get



     (7.15) /v +     k/k   +   (-)h/h - A/   --->   v/ +    + (fi)1h -   A/A




                                       27
          We know '/v from equation (7.7)



      (7.16) u/v — -(-yo+p)


           To find the value of A/A let's divide both sides of equation (7.8)

by A, plug v/A from equation (7.6)' to get:



      (7.17) A/A --


           That is, the shadow price of human capital decreases at a constant
rate 4) (recall that 4' is the productivity parameter of the "production of
knowledge" technology). We can substitute 1h —     y(l-)/(l+-fl)   plus equations
(7.16) and (7.17) in (7.15)   to   get that


      (7.18) h -


           Notice that if there is no externality, the growth rates are
               It is interesting to note that this is the growth rate Rebelo
gets in his CRS model but with 4)       rather   than A. The sector that really
drives the economy is the production of human capital.
           In this model, unlike Rebelo's, the economy is not always in the
steady state balanced growth path. It has some complicated transitional
dynamics which we will not try to derive mathematically.           Although Lucas
conjectures about how this transition looks like, very little is known about
it.



           (c) The Command Economy Solution.


           To solve for the    command solution,    we have to internalize the
externality: we have to solve taking into account the fact that ha is equal
to h. Since the procedure is the same as in the Barro model I will not do it
here. Let me just say that the solution you should get is the following




                                         28
"efficient" growth rate for the the human capital sector:


        (7.24) 1h -          - (l-)P/(l-F-)J

            Notice that, as one should have expected, in the absence of
externality, the growth rate is the same one we got for the market solution.
That is, in the absence of externality, the competitive equilibrium gives the
optimal incentive to invest in education and, therefore, the optimal growth
rate. When the externality is positive, in the other hand, the "efficient"
growth rate is always larger than the market rate.          That is, the market
economy does not grow enough. The reason is that the private return to study
is lower than the social one, so in a market economy people will not invest
in human capital as much as would be socially optimal.
            An interesting extension of this model to the open economy is
provided by Stokey (1990). She constructs a model where different qualities
of goods are produced by people with different human capital stocks.        She
finds that free trade may be bad for poor countries because it may
discourage uses this framework to analyze the impact of opening the economy
to trade and finds that opening the economy may be bad for growth in poor
countries as individuals are discouraged from investing in human capital.


             (8) R&D MODELS OF GROWTH: (1988)


             (a) The Model


            There is a heterogeneity of growth models that emphasizes R&D as
an important engine of economic growth. We can think of R&D as contributing
to growth in at least two ways. First it allows to introduce new types of
capital goods which may or may not be more productive than the existing
ones.     Output is a function of all existing varieties or qualities of
capital goods. If it exhibits "constant returns to the number of varieties
or qualities" (we will define later what we mean by that) we will get
endogenous growth even when there are diminishing returns to each type of




                                         29
capital.     This approach has been taken by Romer (1987) and Barro and
Sala-i-Martin (1990) among others.
           The second contribution of R&D to economic growth is that it may
have some spillovers on the aggregate stock of knowledge: as scientists
spend time thinking about the development of new products or techniques,
they increase the stock of knowledge. A larger stock of knowledge, in turn,
reduces the costs of R&D.      Hence, under some conditions the existence of
spillovers from R&D activities will generate a "Constant Returns to
Investing to R&D" which keeps firms investing constant amounts of resources
in R&D and increasing the stock of knowledge at a constant rate.          Since

general knowledge reduces the cost of producing manufacturing goods, the
amount of manufacturing production will also be growing at a constant rate
over time.      As we just mentioned, what is needed in order to generate
endogenous growth is the incentive to do R&D not to decrease over time.
Because what drives growth is the fact that the Stock of Knowledge is
growing as a side product of R&D, it does not really matter why firms do R&D
in the first place. Thus there are models where firms develop new varieties
of consumption goods (Crossman and Helpman (1989,c) or new varieties of
varieties of production goods (Grossman and Helpman (1989, a and b) and
where the quality of new good is the same as all the others. And on the
other hand there are models where firms try to increase the quality of a
constant number of varieties goods (either consumption or investment goods)
(Aghion and Howitt (1989) or Grossman (1989), and Grossman and Helpman (1989
d,e)). The four type of models will yield exactly the same results.
             These R&D models have been used by Grossman and Helpman (in a
variety of papers) to analyze the open economy implications of endogenous
growth models. Trade of goods has implication for growth because it implies
international transmission of knowledge.      They also use this framework to
develop models where there is a race between first world countries trying to
create new products and third world countries trying to imitate them.
             An interesting finding of these line of research is the endogenous
growth can be generated through the accumulation of knowledge alone.         In
particular, no investment in physical capital is needed.            This is an
interesting finding despite the fact that the data show that investment in




                                        30
physical capital is highly correlated with GNP growth. In order to generate
such a correlation these models have to include some physical capital whose
accumulation responds to growth rather than the other way around.
             In this section we will explore the simplest version of an R&D
model (taken from 8arro and Sala-i-Martin (1990)) where growth arises from
the assumption that the production function exhibits constant returns to
varieties according to the following production function:


     (8.1)      —   AEtxZ

where xi's are intermediate inputs and A is some technological          parameter
(that could be related to fiscal policy or other things).        In words, output
is produced with a set of N inputs x (the amount of inputs available Nt
has a time subscript indicating that it can, and will, change over time).
We can think of x as being different types of capital goods, which we will
call "useful" capital goods'3. Spence (1976) and Dixit and Stiglitz (1977)
first modeled utility as depending on a variety of consumption goods in a
formulation     similar   to   (8.1).        Ethier   (1983)                   the
                                                               reinterpreted
Spence-Dixit-stiglitz utility function in terms of production of a single
output using a variety of inputs, which is the approach taken here.
          Imagine that the useful capital goods are produced from some kind
of "raw" capital.   Raw capital foregone consumption.   Instead of directly
nailing this raw capital to the floor, we must first transform it into
useful capital.   Suppose that we have a certain amount    of raw capital.
This aggregate raw quantity has to be divided among all different types of
useful capital goods. The assumed production function has the property that
if we divide the total available raw capital into N varieties of useful




13

          It is very easy to introduce inputs that cannot be accumulated
such as labor or land. If we call this input L, the production function
                     N
will be y—AL {,xJ



                                        31
capital we get LESS than if we divide it into N+l varieties, and that in
turn is less than the output we get with N+2 and SO Ofl1. This means that,
given a certain amount of aggregate raw K, we can produce an infinite amount
of output by simply dividing it into an infinite amount of varieties, each
                                    1.5
of which is infinitesimally small         .    To prevent that from happening (and
therefore to make the economy meaningfully scarce) we need to argue that, at
any given moment in time the amount of varieties is limited. We do it by
assuming that in order to transform raw into useful capital we need to pay a
fixed R&D cost. After paying the fix cost, we can transform raw into useful
capital at a constant marginal cost.               The fixed research cost is modeled
differently by different people. Some papers assume that it is in terms of
output and some others assume that is in terms of labor (human capital).
The distortionary effects are going to be different according to how this
research cost is modeled, yet the main conclusions are similar across
models.
          Of course this fixed cost structure will limit the amount of
available varieties for a given level of K. ut it also means that if we
want this useful capital to be provided through a market mechanism, it
cannot be a competitive one. Thus, we will assume monopolistic behavior.
          Summarizing, these types of models will have the following three




14
          Suppose we have a fixed amount of capital and we divide it equally
among N varieties. The implied output is (set L—l for simplicity)
Y1—N(K/N) .   Suppose instead that we divide total K into N+l varieties,
output now is Y2_(N+l)(K/(N+l))a. Of course Y2-Y1—K[N-(N+l)]>O.
So WITH THE SANE AMOUNT OF AGGREGATE CAPITAL, the final output is larger the
more we divide it among different varieties. We could think of K as being
the total amount of talent or human capital devoted to work.        We could
transform all this talent into one input or we could divide it into
different inputs (or activities).    The more activities we have (given the
total amount of talent) the more output we get. This, somehow, captures Adam
Smith's idea of increasing return due to division of labor or
specialization.
15

          So there are diminishing returns to each variety but there are
constant returns to the number of varieties, N.




                                              32
kinds of agents:
           (1)    The Producers of the final (consumption) good use labor and
all available varieties of useful capital.        The production function is
(8.1). They rent capital each good i at rate R. Their optimizing behavior
will generate input demand functions of the form x —
rental rate of good i,
                                                        R6   where R is the
                         is an elasticity depending on the parameters of the
model and '   represents   other parameters.
           (2) Producers of useful capital goods x. They use Raw capital
and produce useful capital. They pay an R&D fee equal to   and, after this,
they will be able to produce and rent unlimited amounts of x1 at a constant
marginal cost, i9.   Because of this "fixed cost" technology, their behavior
will not be competitive but, instead, monopolistic.     They will choose the
rental rate R so as to maximize profits subject to the demand functions for
their useful capital goods (x.—RT'). We will assume that everybody in the
economy can invest in R&D and develop a new variety of investment goods.
The existence of free entry will drive profits to zero at every moment in
time1.6  This zero profit condition will imply that the quantity of each
variety of useful capital is fixed and, therefore, that any increase in the
demand for useful capital will be satisfied through increases in the amount
of varieties rather than increases in the quantities of the existing ones.
          (3) Consumers who receive income Y and decide how much to consume

(C) and save (K) each period. Their savings are flows of raw capital that
can be used by the firms. Consumers can trade units of raw capital
                                                                       today
(which is the same good as consumption) for units tomorrow      at the real
interest rate rt. Since we are neglecting labor, their only source of income
is the income from lending raw capital (Y_rK) or bonds, which will have
to yield the same return given that there is no uncertainty. The utility
function for consumer will be assumed to be dES. The model will be solved
in three steps.




16

          This also means that we can neglect profits on the income side of
the consumer budget constraint.




                                        33
          (a.l) Producers of Final Goods.


          As mentioned earlier, they rent each of the N varieties of useful
capital x at rate R and they combine them according to (8.1) to produce
the only consumer good, Y which the sell at unit price. They maximize the
present value of all future cash flows:




     (8.2) Jet [     - t Pilit
                        i—l      )dt
           0


     subject to (8.1). The straightforward first order conditions yield the

following demand function for good i


     (8.2) A(1-a)x. —



          The demand function in (8.2) has a constant elasticity equal to a.


          (a. 2) Producers of Useful Capital Goods.


     As mentioned earlier, the technology to produce useful capital out of
raw capital requires a fixed R&D cost,        (measured in units of output17) which
allows them to develop a new variety which can then be produced at a
constant marginal cost,       and rented at rate R. Entrepreneurs in this
sector choose the rental rate so as to maximize profits taking the demand




17
          Romer (1990) and Grossman and Helpman (1990) assume that the
research technology uses labor only.          In this case, changes in real wages
have an effect on the fixed R&D cost.




                                         34
for their output, x.., as given by (8.2).



     (8.3) MAX jert[Rjx.(t)l9I.(t)]dt - t9x.(O)       -




subject   to I(t)-.x(t) and to (8.2). Notice that (8.3) includes the rental
income from zero to infinite discounted at the real interest rate r, the
future marginal costs of producing increasing quantities of x (I(t) is the
increase in production of x) the marginal cost of producing the initial
quantity x(O) and the fixed R&D cost .       We   can set up the Hamiltonian for
this problem



     (8.4) H —   et    [R.x.(t)I.(t)] -   x.(O)   -
                                                          + q(t)I.(t)



where q(t) is the dynamic multiplier. The first order conditions entail


     (8.5) etl3 —
                    q(t)
     (8.6) -q(t)   — ettA(la)2x.


     Notice that, after taking logs and derivatives, equation (8.5) can be
transformed into



     (8.7) q —   -qr

    We can now substitute (8.7) into (8.6) to get


     (8.8) r —


which is a relation between x. and the real interest rate.              It can be
                             1




                                     35
rewritten as


                                 2
                                             (1/a)
     (8.9) x.(t) —
                      {A(1a)         /r15]


which is independent of time and i. This implies that the quantities of all
goods will be the same and that they will be constant over time.               Hence,
I.(t) is zero for all t's.                    The optimal rental rate can be found by
substituting x in (8.2)


     (8.10) R —      ri3/(l-a)

     This rental rate can be interpreted as follows: the asset value of a
firm that invests in R&D and discovers a new variety is the present value of
all future rental incomes, R/r. Equation (8.10) says that the price of
such an asset is a constant markup over the marginal cost (this result comes
from the constant elasticity demand functions in (8.2)). Notice that R is
independent of i so all goods will have the same market rental rate,
     The free entry in the R&D business condition implies that the cost of
investing in R&D will equal the present value of all future gains. That is



     (8.11) Jet[R.xj(t)l3I.(t)]dt - i3x.(0) —



     Since x(t) equals x.(0) for all periods and I is zero, this present
value condition implies


     (8.12) R1x/r —


     We   can use the rental rate (8.10) and (8.12) to find a relation between
x and the parameters of the model


     (8.14) x.—(l-a)/a




                                                     36
        We can now combine (8.14) and (8.9) to get rid of

                                2-a2           *
        (8.15)   r —   A(l-a)     a /( i9) — A

which is constant relation between the real interest rate and the parameters
of the model. This corresponds to the flat return to investment line (RI)
in Figure 1.


                (a.3) Consumers


             To close the model we need to find the Return to Consumption
schedule, Of course we will find it by allowing individuals to maximize the
typical CIES infinite horizon utility function



        (8.16) MAX U(O)
                                 J


             Subject to the budget constraint.



        (8.17) rK c +
                 N
where       —          — Nx, where x is the constant stock of each and everyone of
                 Ex
                 1
the varieties of capital goods x. Equation (8.17) says that raw capital is

just foregone consumption (in the same units).          Thus, K>O means that some

resources are allocated to the increase in the number of varieties (N>O),
that is, investment in R&D or to the increase in the quantity of existing

varieties (x>O). Individuals receive income from lending their units of raw
capital at the current interest rate r (there is no labor income or profits
since the free entry condition implies zero profits at all times).             The
first order conditions are the usual ones which can be combined to yield



        (8.17) c/c —     (r-p)/a


                                              37
         This completes the description of the model. We can use equations
(8.17) and (8.16) to get the growth rate of the economy:


                      *
     (8.17)'   c/c — (A   -
                              p)/a


          Notice that growth is constant because the return to saving (the
interest rate r) is constant (A*) as the economy grows so the incentive to
save never vanishes (just as in the simple Rebelo model).
          Because the equilibrium interest rate is constant, we can divide
the consumer budget constraint by K, take logs and derivatives of both
sides and get that, in steady state, consumption and capital grow at the

same rate (c/c—K/K). Finally, taking logs and derivatives of K—Nx, we see

that N also grows at the same rate as K (since x/x—O)



     (8.19) c/c — Kb/K         —   N/N

          In words, all capital accumulation takes place in the form of new
varieties rather than in deepening the old ones.
          The growth rates implied by the optimal or command solution to this
model are smaller than the ones in a competitive setup. The reason is that
the producers of useful capital goods charge a monopoly rent which is higher
than the competitive one.            This implies that the private return to
investment falls short of the social return and hence, the steady state
growth of the decentralized is smaller than the socially optimal rate.
Pareto optimal solutions can be achieved if the government raises the
private incentive to invest, which in this model can be achieved by
subsidizing the purchase of goods (at rate )       or   by subsidizing the income
on capital (at rate cr/(l-a)). In this sense, the results are similar to the
ones we found in the public spending, the learning by doing or the human
capital models with externality.




                                          38
       References


       Aghion, P. and P. Howitt, "A Model of Growth through Creative
Destruction", mimeo university of Western Ontario, May 1989.


       Arrow, K. J., "The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing", Review
of Economic Studies, June 1962.


       Backus, D., P. Kehoe, and T. Kehoe, "In search of scale effects in
trade and growth", mimeo University of Minnesota, May 1990.


       Barro, R. (1974), "Are Goverrunent Bonds Net Wealth?", Journal of
Political Economy 82: 1095-1117, November/December.


       Barro, R. (l989,a), "A Cross-country Study of Growth, Saving, and
Government", NBER w.p. no. 2855, February 1989.


       Barro, R. (1989,b), "Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries",
NBER   w.p.   no. 3120, September 1989,


       Barro, R. J. (l989,c), "Macroeconomics", 3rd. edition. John    Wiley &
Sons, New York.


       Barro, R. J. (1990), "Government Spending in a Simple Model of
Endogenous Growth", Journal of Political Economy, October 1990.


       Barro, R. J., and C. Becker, "Fertility Choice in a Model of Economic
Growth", Econometrica, March 1989.


       Barro, R. J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, "Public Finance in Models of
Economic Growth", NEER wp # 3362, May 1990 A.




                                          39
     Barro, R.J and X. Sala-i-Martin, 'Economic Growth and Convergence Across
the United States", NBER up # 3419, August 1990 B.


     Bauniol (1986), "Productivity Growth, Convergence and Welfare: What the
Long Run Data Show", American Economic Review, 76 (Decernber):1072-1085.


     Becker, C., Murphy, K. and Taniura (1990), "Human Capital, Fertility,
and Economic Growth", Journal of Political Economy, October 1990.


     Blanchard, 0. J. and S. Fischer, 'Lectures on MAcroeconomics', M.I.T.
press, 1989.


     Cass, D. (1965), "Optimum Growth in an Aggregative Model of Capital
Accumulation", Review of Economic Studies, 32, July 1965, 233-260.


     Delong, B.   (1988), "Productivity Growth, Convergence, and Welfare:
Comment", American Economic Review, 78, December 1988, 1138-1154.


     Dixit and Stiglitz (1977), "Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
Diversity", American Economic Review, 67, June 1977, 297-308.


     Domar, E. D., "Capital Expansion, Rate of Growth, and Employment",
Econometrica, April 1946.


     Edwards, S. (1989), "Openness, Outward Orientation, Trade Liberalization
and Economic Performance in Developing Countries", mimeo, University of
California at Los Angeles, March 1989.


     Ethier, W. J. (1982), "National and International Returns to Scale in
the Modern Theory of International Trade", American Economic Review, 72, June
1982, 389-405.




                                      40
     Gale, D. and Sutherland, W. R. (1968), "Analysis of a One Good Model of
Economic Development", in Dantzig, G. B. and Veinott, A. F. eds, "Mathematics
of the Decision Sciences", Part II.              American Mathematical Society,
Providence, RI. 1968


     Greenwald, B., M. Salinger and J. Stiglitz, "Imperfect Capital Markets
and Productivity Growth", mimeo April 1990.


     Greenwood, J. and Jovanovic, B. (1990), "Financial Development, Growth
and the Distribution of Income", Journal of Political Economy, October 1990.


     Greenwood, M. J. (1975), "Research on Internal Migration in the United
States: A Survey", Journal of Economic Literature vol. XIII, #2, 397-433.
June 1975.


     Grossman, C., "Explaining Japan's Innovation and Trade: A Model of
Quality Competition and Dynamic Comparative Advantage", NBER wp# 3194,
December 1989.


     Grossman, C. and Helpman, E. (l989a), "Comparative Advantage and Long
Run growth", NBER WP # 2809, January 1989.


     Grossman, G. and Helpman, E. (1989b), "Growth and Welfare in a Small
Open Economy", NBER WP #2970, July 1989.


     Grossman, C.      and Helpman,   E.     (1989c),   "Product Development and
International Trade", Journal of Political Economy, 97, December 1989,
1261-1283.


     Grossman, C. and Helpman, E. (1989d), "Endogenous Product Cycles",
NBER wp# 2913, March 1989.


     Grossman, C. and Helpman, E. (1989e), 'Quality Ladders and Product
Cycles", NBER wp#3201, December 1989.




                                        41
        Harrod, R. F., "Review of Joan Robinson's Essays in the Theory of
Employment", The Economic Journal vol 47, 1937.


        Harrod, R.F., "An Essay in Dynamic Theory", The Economic Journal, March
1939.


        Helpman, E. (1988), "Growth, Technical Progress and Trade", NBER WP
#2592.


        Hicks, J. R., "The Theory of Wages", Macmillan, London.


        Jones, L and Manuelli, R. (1990), "A model of optimal equilibrium
growth", Journal of Political Economy, October 1990.


        King, R. C. and S. T. Rebelo, (1989), "Transitional Dynamics and
Economic Growth in the Neoclassical Model", NBER WP # 3185, November 1989.


        King, R. and Rebelo, S. (1990), "Public Policy and Economic Growth:
Developing Neoclassical Implications", Journal of Political Economy, October
1990.


        Koopmans, T. C., "On the Concept of Optimal Growth", in "The Econometric
Approach to Development Planning", North Holland, Amsterdam., 1965.


        Kurtz, M., (1968), "The General Instability of a Class of Competitive
Growth Processes", Review of Economic Studies, march 1968, p. 155.


        Lucas, R. E. (1988), "On the mechanics of economic development", Journal
of Monetary Economics, 22, p 3-42, June 1988


        Mankiw, N.G., D. Romer, D., and D. N. Weil, (1990), "A Contribution to
the Empirics of Economic Growth", Mimeo Harvard University.




                                        42
        Murphy, K., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, "The Allocation of Talent:
 Implications for Growth", mimeo University of Chicago, May 1990.


        Phelps, E., "The Golden Rule of Capital Accumulation: A Fable for
Growthmen", AER 1961.


        Phelps, E. S., "The New View of Investment: A Neoclassical Analysis",
Q.J.E,, November 1962.


        Phelps, E. (1966), "Golden Rules of Economic Growth", Norton, New York,
1966.


     Ramsey, F.     P. (1928), "A mathematical theory of saving", Economic
Journal, 38, p. 543-59.


     Rebelo, S. "Long Run Policy Analysis and Long Run Growth", NBER WP,
April 1990.


     Robinson, J., "The Classification of Inventions", Review of Economic
Studies, February 1938.


     Robinson, J., "The Production Function and the Theory of Savings",
Review of Economic Studies, 1954.


     Romer, P., (1986), "Increasing returns and long run growth", Journal of
Political Economy, 94, p. 1002-1037.


     Romer, P.      (1987), "Growth Based on Increasing Returns Due to
Specialization", American Economic Review, May 1987.


     Rorner, P. (1989,a), "Capital Accumulation in the Theory of Long-Run
Growth", in Robert Barro editor, "Modern Business Cycle Theory", Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA. 1989.




                                       43
        Romer, P. (1989,b), "Human    Capital     and Growth: Theory and Evidence",
mimeo The University of Chicago, April 1989.


        Romer, P. (1990), "Endogenous Technological Change", Journal of
Political Economy, October 1990.


        Sala-i-Martin, X., "On Growth and States", Unpublished PhD dissertation,
Harvard University, May 1990.


        Samuelson, P. A., (1954) "The Pure Theory of Public Expenditures",
Review of Economic & Statistics, 36, November 1954, 387-389,


        Sheshinski, E., "Optimal Accumulation with Learning by Doing", in Karl
Shell ed. "Essays on the Theory of Optimal Economic Growth", M.I.T. Press,
1967.
        Solow, R. (1956), 'A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth', The
Quarterly    Journal of Economic, 70,   February 1956: 65-94.


        Solow, R. M., "Investment and Technical Progress", in Arrow et al., eds,
"Mathematical      Methods in the Social Sciences",      Stanford University Press,
1959.



        Spence, M., (1976), "Product Selection, Fixed Costs, and Monopolistic
Competition", Review of Economic Studies, L3: 217-236.


        Stokey, N. L., "Human Capital, Product Quality, and Growth", mimeo
Northwestern University, March 1990.


        Swan, T. W. (1956), "Economic growth and capital accumulation", Economic
Record,    32,   p. 334-61.


        Uzawa, H., "Neutral Inventions and the Stability of Growth Equilibrium",
Review    of Economic Studies,   February 1961.




                                          44
     Uzawa, I. (1965), 'Optimum technical change in an aggregative model of
economic growth", International Economic Review, 6, p. 18-31.


     Young, A., "Learning by Doing and the Dynamic Effects of International
Trade", mimeo Columbia University, November 1989.




                                    45
         FIGURE 1: ENDOGENOUS GROWTH MODELS




I                                                  RI:   r=A
(I)
      RC: r=p+cr*(growth rate)




                        Steady State Growth Rate
      FIGURE 2: EXOGENOUS PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH MODELS




                                                     Exogenous
                                                     Productivity
C')
                                                     Growth
       RC:   r=p+a*(growth rate)                     Rate




                                     g
                          Steady State Growth Rate
                 FIGURE 3: BARRO MODEL


            RIPNNER:   r=   (lT)AIaT()Ia
a)
4-




>'
                                            RI PRIVATE:   r=a(1   l/aT(l -a)/a
     RC:   r=p+a*(growth rate)



                                 COMPETITIVE                  PLANNER

                            Steady State Growth Rate
           FIGURE 4: ARROW-SHESHINSKI-ROMER MODEL



            RIpNNER :   r=   (B)1L
a)
a)
cr
 U,
 C)
 C)
.4-'
C
U)
a)
Cl)
>
a)
U)
Cl)                                          RIPR,VATE   =f3I   L
       RC: r=p+a*(growth rate)




                                  COMPETITIVE               PLANNER

                             Steady State Growth Rate
