                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




LEARNING BY DOING AND THE DYNAMIC EFFECTS OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE




                          Aiwyn Young




                     Working Paper No. 3577




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1991




This research was supported by a Sloan Foundation Doctoral
Dissertation Fellowship. I am grateful for the helpful comments
and encouragement of Avinash Dixit, John Donaldson, Ronald
Findlay, Michael Gavin, Gene Grossman, Stanislaw Wellisz and an
anonymous referee. Naturally, all remaining errors are my own.
This paper is part of NBER's research program in Growth. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #3577
                                         January 1991
             LEARNING BY DOING AND THE DYNAMIC EFFECTS
                      OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE
                             ABSTRACT

    Using an endogenous growth model in which learning by doing,
although bounded in each good, exhibits spillovers across goods,

this paper investigates the dynamic effects of international

trade. Examining an LDC and a DC, the latter distinguished by a

higher initial level of knowledge, under autarky and free trade,

I find that under free trade the LDC (DC) experiences rates of

technical progress and GOP growth less than or equal (greater

than or equal) to those enjoyed under autarky. Unless the LDC's

population is several orders of magnitude greater than that of

the DC and the initial technical gap between the two economies is
not large, the LDC will be unable to catch up with its trading
partner. Hence, in terms of technical progress and growth, the
LDC experiences dynamic losses from trade, whilst the DC

experiences dynamic gains. However, since technical progress
abroad can improve welfare at home, LDC consumers may enjoy     -




higher   intertemporal utility along the free trade path. In the
case of DC consumers, as long as their economy is not overtaken
by the LDC they will enjoy both more rapid technical progress and
the traditional static gains from trade, and hence experience an

unambiguous improvement in intertemporal welfare.


Alwyn Young
Sloan School of Management
Massachusettss Institute of Technology
50 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02139
                                     I INTRODUCTION
      In the theoiy of international trade, the static gains from trade and losses from protection

have been thoroughly established. Trade theoty, however, provides little indication as to what
are the dynamic effects of international trade on growth, technical progress and welfare. The

post-war empirical experience of export-oriented economies such as Hong Kong, Singapore,
South Korea and Taiwan, when contrasted with that of protectionist economies such as Argen-

tina and Ghana, has led many to argue that outward-oriented policies will induce rates of growth
and technical progress much greater than those achievable with inward-oriented policies.

      Unfortunately, the theoretical arguments put forward by proponents of this viewpoint
appear to suffer from an inability to distinguish between what Solow's 1956 paper has allowed
us to separate as growth vs. level effects. Thus, for example, the World Bank's ML1

mni R.Qri          argues that the adoption of an outward-oriented policy will raise savings and

investment rates, eliminate DUP rent seeking, increase X-efficiency, and "correctly' value the
exchange rate, all of which are obviously level effects.' Further, the current focus on the post-

war relative superiority of outward-oriented policies is empirically myopic, ignoring the fact that

historically many capitalist economies, such as the United States and Japan, experienced rapid

growth under early conditions of protectionism.2
      In defence of the more rigorous proponents of the positive growth effects associated with

free trade,3 the neo-classical growth model, in which the principal engine of growth is exogenous

technical change, whilst providing many valuable lessons, did not provide a very good frame-
work for analyzing long run growth. With the development during the 1980s of models endoge-
nizing long run growth (e.g. Romer 1986 and 1987, Lucas 1988 and Prescott and Boyd 1987),

economists now have the formal techniques with which to explore the relationship between trade

policy and long run growth. Thus, in a series of recent papers, Grossman and Helpman (1988,
                                                                                                  2



1989 a,b), using models in which endogenous growth is generated either by the development of
new varieties of intermediate or final goods or by the improvement of an existing set of goods,

relate the dynamic effects of various economic policies to their impact on the R&D efforts of two
trading economies.4 In this paper I develop a model in which endogenous growth is generated by

learning by doing which, although bounded in each good, exhibits spillovers across goods, and
use this model to examine the impact of the movement from autarky to free trade on the growth

rates, rates of technical progess, and intertemporal consumer welfare of two economies, one of
which (the LDC) is initially less technically advanced than the other (the DC)
                                                                                                       3




 II A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE MODEL AND ITS RELATION TO
                    PREVIOUS LITERATURE

      The learning by doing model in this paper incorporates two important characteristics sug-
gested by industry level analyses of technical progress. First, there appear to be substantial spill-
over effects in the development of knowledge across industries, with technical innovations

originating in particular industries finding important applications, as well as instigating further
technical change, in other economic sectors. At the anectodal level these spillovers have been
documented extensively by Rosenberg (1982). In a more formal econometric analysis Jaffe
(1986) found that the number of patents a firm received was increasing not only in its own R&D

efforts, but also in the R&D efforts of its technical neighbours. Although no formal analysis of
cross-industry spillover effects in learning by doing has been made, it seems reasonable to

assume that many of the technical and managerial advances brought about by experience in the

production of certain products have applications elsewhere. Thus, in my model productivity
increases in each industry are not only a function of productive activity in that industry, but also

the result of spillovers from learning by doing in other industries. The concept of spillover
effects in learning by doing has previously been incorporated in models by Boidrin and Scheink-

man (1988), Stokey (1988), and Succar (1987).
      The second empirical regularity of relevance to this paper is the existence of strong
diminishing returns in the learning by doing process. Most of the empirical studies of learning
by doing have focused on the log-linear model characterized by the equation: C, = AE, where
C is the cost of production of the nth unit, E, is cumulative output up to and including the nth
unit, A is the cost of the first unit, and b is the progress elasticity.3 Whereas, this formulation
implies that as cumulative experience increases the marginal contribution to cost reduction of an

additional unit of output goes to zero, it also implies that a 1% increase in cumulative experience
                                                                                                      4


will always yield a b% reduction in costs, i.e. that the productivity gains from learning by doing

are essentially unbounded. In contrast, a number of researchers have argued that although the

learning curve is initially approximately log-linear, a plateauing phase is ultimately reached in
which additional proportional increments to experience yield absolutely no additional gains in
productivity.6 Unfortunately, most of the empirical work on learning by doing is remarkably
sloppy, with little or no control for ongoing investment,7 R&D, and product design changes, rare

use of significance tests (curves are frequently drawn through the data and eye-balled to deter-
mine if the fit is good), and no rigorous attempts to test rival hypotheses on the nature of learning

by doing (e.g. perpetual log-linear vs. plateauing). Thus, it is difficult to draw decisive
conclusions on the nature of learning by doing on the basis of the empirical work to date. Never-
theless, sufficient evidence of plateauing exists to justify its consideration as a model of learning
by doing.

      Perhaps learning by doing can be conceived of as the exploration and actualization of the
productive potential of new technologies; if you will, a series of minor technical innovations that

are learnt from a major technical breakthrough. Thus, the development of new productive tech-
nologies, perhaps as the result of R&D efforts, and their use in the production of existing or new

goods initially leads to rapid learning by doing. After some time, however, the productive
capability of these new technologies is exhausted, and learning by doing slows and perhaps ulti-
mately stops. In the absence of the introduction of new technical processes, it is likely that learn-
ing by doing cannot be sustained.' This would explain why, despite considerable economic

activity, learning by doing did not lead to sustained economic growth prior to the modern era.
The unique aspect of the learning by doing model in this paper is that this concept is incorpo-
rated explicitly in the imposition of a bound on the cumulative productivity gains from learning

by doing in the production of any particular good.
                                                                                                     5




      Turning to a description of the formal structure of the model, in order to focus on the

effects of learning by doing, this paper will abstract from the development of new goods and pro-
ductive processes and take as a datum the existence of a continuum of goods, indexed along the

real line, any of which could conceivably be produced at any point in time (although in practice

only a small subset will be produced at any given time). Furthermore, the bound on learning by
doing in each of these goods will also be taken as exogenous. It is assumed that learning by
doing exhibits spillovers across goods and that the knowledge so generated is in the public

domain, i.e. is non appropri able by the firms engaged in production. With labour as the sole fac-

tor of production and preferences which are symmetric and separable in the goods, the equilib-

rium output of perfectly competitive fums will endogenously determine the evolution through

time of a function describing the Unit output labour requirements of each of the goods. Thus,

fundamentally, the model examines the endogenoUs exploitation of the productive potential of a
series of technologies, whose development, for the sake of simplicity, is taken as a given.

      At any point in time, learning by doing will have been exhausted in a subset of goods, but
will continue in the remainder. Some fairly weak assumptions on the nature of preferences and
the learning by doing technology are then sufficient to ensure unbounded growth. Over time,

growth will involve the production of a changing basket of goods, with both the quantity and
variety of goods consumed increasing, which accords well with the empirical experience of most

economies. It is notable that although production takes place under conditions of perfect compe-
tition, there will be gains from increasing variety, which have previously been confined exclu-

sively to monopolistically competitive models.'0
      Assuming there is no international diffusion of knowledge, the effect of trade on technical

progress and growth will depend upon whether static comparative advantage leads an economy
to specialize in goods in which it has mostly exhausted learning by doing or in goods in which
                                                                                                       6



learning by doing still proceeds apace. Trade will obviously improve the intertemporal welfare
of consumers in economies in which it accelerates technical progress and growth. However,
even in an economy in which trade slows technical progress, consumers might experience an
improvement in intertemporal welfare, since under free trade technical progress abroad can

improve real consumption income at home.

      Having outlined the model of this paper, we can now relate it to the previous literature on

endogenous growth and the effect of trade on growth and technical progress." A model with an
infmite continuum of producible goods, of which only a finite number are produced at any given

time, was first proposed by Wan (1975). Ordering goods according to their level of technical
sophistication, Wan assumed that technical progress in each good was a function of the levels of

technical capability in all lower numbered goods, and, allowing as well for the international dif-

fusion of knowledge, examined the conditions under which the technological levels of different

trading economies would converge. Stokey (1988) considered a similar infinite continuum of

goods, with consumer preferences specified over goods characteristics and goods ranked accord-
ing to the number of characteristics they contain. With endogenous technical change based upon
learning by doing, Stokey derived a set of assumptions, not all of which are intuitively

compelling,12 sufficient to guarantee the introduction of new goods and the disappearance of old
goods over time. The model of this paper is a melding of these two approaches. I rank goods
hierarchically by their level of technical sophistication and use fairly intuitive assumptions, i.e.

that learning by doing is bounded in each good and that the ultimate productivity of labour is
rising in the technical sophistication of goods, to generate a learning by doing movement to the
right, with old goods eventually being discarded in favour of new and more advanced goods.
      Ranging from Bardhan's (1970) and Clemhout and Wan's (1970) analyses of the optimal
subsidy for an infant industry in a small open economy, to Lucas's recent (1988) exposition of a
                                                                                                        7



global learning by doing equilibrium, learning by doing has long been used in the formal analysis
of the effects of trade on endogenous growth. In the main, these models have assumed the exis-
tence of two goods, one of which experiences more rapid learning by doing than the other,
which, as in Bardhan's framework, might experience no learning whatsoever. Since at any point
in time the model in this paper will contain two sets of goods, one in which learning by doing has

ended and one in which learning by doing continues, in its static structure, with its assymetric
learning effects, it is similar to this literature. In its dynamic structure, however, it differs in that

it endogenizes the movement of goods out of the learning by doing (infant industry) sector into

the (mature) sector in which learning by doing no longer occurs. Furthermore, as ably demon-
strated in a static framework by Krugman (1987) and in a more dynamic framework by Lucas
(1988) and Boldrin and Schienkman (1988), the usual learning by doing function will tend to

enhance existing patterns of comparative advantage, leading to fairly static trade patterns. In
contrast, the bounded learning by doing with spillover effects of the model in this paper leads to

an evolving trade structure, which agrees with the empirical experience of most economies.
       Finally, with respect to the recent papers by Grossman and Helpman investigating the rela-

tionship between trade, economic policies and endogenous R&D induced growth, this paper, in

essence, takes an opposite approach. Whilst Grossman and Helpman examine the impact of
R&D, assuming that the full productive potential of a technology is actualized at the moment of

invention, I take as given the existence of technical processes produced by path-breaking R&D,
and explore the actualization of their productive potential. Empirically, there is evidence that the

 actualization of the productive potential of existing technologies may lead to productivity
 increases several orders of magnitude greater than those associated with the original technical

 innovations. Thus, for example, Enos (1958) found that whereas during the initial introduction
 of new petroleum refining processes cost reductions of 1.5% per annum were achieved, subse-
                                                                                                      8



quent improvements of these same processes led to cost reductions of 4.5% per annum." At the
same time, as postulated in this paper, learning by doing cannot be sustained without R&D and
pathbreaking innovation. Both effects are important and a more complete and complicated
model would combine R&D into new productive processes/inputs and the learning by doing
exploitation of the ultimate productive potential of that R&D.

      In section 3 below I present the general model of this paper, illustrating how in an autarkic

economy bounded learning by doing with spillovers across goods can result in unbounded
growth. In section 4 I use a specific functional form of this model to examine the effect of the
movement from autarky to free trade on the growth rates, rates of technical progress and inter-

temporal welfare of two economies, one of which is, initially, technically more advanced than
the other. Section 4 concludes with a summary of its principal results. Section 5 presents some
final thoughts.
                                                                                                          9




Ill A GENERAL MODEL OF UNBOUNDED GROWTH WITH BOUNDED
                   LEARNING BY DOING

        Assume an economy populated by a large number of consumers and perfectly competitive
firms. Goods are indexed by s along (B, o)' and are ordered according to the sophistication of
the technical processes used in their production, with the production of higher numbered goods
involving more advanced technologies. Labour is the sole factor of production and for each
good s there exists a lower bound on potential unit labour requirements, i(s), which is continu-
ous and non-increasing in s, the latter assumption reflecting a belief that the ultimate productivity

of labour is non-decreasing (and probably increasing) in the technical sophistication of the
production processes involved. At any time t, however, actual unit labour requirements are

a(s,t).'3 I assume that a(s,t) is continuous in s and that urn, .,_a (s, 1) = ,,16 The latter assump-
tion reflects the notion that although the blueprints of all future technologies are available at each
time t, an economy must pass through a certain amount of production experience before the costs
of production of advanced goods fall to acceptable levels.'7 Together, these two assumptions
imply that at each time t there exists a good s,, which it will be convenient to refer to later on,

such that for all s a(s, t) a(s,', t).
        This economy exhibits bounded learning by doing with spillovers across goods. Thus, if

a (s, t) = i(s), then aa (s, t)/t = 0 regardless of the output of good s or of any other good. If,
however, a(s, t) > a(s), then:

         aa(s,t)Iat =— (                   —
(3.1)                    I    B(s,v,a(v,t)/a(v))L(v,t)dv
           a(s,r)        Ia

where L(v, t) is the amount of labour devoted to the production of good v at time t and the

B(s, v, a(v, t)/(v)) are the learning by doing coefficients. Some reasonable assumptions might
be that, for any industry 5: (i) B (s, v.a (v, f)/(v)) 0 for all v, i.e. the output of other industries
                                                                                                     10




cannot reduce productivity in industry 5; (ii) B (s, v, 1) = 0 i.e. economic activity in industries in

which learning by doing has been exhausted (in which there is nothing left to learn) cannot con-

tribute to productivity increases in other industries; (iii) B (s, v, a (v, t)/(s)) > 0 for all
V E (s — a,,   s + a,) such that a(v, t) > (v) (where a, >0 for all s), i.e. economic activity in

neighbouring industries (in which learning continues) contributes positively to productivity
improvements in industry s; (iv) sup, sup,B(s, v, a(v, t)/(v)) <oo, i.e. the learning by doing
spillovers are of bounded measure; and (v) B (s, v, a (v, t)I(v)) is continuous in s, i.e. the magni-
tude of the learning by doing spillovers is a Continuous function of the technological sophistica-

tion of the industry receiving the spillover.'8 As I assume that learning by doing in this economy

is nonappropriable by firms, production takes place under conditions of perfect competition.
      Turning to consumer preferences, these are additively separable across time, with the
instantaneous utility at each time t given by:

(3.2) V(t) = 5 U(C(s, t)) ds            with U'(O) <'., U(0) =0

where C(s,t) denotes consumption of good s at time t and where U() is strictly concave and con-
tinuously differentiable, which, together with the restriction on U'(O), indicates a strong, but not

unbounded, preference for variety.'9 As there is no storage technology and all consumers are

identical, intertemporal consumption smoothing is not possible and, so, the (implicit) interest
rate2° will adjust to ensure that at each time t consumers, who inelastically supply one unit of
labour for wage W, maximize 3.2 subject to the budget constraint:

(3.3) Wj' P(s,t)C(s,t)ds

Or, since under perfect competition prices P(s,t) = Wa(s,t):


(3.3)' i5         a(s,t)C(s,t)ds
                                                                                                         11




       Although the consumer's optimal consumption plan at each time t can be derived formally,
an intuitive analysis is more illuminating.2' Substitution between goods which are consumed in
positive quantities leads the consumer to follow the usual first order condition:

        U'(C(s, t)) U'(C(v, t)) V
(34)                              s, v such that C(s, 1)> 0, C(v, t)>0
         a(s,t)      a(v,t)
Since all goods enter symmetrically into the utility function, the consumer should obviously con-

sume the cheapest of all goods, i.e. good s. Symmetrical preferences also imply that if the con-
sumer consumes any good x, then she also consumes all goods s such that a(s,t)a(x,t). For
finite quantities of good s, consumed, it follows from equation 3.4 that there exists some good M

such that as the prices of goods approach a(M,t) from below, consumption goes to zero. Good M

is the limit good. For all goods x such that a(x,t)a(M,t), consumption is zero as, given the sym-
metrical nature of goods in utility, these goods are too expensive to warrant positive consump-

tion. For all goods s whose price is less than a(M,t), consumption quantities are determined by:

                     (0)
(3.4)' U(C(S,t))=t)U
                a(M, )
M itself is determined by the requirement that the consumer exhaust her budget constraint. The

equilibrium is illustrated in figure 1. It is apparent that the continuity of a(s,t) and the fact that
i(s) is non-increasing in s ensure that the consumer consumes some goods s such that

a(s, t) >(s), i.e. some goods in which learning by doing has not yet been exhausted.
       Turning to the issue of growth, as a measure of growth I suggest the conventional national
income accounting measure of the increase in real GDP per capita, i.e. the proportional change in
the value of output (at constant prices) minus the rate of population growth:
                                                                                                   12




''             Ja(s, t) aX(s, r)/at ds
          ,. — B
                   I
                   JB
                        a(s, t)X(s, t) ds
                                            —   dL(t)/dt
                                                 L(r)

Where L(t) equals the population at time t and X(s,t) equals aggregate output of goods at time t.

Since 1a(s, t)X(s, t) ds =L(i) at all times t, it follows, using Leibnitz's rule, that:

                       —a(s,t)/tX(s,t)ds
(35)' g(t)= B
                             L(r)
Allowing SL to denote the set of goods s such that C(s, t)> 0 and a (s, t) > i(s) and exploiting
the fact that in autarkyX(s, t) = C(s, t)L(t):

(35)" g(t)=J

which is always strictly positive.22 It is easily verified that if lim, ..,_(s) = 0 then

lim, .._V(r) = oo. Thus, the general model is one in which learning by doing, although bounded
in any particular good, can lead to unbounded growth.
                                                                                                   13



         IV THE DYNAMIC EFFECTS OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE
      In this section I use a specific functional form of the general model of section 3 to investi-

gate the dynamic effects of international trade. To provide a benchmark, I begin by deriving the
endogenous rates of technical progress and growth of an aut.arkic economy, before turning to an
examination of the dynamic evolution of two economies, one more technically advanced than the
other, engaged in free trade. I conclude with a summary of the principal results.

(A) AUTARKY EQUILIBRIUM
     Preferences and Technology
      Consider an economy populated at each time t by L(t) representative consumers, each of
whom inelastically supplies one unit of labour at all times and seeks to maximize the intertempo-
ral utility function:


(4.1) o=J V(x)e>&
where V(x) denotes instantaneous utility at timex, which is given by:


(4.2) V(x)=5 log(C(s,x)+1)ds
where C(s,x) denotes consumption of good s at time x and B, a large negative number,' denotes

the first good ever produced by mankind. Goods are produced using labour as the sole factor of
production, with the lower bound on potential unit labour requirements given by i(s) =            Lt
B (s, v, a(v, t)/(v)) = 2 for all s and v such that a(v, t)I(v)> l. Then, it is easily verified that
if, at some arbitrary time 0, unit labour requirement are given by:

(4.3) a(s, 0) =         V s T(0); a(s, 0) =    e_T(0)e_T(0) V .c T(0)

then, at each point in time t they will be given by:
                                                                                                      14




(4.3)' a(s,t)=e V s T(t); a(s,t)_eT()eT()                   V s T(t)

With T(t) evolving according to the learning by doing equation:

(4.4) dT(r)/dt =JL(s,)ds
                    T(,)

where L(s,t) denotes the labour allocated to the production of good s at time t. Thus, if unit

labour requirements are initially symmetric around T(O), they will remain symmetric around an
ever increasing T(t), which summarizes the cun-ent level of knowledge. To simplify the nota-

tion, in my analysis below I shall frequently suppress the time subscript of the variables, all of
which depend implicitly, rather than explicitly, on time.

      It is easily verified that the economy set out in equations 4.1 - 4.4 is a particular example

of the general model presented in section 3 above. The key simplifying assumption is that all
goods in which learning by doing has not yet been exhausted contribute symmetrically to

economy-wide learning by doing, which ensures that unit labour requirements remain symmetric

around an ever increasing T(t), with learning by doing exhausted sequentially in goods. At any
single point in time this economy has two sets of goods, those in which there is no more learning
by doing to be had (sT(t)), and those in which learning by doing continues (s>T(t)). In this

respect, as mentioned earlier above, it is analogous to learning by doing models which arbitrarily

assume that some goods experience more rapid learning by doing than others. The difference
lies in the fact that this model endogenizes which goods belong to which category. Thus, whilst
retaining a simple static structure, it embodies rich dynamics.

     General Equilibrium
      As the preferences and production technology of this economy are identical in form to that
of the economy discussed in section 3, the equilibrium has an identical structure. With no stor-

age technology and identical consumers, the (implicit) interest rate will adjust so as to ensure that
                                                                                                       15




each consumer maximizes V(t) subject to her instantaneous wage income W. Under perfect

competition, prices P(s)=Wa(s), so that the reai price of goods, in units of labour, is simply a(s).
At each time t there exists a good M such that for all goods s such that a(s)<a(M), consumption

is positive, whilst for all goods x such that a(x)a(M) consumption is zero. For goods consumed
in positive quantities, the usual first order condition holds:

               1
(45)                 =
        (C(s)+ l)a(s) (C(v)+ l)a(v)

As a(s) goes to a(M) from below, consumption of good s goes to zero. It follows, using 4.5, that
for all goods s which are consumed in positive quantities:

(4.6) a(s)C(s)=a(M)—a(s)
M is then determined by the requirement that the consumer exhaust her budget consuaint.

       The autarky equilibrium is illustrated in figure 2. As shown, the difference between the
dashed horizontal line of height a(M) and the unit labour requirements curve a(s) is equal to the
consumer's expenditure on each good s. As a(s) is symmetric around T, to each M there corre-
sponds an N such that a(N)=a(M), with N and M located equidistant from T. The consumer con-
sumes all goods in (M,N). The shaded area denotes total expenditure and, as the consumer's

budget is exhausted, equals 1.
       If we let t denote T - M = N - T, i.e. the range of goods on each side of T that are con-

sumed, then, using the binding budget constraint, we have:
              N

(4.7) 1=5 a(s)C(s)ds =(2t—2)ae'+2aeT
Or,

(4.7)' eT = (2t —2)e' + 2
                                                                                                   16



As 1 > d-cidT > 0 it follows that as T increases the range of goods consumed increases and
moves to the right? dropping off some of the lower end goods. Since:

C(T)=e—1 and C(T±Ei)=ee—1
as T increases the consumption of the cheapest good, and any good located a distance from
that good, increases. Hence, although as T increases some goods are no longer consumed, the

consumption of symmetrical substitutes rises. As knowledge improves utility rises as cheaper
production allows an increase in both the variety and the quantity of goods consumed.

     Autarky Growth Rate and Rate of Technical Progress
        Let X(s,t) denote aggregate output of good sat time t. Then:

(4.8) dT(t)Idt=     I     L(s,t)ds= I          a(s,r)X(s,t)ds=L(r)12
                   JrQ)                 JT5)

Thus, the rate of technical progress always equals one-half of the labour force. This follows nat-

urally from the symmetrical nature of demand around T(t), which leads to one-half of the labour

force being allocated to goods in which learning by doing has yet to be exhausted.

        We know from section 3 that the instantaneous growth rate of GDP per capita, at constant

prices, equals:


               —j a(s,t)/arX(s,r)ds
(4.9) g(t)=            L(t)                                   L(t)
                          (N(r)
                                  a(s,t)X(s,r)ds
           = 2dT(t)/drJ T5)                        = 2(dT(t)/dt)21L(t) =L(r)/2

Thus, in autarky the growth rate of real GDP per capita, like the rate of technical progress, is

equal to L(t)/2. With these benchmarks in mind, we can move to an analysis of the trade equilib-
rium.
                                                                                                   17




(B) TRADE EQUILIBRIUM
     Preferences and Technology
      Consider two economies, an LDC and a DC, with the latter denoted by a star. The two
economies have constant populations L and L (L>=<L) with identical preferences according to
equations 4.1 and 4.2 earlier above. In both economies labour is the sole factor of production

with unit labour requirements a(s) as in equation 4.3'. The key element that distinguishes the DC
from the LDC is that when we initially observe these two economies T is greater than T. Thus,

a(s) a(s), with strict inequality for all s > T. Learning in each economy proceeds indepen-
dently according to the learning by doing equation (4.4) earlier above, with no spillovers of
knowledge between the two economies, and there is no international borrowing or lending.
      Let X = T-T be the difference in the levels of technical knowledge. Further, let W be the

numeraire and:

(4.10) ta=W/W, p(s)=P(s)IW
Thus, ta is the relative wage and p (s) the goods price in terms of units of LDC labour. Under

perfect competition, if the good is produced in the LDC then p(s) = a(s), whereas if it is pro-
duced in the DC then p(s) = wa(s). Obviously, each good swill be produced by the least cost

producer or, in the case of equal costs, by either or both economies.

     General Equilibrium
      Under free trade the consumption problem of consumers in the DC and the LDC is analo-

gous to that in autarky with a(s) replaced by p(s). In the absence of international lending, the
(implicit) interest rate in each economy will adjust to ensure that consumers maximize their

instantaneous utility subject to their instantaneous labour income. At each time t consumers in
                                                                                                    18



both the LDC and the DC only consume goods priced at less than p(M) and p(M), respectively,
with the quantities so consumed given by:

(4.11) p(s)C(s) =p(M)—p(s)                p(s)C'(s) =p(M')—p(s)
Allowing GDC and GLDC to denote the sets of goods produced in the DC and the LDC, respec-

tively,2' M is determined by the budget constraint of individuals in the LDC:

(4.12) i=5,GDC p(s)C(s)ds+fGWC p(s)C(s)ds
M by the budget constraint of individuals in the DC:

(4.13) o=J,GDC p(s)C'(s)ds +5GWCp(s)C'(s)ds
and the relative wage, to, by the trade balance condition:


(4.14) 5G0CLp(s)C(s)ds=5,GLDC L'p(s)C(s)cLs
      As figure 3 illustrates, under free trade five different types of equilibria may emerge. In

equilibrium type A, to = I. For X>O, this is the lowest relative wage possible, as otherwise all

goods would be cheaper to produce in the DC. In this equilibrium, as a'(s>'za(s) for all s>T, it
follows that the LDC produces no goods above T. Goods less than or equal to T might be pro-
duced by either or both countries. Without altering any of the important variables in the analy-
sis, we can assume that all consumed goods s>H (HT) are produced by the DC and all

consumed goods sH by the LDC.29 Given that a(s) is monotonically increasing for s>T, in this
equilibrium (as in all of the others in this model) to each M (M) there colTesponds an N (N),
which is the upper limit on the technical sophistication of the goods purchased by consumers in

the LDC (DC). As the relative wage in equilibrium A is 1, the budget constraints of consumers
in both countries are identical, and hence M=M' and N=N', as illustrated in figure 3.

      In equilibrium type B, to =   e. This is the highest possible relative wage, as for higher to
                                                                                                      19



all goods are produced more cheaply in the LDC. In equilibrium B, the price of producing any
good s<T is strictly less in the LDC, and hence no such good is produced in the DC. For goods
greater than or equal to T, the cost of production is the same in both countries. We assume that
all consumed goods        (HT), are produced by the LDC and all consumed goods s>H by the
DC. The greater income of individuals in the DC allows them to consume both a greater variety

(N>N, ?vl'<M) and a greater quantity3° of goods.
      In equilibria C, D and E e > to> 1. The LDC produces all consumed goods sH,
(T<H<T), and the DC produces all consumed goods s>H. As to>          i, in each of these equilibria
the greater personal income of individuals in the DC allows them to consume both a greater vari-

ety and a greater quantity of goods, as illustrated in the figure. Although in equilibrium C con-
sumers in both economies consume all goods between M and N (M and N), in equilibrium D

LDC consumers only consume goods in (M,m) and (n,N), with p(M)=p(N)=p(m)=p(n) and nm.
Goods in [mn] are too expensive to warrant positive consumption, given the limited income of
LDC consumers and the availability of cheaper symmetrical substitutes. In equilibrium E, indi-
viduals in both economies consume two sets of goods, ((M,m),(n,N)) and { (M,m'),(n,N)}.

For consumers in both economies, the intermediate goods are too expensive to consume given

the availability of cheaper symmetric subsitutes and the limits on consumption imposed by their
budget constraints.

      The conditions under which the various types of equilibria apply are illustrated in figure

4" As shown, the types of equilibria attained depend upon the relative populations of the two
economies. In the case where L'>L, for low values of X the free trade equilibrium is equilibrium

A. Under these circumstances, given the relatively large population of the DC and its relatively
small technical lead over the LDC, the demand for DC products is not sufficient to raise to above
I . For small values of X the highest numbered good produced by the LDC, H, is strictly less
                                                                                                      20



than T. As X increases, holding T constant, the world demand for DC products numbered above
T increases, leading the DC to transfer labour from goods below T to those above it. Hence, H
rises, but to remains equal to 1. When H reaches T we are at the upper boundary of equilibrium

A. Further increases in X raise the demand for DC products above T and, with no more labour to
be transferred from goods below T, raise the DC's relative wage above 1. Hence, above the
boundary of equilibrium A we move into equilibrium C. If one continues to raise X, for given T,
the wage will continue to rise and one will gradually pass into, first, equilibrium D and, then,
equilibrium E. Equilibrium D is reached first since as X increases, with per capita reai LDC
income (in units of LDC labour) limited to 1, consumers in the LDC find themselves unable to

consume all of the goods between T and T. Further increases in X then lead to equilibrium E as
consumers in the DC, despite the increases in their real income due to the rise in 0, ultimately
find themselves unable to afford all of the wide variety of goods between T and T. The bound-
aries of equilibria A, C, D and E are all upward sloping because an increase in T (for fixed X)

implies an increase in the goods purchasing power of consumers in both economies, allowing
them to consume a wider variety of goods.33

      For the case of L=L, for any small value of X above T the free trade equilibrium is equi-
librium C, with e' > to> 1. Given the identical preferences and size of the two populations,
even a small technical lead for the DC leads to an immediate rise in its relative wage. Further

increases in X, for given T, lead to continued rises in to and, for the same reasons as in the pre-
ceeding paragraph, a movement into equilibria D and E. Once again, the boundaries of the dif-
ferent equilibria are upward sloping because an increase in T increases the real income (in units
of symmetric goods) of consumers in both economies.

      For the case where L>L', for low values of X the free trade equilibrium is equilibrium B.

Under these circumstances, given the relatively small population of the DC the demand for its
                                                                                                     21




products, even for a small technical lead, is sufficient to raise its relative wage to the maximum

possible. For small X, H is strictly greater than T. As, for given T, X increases (implying a rise
in T), the world demand for LDC products below T increases, leading the LDC to transfer
labour from goods above T to those below T. H falls, but the relative wage, equal to
continues to rise. When H reaches 1 we are at the upper boundary of equilibrium B. Further
increases in X raise the demand for LDC products below T and, with no more labour to be trans-
ferred from goods above T, lead to a shortage of LDC labour at the relative wage to =      e.
Hence, although the relative wage continues to rise, it falls below the maximum of e, and we

move into equilibrium C. If one continues to raise X, for given T, the wage will continue to rise

(but remain below e) and we then move into equilibrium D. Given the impact of changes in T
(for given X) on goods purchasing power, one can guarantee that, moving left from the boundary
of equilibria C and D, for some small enough T one reaches the boundary of equilibria E, with
consumers in the DC no longer able to afford all goods between T' and T. It is not possible,

however, to guarantee that moving upwards (increasing X) from the boundary of equilibria C
and D, one will reach equilibrium E. Given the relatively small population of the DC (L<L),
increases in the level of technical knowledge of DC workers lead to fairly large rises in their rel-

ative wage, creating the possibility that they will be able to consume all of the ever increasing
range of products between T and T. Thus, it is possible that the lower boundary of equilibrium

E might be backward bending, as drawn in the figure.
       The intuition as to why equilibrium A only holds when L>L and equilibrium B only when
L<L is simple. In equilibrium A the DC produces all consumed goods above T and some con-
sumed goods below T, implying, given the symmetry of world demand around T, that more
than half of world income (equal to + L) is spent on DC products. But, as the income of DC
consumers equals L, this in turn implies that L > (L +L)/2, i.e. that the DC has more than half
                                                                                                  22



of the world's population. In equilibrium B the LDC produces all consumed goods below T and

some consumed goods above T, implying, given the symmetry of world demand around T, that
more than half of world income (equal to coL' +L) is spend on LDC products. But, as the
income of LDC consumers equals L, it follows that L > (coL' + L)12, i.e. that the LDC has more
than half of the world's population.

      It should be noted that whereas it is always the case in equilibria C, D and E that an

increase in X (i.e., an increase in T' for given T) raises the relative wage of DC workers, the
effect of an increase in T (holding X constant) is more ambiguous." As mentioned earlier, an

increase in T (for given X) amounts to an increase in the goods purchasing power of consumers

in both economies and, in this model, will raise the relative wage of workers in the economy in

which less than half of world income is spenL Thus, if L'L, it is always the case that an
increase in T (for given X) lowers the relative wage of the DC. If L'<L, it can be shown that
there exists a horizontal line, at the point where LeX =L, above which (below which) more

(less) than half of world income is spend on DC products.37 Above (below) this line, an increase
in T (for given X) lowers (raises) the relative wage of DC workers.

      Pausing to examine the realism of these results, we see that the DC always produces a

higher numbered set of goods than the LDC, which accords well with empirical experience, i.e.

more technically advanced economies produce more technically sophisticated goods. The
greater personal income of individuals in the DC, in cases where 0>    1,   allows them to consume
both more of each good and a greater variety of goods. Consumers in the DC enjoy frontier DC
goods, e.g. personal computers and advanced medical services, which are too expensive for LDC
consumers. In equilibria D and E, DC consumers also consume low end DC goods and high end
LDC goods which are too expensive for the average LDC consumer, e.g. Italian and Brazilian
shoes. Finally, DC consumers enjoy labour intensive primitive LDC products which are no
                                                                                                   23



longer consumed by the LDC workers themselves. Whilst this is something of an artifact of the
model, examples, such as handicraft goods and labour intensive tourist services, do come to
mind.

         With the different types of equilibria in mind, we now turn to an analysis of the evolution
of T and T, thereby establishing the dynamics of X and T in figure 4. Using this information,
subsequent sections will examine the effect of trade on the growth rates of the two economies

and the intertemporal utility of their respective populations.

     Technical Progress and Equilibrium Dynamics
         As specified earlier, learning by doing in both economies follows a process identical to that
discussed under our autarky example:

(4.15) dT/dt =j L(c) ds               dTIdt =fL(s)ds
where L(s) and L(s) are the labour allocated to the production of good s in the LDC and the DC,

respectively. In equilibrium A, given that the LDC produces no goods above T, the relative
wage equals 1, and world demand is symmetric around T (recall figure 3 earlier above), it fol-
lows that:

(4.16) dT/dt(A)=O               dT/dt(A)=(L+L)/2
In equilibrium B, as the DC produces no goods below T and world demand is symmetric around
T, it follows that:

(4.17)     dT/dt(B) = (L — wL)12          dT/d:(B) =L

In the case of equilibrium E, as expenditure on each country's goods is distributed symmetrically
around its current level of technical sophistication:

(4.18) dT/dt(E)_—L/2              df'Idt(E)=L/2
                                                                                                      24



      Turning to equilibria C and I), examining figure 3 it is readily apparent that, since both
countries produce sets of learning by doing goods of positive measure, both d'T/dt and aT/dt are
sictly greater than zero. As more than one half of total expenditure on LDC goods falls on
goods in which learning by doing has been exhausted, while more than one half of total expendi-

ture on DC goods falls on goods which are still experiencing learning by doing, it follows that:

(4.19) L12> dT/dt(C,D)> 0               fY/dt(C,D)>L/2
      To summarize our results, under free trade L12 d'T/dt 0, while aTIdt L/2. Thus, in

terms of technical progress, the DC experiences dynamic gains from trade while the LDC experi-
ences dynamic losses. Under free trade the keenest area of competition between the LDC and
the DC is in the most advanced LDC goods (those in which it is still experiencing learning by

doing) and the least advanced DC goods (those in which it has exhausted learning by doing).

This competitive interaction has an assymethc affect, driving DC labour out of the DC's low
numbered industries into industries in which it is still experiencing learning by doing and, simul-

taneously, forcing LDC labour out of high numbered LDC industries into industries in which it

has already exhausted learning by doing. Thus, the LDC's comparative advantage, whilst
statically optimal, has detrimental effects on its rate of technical progress. Under free trade the
DC experiences faster technical progress, at the expense of the LDC,

      Using the above information, we can examine the dynamics of X, the difference between
the levels of technical knowledge of the two economies. If L'>L, since dX/dt = d'f/dr — aT/dr,

while a'T/dt L/2 and fT'/dt L /2, it follows that L'/dt is strictly positive in all of the equilib-
ria. This is illustrated in figure 4(a). The larger population of the DC, coupled with its initial
technical superiority, leads to a growing technical gap between the two economies.39 In the case
of = L, as dT/dr <L12 and aT'Idt > L12 everywhere below equilibrium E, it follows that in
those regions dXldt is always strictly positive. Within equilibrium E, dX/dt = 0. However, since
                                                                                                     25




the boundary of equilibrium E is upward sloping and within equilibrium E ff/dt >0. it follows
that the economies will follow paths similar to those outlined in figure 4(b), with the technical
difference between the two economies growing larger and larger. Whenever the growth of X

slows, the continued growth of T forces down the relative wage, accelerating technical progress

in the DC and reducing learning by doing in the LDC, leading to further rises in X. Thus, if two
economies are identical in all respects, but one, say as the result of temporary government subsi-
dies, acquires a miniscule technical advantage, then it will pull further and further away from the

other economy. The costs of a temporary shortfall can be permanent.
      Turning to the case where L>L, figure 4(c), in equilibrium E dXIdt       =L/2 —L12 <0.
Within equilibrium B, /dt = L'(2 + co)/2 —L/2. As o) = e,          it follows that if the LDC's popula-
tion is several orders of magnitude greater than that of the DC, then there exists a horizontal line

in equilibrium B above (below) which dXldt is greater than (less than) zero.4° Thus, if the initial

difference between the two economies is small enough and the LDC's population is large
enough, the LDC can draw back the DC and overtake it, as illustrated in figure 4(c). If, however,

the initial technical difference between the two economies is sufficiently large, while (in cases

where the initial equilibrium lies somewhere above equilibrium B) the LDC might be able to
reduce the technical gap between itself and the DC, it will not be able to eliminate it altogether

(no matter how much larger its population).

     Growth of GDP Per Capita
      Given their constant populations in this example, the growth rates (at constant prices) of

LDC and DC GDP per capita, g(r) and g'(t), respectively, are:


                J p(s,t)X(s,t)Itd-s                      J p(s,t)X(s,f)/atds
                                                          B
(4.20) g(t)= B      —                           g•(t)=         —


                  5 p(s,t)X(s,t)d.s                           5
                                                                                                  26



Where X(s, I) and X(s, t) are aggregate output of good s at time tin the LDC and the DC,

respectively. As 5p (s, f)X(s, t) = L and Jp (s, t)X(s, t) = w(t)L at all times t, it is easily yen-
fied that:

(4.21) g(t) = 2(dT/dt)2/L       g(t) = 2(cff/dt)2/L
It follows, using our results in the previous section, that g(t) L12 and g (t) L'/2, with sict

equality everywhere outside of equilibrium E. Thus, relative to autarky, free ade increases the
growth rate of the DC and lowers that of the LDC.

     Intertemporal Welfare
      In this section I examine the effect of international trade on the intertemporal utility
enjoyed by consumers in the LDC and the DC over the time horizon [0, o). To that end, let

V,.(T-(t), T,.(r)) and VA(TA(t)) denote the instantaneous utility enjoyed at time t by LDC con-
sumers under free trade and in autarky, with V..(T.(t), T.(f)) and V(T(t)) connoting the same
for DC consumers, and the subscripts FT and A highlighting the fact that the time paths of T and

t. depend upon the trade regime followed. I wish to determine under which conditions, on T(0),

T(0), L, L and p, will consumers in each country enjoy higher intertemporal utility under free
trade, and under which conditions will they be better off in autarky,

      Although, given the static gains from trade, it is always the case that for any T and T:

(4.22) V,(T, T) VA(T)            V(T, T) V(T)
more general analytical comparisons between V. and VA (V. and V) are impossible. The utili-
ties enjoyed by consumers under free trade and in autarky are functions of different variables
which are themselves different implicit functions of the parameters T and T." Therefore,
although the instantaneous free trade and autarky utilities are well defined, and could be com-

puted for specified values of the various parameters, in general, for differing values of
                                                                                                       27




T,., r4, T. and     it is impossible to make meaningful analytical comparisons of their relative
magnitudes. Nevertheless, it is still possible to analyze the effect of trade on the intertemporal
utility of consumers in the two economies using 4.22, as well as the following, easily proven,
results:42

(4.23) aVF.)-(T, T')/T 0, aV(T, T)/aT'                       dVA/dT >0

         av(T, T')/aT' >0, dV'/dT' >0
i.e., the utility of consumers in both economies under free trade and in autarky is increasing in

their own level of technical progress and, provided L'L, the utility of LDC consumers under
free trade is strictly increasing in the DC's level of technical progress.43

      Since the DC's rate of technical progress under free trade is greater than or equal to that
experienced under autarky, we know that as long as it remains the DC, i.e. as long as it is not
overtaken by the LDC, T.(t) T(r). Under these circumstances
V;,.(T.(t), T(t)) V,,.(T-(t), T.(r)) V.(T.(t)) (with at least one inequality being strict for all
t>'O)7 i.e. the instantaneous utility enjoyed by the DC at each time t under free trade is greater

than that enjoyed at the same time along the comparable autarky path. It follows that the inter-
temporal welfare of DC consumers is unambiguously improved. This is not surprising, since
free trade increases the rate of technical progress in the DC and at the same time allows DC
consumers to enjoy the usual static gains from trade. As discussed earlier above, in equilibrium
B it is possible that the LDC may overtake the DC, in which case the DC would become the

LDC in equilibrium A, moving subsequently into equilibrium C. We will consider this case after

examining the intertemporal utility enjoyed by LDC consumers.
      If the free trade path begins in either equilibrium A or E it is easily proven that as long as

the world economy remains in those equilibria LDC consumers will, at each moment in time,
                                                                                                    28



enjoy higher instantaneous utilities along the free trade path.43 It can also be shown that when-

ever the free trade path is in equilibrium B LDC consumers will, at each moment in time, experi-
ence higher instantaneous utilities along the autarky path. For the case of equilibria C and D,
as well as equilibrium E entered after time 0, the analysis is complicated by the fact that while

TF,.(t) T,(r), which tends to reduce LDC utility, it is also the case that T.(t) T(t), which
tends to raise LDC utility. Thus, for particular values of T(0), T(O), L, L, and p, it is not possi-
ble to establish definitively whether over the entire time horizon [0, oo) LDC consumers enjoy

higher utility under free trade or in autarky.
      Nevertheless, it is possible to establish some general propositions on the conditions under
which free trade makes LDC consumers better or worse off. First, consider the case where L>L.

Since T.(t) T(0) + tL'12     and   T-(t) T(0), it follows that
V(T(t), T.(t)) V-(T(0), T(0) + tLI2). Thus, V(T(0), T(0) + tL/2) constitutes a lower
bound on the utility enjoyed at time t along the free trade path. An increase in L will increase

the value of this lower bound (at each time t) for two reasons. First, for given T and T an

increase in L lowers        the DC's relative wage, which increases the utility enjoyed under free
trade by LDC consumers. Second, an increase in L raises the value of T(0) + tL'/2 at each time
t, which also enhances welfare in the LDC. Since these potential increases in

V,.(T(O), T'(O) + tL/2) are unbounded in L, it follows that, for any initial value of T(0) and

       one can always find some sufficiently large L such that the intertemporal utility enjoyed
under free trade dominates that experienced in autarky. The basic intuition behind this result is
that, with L much greater than L, under free trade the LDC enjoys the benefits of latching on to a

gigantic engine of technical progress.
       Second, consider the case where L>L, but the LDC is unable to overtake the DC. In this

 case, the LDC will find itself participating in a world economy in which it trails a leader (the
                                                                                                  29



DC) whose fastest conceivable rate of technical progress is bounded from above by L. Now,
whenever 0) = 1 the instantaneous utility enjoyed by LDC consumers under free trade equals the

utility they would enjoy in autarky if TA(t) = T.(r). For the case we are considering, L>L, Co is
greater than 1 and, since the utility of LDC consumers is decreasing in ta, it follows that:

V,.(T,,.(t), T,.(t)) < VA(T,-(t)) V(T(O) + rL). Hence, the instantaneous utility enjoyed by
LDC consumers under free trade is bounded from above by VA(T(O) + tL). In contrast, under
the autarky path at each time t LDC consumers enjoy VA(T(O) + tL/2). Although, due to the

static gains from trade, LDC consumers may initially enjoy higher instantaneous utility along the
free trade path,49 if L is more than twice as large as L' there will come a time t' when

T(O)+ t'L12 = T(O) + t'L, after which the utility experienced under autarky will be greater than
the upper bound on the utility enjoyed under free trade. As L-L increases, t' becomes smaller

and the gap (at any time t after t') between VA(T(O) + tL/2) and VA(T(O) + tL) grows without

bound. It is not hard to see that, given L>2L, for any set of initial values of T(O) and T(O) there
exists some large enough L (relative to L) or small enough rate of time discount p such that the

LDC does better under autarky, losing the static gains from trade, but enjoying a more rapid rate

of technical progress.
       Finally, consider the case in which the LDC's population is much greater than the DC's,
the world economy begins in equilibrium B, and the LDC is able to catch up with the DC.

Recall, from figure 4(c), that for this overtaking to occur the initial difference between the two

economies, X(O), must be less than X', where X' is such that L = 2L      +L'e. It is easily shown
that as X(O) goes to X', the time spent in the catchup path goes to infinity and the value of Ct) at

each point in time along that path rises.° Since

Vp7(8)= VA(T-(t))
                    = VA(T(O)+tL/2—Jo'w(s)L12ds), while VA(TA(t)) = VA(T(O)+tL/2), it follows
 that both the duration and the magnitude of the losses experienced by LDC consumers along the
                                                                                                    30



catch up path are rising in X(0). After the LDC overtakes the DC and enters equilibrium A (as
the new DC), it will begin to enjoy a more rapid rate of technical progress and may, eventually,

enjoy higher instantaneous utilities than along the autarky path. Nevertheless, it is clear that for
large enough p or X(0), free trade will unambiguously lower the intertemporal utility of consum-
ers who reside in the economy which at time 0 is the LDC in equilibrium B. if the initial equilib-

rium is C, D orE, and the world economy evolves into equilibrium B, with the LDC overtaking
the DC, the analysis is complicated by the fact that the LDC initially enjoys higher instantaneous

utilities along the free trade path (due to the static gains from trade). In this case, for low enough

p and a long enough time spent along the catchup path, free trade will unambiguously make
LDC consumers worse off.

      As for the welfare of DC consumers in the case where the LDC overtakes the DC, in both

equilibrium B and equilibrium A (in their new role as LDC consumers) the (former) DC consum-

ers will enjoy higher instantaneous utilities along the free trade path, with the difference between

V,. and V increasing with the time spent in these equilibria. Thus, although the utility
experienced by the ex-DC consumers as the world economy evolves into equilibrium C is diffi-

cult to analyze, it is possible to assert that for large enough p or X(0), free trade will unarnbigu-

ously improve the intertemporal utility of consumers who reside in the economy which at time 0
is the DC.

      To summarize, free trade: (1) unambiguously improves the intertemporal utility of DC
consumers if the DC is never overtaken by the LDC; (2) will improve the intertemporal utility of

DC consumers even if the DC is overtaken by the LDC, provided either p or X(0), and hence the

time spent along the catchup path, is sufficiently large; (3) will unambiguously improve the
intertemporal utility of LDC consumers if the LDC's population is sufficiently small relative to

that of the DC; (4) will unambiguously reduce the intertemporal utility of LDC consumers if the
                                                                                                     31



LDC's population is sufficiently large relative to that of the DC and it is unable to overtake the

latter economy; and (5) for the case where the LDC is able to overtake the DC, will (a) unambig-
uously reduce the utility of LDC consumers if either their rate of time preference or X(O) is suffi-

ciently large and the initial equilibrium is equilibrium B and (b) unambiguously reduce the utility
of LDC consumers if their rate of time preference is sufficiently small, the initial equilibrium is

C, D or E, and the time spent along the catchup path is sufficiently large.

(C) SUMMARY
      This section has used a specific functional form of the model presented in section 3 to

explore the dynamic effects of international trade. The key simplifying assumption chosen is
that all goods in which learning by doing has yet to be exhausted contribute symmetrically to
productivity increases in all other such goods, which, given a monotonically increasing cost

curve for these same goods, ensures that learning by doing is exhausted sequentialiy in goods.
The results indicate that under free trade the LDC (DC) experiences rates of technical progress

less than or equal (greater than or equal) to those enjoyed under autarky. If the DC's working
population is greater than or equal to that of the LDC, the technical gap between the two econo-

mies will increase without bound. Furthermore, even if the LDC has a population several orders
of magnitude greater than that of the DC, if the initial technical gap between the two economies

is large enough the LDC will never catchup with its trading partner. Thus, to a certain degree the
model is characterized by knife edge results, If an economy, say as the result of short term gov-

ernment subsidies, acquires a slight competitive edge over an equally large trading partner, any
subsequent free trade interaction will give it a permanent and increasing absolute technical

advantage. Although these results are no doubt somewhat dependent upon the particular func-
tional form chosen for our analysis, intuitively it would seem likely that they would tend to be

preserved in any functional form in which the learning by doing spillover effects are not heavily
                                                                                                    32



biased in favour of any particular set of goods and learning by doing tends to be exhausted
sequentially in goods.
      With respect to growth rates, the model of this paper suggests that free trade will tend to
raise the rate of GDP growth of the DC and lower that of the LDC. To the extent that bounded

learning by doing with spillovers across goods, but not across nations, is an important source of
growth, it would seem that trade does not accelerate the growth of national income in all trading

economies, as the proponents of the positive growth gains from trade tend to assert. Naturally,

different results might emerge from an analysis of the impact of trade on factors such as R&D,
the acquisition of human capital, and international spillovers of knowledge.

      Finally, with respect to intertemporal welfare the results of this model are somewhat

ambiguous. Since the DC enjoys both the static gains from trade and an accelerated rate of tech-
nical progress, as long as the DC economy maintains its technical lead, i.e. continues to play the
role of the DC, its consumers will enjoy an unambiguous increase in intertemporal utility. As for
the LDC, although it suffers a decrease in its rate of technical progress, its consumers benefit

from the traditional static gains from trade, which increase as the DC experiences technical prog-

ress. As these two effects work in opposite directions, the effect of trade on the intertemporal
utility of LDC consumers is ambiguous. In general, the LDC is more likely to experience an

improvement (reduction) in intertemporal welfare if its population is much smaller (larger) than
that of the DC.
                                                                                                    33



                              V SOME FINAL THOUGHTS
      The stylized model of this paper clearly contains many simplifying assumptions and conse-
quent weaknesses. Not the least of these is that it takes as given the development of new goods

and processes whose productive potential is then exploited by learning by doing. A more
sophisticated model would capture the effect of trade on both research and development and

learning by doing, perhaps modelling the interaction between the two effects. The impact of
flade on technical progress, growth rates and, by extension, intertemporal welfare might also
emerge from a number of other directions, such as via the effect of trade on the international dif-

fusion of knowledge. Furthermore, whereas this paper has only focused on the dichotomy
between autarky and free trade, the analysis of more common deviations from free trade, such as
tariffs and quotas, including the endogenous effects of variables such as rent and tariff seeking

on technical progress, should be quite interesting. This paper has provided an analysis of the
impact of the movement from autarky to trade on one particular factor of importance to growth.
The relationship between trade policies and growth rates obviously remains an open, exciting,

and empirically relevant question.
      The basic structure of the results of the model in this paper, i.e. that the LDC (DC) always

experiences rates of technical progress and growth less than or equal (greater than or equal) to

those enjoyed under autarky, suggests an interesting extension to a three country world com-
posed of an LDC, a DC, and a NIC (located technically between the LDC and the DC). One

possible result, suggested, but not confirmed, by this paper, would be that if a Set of countries
with small populations (the NIICs) enter the free trade era (say post-World War II) with a slight
technical lead over the LDCs they will be driven into concentrating all of their production in

goods in which they experience rapid learning by doing, while the LDCs wait in industries in

which they have already exhausted learning by doing. The NTCs experience extreme product
                                                                                                34



concentration and rapid structural change as they progress up the product ladder. The LDCs
have to wait until the NICs move out of lower industries to enter them and experience more rapid
technical progress and structural change. As the NICs close in on the DCs, their rates of techni-
cal progress and GDP growth would tend to slow. To a certain degree, this simple story charac-

terizes the post-war empirical experience of the East Asian NICs and the more recent accelerated
growth of manufacturing in countries such as Thailand and the Phillipines, which only occurred
after the NICs had begun to move out of the low end light industrial products. Learning by

doing is most certainly not the only source of growth. Nevertheless, the model in this paper, and
its multicountry extension, provides a simple means of modeling the hierarchy and movement of
countries in the international ladder of production.




Alwyn Young
Sloan School of Management, Mn'
                                                                                             35



                                   VI REFERENCES

Aichian, Armen. Reliability of Progress Curves in Airframe Production." Econonietricp 31,
     No. 4 (October 1963): 679-693.

Arrow, Kenneth J. "The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing." Review f Economic
     Studies 29 (1962): 155-173.

Asher, Harold. "Cost-Quantity Relationships in the Airframe Industry." Rand Corporation,
     R-291, July 1,1956.
Baloff, Nicholas. 'Startups in Machine-Intensive Production Systems.' Journal f Indusu-ial
     Eneineeiing 14, No. 1 (January 1966): 25-32.
Bardhan, Pranab K. Economic Growth. Development ns Foreign IIg. New York: Wiley-
     Interscience, 1970.

Boston Consulting Group. Perspectives n Experience. Boston: Boston Consulting Group,
      1968.

Boldrin, Michele and Scheinkman, Jose A. "Learning-By-Doing, International Trade and
      Growth: A Note.' In Anderson, Philip W.; Arrow, Kenneth J.; and Pines, David, eds. flag
      Economy n Evolving Complex System. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing
      Company, 1988.

Carr, Gardner W. "Peacetime Cost Estimating Requires New Learning Curves." Aviation 45,
      No.4 (April 1946): 76-77.
Clemhout, S. and Wan, Henry Y., Jr. "Learning-by-Doing and Infant Industry Protection."
     Review f Economic Studies 37 (January 1970): 33-56.
Conway, R.W. and Schultz, Andrew Jr. "The Manufacturing Progress Function." Journal f
    Industrial Engineering 10, No. 1 (Jan-Feb. 1959): 39-54.

Dixit, Avinash K. and Sti glitz, Joseph E. "Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
       Diversity." American Economic Review 67, No. 3 (June 1977): 297-308.

Dornbusch, R., Fischer, S. and Samuelson, P.A. "Comparative Advantage, Trade, and Payments
     in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods.' American Economic Review 67, No. 5
     (December 1977): 823-839).
Enos, John L. "A Measure of the Rate of Technological Progress in the Petroleum Refining
      Industry." Journalf Industrial Economics 6, No. 3 (June 1958): 180-197.

Fellner, William. "Specific Interpretations of Learning by Doing." Journal f Economic Theory
      1(1969): 119-140.
                                                                                            36



Findiay, Ronaid. "The Terms of Trade and Equilibrium Growth in the World Economy.' Amri
      n Economic Review 70, No. 3 (June 1980): 29 1-299.
________ 'Growth and Dvelopment in Trade Models." In Jones, R.W. and Kenen, P.B., cds.,
     Handbook f International Economics. Elsevier Science Publishers, 1984.
Garg, Anand and Milliman, Pierce. The Aircraft Progress Curve - Modified for Design
     Changes.' Journal af Industrial Engineerine 12, No. 1(1961): 23-28.
Goel, S.N. and Becknell, RH. "Learning Curves that Work." Industrial Engineering 4, No. 5
      (1972): 28-31.
Grossman, Gene M. "Explaining Japan's Innovation and Trade: A Model of Quality Competi-
     tion and Dynamic Comparative Advantage." Manuscript. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Uni-
     versity, October 1989.

Grossman, Gene M. and Helpman, Elhanan. Comparative Advantage and Long-Run Growth."
     Manuscript. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University, August 1988.
________ and ________. "Endogenous Product Cycles." NBER Working Paper No. 2913.
     Cambridge, MA: NBER, March 1989. (a)

________ and _______. "Quality Ladders in the Theory of Growth." Manuscript. Princeton
     N.J.: Princeton University, August 1989. (b)
Helpman, Elhanan. "Growth, Technical Progress, and Trade." NBER Working Paper No. 2592,
     1988.

Hirsch, Werner Z. "Firm Progress Ratios." Econonietrica 24, No.2 (April 1956): 136-143.
Jacobsen, D.H. and Lele, M.M. "New Necessary Conditions of Optimality for Control Problems
     with State-Variable Inequality Constraints." Journal af Mathematical Analysis md Apt1i
        j 35 (1971): 255-284.
Jaffe, Adam B. "Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms' Pat-
       ents, Profits, and Market Value." American Economic Review 76, No. 5 (December
       1986): 984-1001.
Krugman, Paul. "The Narrow Moving Band, the Dutch Disease, and the Competitive Conse-
    quences of Mrs. Thatcher: Notes on Trade in the Presence of Dynamic Scale Economies."
    Journal f Development Economics 27 (1987): 41-55.
Lancaster, Kelvin. "Intra-Industry Trade Under Perfect Monopolistic Competition." Journal f
     International Economics 10(1980): 151-175.

Levhari, David and Sheshinski, Eytan. "Experience and Productivity in the Israel Diamond
     Industry." Econometrica 41, No. 2 (March 1973): 239-253.
                                                                                               37



Liebem,an, Marvin B. 'The Learning Curve and Pricing in the Chemical Processing Industries."
     Biis1 Journal f Economics 15, No.2 (Summer 1984): 213-228.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 'On the Mechanics of Economic Developmeni" Journal f Monetary
     Economics 22 (July 1988).

Mak, James and Walton, Gary M. "Steamboats and the Great Productivity Surge in River Trans-
     portation.' Journal f Economic History 32, No. 3 (September 1972): 619-640.
Oniki, H. and Uzawa, H. "Patterns of Trade and Investment in a Dynamic Model of International
      Trade." Review f Economic Studies 32(1965): 15-38.
Prescott, Edward C. and Boyd, John H. "Dynamic Coalitions: Engines of Growth." American
      Economic Review 77, No. 2 (Papers and Proceedings, May 1987): 63-67.
Romer, Paul. M. "Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth." Journal Qf Political Economy 94
    (October 1986): 1002-1037.
________ "Growth Based on Increasing Returns Due to Specialization." American Economic
     Review 77, No. 2 (Papers and Proceedings, May 1987): 56-62.
Rosenberg, Nathan. Inaid jJi BJk           Technoloev nd Economics. Cambridge: Cam-
      bridge University Press, 1982.
Seierstad, Atle and Sydsaeter, Knut. "Sufficient Conditions in Optimal Control Theory." Jn
      national Economic Review. Vol. 18, No.2, June 1977: 367-391.

Sheshinski, Eytan. "Test of the 'Learning by Doing' Hypothesis." Review f Economics
     Statistics 49, No. 4 (November 1967): 568-578.

Smith, Alisdair. "Capital Theory and Trade Theory." In Jones, R.W. and Kenen, P.B., eds.,
     Handbook f International Economics. Elsevier Science Publishers, 1984.
Solow, R.M. "A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth." Ouarterly Journal f
     mk   70, No. 1(1956): 65-94.
Stokey, Nancy L. "Learning by Doing and the Introduction of New Goods." Journal f Political
     Economy 1988, Vol. 96, no.4: 701-7 17.

Succar, Patricia. "The Need for Industrial Policy in LDCs - A Re-Statement of the Infant Indus-
     try Argument.' International Economic Review 28, No. 2 (June 1987): 521-534.
Wan, Henry Y. Jr. "Trade, Development and Inventions - The Evolutionary Path." Manuscript.
     Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Univ., July 1975.
World Bank.          Development RpQflJ.21. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987.
Wright, T.P. "Factors Affecting the Cost of Airplanes." Journal fIh Aeronautical Sciences 3,
     No.4 (February 1936): 122-128.
                                                                                                38



                                           Endnotes
      1. When finally referring to some growth effects, such as the impact of trade policy on
productivity growth and rates of innovation, the report, despite offering some favourable evi-
dence, becomes more equivocal, acknowledging that 'little is known about technological innova-
tion in relation to trade policy." sflt Development RQri 1.22, 91.
       2. In addition, blanket references to the modem export-led growth successes of the East
Asian economies mask remarkable variations in policy amongst them, from Hong Kong's laissez
faire environment, to Singapore's forced domestic saving and encouragement of foreign invest-
ment, to South Korea's huge government backed conglomerates.
       3. E.g., Krueger and Harberger.
       4. In the Quality Ladders" (1989b) paper, Grossman and Helpman do not emphasize the
dynamic effects of different policies, focusing instead on deriving the autarky and free trade
equilibria, but their model clearly contains policy implications, as illustrated by Grossman's
(1989) further analysis.
       5. See, for examples, Wright 1936, Hirsch 1956, Alchian 1963, Boston Consulting Group
1968, and Lieberman 1984. In some formulations C is the average cost of all n units or the price
of the nth unit. Sheshinski 1967 and Levhari and Sheshinski 1973 assume forms that are log-
linear in output: Q = EbF(K, L), with Q, K, L, E and b denoting output, capital, labour, cumula-
tive experience, and the experience elasticity of output, respectively.
       6. See Carr 1946, Asher 1956, Conway and Schultz 1959, and Baloff 1966.
       7. Which might introduce scale effects and/or embody technology developed from R&D
efforts.
       8. Some of the more egregiously poor examples are Garg and Milliman 1961, Boston
Consulting Group 1968, and God and Becknell 1972. Lieberman's 1984 study of the chemical
industry and Levhari and Sheshinski's 1973 analysis of the Israeli diamond industry are among
the most careful and illuminating studies. Although Levhari and Sheshinski did not explicitly
seek to test rival hypotheses on the nature of learning by doing, they did find that a formulation
in which the elasticity of output with respect to experience was a quadratic and concave function
of the level of experience provided as good a fit as the log-linear model.
       9. It is interesting to note that in his seminal paper Arrow (1962) used cumulative invest-
ment, as opposed to cumulative output, as his index of experience precisely because he believed
that, in the absence of substantial changes in the productive environment, learning by doing is
bounded.
      10. In both static (E.g Dixit and Stiglitz 1977, Lancaster 1980) and dynamic (Romer
1987, Grossman and Helpman 1989a) settings.
      11. 1 will not discuss the neo-classical (e.g. Oniki and Uzawa 1965) and North-South (e.g.
Findlay 1982 and 1984) analyses of the interaction of trading economies. These models rely
upon exogenous technical change to generate growth and, hence, although illuminating in many
ways, tend to beg the question of the dynamic effects of international trade on growth and techni-
cal progress. For surveys of this literature see Findlay 1984 and Smith 1984.
                                                                                                      39


       12. Specifically, Stokey assumed that at each point in time the function describing the
prices of goods (ordered on the real line) was weakly concave on [0, m) and strictly convex on
(m, oo). Since higher numbered goods contain additional characteristics, this implies that the
marginal cost of additional characteristics is diminishing along [0, m), which ensures that no
goods below m will be consumed. At any point in time, the consumers optimal plan involves
consuming goods in [A, B], where A = max{s 01 p(s) —.cdp(s)Ids = 0} is the good that pro-
vides the lowest average cost per characteristic across the widest range of characteristics. Stokey
assumed that aggregate economy-wide learning by doing results in a greater proportional
reduction in the cost of higher numbered goods (ensuring a rise in B) and also raises A.
       13. Similarly, Mak and Walton (1972) have shown that although the initial introduction of
the steamboat, between 1815 and 1820, to western inland rivers led to a significant decline in
freight costs, subsequent improvements in the steamboat, principally changes in hull design, led
to much greater declines in shipping costs between 1820 and 1860.
      14. An extension to the real line of the Ricardian model with a continuum of goods,
indexed on the line segment [0,1], developed by Dornbusch, Fischer and Samuelson (1977).
      15. Throughout this paper, all time subscripts denote an implicit (rather than explicit)
dependence on time, due to the impact of ongoing production experience.
      16. Given the learning by doing assumptions presented further below, if a(s,0) is continu-
ous in sand lim, ..,_a(s, 0) = o, then this is sufficient to guarantee the same for a(s,t) for all t.
       17. Thus, for example, although Leonardo da Vinci developed the blueprints for a bat's
wing flying machine, it is likely that, given the production knowledge of the Italian economy at
the time, it would have taken an enormous amount of labour to produce one such unit. Some
four hundred years later, after the world had considerable experience in producing bicycles and
other simple machines, the French engineer Clement Ader produced and flew a bat's wing flying
machine patterned after Leonardo's original design.
       18. Assumptions (iv) and (v) ensure that if a(s,0) is continuous in sand lirn, .....a(s,0) =
then the same is true for a(s,t) for all t.
       19. Since all goods enter symmetrically into utility, the assumption that(s) is non-
increasing in s is equivalent to maintaining that the upper bound on the utility derived per unit of
labour is non-decreasing in the technical sophistication of the industry. One could, equivalently,
scale units so that i(s) is increasing in s, but with higher numbered goods provided greater utility
per unit. As a practical example, consider the replacement of the phonograph by the compact
disc player. Although compact disc players are more expensive than phonographs, they provide
greater utility per unit cost, and hence are replacing the older system.
       20. On bonds in zero net supply.
       21. The formal analysis is available upon request from the author.
       22. From (3.4) it is apparent that the continuity of a(s,t) ensures the continuity of C(s,t),
implying L(v,t)>0 for all v in some neighbourhood of each sin SL. Assumption (iii)
B (s, v, a (v, 1)/(v)) earlier above combined with the continuity of a(s,t) ensures that
B(s, v, a(v, t)/(v)) >0 for all v in some neighbourhood of each sin S. It follows that
5;B(s, v, a(v, 1)/(v))L(v, t) dv is strictly positive for each sin SL, from which it follows that
(3.5)" is strictly positive as well.
                                                                                                 40


       23. Say li _(s)=. As t goes to infinity a(s) becomes(s), i.e. a downward sloping
curve which assymptotes to . The consumer then divides her budget uniformly over a set of
goods (of infinite measure) whose prices are all negligibly different from , deriving total instan-
taneous utility U'(0)/. The statement in the text then follows.
       24. Large in the sense that in both the autarky and free trade perfectly competitive equilib-
ria (discussed below) good B is no longer produced. This assumption makes the equilibria easier
to analyze and does not substantially alter the results.
      25. And equal zero for all v such that a(v, t)f(v) = 1.
      26. dM/dT=1—dridr>0.
      27. As will be seen further below, the set of goods produced by both the DC and the LDC
can reasonably be restricted to zero measure.
      28. I.e. the utility of consumers in either economy, the relative wage rate, or the rates of
technical progress.
      29. This assumption simply eases the discussion further below.
      30. C'(s) —_p(M')/p(s) —1> p(M)/p(s) —1 = C(s)
      31. A formal proof of the statements which follow is available upon request from the
author.
       32. This result (as in equilibrium B discussed below) is analogous to the case in the stan-
dard Ricardian model when the terms of trade are determined by the cost structure of the larger
economy.
       33. Recall the effect of an increase in Tin the autarky equilibrium.
       34. H actually falls, as opposed to H-T decreasing with H constant or rising, because the
greater DC income leads to a rise in DC demand for all LDC goods below the pre-dX T (incl-
uding some low end goods below T for which demand was previously zero).
       35. An increase in T (holding T constant but allowing X to vary) always lowers the DC's
relative wage.
       36. This is because the income elasticity of demand for each good is inversely related to
current expenditure on that good (note how the richer DC consumers consume a wider variety of
goods than the LDC consumers).
       37. Along that line to = e'. The above result then follows from the fact that
ato(X,T)/ax >0.
       38. The fact that the amount spend on goods below Tin this equilibrium (Lt2 + coL.,2) is
less than total LDC income (L) ensures that (L — tuL')/2 >0.
      39. The dynamic paths drawn in figure 4(a) are intended to be suggestive. In general,
whether or not any particular path crosses the boundaries between equilibria C, D and E will
depend upon the parameter values. What is certain, however, is that everywhere in equilibria C,
D and E dXfdt >0 and dT/dt >0. A similar disclaimer applies to the dynamic paths shown
crossing the boundary between equilibria C and D in figures 4(b) and 4(c).
                                                                                                     41



      40. Otherwise, everywhere in equilibrium B dX/dt >0.
      41. Thus, VA(T) = c, where tA is the range of goods on each side of T that are consumed
under autarky and is determined implicitly by equation 4.7' earlier above. In contrast, in equilib-
ria C, D and E V(T, T) = (X + t. - ln(ta))2 + — (t - 1)2, where X = T — T, 0) is the DC's
relative wage, and - and    ,.are the distance from T to the lowest and highest LDC goods
purchased by LDC consumers under free trade, respectively, with o, t- and         i,-
                                                                                 all determined
implicitly by T and T using equations 4.12-4.14 earlier above. The same equations, with t,
and 1,   describe V and V.
      42, V./aT equals zero only in equilibrium A.
      43. It is notable that          T')IT may be negative, as is the case in equilibrium B. If
L>L, although it can be shown that in equilibrium E, as well as above the horizontal line given
by LeX = L (see the discussion in the General Equilibrium' section earlier above),
aV,,.IaT >0, below that horizontal line and outside equilibrium E              may be less than or
equal to zero, as is the case in equilibrium B.
      44. The first inequality is strict outside of equilibrium E and the second outside of equilib-
rium A.
         45. In the case of equilibrium A since dT,/dt = L12 + L12, it is apparent that
T.(t) > T(t) for as long as the world economy remains in that equilibrium. A cursory examina-
tion of figure 3 confu'ms that V,)(Tn.(t), T,.(t)) = VA(T.(t)) > V,(T,(t)). As for when the free
trade path begins in equilibrium E, as long as the two economies remain in that equilirium,
T,,.(t) = TA(() and T.(t) = T,(t). It follows that V,.(E)(T,T(t), T;,.) = V.(E)(TA(t), T,(t))> VA(TA(t)).
      46. Regardless of whether the world economy is initially (at time 0) in equilibrium B or
enters it subsequently (from equilibrium C), we know that whilst in this equilibrium
TF,.(t) <TA(t) (for all t>0). It follows that Vn.(B)(T,.(t), T,,.(t)) = VA(T,,'(t)) < V,(T(t)).
         47. Unless 0) already equals its minimum value of 1.
         48. Recall figure 3, equilibrium A.
         49. As is the case outside of equilibrium B.
      50. Recall that in equilibrium B w =     e and dX/dt = L(2 + o)/2 —L12. From this it fol-
lows that:
  —            (L—2L)e°
           LeL+(L —2Le°—L
and the time S when X(S)=0, is given by:
                L—3L
            (L—2L)e°—L
FIGURE 1: EQUILIBRrUM IN THE GENERAL MODEL




                                             -4




8
FIGURE 2: AUTARKY EQUILIBRIUM




                        ,a()-
FIGURE 3: TYPOLOGY OF FREE TRADE EQUILIBRIA


                Equilibrium A

                  Cs)




                Equilibrium B
       FIGURE 3- Continued



a(4)      Equilibrium C


                                  ,c4E4
                                  ,Q46l ,7 ___

               \\            //
       \\\ \\\\\\\\\\\\
       r'(*717
          Equilibrium D



                                          4   7




           LC                6 'k
FIGURE 3 - Continued


    Equilibrium E


                           t:
                       t?22? Z




                                 /




                                     -y
FJOtJ 4: CONDiTIONS UNDER WHICH THE DIFFE- EQUILJBPJA APPLY

                          (a) L >L




                          (b)L=L




                          (c)L<L




                                                              I-
