                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




       HUMAN CAPITAL, TECHNOLOGY, AND THE WAGE STRUCTURE:
                    WHAT DO TIME SERIES SHOW?




                          Jacob Mincer




                     Working Paper No. 3581




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          January 1991




This paper is a product of a research program funded by the
National Science Foundation and the U.S. Department of Education
via the National Center on Education and Employment at Columbia
University. I am grateful to David Bloom and to Finis Welch for
data and discussions, and to Lalith Muriasinghe for conscientious
research assistance. This paper is part of NBERts research
program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #3581
                                       January 1991

       HUMAN CAPITAL, TECHNOLOGY, AND THE WAGE STRUCTURE:
                    WHAT DO TIME SERIES SHOW?

                            ABSTRACT
     The major purpose of this study was to detect effects of
technologically based changes in demand for human capital on the
educational and experience wage structure in annual CPS data,
1963 to 1987.
    Major findings are:
    1.   Year-to—year educational wage differentials are quite
closely tracked by relative supplies of young graduates, and by
indexes of relative demand, such as research and development (R &
D) expenditures per worker, and ratios of service to goods
employment. Of these, R and D indexes account for most of the
explanatory power. Indexes of (Jorgenson type) productivity
growth and of international competition are significant as
alternatives, but show weaker explanatory power.
     2.   The observed steepening of experience profiles of wages
is explained, in part, by changes in relative demographic
supplies (cohort effects), and in part by the growing
profitability of human capital which extends to that acquired on
the job. Evidence appears in the significance of profitability
variables or in demand factors underlying them, given the
relative demographic supplies in the wage profile equations.

                                        Jacob Mincer
                                        Department of Economics
                                        International Affairs
                                         Building
                                        Columbia University
                                        420 West 118th Street
                                        New York, NY 10027
         HUMAN CAPITAL TECHNOLOGY. AND ThE WAGE STRUCTURE
                        What Do Time Series Show?


I.

1.     Long-Term Stability and Short-Term Changes in the Profitability of Education
       The effect of education on earnings was the initial and continues to be the central
subject of research in the economic analysis of education. The gain in earnings associated
with an additional year of education is viewed as a return on the investment costs of the
additional year. This return, expressed as a percent gain in wages obtainable without the
investment, is the educational (relative) wage differential or the "educational premium.TM
The same annual return, expressed as a ratio to the investment costs is the (marginal) rate
of return to education, a measure of education's profitability.

        In competitive labor markets, higher wages associated with a higher level of
education correspond to the greater productivity of that labor. However, with no other
changes, increased supplies of educated labor reduce its marginal product, therefore the
educational wage differential. Thus rapid growth of education relative to demand for it
reduces its profitability while slow or no growth increases it. Changing profitabilities in
turn represent incentives for subsequent changes in supply: enrollments decrease when
profitability declines, and once the market experiences a significant decline in the relative
supply of educated labor, educational wage differentials return back to a normal or
equilibrium' level of profitability. Rates of return to education can also increase with
unchanging supplies, when demand for educated labor increases, either because demand
for its services or products increases or because its productivity grows as a result of

technological changes. Again supply adjustment is induced as described before, pushing
profitability rates back to equilibrium. The time lag between the impulse of high or low
profitabilities and their return to normal involves a supply adjustment which tends to be
1
     Equilibrium is best defined as the equality of rates of return on alternative capital investments.
                                              2




lengthy: For example, in response to an increased profitability of college education more
high school graduates enter college. It takes at least four years to graduate and several
more years until the increased supply of college graduates reduces the wage differential to
a level at which relative supplies stabilize if no further impulses intervene.

       The usual estimates of rates of return to an additional year of education run
between 5-10%. These magnitudes are consistent with the investment interpretation, as
they are comparable to rates on alternative capital investments. Sporadic estimates of
rates of return to education in the U.S., based mainly on data in the late 1950's and the
1960's left an impression of temporal stability. However, the decline in the educational
wage premia in the mid- to late 1970's (Freeman, 1976) and even greater rebound in the
1980's (Murphy and Welch, 1989) led to intensive on-going research on what seem to be
unprecedented changes in the past two decades in the U.S.

       Data on long-run changes here and abroad (Becker 1975, Psacharopoulos, 1985)
indicate relatively small reductions in the rates of return to education over many decades of
growth in educational attainment.

       Two questions are posed by these facts on educational wage premia: (1) What
explains the absence of a significant downward long-term trend in the profitability of
education, given massive increases in supplies of educated workers?; and (2) What explains
the rather dramatic swing in the wage premium in the U.S. during the past two decades?

       The economists' answer to the first question is a conjecture based on a generally
accepted hypothesis that downward pressures on profitability due to increase in supply of
educated labor are counteracted by long-term growth in the demand for educated labor. In
this view, the massive growth of educational attainment represents, in large measure, a
continuous response to growth in profitability of education engendered by growing
demand. Profitability is kept in check - near equilibrium levels - as an outcome of these
                                              3




private and social supply responses. Unfortunately, empirical work on factors generating
long-term trends in the demand for educated workers and on documenting the supply
responses is only in its infancy. More work has been done on shorter term fluctuations in

demand and on suppl responses in particular occupations (mainly by Freeman).

       It is generally acknowledged that the basic reason for the secular growth of
education is economic growth. That education, conversely, contributes to economic growth
is not a contradiction - the relation is partly reciprocal. The positive effects of economic
growth on educational attainment are due to growth of income which leads to increases in
private and public expenditures on education, as it does to an increase in consumption
expenditures on most other goods and services. This is so whether education is viewed as
skill or culture enhancing. This income effect obviously results in an increase in the supply
of educated workers with consequent downward pressure on profitability. The
counteracting growth of industrial demands for educated workers originates from the
production side: (1) the growth of quantity and quality of physical capital (machines and
equipment) per worker; and (2) improvements in technology which can increase output
without changes in inputs, that is increase total (or multi-) factor productivity. Both are
mainsprings of economic growth and each one generates increases in demand for human
capital under plausible conditions: (1) For growth of physical capital to have this effect it
must be less substitutable (or more complementary) for educated (skilled) than for less
skilled labor. Econometric studies by Griliches (1969), and by Hamermesh and Grant
(1979, 1981) appear to support this hypothesis of a positive skill bias of physical capital
accumulation. (2) For new technology to have a similar effect, it must be skill-biased. A
growing body of recent economic research is consistent with the proposition that more
schooled and trained workers more readily muster the new technologies. Thus, Bartel and
Lichtenberg (1987) using Census data report that relatively more educated workers are
employed in those manufacturing industries (in 1960, 1970, and 1980) where capital
                                                     4




equipment was newer and R & D (research and development) expenditures were more
intensive. That this is due to a greater demand for educated workers is confirmed by
findings of higher relative wages of better educated workers in such industries, compared to
other industries.

        These findings were reported in my recent study (1989) of PSID data in which I
related indices of demand for educated workers, such as their utilization, relative wages,
wage growth with tenure, turnover, and unemployment, to decade-long averages of the
pace of technology. For the latter I used Jorgenson's total factor productivity (TFP)
indexes.2 The cross-industry findings showed higher levels of demand for human capital in
progressive sectors in the 1960's and 1970's. Similar results concerning effects on relative
educational wage differentials within industries were found in Census data by Gill (1989).

        In order to explore the effects of capital-skill complementarily I used the sectoral
(decade long) growth of capital intensity as a variable, in addition to the productivity
growth variable. The effects on utilization of educated labor were positive, but no relative
educational wage effects were visible within sectors. The effects may be confounded, as
newer vintages of capital contain new technology. Consequently, the skill bias of
technology may to some extent reflect the skill bias of capital and conversely.

        In a previous study (with Higuchi, 1988) we have shown that differences between the
U.S. and Japan in rates of technological change (measured by national and sectoral TFP
indexes) can explain why wage structures (and turnover rates) differ in and between the
two countries.


2 A major merit of the Jorgenson TFP indexes for the purpose at hand was their construction as residuals
     from quality adjusted changes in capital and labor growth accounting. Quality adjustment of the labor
     input eliminates (or, at least, minimizes) the human capital content of the residuals thereby largely
     eliminating a spurious correlation between the residuals and the inputs that would otherwise occur. The
     decade long averages also reduce much of the year-to-year error and the effects of the business cycle.
                                                       5




       All the studies cited are sectoral (industry) cross-sections. While they are strongly
suggestive in showing a positive association between the pace of technology in a sector
(measured by various proxies) and indices of relative demand for educated workers in the
sector, they do not - by themselves - establish a causal relation nor the direction of
causality. For the interpretation to be more compelling, the analysis must be cast in a time
series format to determine whether changes in the pace of technology are followed by
corresponding changes in educational differentials, and whether inferences based on
sectors hold up in the aggregate - a notion that is often misleading.

       The cross-section studies point to technology induced demand for human capital as
a likely answer to the question about long-term stability of as well as changes in the rate of
return to education. With currently available data a time series approach appears to be
feasible and promising for verifying these hypotheses and for estimating the effects of
changing demand for human capital.

        The question concerning causes of the pronounced shorter term swings in
educational wage premia during the past 2-3 decades requires attention to fluctuations in
supply and demand for educated labor, rather than to trends in them. Demand or supply
impulses can generate such fluctuations. These can be relatively lengthy, as adjustments
proceeding through the educational pipeline take time. If the pace of technology varies
over time, its effects as demand "shifters" ought to be discernible in the time series of the

past 25 years.

        Several exogenous3 events ("shocks") are likely to have caused the gyrations in
supply and demand and consequently in rates of return to education in the recent period:
(1) On the supply side: Influx of the baby boom cohorts into the labor market during the
 1970s, and especially of college graduates. Above trend growth of income and of public
     An event is exogenous if it affects other events under consideration, but is not affected by them.
                                               6




subsides to higher education in the 1960's are basic to the increased supply of college

graduates, which was additionally accelerated by the Vietnam War draft exemptions. (2)
On the demand side: Productivity growth which was substantial in the 1950's and 1960's
collapsed to low levels in the 1970's, partly as a result of the emergence of oil cartels and
the oil price shocks, but largely for reasons not yet well understood. A partial recovery was
evident in the 1980's, but its course or measurement seems uncertain. The suggestion that
the pace of technology is implicated in the short as it is in the long run, is a major
motivation of the present study. (3) Another possible factor on the demand side, first
pointed out by Murphy and Welch (1988) is the growth of world trade hence of
international competition which became pronounced in the 1980's. This resulted in losses
of U.S. exports and growth of imports which substituted for domestic production
(automobiles and electronics being the most visible examples). The reduced demand for
labor put downward pressures on wages and employment in the affected sectors, which are
generally less education intensive than other sectors (such as services, finance and
insurance, etc). The decline in union density which was probably induced by these
developments, is another, but not independent, reason for the relative decline in wages of
less educated (high school or below) workers.

       It is clear that in order to test the relation between technological change and the
demand for education in a time series of wage differentials, it is also necessary to take into
account changes in demography and in relative educational supplies. In other words,
although the initial purpose of this work is to ascertain the reality of technological skill bias
in historical changes rather than in cross-sections, empirical research necessitates an
investigation of the major forces at play including technological change in the recent
changes in the wage structure.
                                             7




2.     Skill Differentials in Education and Experience, and Changes in Them: Some

       Hypotheses

       Since labor market skills are acquired by learning at school and by learning on the
job, changes in demand for skills should affect both wage differentials by education as well
as those by labor market experience: Increases in the latter need not, however, be of the
same size at different levels of education. For example, if technology is biased toward
newer vintages of higher education, the experience differential may be smaller at college
than at high school levels. Similarly, reductions in demand for less educated workers
resulting from international competition would affect primarily employment and wages of
younger workers, with lesser skill and seniority. As a result the experience differential at
lower (high school or less) levels would increase relative to the experience differential at

college (or above) levels.

        The influx of "baby boomers" and especially of college graduates into the labor
markets of the 1970's stimulated a research focus on effects of changes in relative supplies
on relative wage differentials. The growth of numbers of college graduates relative to
numbers of less educated workers, in the 1970's narrowed the (percent) wage differential
between college and high school graduates. With the apparent excess supply of college
graduates, the U.S. labor force appeared to be "overeducated." At the same time, the
pronounced increase in the number of young relative to older workers, the "baby boom"
effect was to widen the experience differentials in wages at all levels of education, and
 especially at the college level.

        The bigger increase of young relative to older workers at the college level was
 mainly a result of the more rapid increases of numbers of college graduates compared to
 high school graduates. In other words, changes in relative educational supplies which
                                              8




mainly (initially) affected young cohorts automatically affected relative age distributions
differentially in the two groups.

       The greater "youthening" of the college group compared to the high school group is,
of course, a result of accelerated college enrollments. Entry of large young cohorts tend to
reduce wages of young workers relative to wages of older workers only if substitution in
production between older and younger workers is imperfect. No experience differential
would arise (though wages of all would be reduced somewhat) if substitution were perfect.
If substitution between younger and older workers is weaker among those educated, this
could be an additional reason for the greater widening of the age-differential in wages
("steepening of the experience profile') of college than of high school graduates in the
1970's - simply as a result of demography and not of "overeducation." And this purely

demographic effect would at the same time reduce the educational wage differential or the
college "wage premium" among young workers.

       As "baby bust" cohorts entered the labor market in the 80's and relative supplies of
college graduates stopped growing or even decreased, opposite implications should have
emerged. Wage profiles should have flattened - more so at college than at high school
levels, while the college premium should have risen.

       On the demand side, decline of the pace of technology in the 1970's would intensify
the decline in rates of return of college graduates already attributed in part to increased
supply. Renewed growth of demand for educated workers based on skill biased technology
in the 80's coupled with declines in demand for less educated workers due to international
competition would produce a reversal (growth) in the college wage premium.
                                                      9




       The hypotheses spelled out here are not new. They are partly based on findings of
current research of a number of labor economists4 and partly on conjectures which have
not as yet been verified. In particular, the role of technology has not been empirically
estimated - a major motivation here - nor have analyses been framed in a continuous (year-
to-year) time series which is attempted here.

       Before I proceed to the empirical analysis, a closer look at the meaning of
experience differentials in wages is helpful:

       The growth of wages with experience as a result of learning on the job is the major

factor affecting working age differentials in wages (the "wage profile") according to human
capital theory. The ratio of wages of older to those of younger workers which we study
here does not describe wage progress over time within a cohort (a longitudinal concept)
but wage differences across different cohorts at a given time (a cross-sectional concept).
Differences between the longitudinal and cross-sectional constructs are due to (1)
economic growth and (2) changes in age distributions over time. Economic growth makes
the longitudinal profile slope upward even if no learning takes place. Consequently, with
stable age distributions, the cross-sectional profile may best reflect the expected wage
payoff to learning on the job.5

       This payoff increases with experience, that is the slope of the cross-sectional proffle
is steeper in one period than another because more learning (training) takes place, or
because the acquired learning has become more profitable. Consequently, once relative
demographic supplies are held constant, the experience-wage differentials should move in
the same direction as the profitability of education, assuming that the demand for human
    Aside from the initial and continuing work of Murphy and Welch (i13), a number of papers were
    presented in at least three conferences in 1989 at Brookings, NBER, and AEI. A special focus on less
    skilled workers is provided by Blackburn, Bloom, and Freeman (1990).

    For simplicity of exposition, I ignore possible non- neutralities of economic growth with respect to age.
                                             10




capital affects both that acquired at school and on the job. In the empirical analysis,
therefore, both relative supply variables and demand variables which affect profitability,
should play a role in creating changes in experience wage differentials.

       In this connection there is a question of subsidiary interest: Does the demographic
change affect learning processes, that is investments in training, and in what direction?
Two different theories predict opposite effects: One holds that the opportunity costs of
training were reduced by the reduction in wages of the young "baby boom" workers in the
1970's. The consequent increase in training should have increased longitudinal wage
growth in addition to the cross-sectional steepening due to the demographic effect
(Welch, 1979). The opposite theory maintains that a decrease in the ratio of teachers
(trainers, older workers) to students (trainees, young workers) results in less training per
worker (Berger, 1984) and so a flatter longitudinal profile is possible despite the steeper
cross-section profile due to the baby boom. The empirical analysis should shed some light
on this matter as well.

H.

1.     Empirical Analysis: Data and Dependent Variables

       As already explained, casting the link between technology and human capital in a
time series framework involves an investigation of the changes in the U.S. wage structure in
the recent decades for which annual data are available. The changes which continue to
attract attention of economists and of others were summarized as: (1) A near cessation of
growth of real wages since the 1970's coupled with (2) Large, decade long swings in wage
differentials among skill groups in the work force. In particular, the average near-cessation
of wage growth was accompanied by declines in real wages of workers with below average
skill and education, especially in the 1980's; and (3) Wage differentials by age appear to
have risen throughout most of the period. Other changes which are not analyzed in this
                                                       11




paper are: the switch from a stable sex-differential in wages prior to the mid-seventies to a
subsequent narrowing of it, and the exact opposite in the black-white wage differentials.
These issues are excluded by restricting the data to white male workers. The currentreport
utilizes data from the March issues of the Current Population Survey. The data are in the
form of averages of logarithms of hourly wages of white, male workers in each singleyear
of experience, with 40 such years in each of the six education groups, in each calendaryear
from 1963 to 1987.6


       The wage structure to be analyzed is represented by differences in logarithms of
wages across education and experience (age) groups. Such education and experience
differentials in wages could be represented as continuous variables which enter non-
linearly into the "human capital" wage function. The coefficients of schooling ("dummies")
and of experience in such a function fitted to the data in which logarithms of wages are the
dependent variable would indicate both eduéational and experience (relative) wage
differentials, or wage premia of an additional year of each. Time changes in these
coefficients would provide time series of the changes to be explained.

       However, such a procedure is too restrictive, and can distort the measurement of
wage differentials and, especially, of their time pattern, if the shapes of the experience
wage profiles of the different education groups are different and change differentially over
time, which is the case. A preferred non-parametric approach is to measure the
educational wage differentials by (logs of) ratios of wages of higher to lower education
levels in the 6-10 years of experience groups. This (log) ratio orwage premium per year is
the best approximation of the rate of return to education, as it is measured roughly at the
"overtaking stage" of the working life.7 The cross-section (log) ratios of older to younger

6   I am grateful to Finis Welch for providing the data.

    This is the period when the net contribution of job training to wages is close to zero, thus revealing only
    schooling effects on wages (Mincer, 1974). For this wage premium to equal the rate of return, the
                                                       12




workers within an education group, in turn, represent the experience differentials, inwages.
I use wages of workers with 2 1-25 years of experience in the numerator and wages of those
with 1-5 years of experience in the denominator. Basically, this ratio (in log's) labeled (Dif
51) measures the cross-sectional increase from starting wages in a given education group to
the level at which further increases are rather small. As mentioned before, this cross-
sectional increase does not correspond to the actual growth ofwages within a given cohort,
unless the age distribution is fixed and the level of wages does not change over time

differentially at the various experience levels. Some attempt is, therefore, made also to
explore the within cohort wage growth of young workers over several years of their actual
experience.

       Although our complete analysis utilized information on 6 educationgroups (years of
school < 8,8-11, 12, 13-15, 16, 17+), we focus primarily on the wage differential between

college and high school graduates. The average education level within all other groups
changed over time and this would blur the analysis. At any rate, the big differences and
changes appear in the dichotomy between lower levels (12 or less) and post-secondary
education, and the bulk of that is most clearly captured in comparing graduates ofprecisely
12 years (high school graduates) with those of 16 years of schooling (college graduates).
Indeed, most of the recent studies focus mainly on this comparison for analyses of
educational differentials and age (or experience) differentials.

       The changing structure of educational and age (experience) wage differentials is
portrayed in Fig. 1 and 2. Fig. I shows the changing (percent)wage differential (per year)
between college and high school graduates who had (6-10) years of work experience. This
differential rose between 1963 and 1968, it then declined to about half size by 1979 and
rose steeply thereafter, more than recovering lost ground by 1986.
    denominator of the ratio has to include direct costs in addition to the opportunity costs, represented by the
    lower level wage.
                                                       13




         Fig. 2 shows the changing experience differential in wages (difference in log-wages
between older and younger workers) for high school graduates in graph marked H and for
college graduates in graph marked C. Among high school graduates, this experience
"premium" rises about 25% from the 60's to the 70's and continues to rise about twice as

rapidly in the 1980's. Among college graduates, the pattern is of a steep (about 50%) rise
from the late 60's to the early or mid 70's, and a rough plateau (slight decline followed by
slight increase) thereafter.

         It is important to keep in mind the components of the (log) ratios shown in Fig. 1
and 2: These are average levels of wages for groups with (1-5), (6-10), and (21-25) years of
labor market experience of male high school and college graduates. All of thesewages
rose in real terms before 1973, though a bit faster for college graduates. After 1973, they
declined among young high school graduates, ceased rising for older high school graduates
but continued to rise for college graduates.8 Thus when increases in rates of return to
college graduates are attributed to increases in relative demand, the latter consists both of
increases in demand for college graduates and decreases indemand for high school
graduates.

2.      Independent Variables: Concepts and Data

        To the extent that workers differing in education and inage (experience) are
imperfect substitutes in production, relative supplies exert a negative effect on relative
wages. Relative numbers of all college graduates among all males in the population aged
18-64 or of young college graduates among all young people (young defined here as 20-29
30 years of age) are used as measures of relative supply.9 Fig. 3 shows that the relative
8 The patterns of change in average wages differ somewhat depending on the definition of the average:
     Because dispersion (inequality) in wages increased within groups during this period, arithmetic averages
     show greater increases and smaller declines, while the logarithmic averages, used here, show smaller
     increase and greater declines (Kosters, 1989).

     We used Dopulatipn measures of relative educational and demographic supplies, rather than employment
     numbers of specific groups (here white males). Relative population supplies are the truly exogenous
                                                      14




supply of young college graduates just about doubled between the early 60's and mid 70's
accelerating between 68 and 76. Growth of supply stopped subsequently; indeed the supply
of college graduates declined somewhat from 76 to 81 and rose mildly thereafter. In
contrast, the relative supply of high school graduate declined mildly until the mid 70's, rose
subsequently (as fewer students proceeded to college) and stabilized since about 1982.
These changes are consistent with the changes in the wage differentials between college
and high school graduates (Fig. 1) but only partially explain the latter, as the regression
analysis shows.

       Relative supplies of young and older workers, among high school and college
graduates respectively, are shown in Fig. 4. These are ratios of numbers of young (age 20-
29) to all graduates with the same educational level. The growth of young (relative) to all
college graduates is rapid (about 50%) between 1964 and 1974. The subsequent relative
decline is equally steep and continuous after 1977. Clearly, a steepening of the college
cross-section wage profile down to the mid or later 70's is expected on this account, and is
indeed observed. But instead of declining, the ratios of wages of older to younger college
graduates subsequently stabilize (Fig. 2) Changes in relative supplies of young high school
graduates are milder: After a slight decline in the 60's, the proportion increases mildly until
about 1980, and declines mildly subsequently. Again the corresponding changes in the
wage profile by age (Fig. 2) are consistent up to the late 70's, but the continued and strong
steepening of the profile thereafter is inconsistent with the expected effects of relative
supplies.

        Of primary interest among variables affecting relative demands for skills is a
measure of the pace of technology. This factor, according to previous work,10 is skill-
    variables which affect both relative employment and wages of specific subgroups (here white). This may
    be an overly cautious approach.

10 As referred to Bartel-Lichtenbcrg, Gill, Mincer.
                                              15




biased. It widens the educational wage differentials when the pace quickens. In the study

of the effects of technological change on the demand for human capital (skills) across
industrial sectors I utilized indexes of growth of multi-factor productivity (PG) constructed
by Jorgenson et al (1987). Their major merit for the purpose at hand was that they
represent changes in productivity, given quality-adjusted labor and capital inputs. This
means that the residual which measures growth in productivity is not attributable to human
capital thus avoiding a spurious correlation between the two variables. To the extent that
the residually measured productivity growth is affected by technology, it may serve as a
proxy variable in relating technology to changes in demand for human capital. The well
known problem with the productivity growth indexes is that they reflect other factors than
technology such as the accretion of mundane know-how (learning by doing) in work skills
and capital equipment, economies and diseconomies of scale, business cycles in capacity
utilization and labor hoarding. Perhaps worst of all is the pronounced year-to-year
volatility, reflecting errors of measurement due to the residual nature (differences between
output and input growth) of this statistic.

       For decade long cross-sections, averaging the productivity indexes over a decade
alleviated both the volatility and the business cycle distortions, leaving a usable, albeit
imperfect empirical variable. However, the problem is more acute for annual time series
analysis in the present study. A partial and unsatisfactory (arbitrary) solution is the use of
subperiod averages or moving averages of the Jorgenson residual. Subperiod averages
provided by Jorgenson and Fraumeni are shown in Fig. 5.      A preferred alternative index of
the pace of technology in the current study is based on annual aggregated expenditures on
R & D (research and development). The Bartel and Lichtenberg cross-section study
(1987) showed that sectoral (industry) R & D intensity (ratio of R & D expenditures to
sales) could serve as an index of demand for educated labor-affecting its utilization and
wages in the industry cross-section.
                                                      16




        The conceptual advantage of R & D measures is that they more directly represent
sources and application of new technology to productive processes, rather than their partial
reflection in productivity growth, even if the latter were measured without error. As many
studies have shown, effects of R & D on productivity growth are substantial. About one
third of multifactor productivity growth is attributable to R & D, according to a recent BLS
review (1989). The impact, however, is likely to vary over time and across industries,

especially as between privately and governmentally sponsored R & D. A weakness of the
R & D index at the sectoral level is that it leaves out inter-industry spillovers which
augment the R & D effocts in the aggregate. For the purpose of the present study,
conducted on the aggregate level, sectoral differences and spillovers cause no problems.
Neither does the distinction between privately and governmentally sponsored R & D create
problems, since the effects on demand for educated labor - if the innovations are skill
biased - does not depend much on the particular application of the new technology: In all

cases various sources of demand compete for the same supply of, say, engineers and
scientists. Fig 6 shows the time series of real annual expenditures per worker11 on R & D
from all sources, based on the BLS (1989) data.

        The time series of R & D per worker shown in Fig. 6 has some similarity to the step
function of the PG index (Fig. 5), mainly in the decline from the late 60's to about 1980.
But the rise thereafter is much smaller for PG than for R & D, suggesting a weakening
effect of the latter on measured productivity growth, but not necessarily on the relative
demand for educated labor. Indeed, the time pattern of R & D (Fig 6) is strikingly closer
to the pattern of educational wage differentials shown in Fig. 1 then to the PG series in Fig.
5.



     Intensity of R & D per worker is clearly a more appropriate variable in affecting demand for labor quality
     than its intensity per dollar of GNP.
                                              17




       Two other indexes of relative demand for educated workers are: A measure of the
impact of the growth of international trade, the net balance of merchandise trade as
proportion of total output (RNE), shown in Fig. 7. Here losses of exports and replacement
of domestic production by import reduced demand for labor, mainly in goods producing
(manufacturing) industries. The affected sectors are less education intensive than service
producing industries. The decline in unionism, especially important in manufacturing
industries is likely to have been a result of declining demand for labor in them, contributing
to the widening of the educational wage differential in the 80's. It is not used here as a
variable because of its suspected endogeneity. Another variable that is used, despite its
partial endogeneity is the ratio of service to goods employment (RSG), shown in Fig. 8:
Service industries are the major employer of educated workers. Growth of service relative
to goods employment is a longer term trend which appears to reflect demand more than
supply trends, as is partly evidenced by the differential growth in real wages in the two
sectors.

       The growing demand for skills in service jobs is partly driven by the growth of
information technologies. This is best illustrated by the growing use of computers. The
number of computer workstations has increased from less than 1 million in 1976 to 28
million in 1986, or from 15 to 450 per thousand white collar workers -roughly doubling the

use per worker every two years (Cyert and Mowery, 1987).

       The negative export balance was small prior to the 1980's, but grew rapidly in the
past decade. The ratio of service to goods employment, however, shows mainly a
continuous upward trend over the whole period (and before).

       Note that the relative supply variables are different in the analysis of the
educational wage structure and in the experience wage structure. But the relevant demand
variables are likely to be the same as they affect the profitability of human capital acquired
                                              18




at school and on the job, especially if their impact is stronger among younger than among
older workers. One demand index, as yet not mentioned, which may affect the experience
differentials and the educational differentials in wages is the business cycle. As indexes of
the latter I tried to utilize unemployment rates (Fig. 9) or capacity utilization rates.

HI. REGRESSION ANALYSIS

       Table 1 lists the variable employed in the regressions, their abbreviated symbols, as
well as their means and standard deviations. Their construction and sources are indicated
in Table IA. We now turn to the description of findings, showing the "effects" (regression
coefficients) of the hypothesized explanatory variables on (1) educational wage premia, and
on (2) experience wage differentials, over the 25-year period for which data were collected.

1.     Educational Wage Premia

       Table 2 presents the regression coefficients for the college wage premium (WRAT)
the percentage wage gain per year of college, at the "overtaking stage" (6-10 years) of work
experience. More precisely, the dependent variable is the difference in the average
logarithms of wage rates per hour of college and high school graduates, based on March
surveys of the Current Population Survey (CPS).

        Equation 1 (col. 1) features the effects of the relative educational supply variable

(RES) (fraction of population age 20-29 who are college graduates), the Jorgenson
productivity index (PG), and (RNE), the net export balance (as a fraction of GNP). The
explanatory power, measured by the adjusted R2, increases from .68 to .80 in equation 2
 (col. 2) in which two variables are added: The demographic variable (DR) measuring the
 numbers of young people (ages 20.29) as a fraction of all (ages 18-64) in all education
 groups combined, and the relative demand index (RSG), the ratio of employment in service

 producing to goods producing industries.
                                              19




       The relative supply of college graduates (RES) does indeed exert a negative effect
on the wage gains to college education, holding demand variables fixed. The demand
variables, in turn, also exert the theoretically expected effect. Thus in equation (1) the
(Jorgenson) productivity growth variable has a positive effect presumably by increasing the
demand for college graduates and so does the export deficit, by reducing wages of high
school graduates.

       In equation (1) the relative supply variable (RES), the fraction of young college
graduates among all young people, does not take into account the context of baby boom,
bust, or of a steady aggregate age distribution. In equation (2) the additional demographic
variable (DR) representing the aggregate age distribution does, indeed, have a negative
effect on the wage differential, at (6-10) years of experience, consistent with the hypothesis
that there is less substitutability between young and experienced college graduates than
between young and older high school graduates. The additional relative demand variable
in (2) is the ratio of service employment to goods employment (RSG). It shows a positive
effect on the college wage premium, reflecting a skill bias in the growing demand for
services as well as the depressing effect of international competition on enmployment and
wages of less educated workers in manufacturing. Inclusion of this variable in eq. (2),
therefore, appears to replace (eliminate) the net export variable and weaken the
productivity growth variable.

       Although the explanatory power is significantly increased in eq. (2) compared to eq.
(1), we should not reject the validity of the technological (PG) and international trade
(RNE) demand factors, especially as they may, in part, represent the background
influences affecting the employment ratio (RSG).

       In equation (3) an alternative (to PG) measure of the pace of technology affecting
the demand for human capital is provided by the (R & D), research and development
                                                    20




expenditures per worker.12 This is a sum of private and of government expenditures on R
& D. Although studies indicate that government expenditures have a lesser effect on

aggregate productivity growth than private expenditures do (BLS, 1989), the effect on
demand for higher level workers does not depend on the source of demand. Indeed, when
the two components are put separately into the regression, their coefficients are quite
close. The time pattern of the (combined) R & D variable is remarkably similar to the
time pattern of the college wage premium, when the former is lagged two or three years.1-3
Consequently, this variable dominates (eq. 3), and jointly with the relative supply (RES)
and the relative employment variable (RSG) which remain significant, yields the strongest
explanatory power for eq. 3 compared to the preceding ones (R2 = .90).

       The (aggregate) unemployment rate variable (u) was not significant in any of the
equations. That equation (3) tracks the time pattern of the profitability of college
education quite closely is shown in Fig. 10, where the broken lines are the values predicted
by the three variables in regression (3). Some of the 'saw-tooth' fluctuations in the actual
values of college wage premia (solid line) are due to measurement errors, so the predictive
power of the equation is likely to be even stronger than appears.

        Additional insights on the way variables in Table 2 affect college (relative to high
school) wage premia are provided by considering the effects of these variable on the
components of the comparison, that is on levels of wages of high school and of college
graduates, separately. This is done in Table 3 both at starting levels (1-5 years) and
advanced levels (21-25 years) of experience of the two education groups. The skill bias of
the demand indexes of technology is quite apparent in their negative effect on wage levels
of high school graduates, both young and old, and positive effects on wages of college
12 All monetary variables are in real terms. They are deflated by the Consumer Price Index.
13 According to the literature (BLS Bull, 1989), the same lag holds for the effects of R & D on productivity
    growth.
                                                 2].




graduates. Specifically, equations (1) and (2) of Table 3 show a negative effect of the
Jorgenson productivity growth index (PG) on wage levels of young and of older college
graduates, but a positive effect on wages of young college graduates, and no significant
effect on wages of older college graduates. Equation (3) and (4) shows a negative effect of
the research and development variable (R & D) on wages of young and older high school
graduates, but a positive effect on wages of college graduates at both levels of experience.

       The international trade deficit (RNE) reduced wages of young high school
graduates, but not of older ones, and had a weak, but if anything, an opposite effect on
wage levels of college graduates. Finally, the ratio of service to goods employment (RSG)
had a negative effect on wages of young, and less so of older high school graduates and a

positive effect on wages of young (less clearly), and of old college graduates (more clearly).

       As was expected, the RNE and RSG variables tend to substitute for one another, so
their effects are attenuated when both are included in the regressions (2) and (4) of Table
3.

2.     Experience Wage Prernia: Age Differentials in Wages

       The cross-sectional experience wage profile reflects (working) age differentials in
wages. In a large literature, growth of older to younger wage ratios between the 1960's and
1970's has been attributed to the entry of the baby boom cohorts into the labor market.14
With increased supplies of young workers relative to older workers, relative wages for the
young declined, steepening the wage profiles in all education groups. Relative supplies
(ratio of numbers of younger to all workers in the education group) were shown in Fig. 4.
Until the mid 70's relative growth in young cohorts characterized all education groups, but
was especially pronounced for post-secondary graduates. As a result Fig. 2 shows that (log)
wage ratios of older (those with 21-25 years of experience) to younger workers (with 1-5
14 See Welch (Ui,) and the references therein.
                                              22




years of experience) increased, more steeply for college than for high school graduates.
Subsequently, however, the relative supply of young college graduates declined almost as
steeply as it rose before, while the proportion of young high school graduates entering the
market continued to increase until the mid eighties. Fig. 2 shows a continued steepening of
the HS wage profile, accelerated in the 1980's. In contrast, the college wage profile
stabilizes in the 70's and 80's. While the difference between the two education age profiles
of wages is to some extent consistent with the differential growth of relative numbers, we
might have expected a flattening of the college profile, given the relative decline in its
young cohorts. The much steeper growth of the high school wage profile in the 80's than in
the 70's is also out of line with the milder (compared to the college profile) and not
accelerating increase in relative numbers of young high school graduates.

       Additional factors must have been at play in preventing the college profile from
flattening and in accelerating the growth of the high school profile in the 1980's. A growing
demand for skilled and experience workers and a declining demand for unskilled and
inexperienced workers would be consistent with the data in the face of the fading and
reversal of the "baby boom."

       A cursory look at differential effects of the demand variable (R & D, PG, RSG, and
RNE) on levels of wages in Table 3 shows consistently stronger effects on wages of younger
then older high school graduates. This is clear in the negative effects of high school wages
and less clearly in positive effects on college wages. The relative skill bias of demand for
labor thus contributes to the understanding of the differential changes in the slopes of wage
profiles in the high school and college groups.

       A hypothesis which interprets these findings is that the changing profitability of
human capital is reflected in age differentials in wages which are due to acquisitions of
human capital at work, as it was in educational differentials resulting from differences in
                                                   23




human capital acquired at school. Although relative supply factors differ by school and
age, the same demand factors must be at work. This hypothesis permits two alternative
specifications of the wage profile regressions in Table 4. One, shown in cot. 1 of Table 4 is
to include, in addition to the cohort variable of the education group, the demand variables
which were utilized in the educational premia regressions in Table 2. Alternatively, as
shown in cot. 2 and 3 of Table 4, the profitability variable itself (or its estimated value by
the Table 2 regressions) can be used for the same purpose.

        Wage disadvantages for younger workers and wage advantages for older cohorts
steepen the profile. Among the disadvantages of younger workers are the growth of their
cohort in the education group (variable DRE), growth of net imports for the less educated,
especially younger workers (RNE), and business cycle declines which tend to affect the
young, low-tenured workers disproportionately, here measured by the unemployment rate
(u). Relative wage advantages accruing to experienced (older) workers in both education
groups are captured by the research and development (R & D) variable. All these
variables were included in eq. (1).

        As (col. 1) in Table 4 shows, each of the variables is significant in explaining the
changing wage profile of high school graduates of the past 25 years. Jointly they explain
92% of the time variance of the wage profile. The college profile is not significantly
affected by the international trade variable, as would be expected, and the joint explanatory
power of the regression is correspondingly weaker than in the high school group. Here R2
=.78.

        The wage profiles predicted by these regressions are indicated by broken lines in
Fig. 11 and 12, for high school and college respectively.

15 The (PG) and (RSG) variables were not significant. Neither was a capacity utilization variable when
    substituted for the unemployment rate.
                                              24




       In the alternative specification (col 2 and 3 of Table 4) the educational wage
premium is substituted for the demand variables of col. 1. The reasoning, spelled out
before, was that, if human capital becomes more profitable, both educational and
experience wage premia should increase.

       The estimated value of the college wage premium, based on eq. 3 of Table 2 and
shown in the broken line of Fig. 10, has a stronger effect on the wage profiles of high school
graduates than on that of college graduates. Also, equation 2 which uses the estimated
college premium in the high school wage profile regression yields an      = .88, close to the

explanatory power of eq. (1).

       The explanatory power of the college-high school wage premium in the college wage
profile regression is much lower (R2 = .50 in col. 2). Although the profitability of
experience moves in the same direction as the profitability of education, changes in the
wage profile of the lower education group appear to be more closely tied to changes in
profitability of the higher education group, rather than conversely. This impression is
strengthened when the use of the post-graduate wage premium (relative to college) in the
college experience regression yields a stronger explanatory power (R2 = .65 compared to
.50 in col. 3) for college; while the high school educational premium (relative to drop outs)
yields only a weak effect in the high school regression, (with R2 = .75 compared to .88 in
col.3).

          Since the college premium was estimated by regression, while the high school
(relative to dropouts) and postgraduate (relative to graduate) premium are observed values
(not regression estimated), the comparisons may be misleading. Table 5 therefore shows
these comparisons in terms of observed premia: Here WRAT (A) is the premium relative
to the next higher educational group, WRAT (B) is relative to the next lower. The results
for the high school profile are confirmed: It is the rise in the college premium WRAT (A)
                                                     25




that makes experience of high school more valuable, rather than the high school premium
WRAT (B): The latter is smaller, and barely significant. At the college level, the effects (in
terms of regression coefficients) appear to be equal for WRAT(B) and WRAT (A),
though the explanatory power is greater for the latter. Finally, the slope of the high school
dropout group (8-11) shows no effects of educational premia below or above, while the
educational premium WRAT (B), (the only possible) is positive and significant for the
slope of the postgraduate group.

        In sum, a growing educational premium (best visible in the college-high school
differential) raises the slopes of all education groups, high school and above.16 The effects
are on balance, stronger when the profitability of the next higher groups changes. It is
difficult, however, to say, at this point, whether this means that on the job skills of high
school graduates rather than of college graduates substitute more for the scarcity of
numbers of college graduates.

        A somewhat better insight into this question may be gotten by looking at progress
over time rather than cross-sections. This is done for groups of young workers in Table 6.
Here the dependent variable is growth of wages over 3 successive calendar years17 of
experience for the young workers (experience 3-6 and 7-10 pooled). The regression shows
a positive effect of the college premium on progress of young high school workers, but not
on early growth of college graduates wages. This is somewhat clearer evidence that skill
training of young high school graduates responds (at least in profitability terms) to the
demand for or scarcity of college skills.

        Table 6 also indicates a negative cohort effect on wage progress as distinguished
from cross-sectional slope, in the college group. No effect is seen in the high school group.
16 With the exception of "some college."
17 Given experience level x in year t, we look at wages of (x +   1) in   year (t + 1), and so on.
                                                      26




If training effects on wages are reflected in the longitudinal findings, the results appear to
indicate that effects of changes in the age distribution (teacher-trainee ratios) rather than
of changes in opportunity costs affected changes in the profitability of training. This
suggests that the larger cohorts of college graduates in the 70's received less (or less
profitable) training than before, when their numbers were larger than in the 80's when they
became scarce. Training of high school graduates, by the same interpretation, declined or
became less profitable in the 70's not because of the cohort increase (which was mild), but
because of the abundance of college graduates (as reflected in the low college wage
premium). A reversal in the 80's results, therefore, from the newly emerging scarcity of
college graduates.

        We may infer from this interpretation that job training is likely to have become
more profitable in the 1980's compared to the 1970's, for both college and high school

graduates.'8

SUMMARY AND CONCLUDING REMARKS

        The empirical analysis resulted in several findings:

        1. The year-to-year educational wage differentials (between college and high
school) are very closely tracked by relative supplies of graduates in (roughly) their first
decade of work experience, and by changes in relative demand for more educated workers
which is indexed by research and development expenditures per worker (RDE), as well as
by relative trends in service employment (RSG). Of these, RDE accounts for most of the
explanatory power. Both Jorgenson type multifactor productivity growth (PG) indexes and
net growth of goods imports were significant as alternatives, but showed weaker

explanatory power.

18 Scattered evidence on profitability of job training (Mincer, 1989) yields no clear evidence on this inference.
                                              27




       2.   With the decline of average productivity growth and the near-cessation of
average real wage growth, the skill-biased changes in demand took the form of increases in
demand for workers with post-secondary education and decreases in demand for workers at
lower education levels.

       3. Changes in age distributions (cohort effects) account, in part, for the observed
steepening of experience profiles of wages. They do not account for the acceleration of the
high school profile or for the stabilization of the college profile between the 1970's and
1980's. An explanation is provided by additional variables reflecting the growing
profitability of human capital which extends to that acquired by experience on the job.
This is shown by the effects of the demand factors which are both skill and age biased, or
alternatively by the effects of changing profitability (educational wage differentials) which
is due to the demand changes, given the relative demographic supplies

       In the latter specification, it appears that the increased value of experience of high
school graduates is related to growing profitability of additional (college) education, but
not of its own (relative to high school dropouts). Also, the increased value of experience of
college graduates is related both to the profitability of college and of post-graduate
education.

       Viewed longitudinally, some evidence confirms the positive effect of profitability of
college on wage growth of young high school graduates, but not on the profile of college
graduates. Also, negative cohort effects are observed on wage growth of college graduates
but none on high school graduates. This limited evidence may suggest substitution between
(college) school education and work experience or training of high school graduates. It
also suggests that large cohorts reduce, rather than increase the profitability of training by
increasing, rather than reducing its costs.
                                              28




       Increased growth in college enrollments of high school graduates which started in
the 1980's may continue in the 1990's if the rates of return have not yet stabilized. We
should note that these increases do not translate into absolute numbers, as the young
cohorts declined. Growth of job training is all the more predictable, short of a protracted
recession, or of prohibitive costs due to a deteriorating quality of trainees.

       The major purpose of this study was to detect effects of changes in technology on
changes in the demand for human capital. Positive effects of the pace of technology have
been observed before in decade-long cross-sections across industrial sectors. The present
study extends the analysis to annual time series at the national, aggregate level. It explores
alternative empirical indexes of the pace of technology. Effects of changes in demand for
human capital are observed in regressions, in which the dependent variables are the
profitability of human capital acquired at school, measured by the educational wage
differential, and on human capital acquired at work, measured by the experience wage
differential. In order to observe these effects, it was necessary to include in the analysis
other factors affecting the profitability of human capital, such as relative educational
composition and age distributions, representing educational and experience dimensions of
relative supplies of human capital. As a result, this study joins a number of recent studies
which analyze the changing wage structure in recent decades.

        The implementation of empirical indexes or proxies for the changing pace of
technology appears to be successful in verifying its role in affecting the demand for human
capital, and the direction of its skill bias. These findings move us closer to an
understanding of the apparent paradox of an absence of long term decline in the
profitability of human capital despite the massive growth of educational attainment. It
remains to be seen whether the positive skill bias of technology inferred for the past 2-3
decades dominated also the preceding economic history.
                                               29




       Shorter-term (decade long?) fluctuations in the profitability of human capital, here
seen as skill differentials in wages, generate supply (enrollment) responses which, over
time, provide a corrective to changes in profitability in an equilibrating manner. The long
term tendencies toward equilibrium are apparently trendless. I do not analyze the supply
response. Rather, it is its feedback effect through a long pipeline - that shows up in effects
on profitability in this study.

       The supply responses, or change in enrollment, are sensitive both to returns and
costs of educational investments. The latter include opportunity costs as well as net direct
costs. Direct costs are a balance of tuition and fees and of student earnings, loan subsidies,
and grants. Skill (education) differentials in wages analyzed here (and elsewhere) measure
returns net of opportunity costs only. They, therefore, overstate the growth of profitability,
if net direct costs increase. It is very likely that the decline of profitability of human capital
in the 70's, and even more so its rebound in the 80's are somewhat overstated. The
overstatement is not major, as private net direct costs are much smaller than foregone
earnings at the post-secondary levels.

        Fluctuations in the indexes of technology rule out assumptions of a steady pace of
 demand for human capital. The reality behind the turn around in the "pace of technology"
 indexes between the 1970's and 1980's may be attributed to a growing momentum in
 information technologies. Indeed, supply responses in particular fields currently visible at
 the post-graduate level, support this view: The U.S. Department of Education (OERI,
 1990) reports that the number of MA's conferred in mathematics, computer science and
 engineering grew 70% in the 1980's, while stagnant in other fields (with the exception of
 MBA's who grew 25%). Among doctoral degrees which grew 7% since 1980, engineering
 degrees which declined in the 1970's, grew 67% in the 1980's. Similarly, the number of
 doctorates in the natural sciences, which declines sharply in the 1970's, has outpaced the
 growth of total doctorates since the early 1980's.
                                             30




       A great deal of apprehension has been generated by the perception of a
deteriorating quality of high school and lower levels of education in the past two decades.
Evidence of low achievement levels is found in SAT scores, and more compellingly in
international comparisons according to which, U.S. students (high school and below) are in
bottom ranks among industrialized countries. Deterioration over time is more difficult to
document. Some weak evidence consists of declines in SAT scores, which levelled off
recently and increases in GED, high school equivalence certificates, relative to high school
graduation. If quality deterioration has not (yet?) affected post-secondary education, it
may have contributed to the widened educational wage differential. If so, this is another
reason for a likely overstatement of the recent growth in profitability of college education.
                                            References



Bartel, A. and F. Lichtenberg, "The Comparative Advantage of Educated Workers in Implementing
        New Technology,' The Review of Economics and Statistics, February 1987.
Blackburn, M. L, D. B. Bloom, and R. B. Freeman, 'The Declining Economic Position of Less Skilled
      American Men," in A Future of Lousy Jobs?, (3. Burtless, editor, The Brookings Institution,
       1990.
Becker, G. S., Human Capital, 2nd ed., Chicago University Press, 1975.
Berger, M. C., "The Effect of Cohort Size on Earnings Growth," Journal of Political Economy, June
       1985.
U.S.D.O.L, Bureau of Labor Statistics, The Impact of Research and Development on Productivity
      Growth, Bulletin 2331, September 1989.
Cyert, R. M. and D. C. Mowery, Technology and Employment, National Academy Press, Washington,

 Freeman, R. B., The Overeducated American, Academic Press, 1976.

 __________ 'Demand for Education,' (1.6 in Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 1, 0.
       Ashenfelter and R. Layard, eds., North-Holland, 1986.
 Gill, I., "Technological Change, Education, and Obsolescence of Human Capital,' Ph.D. Thesis,
          University of Chicago, 1989.
 Griliches, Z., 'Capital-Skill Complementarity,' The Review of Economics and Statistics, November
        1969.
 Harnermesh, D. and I. Grant, 'Econometric Studies of Labor - Labor Substitution and Their
       Implications for Policy,' Journal of Human Resources, Summer 1979.
 Jorgenson, D., F. Gollop, and B. Fraumeni, Productivity and U.S. Economic Growth, Harvard
        University Press, 1987. Updated series, 1990.
 Kosters, M. 'The Wage Structure,' paper presented at American Enterprise Institute Conference,
       September 1989.
  Mincer, J., Schooling. Experience and Earnings, Columbia University Press, 1974.
  Mincer, J.,"Human Capital Responses to Technological Change,' NBER Working Paper, December

  Mincer, J., 'Job Training, Costs, Returns, and Wage Profiles.' NCEE Paper, October 1989.
  Mincer, J., and Higuchi, Y., 'Wage Structures and Labor Turnover in the U.S. and in Japan,' Journal
        of the Japanese and International Economics, June 1988.
  Murphy, K., and F. Welch, 'Wage Premiums for College Graduates,' Educational Researcher, May
Psacharopoulos, G., "Returns to Education: An International Update," Journal of Human Resources,
      Fall 1985.
U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement, Conditions of
      Education, NCES Report 681, 1990.
Welch, F., "Effects of Cohort Size on Earnings," Journal of Political Economy, October 1979.
                                    TABLE 1

                             DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

VARIAELE   LABEL                                            MEAN        STANDARD
                                                                        DEVIATION
WRAT       RATIO OF C TO US WAGES                       0.06999860      0.01798548
DIF51H     RATIO OF WAGES OF OLDER TO YOUNG FOR H       0.54800320      0.09016164
DIF51C     RATIO OF WAGES OF OLDER TO YOUNG FOR C       0.59032320      0.08030222
LNWYH      LOG WAGES OF YOUNG US GRADUATES              2.01743201      0.11487096
LNVOH      LOG WAGES OF OLDER US GRADUATES              2.49255201      0.06197540
LNVYC      LOG WAGES OF YOUNG C GRADUATES               2.31450881      0.06279818
LNWOC      LOG WAGES OF OLDER C GRADUATES               2.87666801      0.07994201
V3GH       3—YEAR WAGE GROWTH, YOUNG US                 0.03635897      0.02312090
W3Gc       3—YEAR WAGE GROWTH, YOUNG C                  0.04634133      0.02717765
RESH       RATIO OF YNG US GRADS TO TOT YNG POP        —0.91222274      0.03952945
RESC       RATIO OF YNG C GRADS TO TOT INC POP         —2.21722164      0.16753791
DREH       RATIO OF YNG HS GRADS TO TOT US GRADS       -1.13805892      0.07222434
DREC       RATIO OF YNG C GRADS TO TOT C GRADS         -1.09088485      0.15067780
DR         RATIO OF YOUNG TO TOTAL POPULATION          -1.18834869      0.10927553
PG         TOTAL FACTOR PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH             0.00590400      0.00913302
ROE        EXPENDITURES ON R&D PER EMPLOYEE           771.95500867     70.29096926
RNE        RATIO OF NET EXPORTS TO GNP                 —0.75736937      1.33917798
RSG        RATIO * EMP IN SERV. TO GDS. INDUSTRIES      2.30888321      0.43775142
U          UNEMPLOYMENT RATE                            5.07600000      1.73259920




             NOTE. ALL RATIOS EXPRESSED AS DIFFERENCES IN LOGARITHMS
                            TABLE 2
              Educational Waae Differentials
                     (College —   High School)


                                  Coefficients
Variables     (1.1                 (2)           (3)



Intercept     -.09                 —.59          -.41
              (1.4)                (3.4)         (4.6)

RESY_2        -.065
              (2.2)
R.EST_3                            —.086         —.080
                                   (1.9)         (3.0)
DR...2
                                   -.20
                                   (4.6)
PG            1.12
              (2.2)                (1.00)
R & D..2                                         .00024
                                                 (12.3)
RNE           -.011
               (4.5)
RSG                                .088          .044
                                   (4.1          (3.5)


R2             .69                 .80           .91

t — values in parentheses. Excluded variables not significant.
Subscripts —2 and -3 denote a 2—year and 3-year lag.
                                                      TABLE   3

                                          Wage Level Regressions

                         xperienc         1—5 years                            xerience 21—25 years
High School    (1)         (2                             (4'l        (1'        (2       (3
Intercept      1.70        2.40             1.57          2.23        2.35       2.47     2.36        2.44
               (6.0)       (8.3)            (6.8)         (7.3)       (13.9)     (10.8)   (15.2)      (9.3)
               .48         •   66           —.21          .20         .34        .37      .075        .39
DRE_2
               (1.8)       (3.1)            (.5)          (.6)        (2.1)      (2.2)    (.3)        (1.3)
RES—2          —1.39       —1.41            —.95          —1.16       —.85       —.86     —.71        —1.20
R    &                                      —.001         —.0007                          —.0005      —.0005
         D_2
                                            (2.8)         (2.4)                           (2.1)       (1.8)
RNE            •   054                      •   024                   n.s.                —.019
               (4.7)                        (1.8)                                         (2.2)
PG             —2.75       —3.30                                      —2 .28     —2. 32

               (1.4)       (2.1)                                      (1.8)      (1.9)
RSG                        —.183                          —.140                  n. S.    —.085
                           (3.      7•)                   (2.     8                       t2_

R2             .83         .90              .87           .91         .59        .58      .61         .86
                                              TABLE    3       (continued)

College
                         2.51         3.00    2.04              2.32          2.21     1.06        2. 18      1.61
Intercept
                          (8.8)       (8.0)   (12.2)             (8.4)        (6.4)    (1.6)       (9.1)      (4.4)
                          .049        —.12    .20                .11          .60      .86         .74        .86
DRE_2
                          (.3)        (.6)    (1.9)              (.8)         (3.8)    (4.4)       (5.3)      (5.7)
RES—2                     .037        .25     —.036              .072         —.58     —.98        —.46       —.64
                          (.2)        (1.1)   (.3)               (.5)         (2.8)    (3.5)       (2.8)      (3.4)
                                              .0008              .0007                             •   0007    0007
R    &   D_2
                                              (6.7)              (5.5)                             (2.8)      (3.1)
RNE                      n.s                  .021               .014         —.051    n.s.        —.034      —.021
                                              (1.8)              (1.0)        (3.1)                (2.3)      (1.3)
PG                       4   .   14   2.96                                   n. S.     n. S.

                          (2.6)       (1.8)
RSG                                   .126    n. S.                                    2.85                   .092

                                      (1.8)                                            (2.0)                  (1.8)

R2                        .45         .52     .79                .80          .34      .42         .55         59


                                                           -   values                            not significant
Note:          Excluded variables not significant; t                     in parenthese; n.s. =
                                                         TABLE   4

                                      Cross-section Experience Profiles


                                  Hiah School                            College

Variables                 (1)       (2)
                                  — 1.77      __________         (1)        (2)      (3)
Intercept                 .65                   1.51             .60        1.00     .72
                          (2.8)      (15.1)      (6.5)           (4.6)      (10.3)   (7.8)

DRE_2                     .48        1.21        .90             .44        .48
                          (2.3)      (11.3)      (5.1)           (4.7)      (3.5)    (2.4)

RNE                       —.033                                  —.019
                          (3.4)                                  (2.6)

R    &   D_2              .0004                                  .0005
                          (3.5)                                  (2.1)
u                         .016                                   .015
                          (3.1)                                  (2.6)
     A
WRAT                                 2.3                                    1.85
                                     (5.3)                                  (1.7)
WRAT (A)                                                                             1.23
                                                                                     (3.7)

WRAT      (B)                                   .98
________________ __________ __________           (1.6)     __________ __________ __________   -

R2                        .92        .88        .71              .78        .41      .65



WRAT:          College-High School Wage Differential, estimated by eq. 3 in Table            2.
WRAT (A):          Wage Differential between Post-graduates and College
WRAT (B):          Wage Differential between High School Graduates and Dropouts.
                                            Table 5
                              Cross—section ExDerience Profiles
                           and Observed Educational Profitabilities
Education         8—11                12                 16                    17+
Intercept         .93       1.13      1.89     1.51      .72          .99            .71
                  (4.6)     (8.6)     (12.4)   (6.5)     (7.8)        (12.0)         (8.0)

DRE_2             .28       .35      1.25      .90        18          .46            •   155
                  (2.5)     (4.3)     (8.7)    (5.1)     (2.4)        (4.6)          (2.6)
WRAT   (A)        .72                1.71                1.23
                  (.9)                (3.0)              (3.7)
WRAT (B)                   —.82                .98                    1.22           .70
                                               (1   -                 (2 .0)         (2.   3')


                  .44      .46       .78       .71       .65          .51            .35

WRAT(A): Wage differential between education group and next above
WRAT(B): Wage differential between education group and next below
Neither was significant in the 13-15 years of education group.
            Table 6

Wage Growth of Young Workers
Over 3 years of Calendar Time




Intercept      —.054            —.060
               (.9)             (3.4)

DRE....2       —.028            —.144
                (.4)            (5.5)

WRAT (A)       .77
                (2.9)

WRAT (B)                        —.85
                                (3.4)

                .49             • 64
*                                                                       *
*                              TABLE 1A                                 *
*                    CONSTRUCTION OF VARIABLES AND SOURCES              *
*                                                                       *
*************************************************************************
*                                                                       *
*tPT                                                                    *
*                                                                       *
* CONSTRUCTION:                                                        *
* THE DIFFERENCE OF THE MEANS OF LOG HOURLY WAGES FOR THE              *
* COLLEGE AND HIGH SCHOOL EDUCATION GROUPS AVERAGED AT 6—10            *
* YEARS OF EXPERIENCE.                                                 *
*                                                                      *
* SOURCE:                                                              *
* CPS, MARCH ISSUES, ANNUAL 1963 TO 1987. AVERAGES OF LOGARITHMIC      *
* WAGES FOR EACH EXPERIENCE YEAR AND EDUCATION GROUP.                  *
*************************************************************************
*                                                                       *
* DIF51H & DIF51C                                                       *
*                                                                       *
* CONSTRUCTION:                                                        *
* FOR EACH EDUCATION GROUP WE TAKE THE MEANS OF LOG WAGES FOR TWO       *
* EXPERIENCE LEVELS - FOR THOSE WITH 1 TO 5, AND 21 TO 25 YEARS         *
* OF EXPERIENCE. DIF51H IS THE DIFFERENCE IN THESE TWO MEANS FOR        *
* THOSE WITH HIGH SCHOOL LEVEL OF EDUCATION (12 YEARS OF SCHOOLING),    *
* AND DIFS1C IS THE SAME FOR THOSE WITH A COLLEGE LEVEL OF EDUCATION    *
* (16 YEARS OF SCHOOLING).                                              *
*                                                                       *
* SOURCE:                                                               *
* CPS, MARCH ISSUES, ANNUAL 1963 TO 1987. AVERAGES OF LOGARITHMIC       *
* WAGES FOR EACH EXPERIENCE YEAR AND EDUCATION GROUP.                   *
*************************************************************************
*                                                                       *
* LNWYH, LNVOH, LNIJYC, & LNWOC                                         *
*                                                                       *
* CONSTRUCTION:                                                         *
* FOR EACH EDUCATION GROUP WE TAKE THE MEANS FOR TWO                    *
* EXPERIENCE LEVELS — FOR THOSE WITH 1 TO 5, AND 21 TO 25 YEARS         *
* OF EXPERIENCE. THEN WE DEFLATE THESE MEANS OF LOG WAGES BY            *
* THE CPI.                                                              *
*                                                                       *
* SOURCE:                                                               *
* CPS, MARCH ISSUES, ANNUAL 1963 TO 1987. AVERAGES OF LOGARITHMIC       *
* WAGES FOR EACH EXPERIENCE YEAR AND EDUCATION GROUP.                   *
*************************************************************************
*                                                                       *
* W3GH & W3GC                                                           *
*                                                                       *
* CONSTRUCTION:                                                         *
* DIFFERENCE BETWEEN 3 YEARS AHEAD LOG WAGES AND CURRENT LOG WAGES,     *
* FOR WORKERS WITH 3 TO 10 YEARS OF EXPERIENCE.                         *
*                                                                       *
* SOURCE:                                                               *
* CPS, MARCH ISSUES, ANNUAL 1963 TO 1987. AVERAGES OF LOGARITHMIC       *
* WAGES FflR EACH EXPERIENCE YEAR AND EDUCATION GROUP.                   *

*                                                                        *
* RESH, RESC, DREH, DREC, & DR                                           *
*                                                                        *
* CONSTRUCTION:                                                          *
* RESH=LOG(lt OF NONINSTITUTIONAL POPULATION IN THE AGE GROUP OF 20—29   *
* YEARS WITH HIGH SCHOOL DIPLOMA (12 YEARS OF SCHOOLING)!                *
* TOTAL * OF NONINSTITUTIONAL POPULATION IN THE AGE GROUP OF 20—29).     *
*                                                                        *
* RESCLOG[* OF NONINSTITUTIONAL POPULATION IN THE AGE GROUP OF 20—29     *
* YEARS WITH COLLEGE DEGREE (16 YEARS OF SCHOOLING)!                     *
* TOTAL * OF NONINSTITUTIONAL POPULATION IN THE AGE GROUP OF 20—29).     *
*                                                                        *
* DREH=LOG(* OF NONINSTITUTIONAL POPULATION IN THE AGE GROUP OF 20-29    *
* YEARS WITH HIGH SCHOOL DIPLOMA (12 YEARS OF SCHOOLING)!                *
* TOTAL # OF NONINSTITUTIONAL POPULATION (AGE GROUP OF 18—64) WITH       *
* HIGH SCHOOL DIPLOMA (12 YEARS OF SCHOOLING)).                          *
*                                                                        *
* DREC=LOG(# OF NONINSTITUTIONAL POPULATION IN THE AGE GROUP OF 20-29    *
* YEARS WITH COLLEGE DEGREE (16 YEARS OF SCHOOLING)!                     *
* TOTAL 4t OF NONINSTITUTIONAL POPULATION (AGE GROUP OF 18-64) WITH      *
* COLLEGE DEGREE (16 YEARS OF SCHOOLING)).                               *
*                                                                        *
* DR=LOG(* OF NONINSTIT(JTIONAL POPULATION IN THE AGE GROUP OF 20—29     *
* YEARS/TOTAL * OF NONINSTITUTIONAL POPULATION (AGE GROUP OF 18-64)).    *
*                                                                        *
* SOURCE:                                                                *
* U.S. BUREAU OF THE CENSUS. CURRENT POPULATION REPORT. P-2O             *
* SERIES. EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT IN THE UNITED STATES. 1964-1988.        *
*                                                                        *
*PG                                                                      *
*                                                                        *
* SOURCE:                                                                *
* JORGENSON 0., GALLOP F., AND FRAUMENI B., PRODUCTIVITY AND U.S.        *
* ECONOMIC GROWTH, HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS, 1987. UPDATED SERIES,       *
* 1990.                                                                  *
*************************************************************************
*                                                                       *
*RDE                                                                    *
*                                                                       *
* CONSTRUCTION:                                                          *
* RDE=TOTAL DOLLAR EXPENDITURE ON RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT DIVIDED       *
* BY THE TOTAL EMPLOYED IN THE U.S. LABOR FORCE.                         *
*                                                                        *
* SOURCES:                                                               *
* (1) TOTAL EMPLOYED IN U.S. LABOR FORCE — ECONOMIC REPORT               *
* OF THE PRESIDENT, FEBRUARY 1990. TABLE C—33, PAGE 332.                 *
* (2) R&D EXPENDITURE IN PRIVATE SECTOR - THE IMPACT OF RESEARCH         *
* AND DEVELOPMENT ON PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH. U.S. DEPARTMENT OF LABOR.      *
* BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS. SEPTEMBER 1989. BULLETIN 2331.             *
* TABLE-b.   PAGE 26.                                                    *
* (3) R&D EXPENDITURE IN GOVERNMENT SECTOR - BUDGET AUTHORITY DATA       *
* FROM THE NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION (1985, 1986B). PAGE 35 IN         *
* TECHNOLOGY AND EMPLOYMENT -- INNOVATION AND GROJTH IN THE U.S.          *
* ECONOMY.                                                                *
*************************************************************************
*                                                                       *
*E
*
                                                                        *
                                                                        *
* CONSTRUCTION:                                                           *
* THE RATIO OF NET EXPORTS IN DOLLARS TO GNP IN DOLLARS                   *
* MULTIPLIED BY 100, GENERATING THE PERCENT FIGURE OF NET EXPORTS TO      *
*GNP.                                                                     *
*                                                                         *
* SOURCE:                                                               *
* ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT FEBRUARY 1990. NET EXPORTS—          *
* TABLE C—102, PAGE 410, COLUMN 3. GNP— TABLE C-b, PAGE 306, COLUMN 1. *
*************************************************************************
*                                                                       *
*RSG                                                                    *
*                                                                       *
* CONSTRUCTION:                                                           *
* RATIO OF THE NUMBER EMPLOYEES IN GOODS-PRODUCING                        *
* INDUSTRIES TO THE NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES IN SERVICE—PRODUCING INDIJSTRIES.*
*                                                                         *
* SOURCE:                                                                 *
* ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT FEBRUARY 1990. TOTAL                   *
* NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES IN GOODS-PRODUCING INDUSTRIES— TABLE C—43,          *
* PAGE 342, COLUMN 2. NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES IN SERVICE—PRODUCING            *
* INDUSTRIES— TABLE C-43, PAGE 343, COLUMN 1.                             *

*                                                                         *
*U                                                                        *
*                                                                         *
* SOURCE:                                                                 *
* THE AGGREGATE !JNEMPLOMENT RATE REPORTED IN THE ECONOMIC REPORT         *
* OF THE PRESIDENT FEBRUARY 1990. TABLE C-4O, PAGE 339, COLUMN 3.         *
*******************************************************************;r*****
                                         FIG. 1   EDUCATIONAL WAGE DInERENTIAIS
                                                   (COLLEGE—HIGH SCHOOL)


0. 11-i

                                                                                                                      /

                                A                                                                                 /
       I


0.091                       /       \\
                       If                                                                                    I"



0.081
                                                                                                         /
                                                                                                     '
                                                                 /
:                                                                                               Ii

                                                                                            /
                                                                                        /
                                                                                       _1

0.04-
                                                                              1'


0.03   -j                                                                          V                                      r
            1


       63 64    6   66 67 68 69            •70    71   12
                                                                          1T TTT1i
                                                            73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81      82 83 84 85               86
                                                                                                                              r
                                                                                                                              87

                                                                 YEAR
                                 FIG.2 EXPERIENCE WAGE DIFFERENTIALS
                                     (COLLEGE C, AND HIGH SCHOOL H)


    O   .74 -
    0.72 -4
    0 . 70
                                                                                                                  /
                                                                                                                      /
    0 . 68
    0 . 66 -4                                                                                                $'           \   /' \
                                                                            //                          /,
    0.64-i                                                            'IC
                                                                                                                                     'C
    0
   .62 -i                              I
0 O.6O-
                                                                                       "           /1
I
F 0.58-i                              /
5
i 0.56-i
                                                                                              ,/   ,
    0.54                                       7'..                                    ).1'
             1                             /          N
                                           /                     'I                /
    0.52         M                                                          \
    0.50-                                                                        /
                                      //                                     \}4



    0.46                         //
    0.441
    0 . 42

             63 64 65 66 67 65 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87
                                                          YEAR
                                          FIG.3 RElATIVE SUPPLY OF GRADUATES
                                                   IN POPULATION, AGE 20—29



                                                                                                               H

    -0.9*          -'4 -'4                             H--------—4--H
                                                                                        -         -- -+-
    i1
    —1.2 -




    —1.6      -
E   —1.7,
    —1.8


    _2.0l
    —2.   1
              -j
                                                   /                                '
                                              -z
    —2.3      -
    —2.4                           e-
                       _.c---G--
    —2.5
    —2.6
                                              71 72 73 74 75      76   77   78 79   80 81   62   83 84   85 86 87
              64    65 66    67    68 69 70
                                                               YEAR
                                                        FIG.4 RElATIVE COHORT SIZES


    —O.85
    —0.8-'
                                                                      //
                                                                           / \
    —


    —o.gi4                                               I/
                                                              •
    —0.93-i                                              /
                                                                  \
    —0.97-
    —0.99-i
    -1.01-
    —1 .   03'                                     /
    —1.05-                                  ;••/
                                        C
o —1.07-4                                                                                                             N
A                                                                                H-
                                                                                             '•,                               --R
E   -1.11
                                                                                                                          -
                                                                                                       1    -.                       H
    —i.15-                      /                                                                  \ ,
    —1.i7-                      /
    -1.19                   /
    -1.21                               /
    —1.23                           /                                                                                                'C
    —1.254
                         /'\ \ /
    -1.27
    —1.29         C-
    —1.311
    —1.33-p                                                                                                               rY
                                                                                                                          85   86 87
                 r'i
             54 65   66 67 68 69 70                    71 72 73 74 75 76 77           78 79 80     81      82 83 84

                                                                       YEAR
                                  FIG.5 TOTAL FACTOR PRODUCTIVITYGROWTH




    o.017j
    0.016
    0.015-i
    0.014-j
    0.013-4
    0.012-i
    o.oii.1
    o.o1o
    ooo4
     0.008-
     0.007
p    o.oo6
G
     0.005-1
     0.004-h
     0.003-1
     0.002-
     o.ooiH
     o.ooo-

    —0.002-i                                                                          "
    —0.003       j
    0.004i
    —0.005-"
    -0.0061                                                    -                 —-
    —0   . 007                                                                                   r
                     1                                                     r1
                          rriT
                 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79       8081
                                                                                      rrr rr
                                                                                  82 83 84 85 86 87

                                                     YEAR
                             FIG.6 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
                                EXPENDITURES PER WORKER
                                     (1982 DOLLARS)

900 -




850 -i
                 /                                                                   I,
             /
     I                                                                           /
                        \'
800                                                                          /
         /
                                                                         /
750
                                                                    //
700-1
                                                               //
                                                              /'



650 -j                                                                   rrir TT
         rr r
     63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87
                                           YEAR
                                               FIG.7 BALANCE OF MERCHANDISETRADE
                                                              (RATIO TO GNP)


     1.5


    o   5
            1
                                                                        7
    0.01
                                                                   I
A                                                                               N
t. —1.0
E
                                                                                         /


    —i.5j



    -2.5
                                                                                                                  \


    —3.0


                      65   66   67   68   69   70   71   72   73   74       75 76 77   78    79 80 81   62   83   84   85   86   87
            63   64
                                                                        YEAR
                              FIG.8 RATIO OF SERVICE TO GOODS EMPLOYMENT


    3.2
    3.1-                                                                                  //
    3.O
                                                                                   ,/
                                                                               I
    2.7-                                                                   /
    2.6-i
    2.5                                                            •1
S
G   2.4-
    2.3-'                                         /
           I
    2.2

    2.o                          /   /
    1.81
                      rm    imY 1                                                  r- --i---rn   -
                                                                           82 83 84 85 86 87
           11
           63          67
                64 65 66    68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 7B 79 80 81
                                                      YEAR
                                FIG.g AGGREGATE UNEMPLOYMENTRATES




                                                                                                /
                                                                                            /
1                                                                                           /
                                                         /                             /1
                                                         I                         I
                                                                    S


                                                     /
                                                     I                         /
                                                                              /
      'S                                         I
                                  1

4                               ,/'
                               I
                           /


2-i                                                             r
  1        r                                                        i   r'1
  63 64 65 66   67   68   69 70       71   72 73 74 75          .6 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87
                                                         YEAR
                                                                FIG.1O ACTUAL AND PREDICTED
                                                                     COLLEGE WAGE PREMIA


    0.114
                                                                                                                                                     /   N/
    0.10                                                                                                                                             I   ,''

    0.   o   J             / \           _—                                                                                                     //
                       /       —
                                                                                                                                              1/
                           —
                       —
             I
                                         -                                                                                                   i/Il,

    0.08-4..                                  N._\
                                                                                                                                     I
                                                     S..
                                                       N                                                                         I       /
w                                                                                                                            t I'll
    0.07 -                                                                                                                  / \/ /
    0.06
                                                                                          -.,--                      111/
                                                                                    "NV                              I"
    0.05


    0.04                                                                                          \    /
                                                                                                  V

    0.03           -   --                _____
                   i                           r
             66   67           68   69   70   71           72   73   74   75   76    77     78    79       80   81     82   83—8fl 85                86    87
                                                      r'rri                     YEAR
                                                    FIG. 11 ACTUAL AND PREDICTED
                                                       EXPERIENCE WAGE RATIOS
                                                            (HIGH SCHOOL)


    o   .74 -
    O.72-
                                                                                                                            '?-'   /         \
    O.70                                                                                                               /1'
    0.68
                                                                                                                      'I
                                                                                                                     1 .'
                                                                                                                     I,
    0.66
    O.64
    0   . 62

0 0•60J                                                                                                  I/Il
                                                                                                        I/I'
F   0.581
5
                                                                                                    ii  ,
    0.56                                                                                           //
                                                                                                   I,
                                                     tN                  ,._                      1/
    0 . 54                                                                     -
    O.52                                                       _•\_ 7
                                                                     /              S

                                                                                        •5   //
                                                  / //
    0.50-                                 •/--•___..--_/                                 v



                I,   •'"
    0.42       -j
                                     70   71   72   73    74   75   76   77    78        79       80    81      82   83      84    85   86       87
               66    67    68   69
                                                                     YEAR
                                                     FIG.12 ACTUAL AND PREDICTED
                                                          EXPERIENCE WAGE RATIOS
                                                                 (cOLLEGE)


    o . 69     -
    o . 68     -
    o . 67
    0.66-
    o   . 65
               -
    0.64 -4
    0   . 63                                                                                                                \
    0.62-1
    0.61 -
    0.60 -
    O.59-
0 0.5B-
    0.57-
    0.56i
1   0.55-i
    0.54
    o . 53 -i
    0.52
    0.51 -
    0.50
    0.49
    0.48
    0.47
    0.46
    0.45
                   r                                  rii1                i    r    1    Trrr                               1
               66      67   68   69   70   71   72   73    74   75   76   77   78   79   80   8i   82   83   84   85   86   87

                                                                      YEAR
                                                                                                             rri
