                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




                    GENERATIONAL ACCOUNTS -
         A MEANINGFUL ALTERNATIVE TO DEFICIT ACCOUNTING




                        Alan J. Auerbach

                       Jagadeesh Gokhale
                      Laurence J. Kotlikoff




                     Working Paper No. 3589




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          January 1991




We thank Jinyong Cai, Bash Hardeo, Ritu Nayyar, and Sharon
Parrott for excellent research assistance and Albert Ando, David
Bradford, Bill Gavin, and Mark Snidennan for very helpful
comments. We are particularly grateful to Jane Gravelle for
providing a variety of critical data and for numerous lengthy and
extremely useful discussions. We thank The National Institute of
Aging and The National. Bureau of Economic Research for research
support. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
Growth. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3589
                                        January 1991
                    GENERATIONAL ACCOUNTS -
         A MEANINGFUL ALTERNATIVE TO DEFICIT ACCOUNTING
                             ABSTRACT

     This paper presents a set of generational accounts (GAS)
that can be used to assess the fiscal burden current generations
are placing on future generations. The GAs indicate the net
present value amount that current and future generations are
projected to pay to the government now and in the future.
     The generational accounting system represents an alternative
to using the federal budget deficit to gauge intergenerational
policy. From a theoretical perspective, the measured deficit
need bear no relationship to the underlying intergenerational
stance of fiscal policy.
     Within the range of reasonable growth and interest rate
assumptions the difference between age zero and future
generations in GAs ranges from 17 to 24 percent. This means that
if the fiscal burden on current generations is not increased
relative to that projected from current policy (ignoring the just
enacted federal budget deal) and if future generations are
treated equally (except for an adjustment for growth) the fiscal
burden facing all future generations over their lifetimes will be
17 to 24 percent larger than that facing new borns in 1989. The
just enacted budget will, if it sticks, significantly reduce the
fiscal burden on future generations.

Alan J. Auerbach                        Jagadeesh Gokhale
Department of Economics                 Federal Reserve Bank
160 McNeil Building                      of Cleveland
University of Pennsylvania              Cleveland, OH 44114
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104

Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
                                     —1—


1. Introduction

    The federal deficit is widely viewed as the United States' number one

economic problem. Yet there is no consensus as to how to measure the deficit.

Some want to exclude the current social security surplus, others want to

include the full value of the S&L bail out, and others are concerned about

adjustments for unfunded government retirement liabilities, inflation, growth,

and government acquisition and sale of assets. The debate has not been

restricted to politicians. Economists have played a major role in lobbying

for their favorite definitions of the deficit (e.g., Feldstein, 1974 and

Eisner and Pieper, 1984).

     Of course, a lot is at stake in how one measures the deficit. Given

current policy, leaving out social security surpluses means whopping deficits

through the l990s, while adjusting for inflation and growth almost turns the

officially defined deficit into a surplus. Since the underlying credo of

fiscal policy is to cut spending or raise taxes to make "the" deficit zero,

the attention given to the deficit's definition is not surprising.

     The goal of setting the deficit to zero seems quite strange in light of

our uncertainty about how the deficit should be measured. If we are not sure

what the deficit is, how can we be sure it should be zero? Rather than

continue debating the deficit's measurement, perhaps we should first ask what

concept the deficit is supposed to measure and then determine a measure

consistent with that concept.

     The conceptual issue associated with the word "deficit" is the

intergenerational distribution of welfare. Specifically, how much are

different generations paying to finance government consumption and to

subsidize each other? Unfortunately, from the perspective of economic theory,

the deficit is an arbitrary accounting construct whose value has no necessary
                                     —2—


relation to the question of generational burdens. As demonstrated by

Kotlikoff (1988,1986, 1989) and Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987). from a

theoretical perspective the government can run any fiscal policy it chooses

while simultaneously reporting any size deficit or surplus. It can do so

simply through the choice of how it labels its receipts and payments. For

example, the government can (and does) label workers' social security

contributions "taxes" and retirees' social security benefits "transfers."

Suppose, instead, the government labeled workers' contributions "loans' to the

government and retirees' benefits "return of principal and interest" on these

"loans" plus an additional "old age tax" equal to the difference between

benefits and the "return of principal plus interest" on the "loans." In this

case the reported deficit would be entirely different not only with respect to

its level, but also with respect to its changes over tinie.1 This is not an

isolated example; every dollar the government takes in or pays out is labeled

in a manner that is economically arbitrary.

     If the deficit has no intrinsic relation to generational policy, what

measure does? The answer according to economic theory is what we term

generational accounts. These are accounts — one for each generation —   that
tally up, in present value, the amount of receipts less payments the

government can expect to collect from each generation over its remaining

lifespan. These generational accounts are comprehensive in that they consider

all receipts and payments collected from or paid to all federal, state, and

local governments. In contrast to the deficit, generational accounts are

invariant to changes in accounting labels. This may be seen, for example, by

considering the alternative labelling of social security just discussed. For

each generation the present value of its social security "tax" contributions
                                      —3—


less its receipts of "transfers" consisting of social security benefits is

identically equal to the present value of its "old age tax."

     The generational accounts are discussed in the context of the

government's intertemporal budget constraint1 which states that the

government's current net wealth plus the present value of the government's net

receipts from all current and future generations (the generational accounts)

must be sufficient to pay for the present value of the government's current

and future consumption. By comparing what the government is projected to take

from current generations with the difference between its projected consumpticn

expenditures and its current net wealth, one can estimate the airount that

future generations will need to pay. Hence, the generational account approach

indicates directly the burden on future generations imposed by increases in

expenditures on existing generations, including existing elderly generations.

This "zero sum" feature of the government's intertemporal budget constraint

(some generation has to pay for any benefit to another generation) imposes a

useful discipline on fiscal analysis. If the government were to adopt the

accounting framework developed in this study, it would be required to specify

the costs to be borne by future generations for programs that help existing

generations, and vice versa.

     The generational accounts can also be used to assess the effects on

national saving of programs to redistribute more or less to current

generations. For example, a decision to lower Medicare benefits means an

increase in the expected present value of net payments to the government by

the existing elderly. The change in the present value accounts of each

elderly generation due to this pcliz represens fe change in their lifetime

resources. Using recent generation—specific estimates of the propensity to

consume out of lifetime resources developed by Abel, Bernheim, and Kotlikoff
                                     —4—


(1991), one can consider the effect on national consumption and national

saving of such policy changes.

     The primary sources of data used in this study are the Bureau of the

Census' Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), the Social Security

Administration's population projections, the Bureau of Labor Statistics

Consumer Expenditure Surveys (from 1980 onward), and the National Income and

Products Accounts reported in the July 1990 Survey of Current Business.

     The findings of this paper suggest a larger fiscal burden — 17 to 24

percent larger — on future generations than the burden to be imposed on 1989

newborns under current policy (ignoring the recently enacted federal budget

deal). These figures are adjusted for growth; i.e., the increase is 17 to 24

percent above the increase in fiscal burden that would accompany trend growth.

The assessment that future generations face 17 to 24 percent higher net taxes

over the course of their lifetimes suggests a significant generational

problem. The recently enacted federal budget deal will, if it is not

subverted, substantially reduce, if not eliminate the additional burden that

would otherwise be imposed on future generations.

     The paper continues in Section II with a more precise description both of

generational accounts and their relationship to the government's intertemporal

budget constraint. Section III describes how one can use the generational

accounts to assess the generational stance of fiscal policy. Section IV

considers the relationship of each generation's account to its own lifetime

budget constraint. Section V provides a detailed description of the data

sources and methodology used in calculating the generational accounts.

Section VI presents our findings, including our policy simulations. Our

findings should be viewed as preliminary because there are a number of aspects

of our calculations that can be improved with the additional data that we are
                                        —s-


in    the process of procuring. We simulate a) the President's proposed capital

gains tax cut, b) eliminating the 1983 social security benefit Cuts scheduled

to go into affect around the turn of this Century, c) growth in Medicare

spending in excess of the economy—wide growth rate, d) the impact of the $500

billion S@L bailout, e) slower growth in government consumption spending, and

f) the budget deal just enacted by Congress and signed by the President.

Finally, Section VII summarizes our findings and draws conclusions.



II. Generational Accounts

        The term "generations" refers in this paper to males and females by

specific years of age. The term "net payments" refers to the difference

between government tax receipts of all types (such as federal and state income

taxes) and government transfer payments of all types (such as social security

benefits, unemployment benefits, and food stamps). Finally, all present

values reflect discounting at a pre tax interest rate.

        To make the generational accounts and their relationship to the

government's budget constraint more precise, we write the government's

interteniporal budget constraint for year t   in    equation (1):


             D                                 s
(1)          EN      + EN
            s—0 t,ts s—I t,t+s
                                 +W—
                                   t
                                     EC        II

                                        s—t S j—l (l+r)


The first term on the left hand side of (1) adds together the present value of

the net payments of existing generations. The expression Nt k stands for the

present value of net remaining lifetime payments to the government of the

generation born in year k discounted to year t. The index s in this summation

runs from age 0 to age D, the maximum length of life. Hence, the first

element of this summation is Net, which is the present value of net payments
                                                    —6—


of the generation born in year t; the last term is Ntt_D, the present value

of remaining net payments of the oldest generation alive in year t, namely

those born in year t—D. The second term on the left hand side of (1) adds

together the present value of remaining net payments of future generations.

The third term on the left hand side, WE, denotes the government's net wealth

in year t. The right hand side of (1) expresses the present value of

government consumption. In the latter expression, C5 stands for government

consumption expenditure in year s, and rj stands for the pre tax rate of

return in year j.

      Equation (I) indicates the zero sum                 nature   of intergenerational fiscal

policy. Holding the right hand side of equation (1) fixed, increased

(decreased) government payments to (receipts taken from) existing generations

means a decrease in the first term on the left hand side of (1) and requires

an offsetting increase in the second term on the left hand side of (1); i.e.,

it requires reduced payments to or increased payments from future generations.

      The term Ntk is defined in equation (2):


                              k+D                    s
           N         —         E      T     P        U
(2)
               t,k       s—max(t,k)
                                          s k s,k
                                                    j—t+l
                                                            l+r
                                                              j



In expression (2) TSk stands for the projected average net payment to the

government made in year s by a member of the generation born in year k. By a

generation's average net payment in year s we mean the average across all

members of the generation alive in year s of payments made, such as income and

FICA taxes, less all transfers received, such as social security, AFDC, and

unemployment insurance. The term sk stands for the number of surviving

members of the cohort in year s who were born in year k.                     For generations who

are born prior to year t, the summation begins in year t.                      For generations who
                                     —7-.



are born in year k, where lot, the summation begins in year k. Regardless of

the generation's year of birth, the discounting is always back to year t.

     A set of generational accounts is simply a set of values of Ntk, one for

each existing and future generation, with the property that the combined total

value adds up to the right hand side of equation (1). In our calculation of

the Ntk's for existing generations (those whose kl989) we distinguish male

front female cohorts, but, to ease notation, we do not append sex subscripts to

the terms in (1) and (2).



III. Assessing the Intergenerational Stance of Fiscal Policy

     Once we have calculated the right hand side of equation (1) and the first

term on the left hand side of equation (1), we determine, as a residual, the

value of the second term on the right hand side of equation (1), which is the

present value of payments required of future generations. We further

determine the amount that needs to be taken from each successive generation to

balance the government's intertemporal budget, assuming that each successive

generation's payment is the same up to an adjustment for real productivity

growth.

     This growth—adjusted constant amount is what must be taken from

successive generations to maintain what Kotlikoff (1989) terms 'fiscal

balance' one can compare this measure with the actual amount projected to be

taken under current policy from existing generations, particularly the

generation that has just been born. In other words, these data provide the

answer to the question: Given the projected treatment of current generations

as reflected in the values of their Nt k5' do we need to take substantially

more from future generations than we are planning (as reflected by current

policy) to take from current generations? In particular, is
                                       —8--




substantially smaller than Nt t+i under the assumption that all values of Nts

for s>t+l equal Nt t+l except for an adjustment for productivity growth?2

      Note that our assumption that all values of N for s>t+l are equal.

except for a growth adjustment, is just one of many assumptions one could make

about the distribution across future generations of their collective net

payment to the government. We could, for example, assume a phase—in of the

additional fiscal burden (which could be negative) to be imposed on new young

generations. Clearly, such a phase in would mean that new young generations

born after the phase—in period has elapsed would face a larger (possibly

smaller) Nt5 than we are calculating here. Our purpose in assuming 1)

growth—adjusted equal treatment of future generations and 2) that the Nt S

of   current generations are those one would project under current policy, is to

illustrate the potential intergenerational imbalance in fiscal policy and the

potential need for adjusting current fiscal policy. It is not to claim that

policy will necessarily deal with the intergenerational imbalance by treating

all future generations equally or, indeed, by putting all the burden on future

generations.

       Understanding the size of the Ntk's for current generations and their

likely magnitude for future generations is not the end of the story with

respect to assessing the intergenerational stance or incidence of fiscal

policy. As studied in Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987), intergenerational

redistribution will alter the time path of factor prices and, thereby, the

intergenerational distribution of welfare. Such changes in factor prices

result from changes in the supply of capital relative to labor, gut the

changes in the supplies of capital and labor can, in turn, be traced back to

changes in consumption and labor supply decisions, which are based on private

lifetime budget constraints. As described in the next section, the
                                     —9—


enter private budget constraints. Hence, knowing how their values change is

essential to understanding not only the direct effect of government policy on

the intergenerational welfare distribution, but also for assessing the changes

in factor prices that may result from the policy. In short, then,

understanding fully the incidence of intergenerational fiscal policy requires

knowledge of changes in the values of the Ntk's arising from the policy.

     Indeed, one of the future goals of this research is to consider how

policies other than those examined here might affect the values of the Nt k5

for the elderly and other existing generations and to assess the impact of

such policies on national saving. In a recent study Abel, gernheim, and

Kotlikoff (1991) used CES data to calculate average and marginal propensities

to consume of U.S. households by the age of the household head. We intend to

use these results to determine the U.S. consumption response to a range of

potential intergenerational fiscal policies. A generation's consumption

response to the hypothetical policies will simply be calculated as the change

in the generation's Nt k multiplied by the corresponding marginal propensity

to consume.



IV. How Do the        Enter Private Budget Constraints?

     The lifetime budget constraint of each generation specifies that the

present value of its consumption must equal its current net wealth, plus the

present value of its human wealth, plus the present value of its net private

intergenerational transfers, less the present value of its net payments to the

government, its Ntk. This section shows precisely how the Ntk's enter

private budget constraints and how we can use our estimates on the Ntk's and

additional information to infer the extent of net private intergenerational

transfers.
                                    —10—


     For the generation born in year k the year t remaining lifetime budget

constraint is:



                                       —
(3) ::s,k + 1s,ks,k jt+l l±r               Wk+   SES,kPS,k jt+l l+r —
                                                                           Ntk

In (3) the terms Csk, 1s,k' and Esk stand, respectively, for the average

values in year s of consumption, private net intergenerational transfers, and

labor earnings of the generation born in year k. The term WPtk stands for

the year t net wealth of the generation born in year k. This equation states

that the present value of the cohort's projected consumption plus its net

intergenerational transfers equals the present value of its resources. The

present value of its resources equals, in turn, its net wealth, plus the

present value of its labor earnings, less the present value of its net

payments to the government, Ntk. There are data available to estimate the

present value of a cohort's consumption, the present value of its labor

earnings, and its current net worth. Hence, in future work we intend to

compare our estimates of Ntk with the projected present value of the cohort's

remaining lifetime resources. We will also use these data and equation (3) to

derive, as a residual, an estimate of the projected present value of the

cohort's net private intergenerational transfers.

     As mentioned, in our actual calculations we distinguish generations by

sex as well as age in 1990. Our calculated age and sex—specific values for

the present value of intergenerational transfers include, therefore,

intragenerational transfers from males to females. Hence, in determining the

magnitude of transfers that are truly intergenerational (across age groups) we

add together the calculated private transfers of male and female generations

of the same age. This provides us with a statement of the net present value
                                     —11—


of private transfers given by (received from) all members (both the males and

the females) of a given generation to members of other generations.

     In the previous section we discussed comparing the Ntk's of future

generations with Nt t which is the net lifetime payments of the generation

that was born at time t. We also discussed comparing the Nt k5 of all

existing generations under current policy with their respective values under a

different policy. These comparisons, which involve differences (either across

generations or across policies) in Ntk's, are invariant to the accounting

framework we are adopting, although the absolute values of the Ntk's depend

on our accounting framework.

     To see this point, consider once again the labeling of social security

receipts and payments. Although, the U.S. government labels social security

contributions as "taxes" and social security benefits as "transfers," from the

perspective of economic theory one could equally well label social security

contributions as "private saving" (invested in government bonds) and label

social security benefits as the "return of principal plus interest" on that

saving, less an "old age tax" that would be positive or negative depending on

whether the social security system was less than or more than actuarially fair

in present value. Under either choice of labels the right hand side of the

budget constraint (3) would retain the same value, but the division of the

right hand side between WP and Nkt would change. It is in this sense that

the absolute value of the Nkt's depends on the accounting framework.

However, regardless of which way one accounts for (labels) the social security

system, the change in the value of Ntk from a policy change, such as a

reduction in social security benefits, would be the same. Under the

conventional labeling the change in the value of the Ntk's would simply equal

the reduction for generation k in the time t present value of their receipts
                                     —12—


from social security. Under the "private saving less an old age tax"

labeling, the change in the value of the Ntk's would simply equal the

increase for generation k in the time t   present   value of their old age tax.

    Although, the change in the value of the Ntk's associated with a policy

change is invariant to the accounting convention (the choice of labels for

government receipts and payments), the same is not true for the government's

budget deficit. The same change in policy will lead to different changes in

the reported budget deficit depending on one's choice of labels for government

receipts and payments. For example, consider the impact of a equal reduction

in social security contributions and benefit payments under the two labeling

schemes for social security. In the case social security contributions are

labeled "taxes" and social security benefits are labeled "transfers," this

policy change will have no effect on the budget deficit, since the change in

"taxes" equals the change in "transfer" spending. In contrast, if social

security contributions are labeled "private saving" and social security

benefits are labeled "return of principal plus interest" plus "an old age

tax," an equal and simultaneous reduction in contributions and benefit

payments will mean a larger "old age tax" for elderly recipients and imply a

reduction in the budget deficit.



V. Calculating the Ntks and Other Component's of the Government and Each

Generation's Intertemporal Budget Constraints

A. Data Sources for Calculating et Payments

     According to equation (2) estimating the values of the Ntk's requires

projections of net payments, the TSk's for D+ksk, population projections,

the sk' for D+ksk, and the time path of interest rates. Projections of

the population by age and sex are available from the Social Security
                                       —13—



Administration   through 2050, and we have extrapolated these projections

through the year 2100 in the course of a study of demographics and saving

(Auerbach, Cai, and Kotlikoff 1990).

    We use SIP? data to calculate the average 1984 year values by age and sex

of each of the different types of government receipts and payments covered in

SIPP. The SIP? sample size is roughly 16,000 U.S. households. The SIP? is a

panel survey that reinterviewed respondent households eight times (every four

months) over the course of two years. The first wave of interviews began in

July 1983 and ended in July 1985. Thus, for 1984, there is a complete

calendar year of SIPP data. The government receipts and payments in the SIPP

survey include federal and State income and FICA taxes, Food Stamps, AFDC and

WIC benefits, Supplemental Security Income, general relief, unemployment

compensation, Social Security retirement, survivor and disability benefits,

other welfare, Foster Child   Care   and other government transfers. Denton

Vaughan (1989) provides a detailed analysis of the improvements in the

measurement of government receipts and payments in the SIPP as compared with

other surveys such as The Current Population Survey.

     The major deficiency with respect to SIPP's coverage of government

receipts   and payments is with respect to Medicaid and Medicare health care

payments. To determine the average amount of Medicare payments by age (the

data are not available by sex) for Medicare payments we use Waldo, et. al's

(1989) calculations of average Medicare expenditures by age.

     Data on Medicaid expenditures by age and sex will ultimately be obtained

from the National Center for Health Services Research's National Medical Care

Expenditure Survey for 1987. These data are scheduled to be released later

this Fall. At the moment, however, we assume that the distribution of
                                       —16—


Medicaid expenditures by age and sex is the same as that of general welfare

payments.



B. Determining Net Payments

     The average values of the receipts and payments by age and sex calculated

from SIPP and the Medicare data are only used to determine the values of these

receipts and payments by age and sex relative to that of a base age—sex

category, which we take to be 40 year old males. Given these age—sex relative

profiles we determine our initial year (1990) average values of each type of

payment and receipt by age and sex by benchinarking against aggregate totals

reported in the National Income and Product Account's aggregate values of

government receipts and transfers. We then assume that the age and sex—

specific average values of these payments and receipts in future years equal

those calculated for 1990 adjusted for an assumed growth rate.

     To provide an example of this procedure in a simple two—period context

where there are only young and old, suppose total receipts of a certain type

at a given date equals $1000 and suppose we know that the average payment of

old people equals twice the average for the young. Also suppose we know that

there are 200 young and 150 old. Then the amount paid by each young person Z

must satisfy: $1000 — z x 200 +   Z   x 2 x 150. solving this equation for Z and

multiplying by 2 gives the amount paid on average by old people. If the

growth rate is g. then the projected payment of the young (old) k periods from

now is Z x (1+g)k (2 x Z x (l+)k).

     More generally, we denote by km5              the average value of the ith

payment or receipt made by (received by) an age a male (female) in 1984

divided by the average value of the type i payment (receipt) made by 40 year

old males in 1984. Let Hit denote the aggregate revenues (expenditures) of
                                         —15—


type I received by (made by) the government in year t (1990). Finally, let

      i
             and        denote, respectively, the average values for males and

females of payment (receipt) i in year t. Then we have:



(4)                —
                               0t,i,t_j +


Equation (4) states that total payments (receipts) of type i in year t equals

the average value of these payments (receipts) for 40 year old males times the

cross product of the age—sex profile for payment (receipt) i and the

population by age and sex. We use equation (4) to solve for 4Ojt' The

values of the ait' a,'40 and the a,i,t's are obtained by multiplying

h4oj by Rm5 and Raj, respectively. We assume that                       and

hais for s>t equal their respective year t values multiplied by an assumed

growth factor. The term T$k for males (for females) in equation (2) is

determined by summing over i the values of hs_k
                                                      i,s thsk i,s
          Clearly, for certain types of payments and receipts, such as Medicare

benefits, the choice of the proper growth factor may be particularly

difficult. But rather than chose one value, we present results for different

growth rate assumptions. The same type of sensitivity analysis applies to the

choice of the interest rate to be used in the discounting. While the absolute

magnitude of the terms in the government's intertemporal budget constraint are

sensitive to these assumptions, the assessment of the burden being placed on

future generations relative to that being placed on current generations

happens not to be very sensitive to these assumptions.



C. The Treatment of Labor Income Taxes
                                     —16—


     We determine the relative profile of total labor income by age and sex

from the SIP? data and apply this profile to aggregate labor income taxes.

The aggregate value of labor income tax payments is calculated as 80.4 percent

of total federal, state, and local income taxes, where 80.4 is labor's share

of net national product. In calculating labor's share of net national product

we assume that labor's share of proprietorship and partnership income as well

as its share of indirect tax payments equals its share of net national

product. The resulting figure for aggregate labor income taxes is $446.1

billion.



D. The Treatment of Contributions for Social Insurance

     We used information on labor earnings in the SI?? to infer the amount of

FICA taxes paid by each household member. From these data we then determined

the relative profile of FICA tax payments by age and sex. This profile was

benchmarked against aggregate social insurance contributions, including

contributions by government workers to their pension funds. The 1989 value of

aggregate contributions for social insurance is $476.8 billion.



E. The Treatment of Capital Income Taxes

     Taxes on capital income require special treatment. There are two related

reasons for this. First, unlike other taxes, taxes on capital income may be

capitalized into the value of existing (old) assets. Second, the time pattern

of income and tax payments may differ. As a result of these features of

capital income taxes, such taxes must be attributed with care in order to

ensure that they are assigned to the proper generation. If all forms of

capital income were taxed at the same rate, there would be no such problem:

all assets would yield the same rate of return before—tax (adjusted for risk)
                                    —17—


and each individual would face a rate of return reduced by the full extent of

the tax. However, if tax rates on the income from some assets, typically

older ones, are higher than those facing income from new assets (e.g., because

of investment incentives targeted toward new investment) a simple arbitrage

argument (see, for example, Auerbach and Kotlikoff, 1987, Chapter 9) indicates

that the extra tax burden on the old assets should be capitalized into these

assets' values, reflecting their less favorable treatment. This suggests that

the flow of capital income taxes overstates the burden on new investment. On

the other hand, the presence of accelerated depreciation allowances works in

the opposite direction, since initial tax payments from new investment

understate the long—run tax burden on such investments. Although current tax

payments overstate the tax burden on new capital by their inclusion of taxes

that are already capitalized in the value of existing assets, the

understatement of the burden on new investment works in the opposite

direction.

     We require a method that calculates the value of capitalized taxes and

corrects the flow of taxes for these two measurement problems. The appendix

provides such a method. To illustrate the nature of the correction, consider

the case of cash—flow taxation in which assets are written off immediately. A

well—known result is that the effective marginal capital income tax rate under

cash—flow taxation is zero. However, taxes would be collected each year on

existing capital assets, and such assets should therefore be valued at a

discount. Assigning these taxes to the assets' initial owners, rather than

members of future generations who may purchase the assets, is consistent with

the fact that such future generations of individuals may freely invest in new

assets and pay a zero rate of tax on the resulting income. Our correction to
                                       —18—




actual   tax payments should, in this case, result in a zero tax burden on the

income from new assets.

    The principle underlying our treatment of intramarginal capital income

taxes and the discounting of other payments and receipts at pre tax rates of

return is that one can express private intertemporal budget constraints in the

presence of government behavior as a) the budget constraint that would prevail

in the absence of the government with b) a single modification to the present

value of resources that equals, Ntk, the present value of the generation's

net paymeflt to the government; i.e., one can express private budgets in terms

of pre tax prices less net taxes valued at pre tax prices. In the case of our

adjustment for intrainarginal capital income taxes we are simply valuing

capital at its pre tax price and treating the capitalized value of taxes as

another payment required by the government from the owners of that capital.

     In allocating capital income taxes we 1) correct our estimate of future

capital income taxes to account for their inclusion of taxes on old capital

and the generational timing of capital income taxes, 2) use equation (4) and

the SIPP profile of private net wealth holdings by age and sex to allocate

total 1989 taxes on new capital by age and sex, 3) project future capital

income taxes by age and sex using the 1989 age— and sex—specific values

adjusted for growth, and 4) allocate to 1989 owners of capital as a one time

tax payment the 1989 capitalized value of the excess taxation of older

capital. The allocation of this one time tax by age and sex is based on the

SIPP profile of asset holdings by age and sex. note that in the budget

constraint of each existing generation we value their holdings of existing

capital at market value plus the capitalized value of intrainarginal taxes.

     In these calculations we set aggregate capital income taxes equal to 19.6

percent (capital's share of net national product) of total federal, state, and
                                     —19—


local income taxes, plus federal, state, and local corporate taxes (excluding

the profits of the U.S. Federal Reserve System), plus estate taxes. The

resulting value of 1989 aggregate capital income taxes is $234.9 billion.

Using the method described in the Appendix, we estimate that the 1989 flow of

capital income taxes overstated the capital income tax burden on new

investment by $6.09 billion and that the capitalized value of excess taxes on

old capital equals $609 billion. These estimates are calculated in the

following manner. We take the value of nonresidential equipment plus

structures plus the value of non—owner occupied housing owned by taxable

investors (both of which are reported in the Federal Reserve Flow of Funds for

1989), $5,488.8 trillion, and multiply this by 11.1 percent, our estimate of

the tax—induced percentage difference between the market value and replacement

cost of these assets. We allocate the $609 billion ($5,488.8 x .111) in

capitalized taxes as a one time tax to those age— and sex—specific 1989

cohorts according to the SIPP profile of relative net wealth holdings by age

and sex.



F. Including the Present Value of Government Seignorage in the Nt.k's

     Another form of payment to the government is the seignorage it collects

on private holdings of money balances. Net of the negligible costs of

printing money, the government collects, in each year, resources equal to the

real value of new money printed. In holding this money, households forego the

nominal rate of return available on other assets.

     Our strategy for attributing seignorage to different generations may be

illustrated using the analogy of an excise tax on durable goods. Suppose the

government levied such an excise tax. Households would then spend more to

obtain durables, and would therefore face a higher imputed cost of using them
                                       —20—


until the durables had depreciated or were sold. If the durable good were

sold (tax free) in the future, It would command a price in excess of its

replacement cost, reflecting the arbitrage with respect to new durables facing

the excise tax. A measure of the net fiscal burden imposed on the household

by the excise tax is the tax payment made by the household upon purchase less

this recoupment of the tax upon sale, discounted to the present. In the same

way, we attribute the burden of seignorage to households of particular

generations by treating the entire acquisition of money balances as a payment

to the government and the disposition of money balances as a transfer from the

government. This has the effect of imputing a cost equal to the nominal

interest rate on the holding of money balances, and also attributes to all

current and future generations taken together a total fiscal burden equal to

the present value of government receipts from printing money.

     We add the present value of such seignorage payments to the present value

of other net payments in forming the Ntk's. Specifically, we project average

money balances held by each age and sex—specific generation through the

remainder of Its life and add each year's net acquisitions (positive or

negative) of the monetary base to the Ntk's. As with all our calculations,

we have been careful to benchmark against national aggregates. In this case

we have ensured that the sum   of   age and sex—specific generation net

acquisitions of the monetary base sums to the Dec. 1988 to Dec. 1989 change in

aggregate base money which equals $21.6 billion.



C. Including Excise Taxes in the

     Excise tax payments are not included in the SIP? data. To determine the

amount of excise taxes paid by the age and sex—specific generations we use the

CES data. We use these calculations as well to project each generation's
                                     —21—


annual flow and present value of excise taxes. Our benchmark value of

aggregate 1989 excise taxes of $414.0 billion equals the 1989 NIPA value of

total excise taxes, less total property taxes, plus business property taxes;

i.e., we include in excise taxes only those property taxes assessed on

business. We use the Department of Commerce's (1987) share of business

property tax assessments in total (business plus residential) property tax

assessments to divide total property taxes between business and residences.

This share is 43.9 percent. In determining the 1989 NIPA value of total

excise taxes we include those state and local property and excise taxes listed

in the NIPA accounts as "Personal Tax and Nontax Receipts." We do not,

however, include those nontax receipts that are included as part of "Personal

Tax and Nontax Receipts" as excise taxes. Instead, we treat these items,

which include tuition and hospital charges, as a return to government assets.



H. Including Residential Property Taxes in the

     We treat residential property taxes as excise taxes on home ownership and

allocate these taxes by age and sex using an age—sex profile of relative house

values. This profile was obtained from the SIPP data for 1984. In this

calculation house values for married couples were divided evenly between the

spouses. As in the case of other taxes, we benchmark average property taxes

by age and sex using the 1989 value of total residential property taxes which

equals $62.4 billion, and we project future average property tax payments

using the 1989 age— and sex—specific averages with an adjustment for growth.



I. Treatment of Social Security and Other Ooverrurent Transfers

     We divide total government transfer payments excluding federal, state,

and local civil service, railroad retirement, and veterans benefits into six
                                         —22—


categories: OASDI (including Federal Supplementary Security Income), HI

(Medicare), AFDC, General Welfare (including Medicare), UI (unemployment

insurance), and Food Stamps (including WIG)       We   use the SIPP data to

determine relative profiles by age and sex of each of these categories of

               transfers. To determine average 1989 values of these transfer
government
payments by age and sex we benchmark the relative profiles against the NIPA

aggregates using equation (4).      The absolute average values of each type of
transfer      payment by age and sex in future years are assumed to equal their

respective 1989 values adjusted for growth. The one exception to this

procedure is with respect to future social security benefits. We make a rough

adjustment for the impact for the 1983 Social Security amendments on future

benefits of the baby boom and subsequent generations. These amendments

reduced future social security benefits by 1) phasing in a two year delay in

the   receipt of normal retirement and 2) subjecting an increasing share of

social security benefits to federal income taxation. Our adjustment involves

reducing the average social security benefits of each new cohort that reaches

age 65 in the year 2000 and beyond. The reduction in each years post age 65

benefit's is one percent for cohorts who are age 65 in the year 2000. It          is
 two percent for cohorts who are age 65 in 2001, three percent for cohorts who

are age 65 in 2002, etc. with a maximum reduction of 15 percent; i.e., cohorts

who reach age 65 in 2014 or later experience a 15 percent reduction In the

average annual value of their post age 64 social security benefits relative to

 the growth adjusted value of post age 64 social security benefits prevailing

 in   1989.


J.    Calculating the Present Value of Government Consumption
                                            —23—


       Our   procedure   for projecting the future path of total government

consumption is to decompose total 1990 government consumption         expenditure into
a) expenditures on those age 0—24, 25—64, and 65+ and b) non—age—specific
expenditures, such as defense.3 We denote year t expenditures on those age 0

to 24 divided by the year t population age 0 to 64 as               where y stands

for young. We denote             and       as the corresponding year t average

government consumption expenditures on the middle age (those 25 to 64) and old

(those 65 and older). Finally, we denote             as the year t level of non—age—

specific government expenditure divided by the total year t population. We

assume that the values of                          and    for s>t equal their

respective year t values multiplied by a common growth factor. Total

government consumption expenditure in year s is then determined as



(5)           CS —g,SPy,s +gm,sP ms +go,sPo,s +gP
                                                S S




where                         and      stand for the population of young, middle age,

old, and the total population in year s. We use the OECD's 1986 division of

total U.S. government consumption expenditures among the four expenditure

categories plus our benchmark value of aggregate expenditures. G, to

determine the values of ,t'                 ,t' and        The OECD's division of

U.S. government consumption expenditures was 29.1 percent on the young (age 0—

24),   6.0 percent on the middle age (age 25—64), 7.1 percent on the old (65+),

and the remaining 57.8 percent on the total population. Our measure of Gt is

the 1989 NIPA value of total government consumption expenditures plus the

value of civil service, military, and veterans retirement, medical, and

disability benefits. We include these additional payments as part of

government Consumption rather than as transfer payments because they are part
                                       —24—


of government compensation to its employees. The resulting value for 1989

total government consumption expenditure is $l.1514 trillion.

     An important issue that arises in considering government as well as

private consumption is the treatment of durables. The proper economic

treatment involves imputing rent on private and government durables and

including this rent (and excluding expenditures on durables) in private and

government consumption, respectively. Except for housing, however, the

National Income and Product Accounts treats expenditures on durables as

current consumption. While we follow the NIPA treatment of durables in this

paper, our future analysis will adjust for the proper economic treatment of

private and government durables expenditures.



K. Determining Government Net Wealth

     Since we want our generational accounts and analysis of different

generations' private budget constraints to be consistent with National Income

and Product Account data, including the total (federal, state, and local)

government deficit, we take as our measure of 1989 total government net wealth

net government interest payments divided by the sum of 1) our assumed real

interest rate and 2) an assumed 5 percent inflation rate.4 Our measure of

government net interest payments is $79.4 billion smaller than the NIPA figure

of $131.8 billion because we categorize state and local nontax receipts as

positive capital income earned on state and local assets. Assuming a 6

percent real interest rate the 1989 value of government net wealth is —$571

billion.



L. Determining Private Sector Wealth
                                     —25—


      The 1984 SIP? data are used to determine the age and sex—specific

relative wealth profile. Specifically, we calculate the weighted average

values of net wealth by age and sex for 1984 and normalize these values by the

weighted average value of net wealth of 40 year old males. This provides

values of Qma and Qf8, the relative age—sex wealth profile. Total private

sector wealth in 1989 can then be written as




(6)       W -               ,t-j +


where 4Ot stands for the average wealth of a 40 year old male in year t,

and WP is total 1989 private net wealth. Equation (6) may be used to solve

for 4Ot• The corresponding values               a,40 and       are

determined by multiplying '40 by QW and Qf, respectively.
      In using the SIP? data we distribute household wealth to the owner of

that wealth, where the owiership is indicated. In the case of married

couples, we allocate half of the household's total wealth to each spouse. We

set future values of net wealth by age and sex equal to the 1989 values

adjusted for growth.



M. The Choice of Interest Rate

      The government budget constraint given in (1) depends crucially on the

choice of the interest rate r that is used in discounting future flows to and

from the government sector. If all such flows were certain and riskiess, it

would clearly be appropriate to use the government's borrowing rate,

essentially a risk—free rate, in our calculations. Given that these flows are

only estimated however, which rate is appropriate to use?
                                     —26—


     The answer to this question depends on what we mean by fiscal balance in

the presence of uncertainty. On the one hand, there is a straightforward

argument that the government's actual borrowing rate is still appropriate.

Suppose, for example, that a future receipt has an expected value of, say, x,

but that the true value of the receipt may turn out to be higher or lower. If

it is higher, the government will have to borrow a bit more; if it is less,

less borrowing will be required. Assuming that the government's borrowing

rate is not affected by these fluctuations, the discounted values will cancel

in a calculation of expected discounted revenue, leaving the discounted value

of the expected revenue x in the budget constraint. Thus, if we wish to

consider the payments from future generations that we expect will be needed to

provide fiscal balance, the procedure based on expected flows discounted with

the government's borrowing rate is correct.

     However, expected fiscal balance may not be the only valid measure, or

even the most informative about fiscal incidence. After all, raising a future

individual's fiscal burden by $100 in some cases and lowering it by $100 with

the same probability in others needn't be a matter of indifference to the

individual if he is risk—averse. If the increased burden is associated with

other negative news (as will be true, for example, if government revenue needs

rise during recessions), then these deviations from expected revenues will not

cancel from the taxpayer's perspective. To reflect this, we might wish to

discount future receipts with a higher discount rate that accounts for this

risk. The effect will be to raise the level of receipts necessary for fiscal

balance to be achieved, reflecting the fact that the burden of uncertain taxes

exceeds their expected value. Likewise, the treatment of government spending

and transfers should be adjusted for risk, although one should use the same
                                      —27--



discount rate only If the fluctuations in such spending have the same risk

characteristics as taxes do.

      In our simulations below, we make different interest rate assumptions in

calculating fiscal balance. This will accommodate the alternative views just

discussed. The first approach is to apply a low, risk—free rate to the

projected flows, in keeping with the view of fiscal balance as expected

balance. The second is to apply a market rate, adjusted for risk, in our

discounting of all the flows in the government's budget constraint. This

approach is consistent with fiscal balance being satisfied in risk—adjusted

terms.



VI.   Findings
A. The Burden on Future Generations
      Tables 1 and 2 contain the generational accounts for males and females

for different combinations of growth rate and interest rate assumptions.

Tables la—c and 2a—c contain the same information for alternative assumptions

•about population structure, the treatment of capital income taxation and the

discount rate, which we will discuss after reviewing the results in the first

two tables,

       All of these tables show positive values for the accounts for young and

middle age cohorts alive in 1989, indicating that these generations will, on

balance, pay more in present value than they receive. For generations of

males age 65 and older the net present value of payments is negative. This

primarily reflects the fact that older generations, whose members are

typically retired, can expect to pay relatively little in labor income taxes

and payroll taxes over the rest of their lives, while receiving significant

social security medicare and retirement benefits. For females, the
                                     —28—


generational accounts are negative for ages 55 and over. The younger age at

which this occurs for women is attributable to the lower labor force

participation rates of women and the fact that many women receive social

security benefits as dependents of older spouses.

     In Tables 1 and 2 the values of the accounts more than double between age

zero and age 25.   For example, in the case g—.0075 and r—.06 (which we take as

our "base case") the age zero account for males is $72.0 thousand and the age

25 account is $185.4 thousand. This simply reflects the fact that 25—year

olds are closer to their peak taxpaying years than are newborns. The accounts

are most negative around age 75. For the base case, the age 75 account is

—$30.3 thousand.

     The bottom row of each table, labeled "Future Generations," indicates the

present value of amounts that males and females born in 1990 will, on average.

pay, assuming that subsequent generations pay this same amount except for an

adjustment for growth. For the base case, this amount is $86.4 for males.

This means that males born in 1990 will be greeted with a bill from all levels

of government of $86.4 thousand, which is 20.0 percent larger than the bill

facing 1989 age zero males. Males born in 1991 will face a bill for $87.0

thousand, which equals $86.4 thousand multiplied by 1.0075 (1 plus the growth

rate); males born in 1992 will pay $87.7 thousand ($86.4 times 1.0075

squared), and so forth. For females born in 1990, the bill will be $52.3

thousand, based on the assumption that future female and male "birth bills"

have the same ratio as those of age zero males and females in 1989.

     Table la—c (males) and 2a—c (females) present the same calculations under

different assumptions. Tables la and 2a show the results of assuming that no

further demographic change will occur in the United States, i.e. ,    that   the

population age distribution will be constant after 1990. These tables are
                                       —29—


helpful in understanding the fiscal impact of the continuing demographic

transition to an older population. These tables indicate that, were the

population structure to remain constant, younger generations, those that will

bear the brunt of the demographic shift's fiscal burdens, would be better off.

This is particularly true for males.

     Tables lb and 2b demonstrate the importance of our special treatment of

capital income taxes. Treating all capital income taxes as marginal taxes on

new capital income lowers the fiscal burden on older living generations, since

these groups are no longer being assigned the reduction in capital values

associated with the inframarginal taxation of old capital. Very young living

generations would face a somewhat higher fiscal burden, since these groups

hold little capital and will face many years of somewhat higher marginal tax

rates. On balance, the reduced capital income taxes facing older living

generations and the slightly increased capital income taxes facing younger

living generations, implies a considerably larger burden on future

generations. For the base case parameters the percentage difference in the

accounts between age zero generations and future generations is now 32.2

percent, rather than 20.0 percent. Thus, failure to take account of the

capitalization of some capital income taxes causes one to understate the

viability of the current tax structure by ignoring the taxes that will be

collected on the income from previously acquired capital.

     As we indicated above, the choice of which discount rate to use in these

tables depends on how one interprets the concept of fiscal balance in the

context of uncertainty. The preceding tables have provided estimates for a

range of estimates around 6 percent, corresponding to our "high" interest rate

assumption. Tables ic and 2c repeat the exercise of Tables 1 and 2, but for a

lower range of interest rates centered around 3 percent, closer to the real
                                               —30—


government borrowing rate. The most significant effect of this change is to

increase the measured burdens facing newborns, since these are based largely

on discounted payments and receipts that will occur many years hence.

However, the same conclusion reached above, that the burdens oiust rise for

future generations, still holds here.

      The robustness of this last result is amplified by Table 3, which

presents for a wide range of growth/interest rate combinations the percentage

difference in accounts of age zero and future generations. The table

indicates that for a range of reasonable interest and growth rate assumptions

future generations will face larger fiscal burdens than current age zero

generations based on current policy. For the base case, the difference is

20.0 percent. For the low interest rate case with the same rate of

productivity growth (r—.03, g—.0075), the percentage difference is larger,

namely 22.0 percent. More optimistic growth rate assumptions do not

materially affect the conclusion of a roughly 20 percent larger burden on

future generations compared with current generations.



.   The Composition of Generational Accounts

      Appendix Tables 1 and 2 provide for current male and female generations a

breakdown   of the accounts by different types            of   receipts and expenditures.

The growth and interest rates used in the table are the base case values. All

figures are present values. Take the case of 30 year old males. On average,

the 1989 cohort of 30 year old males will pay $190.1 thousand dollars in

present value to the government over the course of their remaining lives. The

$190.1 thousand dollar figure reflects the difference between $222.8 in

present value of payments to the government less $32.7 thousand in present
                                     —31—


value of receipts from the government. The largest source of present value

payments is the $74.4 thousand in FICA and other payroll taxes, followed by

$69.6 thousand in labor income taxes, $38.4 thousand in capital income taxes,

and $34.2 thousand in excise taxes. The largest sources of present value

receipts are $13.2 thousand in social security OASDI benefits, followed by

$8.2 thousand in general welfare (which includes Medicaid). $4.6 thousand in

Medicare, and $3.4 thousand in AFOC benefits.

     Appendix Tables 3 and 4 further clarify the determinants of these present

values. They detail for different 1989 male and female generations the annual

flows of payments and receipts (measured in constant 1989 dollars) members of

these generations are projected to pay, on average, in specific years in the

future. For the 1989 cohort of 30—year—old males, total 1989 net payments

average $10,486. Their average net payments 30 years later when they reach

age 60 are projected to equal $262l4. The tables show clearly the age

pattern of the government's various payments and receipts. For example, OASDI

benefits for 1989 30 year old males average only $199. but grow to $6378 at

age 80.



C. The Effect of Policy Changes on Generational Accounts

     Tables 4 and 4a explore the impact on generational accounts of a variety

of alternative fiscal policies assuming six and three percent rates of

interest respectively. both tables assume the base case .0075 growth rate.

The tables compare the generational accounts of newborn and future generations

prior to and after the change in policy. Appendix Tables 5 and 6 indicate the

impact on the generational accounts of older generations of the various

policies assuming base case parameter values. Tables Sa and 6a repeat the

analysis assuming a three percent interest rate, Finally, Appendix Table 7
                                     —32—


presents the components of the government's intertemporal budget constraint

assuming base case interest and growth rates, for each of the policy

alternatives as well as for the base case policy. As indicated in equation

(1) these components are the aggregate present values of taxes on future

generations, the aggregate present value of taxes on current generations, the

present value of government consumption, and the 1989 level of government net

wealth.



Capital Gaina Tax Cut

     The first policy considered is the Administration's 1989 capital gains

tax cut proposal. In analyzing this proposal we used the Joint Committee on

Taxation's (the JCT) revenue estimates; specifically, we raised or lowered

projected cohort—specific future average capital income tax payments each year

in the future by a factor that would leave total projected capital income tax

payments in that year larger or smaller by    the   amount of revenue gain or loss

projected by the JCT. The results of this experiment indicate the

Administration's proposal would place an additional burden equal to $1177

($712) in present value on each future generation of males (females).

Appendix Tables 5 and 6 and 5a and 6a indicate that most of the benefits from

the capital gains proposal would accrue to currently middle age generations.

For example, assuming base case parameters,    £5 year old males   are, on average,

projected to receive roughly $600 in present value as a result of the capital

gains proposal.



No Reduction in Social Security

     The next policy experiment involves a cancellation of the 1983 Social

Security amendments. In this simulation we do not reduce future social
                                     —33—


security benefits of generations attaining age 65 in the year 2000 and beyond

according to the procedure described in Section VI. The impact of reversing

the Social Security amendments is particularly strong for middle age women.

According to Appendix Table 6, for base case parameters, 35 year old women

would benefit by $2,400 in present value from such a reversal in policy.



Faster Medicare Grovth

     The third policy we consider is faster growth in medicare expenditures.

Rather than projecting current spending levels forward at the growth rate of

other spending, we assume that medical costs will continue to rise more

quickly than other government expenses. In particular we assume that the rate

of growth of Medicare expenditures is two percentage points higher than the

economy's growth rate for the 20—year period between 1990 and 2010. The

experiment produces a sharp jump in the extra burden to be placed on future

generations: with base case parameters newborns in 1990 will face an extra

burden of $14,700 for males and $8,400 for females; these figures translate

into a 41.6 percent larger burden on future generations than on current age

zero generations. The simulated Medicare policy provides a sizable benefit to

existing older generations. For example, 65 year old males are estimated to

receive an additional $5,100 in present value from this policy option.

     Given the extraordinary growth in health care spending in recent years,

one might well believe that this simulation represents a more realistic view

of current policy than our "current policy" projection which assumes only

trend growth in Medicare. Clearly, one is free to consider alternative views

of what constitutes the expected near and longer term treatment of current

generations. Ideally, one would have information on the publics expectation

of the future treatment of current generations to guide the formation of the
                                      —34—




"current   policy" projection. Certainly there is no reason in assessing

current policy to restrict oneself to what is actually legislated. We offer

our "current policy" projection as an initial benchmark from which to consider

possibly more realistic assessments of the future treatment of current

generations.



Savings and Loan Bailout

     The recent savings and loan debacle and bailout illustrates the

difficulties of measuring "the" deficit. The episode included debates about

whether bailout financing should be "off—budget" and whether the funds raised

should "count" toward the Cramm—Rudman—Hollings targets. Such discussions are

really irrelevant if one is interested in determining who will bear the Costs

of this mammoth new government spending program. To model this, we assume

that the government issues $500 billion dollars of new bonds in 1990 to make

good the claims against the insolvent S&L's, and raises taxes only on new

generations. We treat the bailout essentially as the undoing of a casualty

loss, in that the current generations are assumed to be kept whole by the

bailout; I.e., the $500 billion simply offsets $500 billion in losses due to

the insolvencies. Tables 4 and 4a indicate that this exercise will cost each

1990 newborn male $8,812 assuming a six percent interest rate and $4,094

assuming a three percent interest rate.



Slower Growth in Government Consumption

     One of the goals of those who seek to improve the fiscal situation is to

"get spending under control." We model this by simulating the effects of zero

growth in government consumption for a period of 10 years with the growth in

government consumption after the 10—year period occurring at the assumed
                                     —35—


economy—wide growth rate. For base case parameters, the impact of this

reduced spending is to lower the burden of future generations substantially,

by $23,014 per male and $13,900 per female. The reason this policy has such a

large impact can be understood by considering the size of its effect with

reference to the terms entering the government's intertemporal budget

constraint given in equation (1). Under our base case assumptions the present

value of government consumption is $25.385 trillion, the present value of

payments by existing generations is $20.998 trillion, government net wealth is

minus $.516 trillion, and the present value of payments by future generations

is $4.903 trillion. The simulated 10—year policy of zero growth in government

consumption followed by trend growth means the level of government consumption

in year 10 and beyond is lower than under the "current policy' sitnulation.

The effect of this policy is to lower the present value of government

consumption by $l.306 trillion, which is sizable compared to what would

otherwise be the burden on future generations, namely $4.903 trillion.



The Government's New Budget Deal

     We examine three alternative views of the recent budget deal. The first

alternative, labeled A assumes that the changes made to taxes and spending

will be permanent; the second labeled B assumes that only the reductions in

government consumption spending will be permanent; and the third, labeled C,

assumes that the provisions will last for only 5 years, after which taxes and

government consumption spending will revert to the values they would have had

without the budget deal.5 The results indicate that the importance of the

budget deal depends very much on its duration. If the deal is temporary, case

C, future male generations will benefit by $5,932, while if it is permanent,

case A, they will benefit by $36,916. The loss to current generations is also
                                       —36—


quite sensitive to the duration of the new policy. If it is kept in place it

will,   for example, mean a $4,100 present value loss to current age 35 year old

males, while if it is temporary, the loss to current age 35 year old males is

only $1,000. Tables 5, 5a, 6, and 6a indicate that the current elderly will

pay a considerable share of the total costs to current generations of the new

legislation, although this share differs depending on the longevity of the

policy.

        In understanding the magnitude of the new budget deal, it may help to

consider the effects of the budget deal on the components of the government's

intertemporal budget constraint. In the simulation(s) in which the budget

deal is permanent (temporary) the present value of government consumption

falls by $l.262 trillion; in the case it is temporary it falls by $176

billion. In the permanent simulation the present value burden on existing

generations rises by $825 billion; in the temporary simulation it rises by

$159 billion.



VII.    Summary
        The ongoing debate about how to define the federal budget deficit is

symptomatic of the need for a proper conceptual framework for describing

generational policy. Unfortunately, the budget deficit, no matter how it is

defined, can not provide a proper assessment of generational policy. As an

alternative to economically arbitrary budget deficits, this paper has provided

a set of generational accounts indicating the net present value of payments of

existing generations to the government. We have used these accounts and

additional data concerning the government's intertemporal budget constraint to

assess the magnitude of the fiscal burden being placed on future generations

by current generations and to consider the burden on future generations of a
3. The fact that components of government consumption expenditure are targeted
toward specific age groups suggests including the present value of such
expenditures in forming the N kS and the Cs k5 in equation (3). In future
work we intend to present the generational acounts both including and
excluding the present value_of age—specific government consumption spending in
forming the Nt k's and the C k5 However, for the economic, as opposed to
accounting quetions, of how he N k's of future generations compare with
that of the current new born generaLion and how changes in policy will change
the values of the Nt ks for existing generations, the inclusion or exclusion
of age—specific goveinment consumption spending on existing generations is
irrelevant; i.e. , the analysis of the differential incidence of redistributing
the burden across generations of paying for the government's consumption can
be conducted holding the generational pattern of government consumption
expenditures constant.

4. In future work in which we will measure imputed rent on government durables
we will also take account of government tangible assets using measurements
reported by Eisner and Pieper's (1984) and 3oskin et. al. (198]).

5. In these simulations we assume that total taxes are increased in 1991 by
$21.7 billion, in 1992 by $32.3 billion, in 1993 by $30.4 billion, in 1994 by
$35.1, and in 1995 by $35.1 billion. The respective annual reductions in
total transfer payments are $3.4 billion, $5.9 billion, $8.4 billion, $11.4
billion, and $13.4 billion. Finally, the respective annual reductions in
total government consumption are $15.8 billion, $32.2 billion, $46.1 billion,
$62.7 billion, and $73.5 billion. These aggregatr fi..res as well as the
composition of taxes and transfers across the different types of taxes and
transfers were obtained from Congressional documents describing the budget
deal.
                                            —39--



                                      References

Abel,    Andrew, Douglas Bernheim, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, "Does the
        Propensity to Consume Increase with Age?," miineo 1991.

Auerbach, Alan J., "The Tax Reform Act of 1986 and the Cost of Capital,"
     Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1987.

Auerbach, Alan J., "Corporate Taxation in the United States," Brookins Papers
     on Economic Activity, 1983.

Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Dynamic Fiscal Policy, Cambridge
     University Press, 1987.

Auerbach, Alan 3. and James Hines, "Anticipated Tax Changes and the Timing of
     Investment," in Martin S. Feldstein ed., The Effect of Taxation on
     Genital Accumulation, Chicago, Ill.: Chicago University Press, 1987.

Auerbach, Alan J., Robert Hagetnanri, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Giuseppe
     Nicoletti, "The Economics of Aging Populations: The Case of Four OECD
     Economies," OECD Staff Papers, 1989.

Auerbach, Alan J., Jinyong Cai, and Laurence 3. Kotlikoff, "U.S. Demographics
     and Saving: Predictions of Three Saving Models," 'forthcoming in Carnegie—
     Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 1990.

Boskin, Michael 3., Mark S. Robinson, and A. M. Huber, "Government Saving,
     Capital Formation, and Wealth in the United States, 1947—85," NBER
     working paper no. 2352, August 1987.

The Economic Report of the President 1982, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
     Printing Office, 1982.

Eisner, Robert and Paul J. Pieper, "A New View of the Federal Debt and Budget
     Deficits," American Economic Review, March 1984, vol. 74, no. 1, pp. 11—
        29.

Feldstein, Martin S. ,   "Social Security, Induced Retirement, and Aggregate
        Capital Accumulation," Journal of Political Economy, Sept./Oct. 1974,
        82(5), pp. 905—26.

Hamilton, James D. and Marjorie A. Flavin, "On the Limitations of Government
     Borrowing: A Framework for Empirical Testing," American Economic Review
        76,   September 1986, pp. 808—19.
Kotlikoff,     Laurence J., "From Deficit Delusion to the Fiscal Balance Rule —
        Looking for a Sensible Way to Measure Fiscal Policy," NBER working
        March 1989.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., "The Deficit is not a Meaningful Measure of Fiscal
     Policy," Science, September 1988.
Kotlikoff, Laurence 3., "Taxation and Savings — A Neoclassical Perspective,'
        Journal, of Economic Literature, December 1984.
                                     —40—



Vaughan, Denton R. , Reflections on the Income Estimates from the Initial
     Panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP),"
     Department of Health and Human Services, Social Security Administration
     Office of Policy Research and Statistics, September 1989.

Waldo, Daniel R., Sally T. Sonnefeld, and David R. MeKusick, "Health
     Expenditures by Age Group, 1977 and 1987," He1th Care Financing, Vol.
     10, No. 4, Summer 1989.

Wilcox, David W., "The Sustainability of Government Deficits: Implications of
     the Present Value Borrowing Constraint," Journal of Money. Credit and
     Banking 21, August 1989, pp. 291—306.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1987 Census of Governnients'
     Taxable ProDerty Values, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
     Office, 1987.
                                        —41—




                                       Appendix
                       The Allocation of Capital Income Taxes

       As mentioned in the text, there are two related problems with using

capital income taxes as measured to determine the burden of capital income

taxation. First, existing assets may have excess future taxes capitalized

into their values; such taxes should not be assigned to new investors even if

they occur in the future. On the other hand, the timing of payments of taxes

from new investment may have a different pattern than would an income tax,

meaning that the ratio of current annual tax payments to income may not

provide an accurate measure of the effective marginal tax rate facing new

investment.

       In this appendix we derive the formula used to calculate the capitalized

value of taxes on existing capital and the correction needed to transform

total capital income tax payments into an estimate of capital income tax

payments on new investment. Our formula is based on the user cost of capital

approach (see, for example, Auerbech 1983), which assumes that the marginal

product of capital equals the user cost of capital, C, where


(Al)        C —   (r+8)(l—rz)/(l—r),

where r is the investor's required after—tax return, 8 is the investment's

economic rate of depreciation, r is the investor's marginal tax rate, and z is

the present value of depreciation allowances. We wish to calculate two

measures. The first, which we denote by Q, is the tax—based discount on old

capital which equals the difference between tax savings from depreciation

allowances per unit of new capital and those available per unit of existing

capital:
                                          —42—




                 —
(A2)        Q


where z0 is the present value of depreciation allowances per unit of old

capital.

        Measured capital income tax payments are not based on the effective rate

of tax on new capital m, where


                     C   (r+&)
(A3)             —


Instead they are based on an average tax rate, a, where



'A4'1
'.
                  — r(C—b)



and b is the average current depreciation deduction per unit of total capital.

Comparing (A3) and (A4) indicates that we must correct measured taxes per unit

of capital by subtracting from c(C—&) the term A, where


(A5)            A — (a—m)(C—&).


To calculate the terms z0 in (A2) and b in (A4) we must consider past patterns

of investment. Assume investment grows at rate n.         Then at date 0 (the

present) the nominal amount of capital purchased at date —s was

where *    is    the inflation rate. If this investment has been written off at the

constant geometric rate &, the asset at date 0 has a basis of I0en5e5

and receives depreciation allowances of          times this basis. Thus total

allowances on the existing capital stock K are



(A6)        bK —                         —
                         I0e_01te_*5ds       n-2+   10.
                                                —4 3—.




Since the capital stock equals the sum              of    depreciated net investment we have



                                      —
(A7)         K —
                    0   I0ee6ds                     10.



Equations (A6) and (A7) imply



(A8          b —    (n+6)

       The present value of all depreciation allowances on old capital equals

the basis of each vintage multiplied by the present value of remaining

depreciation deductions on that vintage, or:




(A9)         z0— __      i0e_(Ttf5e_5x              fe+e_ds
               —    ___        10     —     5        n+6 —         n-4-6
                    r+,+5 K(n+r+)         r+,r-1-V' n+w+'         fl+,r+'



where    z is the present value of depreciation allowances per unit of

depreciated basis.

         Substituting (A3), (A4), and (AS) into (A5) yields:



(AlO)           —   (r+6)rz — __________


Substituting        (A9) into (A2) implies:



                        — rz    n+6
 (All)        Q —



 Expressions (AlO) and (All) made by simplified if we make the realistic (under

 current tax law) assumption that               —   z,    thus:
                                              —44—




                —   (r+8)rz[l   —   (r++) (n+6)
(A12)                               (n++)(r+6)1

and



(A13)         Q — rz(]. —             )

        We   assume that 6—.08 and n—.03. These values are roughly consistent with

the average depreciation rates and past growth rates for equipment and

structures (see Auerbach and Hines 1987). We further assume for purposes of

these calculations that r—.04. For these values and for an inflation rate of

4 percent depreciation allowances (the right hand side of (A14)) provide

roughly the same present value as true economic depreciation (the left hand

side of (A14)).



(A14)                —          — z.
                r+6 r++

When r—c—.04 and 5—.08, we have from (Al4) that '—.l6. For our calculation of

the actual value of z based on this value of         we assume ,r— .05 to maintain

consistency with our other calculations. (Using ,r—.04 rather than .05 has no

important impact on the results.) In addition, we assume that the tax rate r

equals .32.         This value is less than the statutory rate of .34 with the

difference reflecting the small difference between corporate and personal

statutory rates. These assumptions lead to the values A—.OOlll and Q—.lll.

This value of Q consistent with earlier direct calculations based on tax

provisions similar to those enacted in 1986 (Auerbach and Hines 1987). These

fractions are multiplied by $5,488.8 billion, the value of depreciable assets

held by taxable investors in 1989 to arrive at the numbers cited in the test,
                                       —45—


viz., a $6.09 billion subtraction from current total capital income taxes and

a $609   billion capitalized burden on old capital.
                                                 TaSI. I


                          Accounts for A;. Z.ro and Tutur. Hal.      G.n.r.tions

                                        (thousand,    of dollars)


                        ro                        g—. 0075                       8. 015


G.n.r.tion'.
Ag.   in 1089   r'.05   r.06 r.07        r.C5 r.06 r.07                 r.05 r.06          r—.07


 0               77.0   58.4     42.0     99.7       72.0    53.0       130.0       92,7    67.4
 5               95.1   72.3     55.8    119.3       89.6    68.5       150.5      112.0    84.5
10              117.3   92.7     74.2    142.6     111.5     86.5       174.2      135.0   106.1
15              143.7   116.0    98.1    169.1     137.7     113.5      200.1      161.6   132,1
20              165.6   140.9   121.2    189.3     159.9     136.5      217.4      162.4   154.6
25              190.8   187.0   147.3    213.2     185.4     182.6      239.0      205.7   180.3
30              194.7   174.2   156.9    213.4     190.1     170.5      234.4      208.0   180.7
35              168.4   171.9   157.5    203.1     184.7     168.8      219.3      198.9   181.2
40              181.2   158.2   155.6    192.4     178.3     165.7      204.4      189.2   175.6
45              163.9   135.0   146.7    171.2       162.0   153.3      178.7      169.2   160.1
50              125.5   121.3   117.1    125.7       124.8   120.4      131.6      127.8   123.7
55               84.2   83,7     82.9     84.2       64.1     83.5       83.8       84.2    84.0
50               37.0    36.9    40.4     35.1       37.4     39.3       32.8       35.6    37.8
65              —10.7   —7.9     —5.6    —13.1       —10.0    —7.4      —15.8       12.4    —9.5
70              —26.3   —23.9   —21.7    —28.5     —25.8     —23.4      —30.8      —27.9   —25.3
75              —30.8   —28.9   —27.1    —32.4     —30.3     —26.5      —34.1      —31.9   —29.9
60              —29.1   —27.9   —26.7    —30.2     —28.9     —27.6      —31.3      —29.9   —26.6
85              —24.4   —23.7   —23.1    —25.0     —24.3     —23.6      —25.6      —24.9   —24.1
90               —1.0   —1.0     —1.0     —1.0       —1.0     —1.0       —1.0       —1.0    —1.0


Futurs
G.neratjon,      92.7    67,2    49.3    120.6        66.4    62.8       158.5     112.3    80.7
                                                    TabLe 1.

                              Account, for Ag. Z.ro end Future 44.1. G.n.r.ticn.
                                A.sukting a Constent D.tnosr.pbIc Structur.

                                          (thou..nd.    of dotter.)


                                                                               . 015
G.n.ration' a
Ag. in 1969     r—. 05   r— .06   r— 07    r .03      r. 06    r.Ol    r .05   r .06      r .07

 0               67.6     50.3    36,0      66,3       63.4    47.4    110.9    60.6       59.6
 5               67.0     67.1    32.6     107,1       82.3    63.8    134.0    101.4      11.9
10              114.4     91.8    74.6     137.1      109.1    87.9    165.3    130.4     104.2
15              148.9    124.3    105.0    172.8      143.2    120.0   201.6    165.6     137.9
20              158.1    136.9    119.6    176.2      153.2    133.1   201.6    172.3     146.7
25              159.0    141.6    127.2    175.0      155.0    136.3   193.3    170.3     151.3
30              149.9    136.4    124.9    162.1      146.9    133.9   175.9    158.6     144.0
35              145.8    134.6    124.9    155.7      143.3    132.6   166.5    152.8     140.9
40              142.1    132.9    124.7    150.1      140.1    131.2   158.7    147.6     138.1
45              141.1    133.5    126.7    147.4      139.4    132.1   154.1    145.6     137.8
50              124.1    119.3    114.8    127.9      123.0    118.4   131.6    126.8     122.1
55               91.6     90.4     88.9      92.8      91.6     90.1    93.4       92.5    91.3
60               41.8     42.9     43.7      40.7      42.0     43.0    39.4       41.0    42.3
65               —4.4     —2.6     —0.9      —6.1      —4.0     —2.2    —8.0       —5.6    —3.6
70              —19.7    —16.0    —16.4    —21.2      —19.3    —17.6   —22.9    —20.8     —19.0
75              —24.9    —23.5    —22,2    —26.1      —24.6    —23.2   —27.4    —25.8     —24.3
80              —25.0    —23.9    —23.0    —25.8      —24.7    —23.7   —26.7    —25.5     —24.5
85              —22.3    —21.7    —21.1    —22.6      —22.2    —21.6   —23.4    —22.7      22.1
90               —1.0     —1.0     —1.0      —1.0       —1.0    —1.0    —1.0       —1.0    —1.0


Futur.
G.n.ration.       61.3    63.3     50.3     100.3       76.9    60.2   125.6       94.7    72.9
                                                 Tab].. lb


                             Account. for As. Zero   and Future Male Generation.
                              Assumin; alt Capita]. Incoa. Tax.. Sr. Marginal

                                            (thou.snd.   of dollar.)


                           rO                        s— 0075                     s— .015



Generation's Age
     in 1989       r.05 r'.06      r.07     r'.OS     r.06 r.07         r—.05      r—.06    r—.07


 0                  77.3    58.5   42.2     100.1      72.3    53.2     130.5       93.1     57.7
 5                 95.5     72.5   56.0     119.6      90.0    68.7     151.3      112.4     84.9
10                 117.8    93.0   74.5     143.1     111.9    86.8     175.0      135.5    106.5
15                 144.2   116.4   98.4     169.8     136.2    113.9    201.0      162.2    132.6
20                 168.2   141.3   121.5    190.1     180.5    138.9    218.4      163.0    155.1
25                 191.0   166.9   147.1    213.5     185.5    162.6    239.5      206.9    180.3
30                 193,9   173.2   155.8    212.7     159.2    169.4    233.9      207.2    184.8
35                 186.2   169.5   155.0    201.1     182.5    166.4    217.4      195.8    178.9
40                 177.4   164.3   152.5     158.8    174.5    161.8    200.9      185.6    171.8
45                 158.6   149.6   141.2     166.0    156.6    147.8    173.7      164.0    154,7
50                 116.7   114.4   110.1     122.0    117.8    113.5    125.1      121.1    116.9
55                  76.4    75.9    75.0      76.5     76.3     75.7     76.2       76.5     76.2
60                  28.8    30.7    32.1      27.0     29,2     31.0     24.7       27.5     29.7
65                 —18.6   —18.0   —13.6     —21.1    —18.0    —15.5    —23,7      —20,4    —17.5
70                 —33.8   —31.2   —29.0     —35.7    —33.1    —30.7    —38,0      —35.1    —32.5
75                 —36.9   —35.0   —33.3     —38.5    —38.5    —34.7    —40.2      —38.1    —36.1
80                 —34,3   —33.0   —31.9     —35.4    —34,0    —32.8    —36.5      —35.1    —33.8
65                 —29,3   —28,6   —27.9     —29.9    —29,1    —28.5    —30.5      —29.7    —29.0
90                  —5.8    —5.8    —5.6      —5.8     —5,8     —5.8     —5.8       —5,8     —5.6


Future
Generations        101.5    77.9    61.9     127.9     95.6     73.9     164,3      120.0    90,4
                                                    tsbl. Ic

                           Accounts    for Ag. Zsro and Futurs P4.1. G.n.rations

                                          (thousands    of dollars)


                                                     r. 0075                    g.015

G.nsration's
Ag. in 1989    r,025 r.05      r—.035      r.025 r.03 r.035            r—.025 r.03 r,035

 0             182.8   152.4   127.6       243.2      201.8    168.1   324.8    268.4     222.6
 5             203.3   173.3   146.3       261.3      221.7    186.8   337.1    285.1     241.8

10             225.6   196.5   111.6       260.1      243.1    211.7   349.1     302.0    262.0

15             246.7   221.5   197.6       296.5      264.9    235.7   359.5     318.1    282.1

20             260.1   236.4   215.4       302.4      274.0    248.9   352.8     318.7    288.6

25             277.0   256.0   237.1       313.5      269.1    287.1   355.4     321.2    301.7
30             264.5   246.0   232.9       292.4       273.8   256.7   323.6     302.7    263.5
35             241.1   229.5   218.1       261.8       248.5   238.0   283.5     269.1    255.4
40             220.4   211.8   203.5       234.3       225.1   215.4   248.6     239.1    229.9
45             186.3   183.2   178.2        196.0      191.0   185.9   203.3     196.6    193.6
50             134.9   133.3   131.5        137.0      135.7   134.2   138.4     137.6    136.5
55              82.7    83.4    63.9         61.1       82.2    63.1    76.7       80.3    81.7
50              29.3    31.2    33.0         25.8       28.2    30.2    21.7       24.5    27.0
65             —19.7   —17.6   —15.6        —23.3      —20.9   —15.7   —27.3     —24.6    —22.2
70             —33.9   —32.2   —30.6        —38.8      —34.9   —33.1   —39.9     —37.6    —35.9
75             —36.4   —35.1   —34.0        —38.4      —37.1   —35.8   —40.6     —39.1    —37.6
80             —32.8   —32.0   —31.2        —34.0      —33.2   —32.4   —35.3     —34.5    —33.6
85             —26.4   —26.0   —25.6        —27.0      —26.6   —25.2   —27.7     —27.2    —26.6
90              —1.0    —1.0    —1.0         —1.0       —1.0    —1.0    —1.0       —1.0    —1.0


Futura
G.n.rstions    221.8   184.7   154.5        297.2      245.2   204.7    401.2    330.5     273.4
                                                   T.bt. 2

                          Aceourith for   Al. Zero   end Futur. Fe.].. G.n.r.tion.



                                                     .
                                          (thoucende of dotter.)

                                                         0075                    015


0.n.ration'.
A&. In 1989    r.05 r.06 r. 07             r .05     r—.06 r. 07        r. 35   r.06 r,O?

 0              46.2    35.3   27.3         57.3      43.6      33.3     10.9   53.9    41.2
 3              53,6    44.0   35.2         65.9      52.9      42.0     80.4   63.6    50.4
10              69.8    57.4    47.6        81.5      87.0      53.2     94.8    78.1   64.3
15              80.0    68.4    58.8        90.4      77.4      66.3    101.9    87.4   74,9
20              85.0    84.2    74.8       104.4      92.6      82.2    114.2   101.8   90.3
23              96.2    89.1    80.9       105.6      96.2       87.4   112.8   103.5   94,3
30              95.0    88.2    81.7       100.1      93.3       85.8   104.5    98.7   92.1
35              67.7    63.5    79.0        90.3      86.6       82.6    92.0    89.7   86.0
40              15.0    73.6    71.4        75.1      74.8       73.2    74.0    75.2   74.5
45              54.8    56.5    57.1        52,1      55.3       56.1    48.0    53.0   55.7
30              27.7    32.5    35.8        22.6      28.9       33.3    15.9    24.1   29.9
53              —6.5     0,7     5.4       —13.5         4.8      2.0   —21.9   —11.4   —5.2
50             —44.4   —36.4   —28.7       —51.8     —42.6      —35.0   —60.3   —49.7   —40.8
65             —78.0   —70.7   —64.4        84.5     —18.4      —69.4   —91.8   —82.7   —74.9
70             —79.6   —73.9   —68.9       —84.6     —78.4      —72.9   —90.1   —83.2   —77.2
75             —70.7   —66.7   —63.1       —74.1     —69.8      —63.9   —77,8   —73.2   —59.0
80             —57.7   —55.2   —52.9       —59.7     —57.2      —54.8   —61.9   —59.2   —56.5
85             —44.8   —43.6   —42.4       —45.8     —44,5      —43.4   —46.8   —45,5   —44.3
90              —7.3    —7.3    —7.3        —7.3       —7.3      —7.3    —7,3    —7,3    —7.3


Future
G.n.retlone     55.5    42.1    32.1        69.3       52.3      39.7    86.5    55.3    49.3
                                                    r.bl. 2s
                              Accounts or A;. ma sod Futur.              0.n.rstton.
                                                                  F.aia]..

                                         s Con..tsot tior.phic      Structur.

                                          (tbou.sods of 6o].1.r.)


                        8—0                          5 0075                           .015


G.n.rst ton.
A;.   in 1989   r—.05 r.06       r—.0?     c—OS       r—.06    r—.0l         r.05    r—.06   r—.07


 0              43.0    33.0      25.7      53.3       40.6    31.3          86.2     50.2   35.4
 5               54.0   42.9      34.5      85.0       51.4     41.0          76.4    81.7   49.0
10               72.5   59.9      48.9      84.6       69.6     57.6          95.7    61.0    66.8
15               65.5   76.1      65.8      99.9       85.6     73.5         112.8    95.8    83.0
20               96.3   85.8      76.7     105.7       93.9     63.8         116.0   103.0    91.7
25               86.0   76.5      71.9      92.4       84.3     77.1          99.2    90.6    82.7
30               76.5   71.2      66.3      80.9       75.4     70.2          53.2    79.8    74.2
35               70.7   67.1      63.5      73.4       69.9     66.3          75.8    72.7    69.2
40               61.3   59.6      57.5      62.3       61.0     39.2          62.8    62.1    60.6
45               49.9   50.3      50.1      46.8        50.0    50.3          46.8    49.2    50.2
50               31.2   34.5      36.6      27.6        32.0    35.1          22.9    28.7    32.7

55               —0.5     5.5     10.2      —6.3        0.9      6.5         —13.1    —4.6     2.2
60              —35.1   —26.8    —23.3     —40.6       —33.7   —27.7         —47.2   —39.1   —32.3

65              —83.2   —39.7    —54.9      —70.0      —53.9   —38.6         —75.3   —68.6   —82.8
70              —67.3   —62.9    —59.1      —71.0      —66.3   —62.1         —75.0   —69.9   —63.4
75              —60.4    57.3    '54.3      —63.0      —59.8   —56.8         —65.8   —62.3   —59.1
80              —50.3   —48.3    —46.7      —52.1      —50.0   —48.1         —53.9   —51.7   —49.5
85              —41.2   —40.2    —39.1      —42,1      —41.0   —39.9         —43.0   —41.9   —40.5
90               —7.3    —7.3     —7.3       —7.3       —7.3    —7.3          —7.3    —7.3    —7.3


Futurs
G.n.rstions      51.7    41.6     34.0       61.9       49.2    39.7          75.0    59.0    47.0
                                                       T..bi. 2b

                               Accounts for A. Z.ro and Futur. FtnaL. G.n.rations
                                   A.suin& .11. Capital Inc. T... ar. M.r&in.1

                                              (thou.and, of dollar.)

                                                        ;.0075                     —.C15


G.n.ration'I Ag.
     in 1989       r,05    r.06      r.07     r.05        r..06    r,0?    r.05     r.06    r.O?


 0                 88.3    35.4       27.4     57.4        43.7    33.5    71.2     54.1    41.3

 5                  55.7    44.1      35.2     67.1        33.0    42.1    60.7     63.7     50,5

10                  70.0    57.5      47.8     61.7        67.1    55,3    95.1,    78.3     64.4

15                  80.2    85.6      59.0     90.7        77.8    65.5    102.2     87.7    75.1
23                  95.3    84.4      74.9     104.8       92.9     82.4   114.7    102.1    90.6
25                  98.5    89.4      81.1     106.0       98.5     87.8   113.3    103.9    94.6
30                  95.0    88.2      81.6     100.2       93.6     86.8   104.5     98.8    92.1

35                  87.2    83.0      78.4     90.0        66.4     82.1    91.7     89.3    85.5
40                  73.9    72.4      70.2      74.1       73.7     72.0    73.1     14.2    73.4

45                  53.0    54.7      55.2      50.4       53.5     54.9    46.4     51.3    53.9
50                  25.2    29.9      33.2      20.1       26.4     30.7    13.5     21.1    27.4
55                  —9.8    —2.5       3.1     —16.5       —8.0     —1.2   —24.9    —14.5    —5.4
60                 —48.1   —40.1     —33.4     —55.4      —48.3    —36.5   —63.8    —53.3   —44.5
63                 —81.9   —74.6     —66.3     —88,4      —63.3    —73.3   —95.6    —88.5   —78.7
70                 —83.5   —77.8     —72.7     —85.4      —82.2    —76.7   —93.5    —87.0   —81.0
75                 —74.3   —70.3     —66.5     —77.7      —73.4    —69.5   —81.3    —76.7   —72.5
80                 —60.1   —58.3     —56,0     —62.8      —60.2    —51.8   —64.9    —62.2   —59.7
65                 —46.8   —45.6     —44.4     —47.8      --465     45.4   —48.8    —47,5   —46,3
90                  —7.6    —7.6      —7.6      —7.6       —7,6     —7.6   —7.6     —7.6     —7.6


Futur.
G.n.rationn         60.1    48,7      40,2      73.4        57.8    46,6    89.6     69.7    55.2
                                                   Tabi. 2c

                           Accounts for .g. i.ro .nd Futurs Fsmsls G.n.rsttons

                                         (thousinds of    dotisri)


                                                    ;—,0075                      —.c1S

G.n.rstion's
Aj. In 1989    r—.025 r—.03     r—.035    r—.025 r.03          r—.035   r.025 r. 03        r.035


 0              92.0    80.3     69.9      112.0      98.1      88.4    132.9     119.2    105.6

 5             100.2    69.3     79.4      116.0     106.3      95.1    135.2     124.1    112.4

10             113.3    103.3    93.8      129.0     118.3     108.7    142.7     134.1    124.2

15             116.9    103.9   101.1      128.5     121.1     113.2    137.4     132.1    125.1

20             126.2    120.0   113.6      134.4      129.3    123.4    139.0     136.5    132.2

25             120.7    116.3   112.4      124.9      122.5    119.0    124.9     125.5    123.9

30             106.2    106.6   104.3      108.4      103.6    107.6    104.3     107.6    108.7
35              91.7     92.2    91.9       38.4      90.9      92.1     30.6      36.3     69.6
40              70.0     72.5    74.1       63.7      68.2      71.3     53.4      60.7     66.0
45              40.2     44.3    48.4       30.7       37.2     42.4     17.5      26.6     33.9
50               4.9     11.2    16.4       —6.9         1.1     7,9    —21.9     —11.7     —3.0
55             —34.7    —27.6   —21.3      —47.8      —39.0    —31.3    —63.2     —52.7    —43.4
60             —72.6    —65.8   —59.7      —34.3      —76.5    —69.4    —97.9     —88.8    —80.5
65             —102.0   —96.4   —91.3     —111.4 —105.2        —99.4    —122.0 —114.9 —108.4
70              —97.5   —93.5   —69.7     —104.3      —99.8    —95.6    —111.7 —106.7 —102.1
 75             —82.7   —30.1   —77.5      —67.1      —84.2    —81.5    —91.7     —88.6    —85.7
 80             —64.7   —83.2   —61.7      —87.2      —65.8    —64.0    —69.7     —68.0    —66.4
 85             —48,2   —47.5   —45.8      —49.3      —48.5    —47.8    —50.4     —49.6    —46.9
 90              —7.3    —7.3    —7.3       —7.3       —7.3     —7.3     —7.3      —7.3     —7.3


 Futur.
 G.nsrations    111.8    97.3    84.7       136.9     120.4     105.3    164.1     146.8    129.8
                                           TabI. 3


                               P.rc.ntaj. Diff.r.ncs in Accounts
                               of A. l.ro and Tutur. G.n.r.tion.


Int.r..t
Rat.       —0      r .0025 8005 r .0073 r.01 r 0125 g.0l5 8 .0175 r.02

0.03       21.22   21.43   21.71   22.01    22.33    22.71   23.12   23.57   24.05
0.04       20.90   21.10   21.33   21.59    21.88    22.20   22.54   22.91   23.30
0.03       20.29   20.30   20.73   21.00    21.29    21.50   21.93   22,29   22.55
0.08       19.18   19.44   19.72   20.03    20.36    20.71   21.07   21.43   21.84
0.07       17.34   17.89   18.06   18.46    18.87    19.30   19.74   20,19   20.65
0,08       14.45   14.96   13.49   16.03    18.36    17.14   17.70   16.27   18.84
0,09       10,18   10.93   11.69   12.45    13.20    13.95   14.70   13.44   16.18
0.10        4.10    3.20    8.28    7.34     6.39     9.41   10.42   11.40   12.37
                                                                      Table   4

                                       Abaolute Values wd Percentage Dilference in Acco,ts of Age Zero
                                          and Future Nate Generations .s'der Alternative Policy Changes

                                                                (r=.06. g.OO?5)

                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                               Current 8udget Agrees-ant
                Current   Capital G.ins No Redxtion Faster iledicare 5500 b. S&t. Sto..er Groith
                Policy      Tax Cut     in Soc. Sec.    Groiith        Bailout    In Coy. Cons.

                                                                                                           A              B                C


Age Zero
                                                              71448               71999   71999           74103         74103         72105
in 1989          71999         71881            71723


Future
                                                91126        101069               95231   63405           49503         68583         80487
Generations      86419         87596


Percentage
                  20.0            21.9           19.8         27.1                32.3    -11.9           -33.2          -7.4              11.6
DIfference

  A   AU changes are peremnent.
  B   —
      Goverraant expenditureretions are tsecorary.
           I
  C = Al changes are teeorary.
                                                                           Tabte 4a


                                            Absolute Values and Percentage Difference in Accowits of Age Zero
                                              and Future Nat. Generations i.nder Alternative Policy Changes


                                                                      (r".03,   g.O075)


                                                                                                                                                 *
                     Current   Capital Gaina    No   Rec4xtion Faster Kedicare $500 b.       S&L   Slower Growth          Current Budget Agreement
                     Policy      Tax Cut        in   Soc. Sec.    Growth          Bailout          in   Coy. Cons.


                                                                                                                      A              B               C




Age Zero
in 1989             201755         201284            199469       197055          201755                201755       208030       208030        201875


Future
Generations         246165         247200            256043       268593          250259                215146       201179       230081        243016


Percentage
Difference             22.0          22.8             28.4          36.3              24.0                6.6          -3.3          10.6            20.4

*   A   * Alt change, are persanent.
    B   a Covernaent
                     expenditure redjctions are teeporary.
    C     All changes are te.vporary.
                                                            AFpendiX Table I


                                 The CcmçositiOn of MeL. Generational Accotrits (r—.06, g—.OO7S)

                                            Present Values of Receipts        and Paywents


                                                      (thousands of doLlars)


                                              Payments                                                 Receipts



                         Lsbor                      Capital
                                                                                                       welfare              Food
Generation's     Met     ince     FICA     Excise   Iric      Seigno- Property
                                                                       Taxes         OASOI    MI     AFDC   General   UI    Stanps
Age in 1989    Payment   Taxes    Taxes    Taxes    Taxes     rage

                                                                        1.6           4.4      1.1   2.2      3.9     0.4     1.3
 0               72.0     24.8     26.5     22.9      9.5       0.0
                                                                0.1     2.0           5.3      1.5   2.9      4.9     0.6    1.6
 5               89.6     31.8     3.4.0    26.3     12.2
                                                                        2.6           6.3      1.9   3.7      6.3     0.7    2.1
10              111.5     40.8     43.6     29.8     15.6       0.1
                                                                0.1     3.3           7.7      2.4   4.7      8.1     0.9    2.7
15              137.7     52.2     55.8     32.8     20.0
                                                                        4.1           9.1      2.9   5.0      9.6     1.1    3.2
20              159.9     61.9     66.2     33.9     24.8       0.1
                                                                                      11.4     3.8   4.5      9.6     1.1    3.0
25              185.4     70.3     75.1     35.8     32.4       0.1     5.3
                                                                        6.1           13.2     4.6   3.4      8.2     1.0    2.4
30              190.1     69.6     76.4     3.4.2    38.4       0.1
                                                                0.0     6.9           15.0     5.7    2.4     7.1     0.8    1.8
35              184.7     65.2     69.7     32.0     43.8
                                            30.5     49.8       0.0     7.6           17.9     7.4    1.7     6.5     0.7     1.3
40              178.3     60.9     65.1
                                                                        7.8           22.7    10.0    1.0     6.0     0.6     0.9
45              162.0     54.4     58.1     28.7     54.2       0.0
                                                                0.0     7.1           27.0    12.4    0.5     5.3     0.4     0.6
50              124.6     42.1     45.0     24.4     52.1
                                                                        6.6           3.4.3   16.0    0.2     5.0     0.3     0.5
55               84.1     31.0     33.2     202      48.7       0.0
                                                                0.0     6.1           44.8    22.0    0.0     5.0     0.2     0.4
60               37.4     20.2     21.5     17.9     44.1
                                                     37.0       0.0     5.4           50.0    30.7    0.0     4.9     0.1     0.3
65              -10.0      9.1      9.7     14.7
                                                                0.0     4.5           45.3    29.6    0.0     4.5     0.0     0.3
70              -25.8      4.0      4.3     11.9     29.3
                                                     22.5       0.0     3.7           37.9    27.9    0.0     3.9     0.0     0.2
75              -30.3      1.8      2.0      9.5
                                             7.5     17.2       0.0     3.0           29.8    24.4    0.0     3.2     0.0     0.2
80              -28.9      0.6      0.6
                                                     14.3       0.0     2.4           23.4    20.9    0.0     2.7     0.0     0.1
85              -24.3      0.0      0.0      6.1
                                                      6.7       0.0     0.5            4.6     4.2    0.0     0.5     0.0     0.0
90               -1.0      0.0      0.0      1.2
                                                         Appecxlix tabLe   2



                            The   CW,osition of   FemaLe GenerationaL ACCOJ,tS   (r.06, g.0075)
                                          Present VaLues of Receipts and Pa.meflts

                                                    (thousands of doLLars)


                                          Payments                                                Receipts


                    Labor                        CapitaL
GeneratIons Net     Ince FICA           (xcise   lnc       Seigno- Property                       teLfare             Food

Age In 1989 Payment Taxes Taxes         Taxes    Taxes     rage     Taxes      S0!      H!    AFOC    GeneraL   UI    StS
 0           43.6    14.0     14.9      20.2       3.5       0.0     2.1         4.9    1.5    0.3      3.2     1.0    0.3
 5           52.9    17.7     18.9      23.0       4.5       0.0     2.6         6.0    1.9    0.4      4.1     1.2    0.4
10           67.0    23.3     24.9      27.2       5.9       0.1     3.5         7.5    2.5    0.5      5.4     1.6    0.5
15           77.4    28.1     30.1      29.0       7.2       0.1     4.2        8.7     3.0   0.6       6.3     2.0    0.7
20           92.6   3.4.6     37.2      32.2       9.3       0.0     5.4       10.9    3.9    0.7       1.5     2.5    0.8
25           96.2   36.3      38.8      33.2      11.7       0.0     6.5       13.2    4.8    0.8       8.0     2.6    0.9
30           93.5   35.1      37.5      33.1      14.9       0.0     7.4       16.3    6.1    0.8       8.2     2.4    0.9
35           86.8   32.9      35.2      32.1      18.3       0.0     8.1       20.2    7.7    0.7       8.4     2.1    0.9
40           74.8   29.7      31.7      30.1      21.4       0.0     8.6       25.2    9.8    0.5       8.7     1.8    0.8
45           55.3   25.4      27.2      27.4      23.8       0.0     8.9       33.0    12.6   0.4       9.3     1.5    0.6
50           28.9   20.4      21.8      24.2      25.0       0.0     8.9       43.2    16.3   0.3      10.0     1.1    0.5
55           -4.8    14.9     15.9      20.8      24.9       0.0     8.7       56.5    21.3   0.2      10.9     0.7    0.4
60          -42.6    9.3          9.9   17.4      23.4       0.0     8.2       70.9    27.8   0.1      11.4     0.3    0.3
65          -76.4    4.8          5.1   14.2      20.8       0.0     7.6       79.8    37.4   0.0      11.4     0.0    0.3
70          -784     2.0          2.2   11.5      17.3       0.0     6.9       70.7    36.8   0.0      10.5     0.0    0.2
75          -69.8    0.7          0.7    9.1      13.2       0.0     6.0       56.4    34.5   0.0       8.5     0.0    0.2
80          -57.2    0.0          0.0    7.2      8.8        00      5.1       42.8    29.9   0.0       5.5     0.0    0.1
85          -44.6    0.0          0.0    5.8      4.5        0.0     4.2       32.1    24.7   0.0       2.1     0.0    0.1
90           -7.3    0.0          0.0    1.0      0.4        0.0     0.7        5.3     4.2   0.0       0.0     0.0    00
                                                                         Appendix Table 3


                                             The Cnrponents of Male Generational Accotsits     (r.06,r.O 075)

                                                     Average Amual Values of Receipts arid Payments

                                                                                                                      Receipts
                                                           Payments



                               Labor                          Capital                                                                        Food
                                                                                                                     Welfare
                      Net      Inccne    FICA     Excise       Income    Seigno-    Property
Cohort that is                                                                                  OASOI      HI     AFDC    General    UI      Staeçs
                               Taxes     Taxes    Taxes        Taxes     rage       Taxes
Age 0   in1989 Payment
Age     Year
                                                                                                                    0.0     0.0      0.0       0.0
                                                                 0.0       0.0        0.0       20.6       0.0
         1989        480.8        0.0       0.0   501.4                                                                                        0.0
 0                                                                                              78.5       0.0      0.0     0.0       0.0
                                  0.0       0.0    867.5         0.0       0.0        0.0
10       1999        789.0                                                                                        381.4   376.2      43.1    ¶84.5
                                                               183.0      14.5        4.3       77.1       0.0
20       2009        3775.5    1467.3    1568.4   1600.2                                                                                     271.7
                                                                                                           0.0    436.7   723.0      88.0
                                                              3214.9       6.6      ¶30.8      249.0
30       2019       13120.8    4461.1    4768.4   2307.5                                                                             85.0    209.4
                                                                                               472.5        0.0   297.6   626.2
                               6085.1    6504.3   2755.2      9246.0       4.1      493.2
40       2029       23397.1                                                                                       149.2   517.9      72.8    10&4
                                                                                    688.8      553.7        0.0
                               6336.7    6773.2   2868.5     15876.5        2.1
50       2039       31145.9                                                                                0.0    32.1    497.1      51.2     60.8
                                                             19621.5        1.7     806.5      1396.6
60       2049       32801.9    5652.7    6042.1   2715.4                                                                              6.3     50.6
                                                                                               7320.9    4954.7    0.0    820.0
                                         1464.9   2466.9 18162.6            2.4     895.5
70       2059       11210.3    1370.5                                                                               0.0   972.0       0.0     54.6
                                                                            1.2     920.2      7981.0    7226.0
80       2069        1582.5     410.2     438.5   2324.4 13721.6                                                                      0.0     58.8
                                                                                               7614.6    8279.8     0.0   1058.0
                                  0.0       0.0   2404.6 13121.9           -6.3     916.3
90       2079        -574.7

                                Labor                          Capital                                                                        Food
                                                                                                                      Welfare
                                          FICA     Excise      Income     Seigno-   Property
Cohort that is         Net      Incare                                                                                                UI     Stance
                                                                                                 OAS0I      HI     AFDC    General
                                                               Taxes      rage      Taxes
                                Taxes     Taxes    taxes
Age 10 in 1989       Payment
Age     Year

                                                                                                                               0.0    0.0       0.0
                                                                                                 72.9       0.0     0.0
                      732.2       0.0       0.0    805.1         0.0        0.0       0.0
 10      1989                                                                                                     354.0    349.2     40.0     171.2
                                                                           13.5       4.0        71.5       0.0
         1999        3503.6    1361.7    1455.5   1485.0       169.8                                                                          252.1
 20                                                                                                               405.3    671.0     81.7
                                                                            6.1      121.4      231.0       0.0
                    12176.1    4139.9    4425.1   2141.3      2983.4
 30      2009                                                                                                     276.2    581.1     78.9     194.4
                                                                                    457.7       438.4       0.0
                               5646.9    6036.0   2556.8      8580.4        3.8
 40      2019       21712.6                                                                                                480.6     67.5      98.8
                                                                                                513.9       0.0   138.4
                                                  2661.9      14733.5       2.0     639.2
 50      2029       28903.5    5880.5    6285.6                                                                                                56.4
                                                                                               1296.1       0.0    29.8    461.3     47.5
                                         5607.1   2519.9 18208.8            1.6      748.4
 60      2039       30440.3    5245.7                                                                                      761.0       5.8     47.0
                                                                            2.2      831.0     6793.8    4598.0     0.0
 70      2049       10403.2     1271.9   1359.5   2289.3 16854.9                                                                               50.6
                                                                                               7406.4    6705.7     0.0    902.0       0.0
                                          406.9   2157.0      12733.7       1.1      853.9
 80      2059         1468.6     380.7                                                                                     981.8       0.0     54.6
                                                                                     850.3     7066.4    7683.7     0.0
             2069     -533.3       0.0      0.0   2231.5 12177.2           -5.9
 90
                                                                     Appendix Table 3 (continued)

                                  Labor                          Capital
Cohort   that is         Wet      Inccaie    FICA     Excise                                                            Welfare               Food
                                                                 lnc       Seigno- Property
Age 20   in 1989                  Taxes      Taxes    Taxes      Taxes     rage      Taxes          CASt!      HI    AFOC    General   UI     Staeva
                       Payment
Age       Year

20        1989         3251.4    1263.6     1350.7   1378.1      157.6      12.5       3.7          66.4       0.0   328.5   324.0     37.1   158.9
30        1999        11299.5    3841.8     4106.5   1987.2     2768.6       5.7     112.6       214.4         0.0   376.1   622.7     75.8   234.0
40        2009        20149.4    5240.4     5601.4   2372.7     7962.6       3.5     424.8       406.9         0.0   256.3   539.3     73.2   180.4
50        2019        26822.5    5457.1     5833.0   2470.3 13672.7          1.8     593.2       476.9         0.0   128.5   446.0     62.7    91.7
60        2029        28248.7    4868.0     5203.4   2338.5    16897.8       1.5     694.5      1202.8         0.0    27.7   428.1     44.1    52.4
                                                                             2.0     771.2      6304.7      4267.0    0.0    706.2     5.4     43.6
70        2039         9654.2    1180.3     1261.6   2124.5    1564142
80        2049         1362.9     353.3      377.6   2001.7    11816.9       1.1     792.5      6873.2      6222.9    0.0    837.1     0.0     47.0

                                                               11300.4      -L4      789.1      6557.6      7130.5    0.0    911.1      0.0    50.6
90        2059         -494.9       0.0        0.0   2070.8


                                  Labor                          Capital
                                                                                                                        Welfare               Food
Cohort that is           Wet      Incc*ne    FICA     Excise     Ircwie    Seigno-   Property
Age 30 in 1989         Payment    Taxes      Taxes    Taxes      Taxes     rage      Taxes          OASDI      HI     AFDC   General   UI     StaTps

Age       Tear


30        1989                   3565.2     3810.9   1844.1     2569.3       5.3     104.5       199.0         0.0   349.0   577.8     70.3   217.1
                      10486.0
40        1999        18698.7    4863.1     5198.1   2201.9     7389.3       3.3     394.2       377.6         0.0   237.8   500.5     68.0   167.4

50        2009        24891.4    5064.2     5413.1   2292.4    12688.3       1.7     550.5       442.5         0.0   119.2   413.9     58.2    85.1

60        2019        26214.9    4517.6     4828.8   2170.1    15681.2       1.4     644.5      1116.2         0.0    25.7   397.3     40.9    48.6
70        2029         8959.1    1095.3     1170.8   1971.5    14515.3       1.9     715.7      5850.8      3959.7    0.0    655.3      5.0    40.5

80        2039         1264.7     327.9      350.4   1857.6    10966.1       1.0     735.4      6378.3      5774.9    0.0    776.8      0.0    43.6
                                                                                                6085.5      6617.1    0.0    845.5      0.0    47.0
90       2049          -459.3       0.0        0.0   1921.7    10486.9      -5.1     732.3


                                  Labor                          Capital
Cohort that              Wet      Income     FICA     Excise     Inccsre                                                Welfare               Food
                 is                                                        Seigno-   Property
         in                       Taxes      Taxes    Taxes      Taxes     rage      Taxes          OASOI      HI    AF0C    General   UI     Staeps
Age 40        1989 Payment
Age      Year


                                 4513.0     4823.9   2043.4    6857.3        3.1     365.8      350.4          0.0   220.7   464.4     63.1   155.3
40        1989        17352.4
50        1999        23099.3    4699.6     5023.4   2127.4    11774.8       1.6     510.8      410.7          0.0   110.6   384.1     54.0    78.9
                                 4192.3     4481.1   2013.9    14552.2       1.3     598.1      1035.8         0.0   23.8    368.7     38.0    45.1
60       2009         24327.5
                                                                                                5429.5      3674.7    0.0    608.1      4.6    37.5
70       2019          8314.1    1016.5     1086.5   1829.6    13470.2       1.7     664.2
                                             325.2   1723.9    10176.6      0.9      682.5      5919.1      5359.1    0.0    720.9      0.0    40.5
80       2029          1173.7     304.3
                                    0.0        0.0   1783.4    9731.8       -4.7     679.6      5647.4      6140.7    0.0    784.6      0.0    43.6
90       2039          -426.2
                                                                 Appendix Table 3 (continued)

                                Labor                         Capital
                                                                                                                     Welfare                Food
Cohort that    is       Net     Income    FICA     Excise     Income     seigno- Property
                                                                                   Taxes        OASOI       NI    AFOC    General    UI     Stwps
         in   1989 Payment      Taxes     Taxes    Taxes      Taxes      rage
Age 50
Age      Year

                                                                                              381.1         0.0   102.7   356.4      50.1    73.3
50        1989        21436.2   4361.2    4661.7   1974.2 10927.1          1.5     474.0
                                                                           1.2     555.1      961.2         0.0    22.1   342.1      35.3    41.8
60        1999        22576.0   3890.5    4158.5   1868.9 13504.5
                                                                                   616.3      5631.4     3410.1    0.0    564.4      4.3     34.8
70        2009         7122.7    943.3    1008.3   1697.9 12500.4          1.6
                                                                           0.8     633.3      6139.2     4973.3    0.0    669.0       0.0    37.5
80        2019          443.0    282.3    301.8    1599.7 9443.9
                                                                          -4.4     630.6      5857.3     5698.6    0.0    728.1       0.0    40.5
90        2029        -1012.1      0.0      0.0    1655.0 9031.2

                                 Labor                        Capital
                                                                                                                      Welfare               Food
Cohort that Is           Net     IncTe     FICA     Excise    Income     Seigno-   Property
                                                                                   Taxes        OASOI       NI     AFOC   General     UI    Staiçe
Age 60   in   1989 Payment       Taxes     Taxes    Taxes     Taxes      rage
Age       Year

                                                                           1.1     5151         892.0       0.0    20.5   317.5      32.7    38.8
60        1989        20950.6   3610.4    3859.1   1734.3 12532.2
                                                                                   572.0      5501.0     3164.6     0.0   523.7       4.0    32.3
70        1999         6334.9    875.4     935.7   1575.6 11600.4          1.5
                                                                                              5997.0     4615.2     0.0   620.8       0.0    34.8
80        2009          111.2    262.0     280.1   1484.6 8764.0           0.8     587.7
                                                                          -4.0     585.2      5721.7     5288.3     0.0   675.7       0.0    375
90        2019        -1225.3      0.0       0.0   1535.8    8381.0


                                 Labor                        Capital
                                                                                                                      Welfare               Food
Cohort that      is      Net     Income    FICA     Excise    Incore     Seigno-   Property
                                                              Taxes                Taxes        OAS0I       HI     AFOC   General     UI    Staaps
Age 70   in 1989 Payment         Taxes     Taxes    Taxes                rage
Age       Year

                                                                           1.4     530.8      5105.0     2936.7     0.0   4860        3.7    30.0
70        1989         5878.8    812.3     868.3   1462.2    10765.2
                                                                                                         4283.0     0.0   576.1       0.0    32.3
                                 243.2     259.9   1377.7    8133.0        0.7     545.4      5565.3
80        1999          103.2
                                                                                              5309.8     4907.6     0.0   627.1       0.0    34.8
90        2009        -1137.1      CM        0.0   1425.2    7777.6       -37      543.1


                                 Labor                        Capital
                                                                                                                      Welfare               Food
                 is      Wet     Income    FICA     Excise     Iricore   Seigno-   Property
Cohort that
                                                                                                 0*50!      HI     AFOC    General    UI    Staitçs
                                 Taxes     Taxes    Tases     Taxes      rage      Taxes
Age 80   in   1989 Payment
Age       Year

                                                                                                         3974.6     0.0    534.6      0.0    30.0
                                           241.2   1278.5     7547.4       0.7     506.1      5164.6
80        1989           95.8    225.6
                                                                                              4927.5     4554.2     0.0    581.9      0.0    32.3
                                   0.0       0.0   1322.6     7217.6      -3.5     504.0
90        1999        -1055.2
                                                        Appendix Table 3 (continued)

                         Labor                       CapitaL
                                                                                                          Welfare              Food
Cohort that is   Wet     Lnc&ne   FLCA     Excise    Income    Seigno-   Property
                                  Taxes    Taxes     Taxes               Taxes         OASDI      HI    AFDC   General   UI    StasTpS
Age 90 in 1989 Payment   Taxes                                 rage
Age     Year

                                                                                               4226.3    0.0   540.0     0.0    30.0
90     1989    -979.2      0.0      0.0   1227.4    6697.9      -3.2     467.7      4572.7
                                                                           Appeodix Table 4


                                             The Ccri,onents    of Female Generational Accotflts (rs.06, gs.0075)

                                                       Average Aratal Values of Receipts ard Payrients

                                                                                                                            Receipts
                                                             Payments



                               Labor                            Capital
                                                                                                                        welfare                   Food
Cohort that is  Wet             Income   FICA       Excise      Income     Seigno-   Property
                                                                                                   OASOI      Ill    AFOC       General    UI     StSTps
                               Taxes     Taxes      Taxes       Taxes      rage      Taxes
Age 0 in 1989 Payment
Age     Year

                                                                                                              0.0     0.0         0.0      0.0      0.0
                                                    501.4          0.0       0.0       0.0         31.0
 0       1989         470.4       0.0       0.0                                                                                                     0.0
                                                                                       0.0         69.7        0.0    0.0         0.0      0.0
10       1999         585.3       0.0       0.0     655.0          0.0       0.0
                                                                                                               0.0    8.9       251.1     68.9     16.4
                                         1148.3    1358.1         0.0        5.2      30.3         81.5
20       2009        3189.4    1074.3                                                                                                              63.8
                                                                                                  101.6        0.0   73.9       440.0     204.3
                               2512.9    2686.0    2123.5       598.3        3.3     250.4
30       2019        7290.9                                                                                                               200.1    79.6
                                                                                                  156.4        0.0   68.2       458.2
                                         3187.1    2632.1       2985.7       0.8     479.7
40       2029       11304.6    2981.7                                                                                                     194.1    71.4
                                                                                                  471.0        0.0   51.1       520.7
                                                   2744.8       6230.2       0.2      703.1
50       2039       14624.0    3022.8    3231.1
                                                                                                                     31.7       922.8     140.6    50.8
                                                                8921.5       2.3      882.6      1719.9        0.0
60       2049       14352.4    2374.1    2537.7    2500.1
                                                                                                                      8.2      1696.2       0.0    36.3
                                                   2090.5       9683.5       5.9     1021.5      10578.8    4954.7
70       2059       -2771.5     822.3     879.0                                                                                                    35.0
                                                                                                 9850.4     7226.0    0.0      2097.5       0.0
                    -8090.9      57.4      61.4    1811.8       7978.8       6.6     1202.0
80       2069                                                                                                                               0.0    34.6
                                                                                                 8745.0     8279.8    0.0         0.0
                                            0.0    1974.6        873.2      -2.6     1429.6
90       2079      -12784.5       0.0


                                Labor                            Capital                                                                          Food
                                                                                                                        welfare
Cohort   that is       Net      IncTe     FICA       Excise      Incme     Seigno-    Property
                                                                                                    OASOI      HI    AFDC       General     UI    Stan!)S
                                Tases     Taxes      Taxes       Taxes      rage      Taxes
Age 10 in 1989       Payment
Age      Year

                                                                                                               0.0     0.0        0.0       0.0     0.0
                                                                   0.0       0.0        0.0         64.7
10        1989        543.2       0.0       0.0      607.8
                                                                                                                       8.3      233.0      64.0    15.2
                                                                             4.8       28.2         75.6       0.0
          1999       2959.8     996.9    1065.6     1260.3         0.0
20                                                                                                                              408.3     189.6    59.2
                                                                                      232.4         94.3       0.0   68.5
                               2332.0    2492.6     1970.6       555.2       3.0
30        2009       6766.0                                                                                                                        73.9
                                                                                                               0.0   63.3       425.2     185.7
                                                                2770.8       0.7      445.2        145.2
40        2019      10490.7    2767.0    2957.6     2442.6
                                                                                                                                483.2     180.1    66.3
                                                                                      652.5        437.1       0.0   47.4
                               2805.2    2998.5     2547.2      5781.6       0.2
50        2029      13571.1                                                                                                                        47.2
                                                                                                               0.0    29.5      856.4     130.5
                                                    2320.1      8279.2        2.2     819.0       1596.0
60        2039      13319.1    2203.2    2355.0
                                                                                                            4598.0     7.6     1574.1       0.0    33.6
                                                                8986.3        5.5     948.0       9817.2
          2049      -2571.9     763.1     815.7     1940.0
70                                                                                                                                          0.0    32.5
                                                                              6.1    1115.4       9141.2    6705.7     0.0      1946.5
80        2059      -73083       53.3      57.0     1681.4      7404.4
                                                                                                            7683.7     0.0        0.0       0.0    32.1
                                                                             -2.4    1326.7       8115.4
          2069     -11864.1       0.0       0.0     1832.4       810.3
90
                                                                Appendix Table 4 (continued)

                               Labor                        Capital
Cohort that ia         Met     Income    PICA     Excise    Income    Seigno-    Property                          Wet fare               Food

Age 20 in 1989 Payment         Taxes     Taxes    Taxes     Taxes     rage       Taxes         OASOI      141   AF0C    General    Ut     Stairça

Age       Year


20        1989       2746.7    925.2     988.9   1169.6       0.0       4.5       26.1         70.1       0.0    7.7    216.2     59.4     14.1

30        1999       6278.9   2164.1    2313.2   1828.7     515.3       2.8      215.7         87.5       0.0   63.6    378.9     175.9    54.9
40        2009       9735.4   2567.8    2744.7   2266.7    2571.3       0.7      413.1       134.7        0.0   58.7    394.6     172.3    68.5
50        2019      12594.0   2603.2    2782.6   2363.8    5365.4       0.1      605.5       405.6        0.0   44.0    448.4     167.1    61.5
60        2029      12360.1   2044.6    2185.4   2153.0    7683.1       2.0      760.1      1481.1        0.0   27.3    794.7     121.1    43.8

70        2039 -2386.7         708.2     757.0   1800.3    8339.3       5.1      879.7      9110.4     4267.0    7.1   1460.7      0.0     31.2
80        2049 -6967.8          49.5      52.9   1560.3    6871.3       5.6     1035.1      8483.0     6222.9    0.0   1806.3      0.0     30.1
90        2059 -11009.9          0.0       0.0   1700.5     752.0      -2.3     1231.2      7531 .1    7130.5    0.0      0.0      0.0     29.8


                               Labor                        Capital
Cohort that is   Met           Income    RCA      Excise    Income    Seigno-    Property                          Wet fare               Food

Age 30 in 1989 Payment         Taxes     Taxes    Taxes     Taxes     rage       Taxes         OASDI      III   AFOC    General    UI     Steeps
Age     Year


30        1989      5826.8    2008.3    2146.6   1697.1     478.2       2.6      200.2         81.2       0.0   59.0    351.6     163.2    51.0
40        1999      9034.5    2382.9    2547.1   2103.5    2386.2       0.6      383.4       125.0        0.0   54.5    366.2     159.9    63.6

50        2009     11687.3    2415.8    2582.2   2193.6    4979.1       0.1      561.9       376.4        0.0   40.8    416.1     155.1    57.1
60        2019     11470.2    1897.4    2028.1   1998.0    7129.9       1.9      705.3      1374.5        0.0   25.4    737.5     112.3    40.6

70        2029     -2214.9     657.2     702.5   1670.7    7738.9       4.8      616.4      8454.5     3959.7    6.6   1355.6      0.0     29.0
80        2039     -6466.1      45.9      49.1   1448.0    6376.9       5.2      960.6      7872.3     5774.9    0.0   1676.3      0.0     28.0

90        2049     -10217.2      0.0       0.0   1578.1     697.9      -2.1     1142.5      6988.9     6617.1    0.0      0.0      0.0     27.6


                               Labor                        Capital
Cohort   that is      Met      Incane    FICA     Excise    Income    Seigno-   Property                           Welfare                Food

Age 40   in 1989               Taxes     Taxes    Taxes     Taxes     rage       Taxes         OAS0I      HI    AFOC    General    UI     Sta4Tps
                    Payment
Age       Year


40        1989      8384.0    2211.4    2363.7   1952.1    2214.4       0.6     355.8        116.0        0.0   50.6    339.8     148.4    59.0

50        1999     10845.8    2241.9    2396.3   2035.7    4620.6       0.1     521.5        349.3        0.0   37.9    386.1     143.9    53.0

60        2009     10644.4    1760.8    1882.1   1854.2    6616.6       1.7     654.6       1275.5        0.0   23.5    684.4     104.3    37.7

70        2019     -2055.4     609.9     651.9   1550.4    7181.8       4.4     757.6       7845.8     3674.7    6.1   1258.0      0.0     26.9

80       2029      -6000.6     42.6      45.3    1343.7    5917.5       49      891.4       7305.5     5359.1    0.0   1555.6      0.0     25.9

90       2039      -9481.6       0.0       0.0   1464.4    647.6       -1.9     10603       6485.7     6140.7    0.0      0.0      0.0     25.6
                                                                         Appendix table 4 (contirued)


                                   Labor                              capital                                                   Welfare                          Food
                         Net       Income     ricA         Excise     iricnne     SeignO    Property                                                  UI
Cohort    that is                                                                                                   MI        AFDC      General                  Stamps
                                                                                            Texes       OASOI
                                   Taxes      Taxes        Taxes      Taxes       rage
Age 50    in 1989      Payment
Age        Year
                                                                                                                              35.2      358.3        133.6        49.2
                                                                                    0.1     483.9       324.2        0.0
                                   2080.5     2223.8       1889.1     4287.9                                                                                      35.0
50         1989        10065.0                                                                                                21.8      635.2        96.7
                                                                                    1.6     607.4      1183.7        0.0
                        9878.1     1634.0     1746.6       1720.7     6140.2                                                                          0.0         25.0
60         1999                                                                                        8137.5     3410.1       5.7     1167.4
                                                           1438.8     6664.1        4.1     703.1
70         2009        -2764.0      566.0     605.0                                                                            0.0     1443.6         0.0         24.1
                                                                                    4.5     827.3      7571.1     4973.3
                       -6366.1       39.5      42.3        1247.0     5491.4                                                                          0.0         23.8
8o         2019                                                                                        6726.8     5698.6       0.0        0.0
                                                 0.0       1359.0      601.0       -1.8     983.9
90         2029        -9507.1        0.0

                                    Labor                              Capital                                                   weLfare                         Food
                                                            Excise     InccaTIe   Seignr    Property
Cohort that is            Met       Income     FICA                                                                           AFOC       General       lii       Stamps
                                                                                                         OASOI       HI
                                               Taxes        Taxes      Taxes      rage      Taxes
Age 60 in 1989 Payment              Taxes

Age        Year
                                                                                                                                         589.4        89.8         32.5
                                                                                     1.5    563.7       1098.5       0.0      20.3
                        9166.9     1516.4     1620.8       1596.8     5698.2                                                                           0.0         23.2
60          1989                                                                                                  3164.6       5.3      1083.3
                                                                      6184.9         3.8    652.4       7949.0
            1999       -2962.5      525.2      561.4       1335.2                                                                                      0.0         22.3
 70                                                                                                               4615.2       0.0      1339.1
                                                           1157.2     5096.1         4.2     767.7      7401.7
            2009       -6277.9       36.1       39.2                                                                                       0.0         0.0         22.1
 80                                                                                                     6571.1    5288.3       0.0
                                                           1261.2      557.7        -1.1    913.1
            2019       -9151.1        0.0        0.0
 90


                                    Labor                              Capital                                                                                    Food
                                                                                                                                  Welfare
                                               FICA         Excise     IncaTe      Seigno- Property                                                               Stamps
 Cohort that is            Net       Inca                                                                 OASOI       HI       AFDC      General        ui
                                               Taxes        Taxes      Taxes       rage      Taxes
           in   1989     Payment     Taxes
 Age 70
 Age        Year
                                                                                                                                        1005.4          0.0        21.5
                                                                                                        7376.7     2936.7       4.9
                                                                       5739.6        3.5     605.5
                        -2749.2      487.4      521.0       1239.1                                                                                      0.0        20.7
 70         1989                                                                                                   4283.0       0.0     1243.2
                                                                                     3.9     712.4      6868.8
                                                 36.4       1073.9     4729.2                                                                                      20.5
 80         1999        -5825.9       34.0                                                                                      0.0        0.0          0.0
                                                                                             647.4      6098.0     4907.6
                                                  0.0       1170.4      517.6       -1.6
            2009        -8492.3        0.0
 90

                                     Lsbor                              Capital                                                                                    Food
                                                                                                                                     Welfare
                            Net      Income     PICA         Excise     Inci*      Seigno- Property                                                        UI      Stacps
 Cohort that is                                                                                                          Hi    AFDC       General
                                                                                             Taxes        OASOI
                                     Taxes      Taxes        Taxes      Taxes      rage
 Age 80 in 1989          Payment

 Age     Year

                                                                                                                                0.0      1153.7            0.0      19.2
                                                                                     3.6     661.1      6374.2     3974.6
                                                 33.8        996.6     4388.7                                                                                       19.0
     80      1989       -5406.4       31.6                                                                                      0.0            0.0         0.0
                                                                                             786.4      5658.9     4554.2
                                                     0.0    1086.1      480.3        -1.4
     90      1999       -7880.9         0.0
                                                          Apperxix Table   4   (continued)


                             Labor                     Capitet                                                                       Food
                                                                                                                Welfare
Cohort               Net     Income   FICA    Excise   Iric&ne   Seigno-   Property
         that is                                                                             OASOI     HI     AF0C   General   UI    Starpe
                             Taxes    Taxes   Taxes    Taxes     rage      Taxes
Age 90   in 1969   Payment
Age       Year

                                                                                                               0.0     0.0     0.0    17.7
                                                       445.7      -1.3     729.7         5251.5      4226.3
90        1989     -7313.5     0.0      0.0   1007.9
                                                                                Appendix Table    5



                                                   Accotrits       for   Age Zero arid Future Mate Generations
                                                                                                               uider

                                                                           Alternative Pot icy    Changes


                                                                                (r.06, gs.0075)

                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                             Cthousar of dultars)                                  Current Btdget Agreaent

Generation's           Current    Capital Gains   No   Reduction Faster Medicare $500 b. $61 SLower Growth
                                                                                                            In Cow.   Cons.   A              B               C
         In 1989                    Tax Cut       In Soc.   Sec.           Growth         Del tout
Age                    PoLicy


                                                                               71.4              72.0             72.0        74.1               74.1            72.1
 0                        72.0             71.9           71.7
                                                                                                 89.6             89.6        92.2            92.2                89.8
 5                        89.6             89.5           89.3                 88.9
                                                                                             111.5               ilLS         114.5          114.5               111.7
10                        111.5           111.3          111.0                110.6
                                                                              136.5          137.7               137.7        141.3          141.3               138.0
15                        137.7           137.4          137.1
                                                                              158.5          159.9               159.9        163.8           163.8              160.5
20                        159.9           159.6          159.2
                                                                              183.6          185.4               185.4        189.7           189.7              186.2
25                        185.4           185.0          184.5
                                                                                                                 190.1        194.4           194.4              191.0
                          190.1           189.6          189.0                187.9          190.1
30
                                                                              182.0          184.7               184.7        188.8           188.8              185.7
35                        184.7           184.2          183.3
                                                                                             178.3               1ThJ         ¶82.4           182.4              179.3
40                        178.3           177.8          176.5                174.7
                                                                              157.2          162.0               162.0        166.0           166.0              163.0
45                        162.0           161.4          160.3
                                                                                                                              128.3           128.3              125.5
                                          124.1          123.6                119.1          124.6               124.6
50                        124.6
                                                                               78.2              84.1             84.1            87.6           87.6            85S
55                         84.1           83.6              84.1
                                                                                                 37.4             37.4            40.8           40.8            38.5
60                         37.4           37.1              37.4               31.5
                                                                              -15.1          -10.0               -10.0            -7.3         .73                -9.0
65                        -10.0           -10.3          -10.0
                                                         -25.8                -29.6          -25.8               -25.8        -237            -237               -24.9
70                        -25.8           -26.0
                                          305            -303                 -33.0          -30.3               -30.3        -28.8           -28.8              -296
75                         303
                                                         -28.9                -30.5          -289                -289         -278            -27.8              -28.3
80                        -28.9           -28.9
                                                                                             -24.3               -24.3        -23.6           -23.6              -23.6
85                        -24.3           -24.3          -24.3                -25.1
                                                                               -1.0              -1.0             -1.0         -1.0            -1.0               -1.0
90                         -1.0            -1.0             -1.0

Future
                                                                              101.1              95.2             63.4            49.5           68.6            80.5
Generations                86.4            87.6             91.1



*    A = AtL changes    are permanent.
     B     Goverrasent expenditure reductions are teirperary.
           Alt   changes are tençorary.
                                                                          Appendix TabLe Sa

                                                   Accotlits   for   Age Zero and Future Mate      Generations wider

                                                                     ALternative   PoLicy Siatitations


                                                                            (r.03, g.00Th)


                                                                         (thousandsof dot tars)
                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                            Current   BLxlget   Agreement

                                                   No    RaO.tion Faster   Medicare $500 b. SAL        SLower Growth
Generation's            Currant    Capitat Gains
                                                                                      BaiLout          in Gov. Cons.   A                 B                  C
Age      in   1989      PoLicy       Tax Cut       in   Soc. Sec.      Growth



                                                                           197.1           201.8            201.8      208.0             208.0                  201.9
0                          201.8         201.3             199.5
                                                                           216.5           221.7            221.7      228.6              228.6                 22L9
S                          221.7         221.2             219.2
                                                                                           243.1            243.1      250.5              250.5                 243.3
10                         243.1         242.5             240.3           237.3
                                                                           258.5           264.9            264.9      272.7              272.7                 265.3
15                         264.9         264.2             261.8
                                         273.2             270.7           267.3           274.0            274.0      281.9              281.9                 274.7
20                         274.0
                                                           285.4           281.5           289.1            289.1      297.2              297.2                 290M
25                         289.1         288.2
                                                           269.9           265.8           273.8            273.8      281.5              281.5                 274.8
30                         273.8         272.9
                                                           244.3           239.9           248.5            248.5      255.5              255.5                 249.5
35                         248.5         247.6
                                                                                           225.1            225.1      231.8              231.8                 226.3
40                         225.1         224.2             220.4           215.5
                                                           187.3           179.9           191.0            191.0      197.4              197.4                 192.1
45                         191.0         190.1
                                         135.0             133.8           124.5           135.7            135.7      141.3              141.3                 136.8
50                         135.7
                                          81.6              82.2            71.4            82.2             82.2       87.4               87.4                  83.2
55                          82.2
                            28.2          27.7              28.2            18.3            28.2             28.2       32.8               32.8                  29.4
60
                                         -21.3             -20.9           -28.7           -20.9            -20.9      -17.3              -17.3                 -19.8
65                         -20.9
                           .349          -35.2             -34.9           -40.4           -34.9            -34.9      -32.2              -32.2                 -33.9
70
                                         -37.2             -37.1           -40.6           -37.1             37        -35.2              -35.2                 -36.2
75                         -37.1
                           -33.2          333              -33.2           -35.2           -33.2            -33.2      -31.9              -31.9                 -32.5
80
                           -26.6         -26.7             -26.6           -27.5           -26.6            -26.6      -25.8              -25.8                 -25.8
85
                            -1.0          -1.0              -1 C            -1.0            -1.0             -1.0          -1.0            -1.0                  -1.0
90


Future
                                                                           26&6            250.3            215.1      201.2              230.1                 243.0
Generations                246.2         247.2             256.0


* A      =   ALL changes  are pennanent.
     B   —   Goverrasent expenditure redictions are teeporary.
     C =     At L changes are teirç,orary.
                                                                              Appendix TabLe 6


                                                     Accorts     for Age   Zero and Future Fenale Generations titer


                                                                       Alternative Policy Changes

                                                                               (r=.06, g.0075)

                                                                            (thousands   of dollars)                                                 *
                                                                                                                      Current     Budget Agreasent

Generation's            Current    Capital   Gains    110   Reduction Faster Medicare $500 b. Sit. Slower Growth
                                    Tax Cut          In Soc.   Sec.     Growth          Bailout    In Ccv. Cons.
Age      in   1989      PolIcy                                                                                                                           C
                                                                                                                       A                 B


                                                                                                           43.6         45.2              45.2           43.7
                                           43.5                43A             42.9            43.6
 0                         43.6                                                                                                                          53.0
                                                                                               52.9        52.9         54.8              54.8
                                           52.8                52.3            52.0
 5                         52.9                                                                                                                          67.1
                                                                                               67.0        67.0         69.3              69.3
                           67.0            66.9                66.2            65.8
10                                                                                                                                                       77.7
                                                                                               77.4        77.4         80.0              80.0
15                         77.4            77.3                76.4            75.9
                                                                                                           92.6         95.7              95.7           93.1
                           92.6            92.5                91.4            90.8            92.6
20                                                                                                                                                       96.7
                                                                                               96.2        96.2            99.            99.4
25                         96.2            96.0                94.7            93.9
                                                                                                           93.5            96.8           96.8               94.1
                           93.5            93.3                91.6            90.6            93.5
30                                                                                                                                        90.2               87.4
                                                               84.4            83.1            86.8        86.8            90.2
35                         86.8            86.6
                                                                                                                           78.2           78.2               75.4
                           74.8            74.5                71.6            70.0            74.8        74.8
40                                                                                                                                        58.9               55.9
                                                               52.6            49.3            55.3        55.3            58.9
45                         55.3            55.0
                                                                                                                           32.7           32.7               29.5
                           28.9            28.6                27.2            21.6            28.9        28.9
50                                                                                                                                                           -4.2
                                                               -48            -130             -4.8        -4.8            -0.6           -0.6
55                         -48               .50
                                                                                              -42.6       -42.6            383           -383            -41.6
60                         -42.6           -42.8               426            -50.9
                                                                                                          -76.4        -72.6             -72.6           -75.2
                           -76.4           -76.6               -76.4          -83.8           -76.4
65
                                                                              -84.2           -78.4        734         .754              754             .773
70                         .74             -78.5               -78.4
                                                                              -73.8           -69.8       -69.8        -67.7              -67.7          -689
75                         -69.8             699               -69.8
                                                                                                          -57.2        -55.7              .553           -56.4
                                           -57.2               -57.2          -59.5           -57.2
80                         -57.2
                                                                              -45.6           -44.6       -44.6        -43.7              .437           .437
                           -44.6           -44.6               -44.6
85                                                                                                                                         -7.3              -7.3
                                             -7.3               -7.3           -7.3            -7.3        -7.3            -7.3
90                          -7.3

Future                                                                                                                                                       48.8
                                                                                                           3.8.4           30.2              41.8
Generations                 52.3             531                548            60.7            57.7



 •   A   • Alt    changes are permanent.
     B        Goverrr,ent expenditure reductions are tenporery.
     C = ALL changes      are teeporary.
                                                                          Appendix Table   6a


                                                   Accotsts   for Age   Zero end Future Female Generations titer


                                                                  Atternative Policy Siesilations

                                                                           (r=.03,   gs.0075)


                                                                        (thousands of dot tars)
                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                         Current Budget Agreement
Generation's            Current   Capital Gains 110 Redxtion Faster Medicare 1500 D. S&L Slower Growth
                                                in Soc. Sec.   Growth          Bailout   in Coy. Cons.             A               B                C
Age In 1989             Policy     Tax Cut



 0                         98.7            98.5          94.8              92.3            98.7         98.7        104.0           104.0           98.8
5                         106.3            106.1         101.9             99.3            106.3       106.3        111.9           111.9           106.4
10                        118.8            118.5         113.8            110.8            118.8       118.8        125.1           125.1           119.0
IS                        121.1            120.8         115.9            112.8           121.1        12t1         127.5           127.5           121.4
20                        129.3            129.0         123.5            120.0           129.3        129.3        13.6.1          136.1           129.8
25                        122.5           122.1          116.2            112.4           122.5        122.5        129.2           129.2           123.1
30                        108.6            108.2         101.8             97.6           108.6        108.6        115.3           115.3           109.3
35                         90.9            90.5          83.4              78.8            90.9         90.9         97.4           97.4            91.6
40                         68.2            67.7          59.9              54.9            68.2         68.2           74.5         743             68.9
45                         37.2            36.8          31.1              22.6            37.2         37.2         43.5           43.5            37.9
50                          1.1             0.7          -2.3             -14.5             1.1          1.1          7.5            7.5                1.8
55                        -39.0            393           -39.0            -54.7           -39.0        -39.0        -32.5          -32.5         -38.2
60                        -76.5            -76.8         -76.5            -90.8           -76.5        -76.5        -70.3          -70.3         -75.3
65                       -105.2           -105.4        -105.2           -116.9          -105.2       -105.2       -100.0         -100.0        -103.8
70                        -99.8           -100.0         -99.8           -1085            -99.8        -99.8        -95.9          -95.9         -98.6
75                        -84.2           43             -84.2             897            -8.4.2       -84.2        -81.5          -81.5         -83.2
80                        -65.6           -65.6          -65.6            -683            -65.6        -65.6        -63.8          -63.8         -64.8
85                        -48.5           -485          485               -49.7           -48.5        -48.5        -47.5          -47.5         -47.5
90                         -7.3            -7.3          .7.3              -7.3            -7.3         .7.3           -7.3         -7.3          -7.3

Future
Generations               120.4            121.0        121.6             125.9           122.4       105.3         100.5           115.0           118.9


     A    Alt changes are permanent -
     B    Goverrenent expenditure reductions are teeporary.
     C   • Alt   changes are teeporary.
