                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




              INTERNATIONAL ACCOUNTING DIVERSITY:
              DOES IT IMPACT MARKET PARTICIPANTS?




                      Frederick D.S. Choi
                       Richard M. Levich




                     Working Paper No. 3590




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1991




This manuscript is based on a larger study, Frederick Choi and
Richard Levich, The Capital Market Effects of International
Accounting Diversity, Homewood, Illinois: Dow Jones-Irwin, 1990.
The original study was funded by a grant from Arthur Anderson &
Co. and Salomon Brothers, Inc. The analysis and conclusions in
this paper are those of the authors and do not reflect the views
of any of the participating institutions. This paper is part of
NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #3590
                                       January 1991

          INTERNATIONAL ACCOUNTING DIVERSITY: DOES IT IMPACT
                      MARKET PARTICIPANTS?

                            ABSTRACT
     While many indicators point to the globalization of capital
markets, one barrier may persist —— International Accounting
Diversity. Even though coordination of many national policies is
gaining favor, the measurement and disclosure principles that
underlie financial statements remain largely a nationalistic
affair.
     In this paper, we analyze the channels through which
accounting diversity affects financial statements. Accounting
differences may affect cash flows and lead to a direct affect on
valuation. Accounting differences may also affect balance sheet
items and measures of capital adequacy or credit worthiness that
indirectly affect managerial decisions and firm valuation.
     In a survey of participants in the international capital
market, we find that accounting diversity is a problem that
affects the capital market decisions of roughly one—half of the
participants in our study. Thus, we cannot rule out the
possibility that international accounting diversity is a barrier
whose presence may affect the pricing of securities and the
composition of international portfolios. On the other hand,
roughly one-half of the participants in this study found what
they described as effective ways of coping with diversity. These
coping mechanisms may be useful for other investors and issuers
in making their capital market decisions.

Frederick D.S. Choi                     Richard M. Levich
New York University                     New York University
Stern School of Business                Stern School of Business
100 Trinity Place                       100 Trinity Place
New York, NY 10006                      New York, NY 10006
1. Introduction

        When asked to coment on the themes that will characterize capital markets in the

1990s, portfoLio managers and security analysts now routinely cite 'globalization of market.

as a major trend. There is plenty of hard evidence to support their forecast. In 1988,      the
United States accounted for Less than 30% of world GNP, down from roughly 50% in 1960.' In

1989, the market capitaLization of U.S. securities markets was nearly $8 trilLion or 39% of

the world total, whereas in 1970, the United States accounted for more than two-thirds of world

market capitalization.2 U.S. gross purchases and sales of foreign stocks reached $140 biLLion

in 1988, a nine-fold increase over 1982, whiLe foreign gross purchases and sales of U.S. stocks

exceeded $380 billion, a five-fold increase over the same time period.3 Recent regulatory

changes in the United States (Rule 144A) arid ongoing regulatory changes in the European

Cooiminity shouLd further allow for linkages between national markets.4

        The relative shrinkage of the U.S. economy suggests that passive U.S. investors ought

to hold a Larger fraction of non-U.S. securities to achieve welt-diversified portfolios. And

active U.S. investors have been attracted by higher rates of growth outside the United States,

as well as special situations such as privatization of foreign firms (e.g. British Air and

British Telecom), growth opportunities associated with Europe 1992, and the developing market-

oriented economies of Eastern Europe and Southeast Asia. The surge in specialized country funds

and international nstual funds in 1989 illustrates these trends.

        While the stage seems to be set for globalization of capital markets, one barrier may

persist --   International   Accot.nting Diversity.5 Even though coordination of many national




     1 Based on 113 countries in 1988 and 93 countries in 1960 reporting in the International
Financial Statistics Yearbook (1989).

     2 Data for the United States in 1988 reflects roughly $3 trillion in equities and $5
trillion in bonds. See International Herald Tribune, Septeaer 8-9, 1990. Data for 1970 are
from Morgan Stanley Capital International. In part, this trend reflects the tremendous growth
in emerging markets docunented by the World Bank (1989). However, the growth of some foreign
markets may be exaggerated as corporate cross-holding Leads to double counting. See French and
Poterba (1989).


       U.S. Goverrinent Accounting Office, (1989, pp. 9-10).

       Rule 144A, adopted on April 19, 1990, intends to expand the ability of foreign firms
to place securities with large institutional investors in the United States by alLowing the
resale of these securities to other large investors. See Gurwitz (1989).

       Other barriers to international investment that have been analyzed include taxation
(Black, 1974), and ownership restrictions (Stapleton and Subrahmanyam, 1977 and Eun and
Janakiramanan, 1986).
pot ides --    trade   policy, fiscal and monetary policy, and banking regulation --   are gaining

favor, the measurement and disclosure principles that underlie financial statement reports have

remained Largely a nationalistic affair. When accounting reporta retain a nationalistic

character, apparent differences in financial measures of enterprise risk and return

characteristics could be due as rruch to differences in accounting measurement rules as they

are to real differences in the attributes being measured. In the globolized envirornent of the

1990s, when a reader from one country examines financial statements from a firm in another

country, wilL the reader be able to understand (a) the ieçact of accounting measurement

differences, (b) the irrpact of economic, cultural and institutional differences, and (C)      the
remaining real economic attributes of the firm being measured? Bear in mind that this difficult

problem is coeounded, in practice, by the fact that certain accounting data are not disclosed

in some countries. Even where disclosures are similar, differences in auditing standards may

affect the reader's confidence in reported figures.6

            The purpose of this paper is three-fold. First, we briefly outline the channels though

which accounting diversity affects financial statements, and in turn affects institutional

investors and corporate issuers. Second,. we report the findings of a study of participants in

the international capital markets that examines whether international accounting diversity

affects capital market decisions and how these participants cope with accounting differences.

Third, we summarize the irrçlications of our study for institutional investors and corporate

 issuers.

            Our main finding is that international accounting diversity is a problem that affects

 the capitaL market decisions of roughly one-half of the participants in our study. Thus we

 cannot rule out the possibility that international accounting diversity is a barrier whose

 presence may affect the pricing of securities and the colTposition of international portfolios.

 On the other hand, roughly one-half of the participants in this study found what they described

 as effective ways of coping with diversity. These coping mechanisms may be useful for other

 investors and issuers in making their capital market decisions.




      6 Branson and Jaffe (1989) analyze the ilTplications of the quality of information on
 international capital mobility and welfare.

                                                   2
2. Investors. Issuers, and Accounting Diversity

           In this section, we briefly describe several channels through which accounting

diversity could irract the financial statements that are presented to international tnvestor.

Accounting diversity eatraces differences in accounting principles, disclosure practices and

auditing standards. Our focus here is on the first two conçonents of accounting diversity.7

           Differences abound   in   accounting principles across countries.8 Accounting rules may

affect the value of the firm via several channels. To begin, national accounting rules are

typically well-integrated with national codes for taxation. Accounting rules for taxation that

pertain to the recognition of income and expenses, non-cash items such as depreciation and

reserving, and dozens of other rules come together to set the definition of corporate income

and, in turn, corporate taxes. As taxes are real cash flows, accounting diversity may have a

direct affect on firm valuation. Second, coffplementing their irrçact on tax payments, accounting

rules may aLso inpact the figures used by managers for decision making as well as the figures

pertaining to managerial performance evaluation (e.g. ccxrf*nsation). This may have an inpact

on managerial decisions, and in turn, corporate cash flows. Third, accounting rules affect the

magnitudes of the nuthers that are released externally for shareholders and financial analysts.

• In addition, rules on disclosure may alter the categories of information that are reLeased.

Variation in this external information base may directly affect analysts' estimates of the

market value of the firm -.      either    by affecting the expected value of key variables or the

 uncertainty surrounding these estimates. Or the effect of variation in externaLly reported

 information on market vaLue may be indirect, through an effect on the firm's credit rating or

 credit capacity.

           Accounting diversity, therefore, holds the possibility of Leading to a t! economic

 difference by changing managerial decisions, corporate cash flows, or analysts' evaluations

 of the firm. But accounting diversity may have only a nominal inpact            (i.e. a change in

 accounting nuiters but not a change in market values) if the accounting rules affect only non-

 cash flow items, or do not affect the variables that managers use for decision making, or do

 not affect evaluations of the firm by external analysts.




        Most respondents in our survey felt that differences in auditing practices were part
 of accounting diversity, but that coping was straightforward. Investors in our study wouLd only
 consider firms with statements audited by large, welL-regarded accounting firms.

      8 See TabLe 4 of Choi and Levich (1990) for a coiparison of 30 accounting principles
  across   8 countries.
                                                     3
        The connections between accounting diversity and the firm's economic envirom*nt are

surmarized in Figure 1. If we consider the case of two firms that are similarly situated in

economic terms, then clearly it would be logical for those firms to follow similar .ccounting

practices    (Box A]. And if they did, then the accounting statements of the two firms could be

used for coTparative analysis.

         If these two similarly situated firms were permitted to adopt two dissimilar

accounting treatments (Box C], then the firms would be made to appear dissimilar. This

hypothetical case couLd represent a real effect if, for exanle, one firm used aggressive

accounting techniques to gain a real cash-flow advantage. Since the two firms are similarly

situated, a variation in accounting treatments would pose an unacceptable conetitive result.

On the other hand, this hypotheticaL case could sinçly represent a nominal effect that

financiaL analysts would "see through" after spending some additional time and effort.9 In

either case, the contination illustrated by Box C is an inappropriate choice and the accounting

 reports of the firms would not be (by themselves) suitable for corçarative analysis.

            The more interesting cases involve firms that are dissimilar in a reaL economic sense.

 It is sometimes argued that the case for accounting harmony in the presence of diverse economic

 situations (Box B] is that meaningful inter-firm conarisons are then possible. For exarrle,

 an airline that depreciates its aircraft over five years (because these aircraft make thousands

 of take-offs and landings per year) is not similarly situated to an airline that flies long-

 hauL routes and depreciates their aircraft over 10 years. Use of the same accounting rule (in

 this case, straight-Line depreciation) allows this economic difference to be highlighted.

            However, suppose that the dissimilarity between the two firms pertains to the legal

 definition of income, or the rules available for conuting taxes, or the culturaL or accounting

 variables that influence managerial performance measures and conpensation. Then the adoption

 of similar accounting treatments will only obscure the dissimilarities between the two firms.

 As a result, when the economic situation of firms is dissimilar, the adoption of similar

 accounting treatments (Box B] may or may not be an appropriate and logical response.

             In cases where our two hypothetical firms are in the same industry and the same tax

  laws and business customs apply, then it seems clear that the firms ought to use similar




         The enpirical evidence in Ball (1972) strongly suggests that share prices are set as
  though analysts were able to see through nominal accounting changes.
accounting practices, if only to maintain a Level conpetitive playing field.'° However, when

the source of the dissimilarity relates to national tax rules, national industry practices or

regulations, then as we have argued elsewhere (Choi and Levich, 1990), dissimIlar accounting

treatments may be necessary [Box 0). In this case, however, direct coaparisons between firms

may be difficult.

        The treatment of goodwill offers a clear illustration of the potential inpact of

principles differences. Suppose that firm A with a book value of $5 billion is purchased for

$6 billion by firm B. In the United States, firm Bus would book the excess Si billion as an

asset (goodwill) and amortize it over a period not to exceed 40 years. At the end of the

amortization period, the book value of shareholder equity for firm 8us will be tower by Si

billion. As a result of higher amortization expense, Bus will report lower earnings. This might

appear to put U.S. firms at a disadvantage. However, since amortization is a non-cash item,

cash flows available from the acquisition of firm A will be unaffected.

         In the united Kingdom, the excess $1 billion associated with the purchase of Firm A

generally would be charged imediately against shareholder equity, leaving reported earnings,

taxable earnings and income taxes for firm 9UK unaffected by any amortization charges. However,

the write-off of goodwill in the United Kingdom raises the debt to equity ratio for firm BUK.

Assuning that this change does not affect the firm's credit rating or cost of borrowed funds,

the reported earnings of firm BUK would remain unaffected.12 If the capital markets (i.e.

investors or rating agencies) respond to differences in reported earnings book values rather

than to cash flows, then the accounting treatment of goodwill might give bidding firms from

the United Kingdoaran advantage over firms from the United States.13




     10 The new supervisory guidelines for banking from the Bank for International Settlements
(81$) are a good case in point. Now that policyinakers have agreed to uniform guidelines for
bank supervision (including capital adequacy measures, risk rating measures, etc.) uniform
accounting seems to be a naturaL outgrowth.

        If amortization of goodwill applied to tax accounting as well, then 8us would
experience tower taxable earnings and lower corporate income taxes     providing a net
invrovement to real cash flows.

     12 In an enpirical study of U.K. firms in the 1982-1986 period, Russell, et al. (1989)
conclude that firms with stronger balance sheets tend to write off larger amounts of acquired
goodwill. These firms would incur a smaller inpact on their credit ratings. This evidence is
largely consistent with the positive accounting framework of Watts and Zimerman (1986).

     13 In the United Kingdom, the Accounting Standards Comittee has proposed a change in the
treatment of goodwill to bring U.K. practices into closer conformity with U.S. practices.
However, this proposal has yet to be adopted. For more on the treatment of goodwill across
countries, see U.S. Goverrnent Accounting Office (1987).

                                               5
         Other differences in accounting principles can also lead to asymetric effects. For

exarrçle, recognition of deferred taxes as a current expense item is permitted in the United

States and the United Kingdom, but disallowed in Germany, Switzerland and Sweden. This

accounting difference may exert an upward bias on earnings from the latter countries.

Similarly, general purpose, or purely discretionary reserves are not allowed in the United

States and the United Kingdom. However they are corronplace in Germany, Switzerland, Japan,

and elsewhere. As over-reserving is popular, reported earnings from these countries may have

a tendency to be "under-stated," except during periods of economic downturn when discretionary

reserving is relaxed.

         Differences in the disclosure of accoundng data and accounting practices are also

widespread. Frequency of reporting is perhaps the most basic difference. The United States is

alone in requiring quarterly reports of its large publicly traded firms. Most of the rest of

the world requires only semi-annual or annual reporting. As a result, coarison of first,

second and third quarter reports between U.S. firms and other firms is ruled out. When Like-

dated reports are available, U.S. firms will typicaLly provide more segmental information --

the   break-down of saLes and profits across geographic regions and product lines --     than do

 foreign firms. U.S. firms may also be more forthcoming about their off-balance sheet

 transactions, contingencies, and valuation procedures. On the other hand, foreign firms may

disclose more about their accounting for tax authorities, if only because their external

 reports use the same procedures for recognizing income, calculating depreciation, and so forth

 as is required by the tax authorities.

          The final point reveals a critical difference between the United States and foreign

 countries. In the United States, there are accounting principles for external reporting (GAAP),

 accounting principles for the calculation of taxes (TAP), accounting for regulatory bodies

 (RAP) and perhaps accounting for managerial decision making. In other countries such as

 Germany, Italy, and Japan, accounting principles are said to be "tax-driven" as there is no

 distinction between TAP, RAP, and GAAP. If accounting rule changes would have lirinediate cash

 flow and tax inlications, it is easy to understand why firms would resist conforming to some

 external standard. And, where firms come from a tradition of supplying only one "correct"

 accounting statement, it is easy to understand why they would resist preparing a second

 (potentially confusing) accounting statement even it had no cash flow inLications.

           Our brief analysis of international accounting principle differences raises doubts as

  to whether meaningful cross-country conarisons are possible. Consider the case of a U.S. firm


                                                 6
(Philip Morris) that might have been bidding for Pillsbury versus the U.K. firm (Grand

Metropolitan) that finally acquired Pillsbury. The accounting and tax treatment that Grand Met

enjoys as a U.K. firm is a nontraded asset. White one could restate the accounts of Grand Met

as if it were a U.S. firm (Figure 1, box (8)) reporting according to U.S. GAAP and TAP, this

would mislead readers from the fact that Grand Met is in fact a U.K. firm and able to pass

along to shareholders whatever costs and benefits there are in the U.K. accounting and tax

system.

          The difficulty of conparative analysis across firms within an international, industry

corresponds nicety to the "top-down" investment approach coninonly enployed by institutional

investors. In this approach, investors first select an asset allocation across countries on

the basis of macroeconomic variabLes. The choices of countries may be tenpered by market size,

liquidity, absence of capital controls, politicaL risk and so forth. The result is a set of

portfolio weights for countries rather than for industries. Given these aLLocations, investors

are Led to ask which are the best stocks within countries rather than which are the best within

an industry but across countries. As a result, con'çarative analysis of firms across countries

 (with differing accounting principLes) is discouraged.



3. Motivation for the Study and Methodology

           While international accounting differences such as those mentioned above have been

 chronicled in the literature, little research has explored whether these differences matter

 in the sense that they affect the Location of investing and issuing activity, the   copposition

 of   international portfolios, or the prices of securities. Naturally, international accounting

 differences are "inortant" in the trivial sense that the reader im,jst know whether he is about

 to read financial statements prepared according to U.S., French or Japanese accounting

 principles --    exactly   as anyone ni,Jst know whether a distance is expressed in miles or

 kilometers before making travel decisions. In the travelling exançte, we would expect that the

 choice of units of measurement has no inçact on travel decisions. Can it also be said that the

 choice of accounting principles has no i,Tpact on capital market decisions?

           The existing literature in accounting and financial markets contains several irportant

 themes. First, the seminal work of Ball arid Brown (1968) concludes that accounting earnings

 data include relevant information that affects share prices. The Ball and Brown methodology

 has been applied in numerous reLated contexts and the results are consistent with            the


 contention that earnings announcements (including those generated under U.K. GAAP, Australian


                                                 7
GAAP, Swedish GAAP, and so forth) provide timely and relevant information to the market.

        A second strand of research suggests that investors are not misled by changes in

accounting rules. In the cases studied by Ball (1972). firms that adopted accounting rule

changes tended to display a pattern of Lower returns relative to the market. One interpretation

of these results is that these firms may have adopted accounting changes to irrçrove the

appearance of their reported accounting nuiers. Capital markets apparently saw through these

decisions, since share prices moved welL in advance of the accounting changes.14

        Overall, previous research suggests that accounting information is meaningful for

investors, and so knowledge of international accounting rules should be irrçortant. However,

investors are known to rely also on non-accounting information that helps them to 'see through"

accounting changes and differences that are purely nominal. it is an enirical question whether

international accounting differences have an ilact on capital market decisions.

         To approach this question, we undertook in-depth interviews with users and providers

of international accounting statements. To arrive at a representative sarçle. we stratified

the universe into several dimensions -   - geographic   location, user group and size. We sarrpled

participants from Germany, Japan, Switzerland, United Kingdom and the United States. These are

countries whose capital market institutions have a large stake in international investments,

and in the case of Germany, Japan and Switzerland, whose accounting principles diverge quite

significantly from international norms. Four primary user groups were identified

 institutional investors, corporate issuers, investment underwriters, and market regulators.15

 The sairple design resulted in 52 institutions distributed across various categories as shown

 in Table 1. The names of these institutions are listed in Appendix 1. Owing to the expense

 associated with the interview survey method (especially in an international context) our sançle

 is not Large. However, the sançle was selected in large' random fashion and, hence, our

 findings should be fairly representative.




      14 A related area of research is how markets respond to non-trivial changes in accounting
 practices, in particular to increase above (or decrease below) a standard level of reporting.
 The evidence in Choi (1973) suggests that in the Eurobond market firms often precede their
 offering by an increase in the volune and quality of their financial disclosures, and these
 actions tend to Lower the cost of funds. Similarly, Meek and Gray (1989) conclude that European
 firms with shares listed on the London Stock Exchange often exceed Exchange requirements
 through a wide range of voluntary disclosures, again with the expectation of lowering their
 cost of funds.



         Representatives of ratings agencies, an international financial data service, and an
 organization working toward international accounting harmony were also interviewed.

                                                 8
        For the 52 institutions in our sanple, a personal interview was conducted with

representatives high enough in the management hierarchy to have decision responsibility. i.e.

actualLy make international investment, funding, underwriting or regulatory decisions. We

followed a written questionnaire covering factual and behavioral questions relating to decision

processes, information requirements, nature of accounting diversity, coping mechanisms and

capitaL market effects. AU interview subjects were sent a sanple of the interview questions

in advance and some institutions prepared written answers ahead of time. ALL interview subjects

were promised that there remarks would be kept confidential.




4. Survey Findings

         The key question asked during our interviews was whether capital market decisions were

affected by international accounting diversity. The results appear in Table 2 and show that

approximately one-half of the respondents (24 of 50) feeL that their capital market decisions

are affected by accounting diversity. The hypothesis that accounting diversity has no affect

nust be rejected.

         We then cross-tabulated the answers to this question against five descriptive

categories --   nationality,   size, extent of international investing/funding experience, scope

of international investing/funding activities, and organization structure. These results appear

in Table 3. We constructed a chi-square statistic to test for independence of "yes'1 and 'No'

responses within each category. in each case, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the "Yes"

and "No" responses split proportionately regardless of country, size, experience, scope or

organization structure.16

         Among underwriters, nearly all in our sançLe (7 of 8) feel that accounting diversity

affects their capital market decisions. We suggest that this result stems from the function

of underwriters as intermediaries who deal with nunerous issuers and investors; many of whom

are not comfortable with national accounting differences. The soLe underwriters who is not

bothered by accounting diversity copes by (1) soliciting only top-tier firms in the industry,

 (2) relying heavily on credit ratings, and (3) using private placements to access foreign

capital markets.

         Among regulators, none that we interviewed reported being hindered by accounting




      16 For the cross-tabulation of answers by "Size", we concluded that 'size' was not a
 relevant category for reguLators. Excluding regulators results in a 24 "Yes" and 16 "No" split.


                                                  9
diversity when approaching a capitaL market decision such as a Listing or offering. Owing to

their authority, regulators can cope with disclosure differences by requesting additional

information. Even though most non-U.S. regulators analyze original source financial statements,

our results show that they are not affected by accounting diversity.17

        The results for investors and issuers were more diverse and we consider them now in

more detaiL.

        InstitutionaL. Investors. More than one-half (9 out of 17) of the investors in our

sançte stated that accounting differences make it more difficuLt for them to measure their

decision variables, which ultimately affects their investment decisions. Respondents in this

group tended to highlight the inortance of accounting data and to point out the inadequacy

of certain international accounting data for conparisons to a benchmark or for conparisons

across countries. On the other hand, seven investors in our sanpLe did not feel hindered by

accounting differences. These respondents tended to focus on the economics of foreign

investment opportunities, rely on Local financial statements, utilize the services of Local

brokers or research houses, or adopt investment approaches that largely ignore accounting

factors, such as the discounted dividend approach or a global portfolio allocation model)8

Among the nine 'Yes" and seven "No" investor response, we did not observe any correlation with

either investor size, country of domicile, organization structure, length of experience in

 international investing, scope of international investments, or investment approach.

         Among our sanpte of investors, Germany, Japan, and SwitzerLand were mentioned most

 frequently as troublesome countries for analysts when investing outside their home      country.
Across industries,banking and financial services, insurance, semi-conductors, and mining were

 identified as presenting analysts with similar difficulties. Specific differences in generally

 accepted accounting principles (GAAP) that are troublesome tc investors relate to njltinational

 consolidations, valuation of fixed assets, deferred taxes, pensions, marketable securities,

 discretionary reserves, foreign currency transactions and translations, leases, goodwill,

 depreciation, long-term construction contracts, inventory valuation and provisions. Similarly,

 the absence of conç>arable disclosure standards also hindered the analysis of about one-half




      17 Non-U.S. regulators may cope in other ways, such as using sponsoring banks to validate
 they worthiness of a new listing or offering and to share in the liability of a poor decision.

      18 The later approaches raise the question of whether these investors selected these
 approaches because they were unable to utilize accounting data prepared according to diverse
 principles.

                                                 10
of the investors in our study. Disclosure items      most frequently mentioned were segmentaL

information, methods of asset valuation, foreign operations disclosures, frequency arid

conLeteness of iriterim information, description of capital expenditures, hidden reserves arid

off-balance sheet items.

        ALL investors in our sanpte attenpt to cope with accounting diversity in some fashion.

For the nine investors who claim that accounting diversity represents a problem (the "Yes"

group) seven cope by restating foreign accounts to a more familiar accounting framework. Two

cope by adopting different investment strategies. One of these has eLected to Limit its foreign

investments to goverrinent bonds and to equity investment in countries with accounting

principles similar to its own. The second copes by utiLizing a globaL portfolio allocation rule

that abstracts from accounting information.

         For the seven investors who respond that accounting diversity is not a probLemthat

affects their capital market decisions, four cope by deveLoping a mottiple principles

capabiLity (MPC) --   undertaking to famiLiarize themseLves with foreign accounting practices
and to adopt a LocaL perspective when analyzing foreign financial statements. The remaining

three investors cope by relying on information Less sensitive to corporate accounting

treatment. One investor uti Lizes a dividend discount model, and another relies on macroeconomic

variables for making asset allocations by country and then selects a diversified portfolio

within each country. The final investor circunvents the problem of accounting diversity by

relying primarily on "sociological trends" in making investment decisions. This invoLves first

seeing in what direction consuner preferences are moving and then investing in industry leaders

 which are expected to capitalize on such trends.

         Corporate Issuers. Most of the issuers in our sanple (9 out of 15) stated that

 accounting differences have no inpact on their funding or Listing decisions. The respondents

 in this group offered various explanations including funding strategies that insulate the

 coapany from reporting to foreign investors (such as internal funding or private placements),

 management's focus on economic fundamentals, management's confidence in investors' abilities

 to deaL with acCounting differences, and the value of "name recognition" in the capital markets

 that minimizes the need to focus on accounting considerations.

          On the other hand, six issuers in our sanple stated that accounting differences result

 in capitaL market effects. In some cases, accounting principles are the underlying cause. For

 exançte, the accounting treatment of intangibles Left one of our respondents with a negative

 net worth, and unable to obtain a credit rating from a major agency and unwiLling to attecrpt


                                                11
to raise funds in the United States. This firm turned    instead   to the European connierciaL paper

market. More cormon is the case of differences in disclosure requirements having an irvpact on

funding and Listing decisions, especially for firms domiciLed in Japan      and   Germany. DiscLosure

items mentioned most frequently include preparation of consolidated statements, provision of

information on business segments, reporting quarterly results, and explaining the nature of

various reserves to foreign analysts.

        Unlike the case of investors, our responses from corporations reveal some distinct

patterns. Firms who report that they are not affected by accounting differences        tend to be from

North America, are Large in size, have had Long experience in international financial markets,

and have engaged in extensive international funding arrangements. Most North American firms

are unaffected by accounting differences because they enjoy reciprocity when raising         funds in

foreign markets. Non-U.S. regulators generally respect the accounting principles of the

issuer's home country while the United States requires restatement and reconciLiation to U.S.

GAAP and U.S.-style disclosure for pubLic issues or listed securities.

            Most corporations atteffpt to cope with accounting diversity. Several non-U.S. issuers

cope by providing a full or partial restatement of their accounts to U.S. GAAP. However,          this

method is used selectively depending on whether the restatement casts the firm in a more or

 Less favorable Light, and whether the restatement would provide privileged (and previously

 undisclosed) information to conpetitors. Two firms in our sanpLe had issued ADR shares and were

 fortunate to be grandfathered from having to meet more stringent U.S. reporting requirements.

 SeveraL firms cope by using road shows and hosting analysts meetings.

            For the six firms that respond that accounting diversity (and the related regulatory

 diversity) affect their capitaL market decisions, coping behavior is very irrçortant. All six

 firms have avoided raising funds or Listing their shares in the U.S. market and have relied

 on other means -.    financing   in the Eurobond market or the private placement market, domestic

 bank financing, offering sponsored but unlisted ADRs in the United States, or sirrply

 encouraging foreign investors to buy the firms shares in their home market. For these six

 firms, accounting diversity clearly affected the geogra*ic location of their funding and

  Listing, and possibly affected their cost of capital. Several firms felt that their coping was

 highly effective in providing them with access to low cost funds. Other firms acknowledged that

  they had probably paid more to obtain external capital owing to their reluctance to discLose

  certain items that were viewed as proprietary, but that this was a price that they were wilLing

  to pay.


                                                   12
5. COnClUSIOnS and Inlications

        Our survey has revealed that many participants in the international capital markets -

- roughly 50%   in our sanLe -. bet ieve that accounting differences are an iriOrtant factor that

affects their capital market decisions. By the same token, international accounting differences

have existed for many years and coping behavior is widespread. Again, many participants in the

international capitaL markets --      roughLy 50% in our sauiple -- believe that their coping
behavior has been successful and that their capital market decisions are unaffected. Which

group dominates the capital markets and whether, at the margin, accounting diversity affects

the pricing efficiency of markets remains an unanswered eniricaL question.

         Nevertheless, our study has revealed several inortant patterns for institutional

investors and corporate issuers. Investors in our sanple who atteapt to cope by restating

foreign accounting information report that accounting diversity affects their investment

decisions. In other words, restatement is not sufficient to remove the problem of accounting

diversity. This finding suggests that either (a) existing restatement algorithms are at a crude

stage of deveLopent, (b) existing algorithms are not being applied effectively, or (C) no

algorithm is capable of producing a proper and meaningful restatement. If the truth lies in

 (a) or (b) then more effort in restatement may result in a payoff. However if the true answer

 is (c), then investors may be right in developing their skills to read and interpret foreign

 financial statement in their original form.

          In our sanle, only four of 17 investors relied on original un-restated accounting

 information for their investment decisions (MPC'ers). Interestingly, but not surprisingly, none

 of these respondents reported that accounting diversity poses a problem as far as           their

 investment decisions are concerned. Based on our survey, investors who make the         effort to

 familiarize themselves with local environmental norms anc deveLop skills in interpreting

 foreign accounts in their original form are least likely to encounter problems          caused by


 accounting diversity.

          Corporate issuers in our sancle also revealed some distinct patterns.        As could be

 expected, firm size and length of experience are associated with fewer problems relating to
                                                                                behavior. U.S. and
  accounting diversity. Nationality also plays a role in explaining issuer

  U.K. firms whose standards of accounting and financial disclosure tend to be relatively high
                                                                                 while German,
  appear to have greater flexibility in accessing international capital markets,
                                                                                 e.g. in the areas
  Japanese and Swiss firms whose financial statements are less transparent,

                                                                                    This phenomenon
  of segmental disclosures and hidden reserves, appear to have less flexibility.


                                                  13
may also be related to the asrmetry between the United States (that provides a Level pLaying

fieLd by demanding uniform accounting statements and uniform discLosures) and foreign countries

(that practice reciprocity by accepting the accounting       and reporting practices   of the Issuer's

mother country. The U.S. posture inoses additional costs on non-U.S. firms and some are not

wilting to bear these costs.

        The differences in international funding and coping behavior can be understood if we

take a broader view of the firm's cost of capital to include (1) financiaL costs, (2)

information preparation costs, and (3) colrçetitiVe costs. In contlunicating with foreign

readers, firms can restate Local GAAP statements into the accounting principles of the reader's

country, supply additional disclosures, and/or have the audit report reflect an enhanced set

of auditing standards. At the margin, additional information should tower the financial costs

to the firm. But additional information is costly to prepare and may aLso increase the

conpetitive costs to the firm. Thus the firm wilt provide the amount of information that

optimizes the trade-off between conpetitive costs and financial costs.

         This framework helps   to   explain why some firms    are wilLing to restate to another set

 of GAAP rules but not disclose certain items of information, while others are wiLting to

 disclose more but unwitting to undertake GAAP restatemerits. This then ties into country of

 origin. Issuers from a country with substantial accounting disclosure (e.g. the United Kingdom)

 tend to be more concerned about the inpact      of   GAAP   differences   on their colretitive costs.

 Issuers from a country with limited       disclosures   (e.g. Germany and Japan) tend to be more

 concerned about the coffpetitive costs of additional disclosure.

          Finally, the positive correLation between length of international experience,

 frequency of exposure to international markets and the Lesser inportance attributed to

 accounting diversity as a decision problem highlights on of the channeLs through which

 diversity may pose a barrier to capitaL market entry abroad. It also suggests that a key coping

 mechanism may sirrply be perseverance and the selective accomodation of investor information

 needs. If the investor's best coping mechanism is to be an MPC'er, then the issuer's best

 coping mechanism may be to help the investor to inplement an MPC approach.




                                                   14
                                          References




Ball, R. "Changes in Accounting Techniques and Stock Prices," Errçirical Research in Accounting,

        Selected Studies. 1972 (supplement), Journal of Accounting Research, 10 Spring 1972,

        pp. 1-38.

BaU, R., and P. Brown. "The Enirical Evaluation of Accounting Income Nurbers," Journal of

        Accounting Research, Autumn 1968, pp. 159-177.

BLack, Fischer. "International Capital Market Equilibriuii with Investment Barriers," Journal

        of Financial Economics, Decerber 1974,.

Branson, William H. and Dwight M. Jaffe. "The Globalization of Information and Capital

        Mobility," working paper, Vincent C. Ross Institute of Accounting Research, New York

        University, Septerber 15, 1989.

Chol, F.D.S. "Financial Disclosure and Entry to the European Capital Market," Journal of

         Accounting Research, Auttiin 1973, pp. 159-175.

Choi, Frederick D.S. and Richard M. Levich. The Capital Market Effects of Internationa

         Accounting Diversity, Homewood, Illinois: Dow Jones-Irwin, 1990.

Eun, Cheut and S. Janakiramanan. "A Model of International Asset Pricing with a Constraint on

         the Foreign Equity Ownership," Journal of Finance, 41, No.4, 1986, pp. 897-914.

French, Kenneth and James Poterba. "Are Japanese Stock Prices Too High?" manuscript, NBER

         Sumner Institute, August 1989.

Gurwitz, Aaron S. "SEC Rule 144A and Regulation S: Inact on Global Fixed Income Markets,"

         Fixed Income Research Series, (New York: Goldman Sachs), Septeer 1989.

Meek, G.K., and S.J. Gray. "Globalization of Stock markets Lir,d Foreign Listing Requirements:

         Voluntary Disclosures by Continental European Conpanies Listed on the London Stock

         Exchange," Journal of International Business Studies, 20, No. 2 (Sunier 1989), pp.

         315-36.

Russell, A., J.R. Grinyer, M. Walker, and P.A. Malton. Accounting for Goodwill, London:

         Certified Accountant Publications Limited, Research Report No. 13, June 1989.

StapLeton, Richard and Marti Subrahrnanyam. "Market Inperfections, Capital Market Equilibriun

         and Corporate Finance," Journal of Finance, May 1977.

U.S. General Accounting Office. International Finance: Regulation of International Securities

         Markets, Washington, D.C.: GAO, April 1989.


                                                15
U.S. General Accounting Office. Foreign Investment: Country Differences in Accounting for

         Takeover Costs, Washington, D.C.: GAO, ApriL 1987.

Watts, R.L. and   J.L.   Zimerrnan. Positive Accounting Theory, Engtewood Cliffs NJ: Prentice Hall,

         1986.

WorLd   Bank. Emerging Stock Markets Factbook, Washington, D.C.: International Finance

         Corporation, 1989.




                                                    16
                                          TabLe 1
                              MATRIX OF INTERVIEW CANDIDATES




        LOCATION   NEW YORK    LONDON             ZURICH       FRANKFURT   TOKYO       Total


GRJPS

BUYERS
OF SECURITIES
   Large                          2                   2             N.A.       2           9


   Less Large         2           1                                 W.A.       2           8


SELLERS

OF SECURITIES

   Large              2           2                   1               2            2       9


   Less Large         2           2                   W.A.             1           1       6


UNDERWRITERS

                                   2                  N.A.             2           2       8


OTHERS

  -ReguLators          1           1                       1                       1       4
    / Standards

    Boards

  -Exchange            1           1                       1           1           1       5
    Off iciaLs

  -Ratings Agencies 2                                                              1       3
    /Data Services



TotaL                 15          12                       8           6       11         52


Note: (a) One interviewed in Tokyo office;
      (b) One interviewed in New York and Zurich offices;
      Cc) One interviewed in London office.




                                             17
        TabLe 2: Surmary Findings for Investors, Issuers,
                Underwriters, Regulators and Others


                           Key Question:

"Does accounting diversity affect your capital market decisions?"


                         Yes         No        N.A.     Total


    Investors             9          7          1           17

    Issuers               6          9                      15


    Underwriters          7          1                       8


    ReguLators            0          8                       8

    Raters & Others       2          1                       3

           Total         24         26              1       51*




Note:    The International Accounting Standards Comittee was
         interviewed but their answers are not included here.




                                               18
   Table 3: Surmary Findings by Country, Size, Experience,
       Scope of Activity, and Organizational Structure.

                          Key Question:

"Does accounting diversity affect your capital market decisions?"

   Country              Yes         No        N.A.         Total

    U.S.                 6          9                         15
    Germany              4          2                          6
    Japan                6          5                         11
    Switzerland          3          5                          8
    U.K.                 5          5              1          11


            Total       24         26              1          51

    Size                Yes         No        N.A.         Total

    Large               15         12                         27
    Less Large           9          6              1          16
    N.A.                 0          8                          8

            Total       24         26              1          51


    Experience          Yes         No        N.A.         Total

    Long                 14         18                        32
    Short                 9         8              1          18
    N.A.                  1                                    1


            Total        24         26                 1      51


    Scope                Yes         No        N.A.        Total

    Limited               9         12                 1      22
    Extensive            15         14                        29

             Total       24         26                 1      51


    Org. Structure       Yes         No        N.A.        Total


     Centralized         13         15                         28
     Decentralized       10         11                 1       22
     N.A.                    1                                     1


             TotaL       24         26                 1       51




                                              19
                                                            Figure 1

                           Accounting Diversity and Economic Erivirornents




                                     Economic Situations
                                             of Two Firms

                                  Simi tar             Dissimi tar


                             Acceptable             May or may not
                 Similar     Practice               be acceptabLe

                             ResuLts                Results may or may
  Accounting                 Conparabte       (A)   not Conparable (B)
   Treatment
                             unacceptable           Acceptable
                             Practice               Practice
               Dissimi tar
                             Results not            Results may not
                             Conparable       (C)      Conparabte (D)




l4ote:   The term Hacceptablel is used here to mean appropriate or Logical.




                                                       20
                                         APPENDIX 1
                             List of Organizations Interviewed

B.A.T. Industries, pLc
Bank Julius Baer
Bear Stearns & Co., Inc.
BHF-Bank
Brown Brothers Harriman & Co.
Cadbury Schweppes, plc
Canon Inc.
CapitaL Research Co.
Deutsche Bank
Exxon Corporation
Federation of German Stock Exchanges
The Fuji Bank, Ltd.
General ELectric Coapany
International Accounting Standards Board
Japan Ministry of Finance
KLeinwort Benson Ltd.
Lorard Odier & Cie.
London Stock Exchange
MerriLl. Lynch Asset Management
The Mitsubishi Trust and Banking Corp.
Moody's Investors Service
Morgan Grenfell Group, pLc
Morval & Cie., S.A.
Nihon Keizai Shintun Inc. (Data Bank Bureau)
NestLe, S.A.
 New York Stock Exchange
 Nippon Life Insurance Co.
 Nissan Motor Coilpany, Ltd.
 Pfizer Inc.
Prudent i at-Bache
Prudential Portfolio Managers Limited
Reckitt & Cotman, plc
SANYO Electric to., Ltd.
Schering
Joseph E. Seagram & Sons, Inc.
Security Pacific Hoare Govett Ltd.
Siemens AG
Standard & Poor's Ratings Group
Swiss Bank Corporation
Swiss National Bank
Teachers Insurance Annuity Association - Cot Lege Retirement Equity Fund
Tokyo Stock Exchange
Union Bank of SwitzerLand
U.S. Securities and Exchange Comision
Volkswagen AG
S.G. Warburg & Co., Ltd.
WPP Group, pLc
 Yamaichi Securities Conpany
 Yamaichi Investment Trust Management
 Zurich Stock Exchange

 In addition, two organizations that wished to remain anonymous were interviewed.




                                               21
