                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




          TRADE REFORMS, CREDIBILITY, AND DEVELOPMENT




                        Joshua Aizennian




                     Working Paper No. 3600




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEAflCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA. 02138
                           January 1991




Prepared for the fourth meeting of the Interamerican Seminar on
Economics, organized by Edniar Bacha and Sebastian Edwards, under
the auspices of the National Bureau of Economic Research and the
Pontificia Universidade Catolica do Rio de Janeiro. I would like
to thank Carsten Kowalczyk and Nancy P. Marion for very useful
comments. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NEER Working Paper #3600
                                        January 1991

            TRADE REFORNS, CREDIBILITY, AND DEVELOPMENT
                             ABSTRACT

     This paper analyzes the role of investment policies in

regimes undergoing trade liberalization with policy makers of
uncertain credibility. We consider an economy producing

exportable and importable goods. The economy is liberalized, and
tariffs are eliminated. The public views the reform credibility
as questionable, and expects the possibility of future policy
reversal. The policy maker sets policies and public investment
as to maximize the expected utility of a risk averse

representative agent. We identify the need to tax private
investment in the importable sector, and to subsidize private
investment in the outward—oriented sector. We show that the

signaling effect of public investment nay generate a positive
externality for public investment in the outward sector, and a

negative externality for public investment in the inward—oriented
activity. We demonstrate that the elimination of sectorial
private investment policies call for a rise in the public/private
capital ratio in the outward-oriented activities, and a drop in
that ratio in the inward-oriented activities. In the presence of
an external credit ceiling, a higher degree of risk aversion
increases the magnitude (without changing the nature) of the

policies.
Joshua Aizenman
Economics Department
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
1. Introduction and summary
      Recent discussions have highlighted the adverse effects of policy uncertainty on
investment in developing countries: domestic and foreign investors may prefer to wait for the
uncertainty to clear itself, or to invest abroad.1 This may leave the policy maker in the uneasy
position. where the private sector will not renew investment and growth as long as credibility
is shaky. The policy maker may find himself in the position of Baron von Mtlnchausen,
searching for the cheapest way to pull himself out of the mud by griping his own hair. The
purpose of this paper is to investigate tile degree to which investment policies may work
toward reaching this goal. We focus on the case where the policy maker applies the same
welfare criteria as the private sector, and attaches the same probabilities to the various events.
We would like to demonstrate that, in addition to the standard role of increasing the capital
stock, public investment may serve as a signaling device. By investing in the proper activities,
the policy maker is bonding himself, conveying an important signal regarding his future
intention.
      The motivation for this paper stems from several observations. A study by Greene and
Villanueva (1990) demonstrated that the rate of private investment in developing countries is
positively related to the public sector investment.2 This begs the question regarding the
importance of public and private investment in accounting for growth. This issue may be
confirmed more formally, by regressing the growth rate on the private and public investment
rates. It turns out that public investment has insignificant importance, whereas private
investment plays an important role in accounting for growth.3 These observations are


       1.    On uncertainty and the timing of investment see, for example, van Wijnbergen
(1985), Pyndick (1988), Dornbusch (1988) and Dixit (1989).
      2.    Their study uses the data assembled by the world bank on private investment in 23
 countries between 1975-1987 [see Pfeffemrnn and Madarassy (1989)].
       3.    To verify this point, I analyzed the role of public and private investment of the 23
 countries studied by Greene and Villanueva (1990). For details, see Appendix A. For further
                                             -2-
consistent with the view that an important role of public investment is signaling the
                                                                                      policy
maker's future intention. In regimes whose credibility and reputation are questionable,
signaling may require irreversible acts like a sector specific investment. In this paper we
explore this possibility for a developing economy facing an endogenous credit ceiling. The
signaling role of commercial policies in the presence of incredible policy makers was the topic
of Rodrik (1989), who concluded that achieving credibility of commercial reform may
require overshooting free trade, actually subsidizing imports. The purpose of our paper is to
focus on the signaling role of investment, taking the commercial policy invoked by the
reformist administration as given. We consider the case where there are several feasible
projects, requiring both public and private investment. Projects may differ in terms of their
outwardness (as measured by their impact on the nation's international trade), as well as in
terms of the degree of substitutability between public and private investment. In such an
economy, irreversible public investment may signal the future design of policies.
      For exposition simplicity we consider a minimal framework: a two period, two sector
economy. One sector is producing exportable goods, and the second sector is producing
importable goods. We refer to these sectors as the outward- and the inward.oriented sectors,
respectively.4 The output in each sector is determined by the available capital. The capital
stock is specific to each sector, and is the outcome of past private and public investment.
Private investment is financed by local bonds, denominated in terms of the local goods. The
economy is small, facing given external terms of trade and an external credit ceiling. A
country that will default on its external debt obligations may face impediments to its trade,




discussion regarding the relative role of public investment, see Blejer and Khan (1984) and
Khan and Reinhart (1990).
      4.    This classification stems from the observation that expansion of exportable goods
tends to increase the trade dependency of the economy. The opposite applies for expansion of
importable goods.
                                             -3-
generating a deterioration of its terms of trade and consequently a penalty. The penalty is
related to its trade dependency, as defined by the damage inflicted by a trade embargo. The
threat that a default will invoke a penalty supports an equilibrium with international debt. The
external indebtedness cannot be greater than the credit ceiling, proportional to the openness
of the economy, as measured by the gains from trade.
      In period one the economy is liberalized, and tariffs are eliminated. The public views
the reform credibility as questionable, and expects the possibility of a policy reversal. We
assume that the sectorial composition of public investment conveys a signal regarding the
probability of policy reversal: higher public investment in exportable goods increases the
public capital vested in the outward sector, reducing, thereby, the prospect for policy
reversal. A key feature of the economy is the lack of complete markets, preventing the public
from insuring against the policy risk. Agents are risk averse, and they act so as to maximize
their expected utility. The policy maker sets policies and public investment so as to maximize
the expected utility of the representative agent. The role of policies stems from the attempt to
induce the private sector to internalize externalities, and to provide for public investment that
will recognize its signaling effect.5
       We characterize the equilibrium, deriving the optimal public investment and the private
 investment tax-cum-subsidy policies. We show that the signaling effect of public investment
 generates a positive externality for public investment in the outward sector, and a negative
 externality for public investment in the inward-oriented activity. Using the investment path
 with full credibility as the benchmark, we show that the signaling externality increases the
 optimal share of public relative to the private investment in the outward-oriented activity,
 and lowers that share in the inward-oriented activity. Thus, to overcome the lack of



       5.     Thus, the role of policies does not stem from asymmetric information. Calvo
 (1988) showed that mistaken beliefs about future policies act like a distortion, calling for
 policies.
                                              -4-
credibility the government biases the public /private capital share in favor of the outward
sector, and against the inward sector.
      We identify the need to tax private investment in the importable sector. The prospect
of the imposition of a tariff in an economy that finances investment in terms of local bonds
generates excessive investment in the importable sector. This is the outcome of the drop in the
ex-ante real interest rate facing a producer in the importable sector due to the expected tariff
hike. Another reason for taxing investment in the importable sector is to account for the
negative openness externality: inward investment makes the country more risky for external
creditors, reducing the external credit ceiling. Applying the openness argument to the outward
sector, it follows that one should subsidize investment in the outward-oriented sector.
      A necessary condition for the implementation of these policies is that sectorial
investment policies are feasible. This presumes that the policy maker has the ability to prevent
the abusing of the preferential investment incentive system. To gain insight regarding the role
of policies in economies where the authorities can not enforce sectorial policies, we contrast
the equilibrium with sectorial private investment policies to the one obtained in the absence of
these polices. We show that the elimination of sectorial private investment policy calls for a
rise in the public/private capital ratio in the outward-oriented activities, and a drop in that
ratio in the inward-oriented activities. In the presence of an external credit ceiling, the degree
of risk aversion plays an important role in determining the magnitude (but not the nature) of
the policies. A higher degree of risk aversion increases the magnitude of the above policies
(i.e., it will increase the rates of private investment tax-cum-subsidy policies). To clarify the
role of the integration with the international credit market, we compare the case where there
is limited access to the international credit market with two extreme situations: no access
versus unrestricted access to the international credit market. We show that cutting the country
off the international credit market eliminates the openness externality, and thereby removes
the need to subsidize private investment in the outward-oriented activity, and reduces the tax
on private investment in the inward-oriented activities. Full access to the international credit
market reduces further the tax on investment in the outward activity. We conclude that a
                                             -5-
switch from integrated credit markets toward partially integrated markets, where the
developing country faces a credit ceiling, implies that liberalization efforts should be
supplemented with more activist private investment tax-cum-subsidy policies, whose purpose
is to encourage outward orientation and discourage inward orientation.
      In section 2 we specify the model. In section 3 we characterize the behavior of the
private sector. In section 4 we infer the value of the public investment and the tax-cum-
subsidy policies under different scenarios. First, we assume that the policy maker determines
the public investment and activates private investment incentives in the form of sectorial
investment tax-cum-subsidy policies. In the second scenario the only role of the policy maker
is determining the public sector's investment. In section 5 we analyze the dependency of the
optimal policies on the degree of risk aversion and the access to the international credit
market. Section 6 closes the paper with concluding remarks.



 2. The economy
       We describe the economy by reviewing output, preferences, the linkages to the
 international goods and credit market, and the nature of the policy uncertainty.


 2.1 Output
       Consider a two sector economy, composed of activities X and Y, where output at time
 is given by


               (1) X =
               (2)   Y. =    ayt(Ky)7+X(KyYY]I3"T
                                                           for ' ,O 1,0 <A,
                                                                     1



 where         ; K) denote private and public investment at time t in sector j      = x, y). Both

 private and public capital are used in the production process. The coefficient A measures the
                                              -6-
efficiency of public capital relative to private capital. A unitary coefficient indicates no
efficiency bias, and a lower value implies greater efficiency bias in favor of private capital.
The elasticity of substitution between the two types of capital is given by 11(1 - y).6 The
second period capital stock is the sum of the first period capital, adjusted downward to
account for depreciation, plus the first period investment. For exposition simplicity, we
assume henceforth zero depreciation.


2.2   Preferences
      The representative agent maximizes the value of expected utility function, of the
constant absolute risk aversion variety,


             (3) V=-exp-(l+p)(U1+ 1
U (t=1,2) denotes the periodic utility, assumed to be of a Cobb-Douglas type:


             (4) U = (ct;x)l_a (Ct;y)U /[(1 — a)a(aY]                .   0   a 1.


       A useful feature of the utility function specified in (3) is the separation of the degree of
 risk aversion from the degree of intertemporal substitutability. This is done at the cost of
 forgoing the linearity advantage. 7




      6.     To simplify exposition, we assume the same elasticities for both sectors. It can be
 shown that the key results hold even if elasticities differ across sectors.            -




       7.     In the absence of uncertainty, the utility specified in our paper is equivalent to the
 time additively separable utility, where the subjective discount factor is p. With uncertainty,
 the degree of risk aversion is measured by 'C.
                                             -7-

2.3 Linkages with the international market
      We assume that the external relative price of the two goods is one. The country has a
comparative advantage in the production of good x$ The international interest rate is given
by rt. The access of the country to the international credit market is restricted by its
perceived openness, which determines the ability and the willingness of the country to service
its external debt. A country that will default on its external debt may face trade restraints,
generating a deterioration of its terms of trade and, consequently, a penalty. Let us denote the
percentage deterioration of the terms of trade by e, and the volume of exports in the absence
of impediments to trade by Q.9 In equilibrium, the country's repayment to its lenders is
bounded by the penalty associated with default, and the repayment occurs to avoid the
penalty.1° Applying the properties of the Cobb-Douglas utility, we find that the willingness to
provide external credit (Fl to the economy is governed by the condition that


              (5)   F*(1 + r*)   e
 where




         8.   This assumption requires the relative productivity ratio a/     to be large enough


 such that the autarky relative price of good x relative to good y is smaller than the
 international relative price.
       9.      The parameter e measures the effectiveness of a trade embargo in affecting the
 terms of trade facing the economy.
       10. For a discussion regarding bargaining and sovereign debt see Bulow and Rogoff
  (1989) and the references there. For a discussion regarding the role of openness in
  determining the bargaining outcome see Aizenman (1989).
                                                 -8-
             (6)      U2=aX2-(1-a)Y2. 11
The right hand side of (5)     is   [he penalty associated with the deterioration of the terms of
trade, equals to the deterioration of the terms of trade times the level of exports,
approximated by 2• Consequently, the trade dependency of the economy is determining the

credit available to the economy. Throughout the first part of the paper we will assume that the
country is credit constrained, and thus (5) holds with equality. In Section 4 we relax this
assumption in order to explore the consequences of the presence of credit rationing on the
desirable policies.


2.4 The policy uncertainty
      A salient characteristic of developing countries is the relative instability of their
policies, including the instability of commercial policy. One can interpret this as the outcome
of a struggle between pressure groups whose relative powers vary over time, as well as due to
attempts to adjust to domestic and foreign shocks by manipulating the commercial policy.'2 In
this paper we focus on investigating the consequences of credibility problems facing a policy


      11.    Applying the properties of the Cobb-Douglas function we get the the second
period utility in the absence of default is U2 = X2 + Y 2 - F*(1 + r*). In ease of default the

                   X2 +   Y2(1-+-e)
utility is U2 =              a       . The exact credit ceiling is obtained by finding the value
                       (1+e)
of P that will equate these two expressions. The exact penalty is given by
[1- (1+e)a] X2 - [1- (lfe)a] Y2. The term e                 in (5) is the first order approximation

to the exact credit ceiling.
       12.   For a review of the experience of developing countries see Edwards (1989),
Choksi, Michaely and Papageorgiou (1990) and the references there.
                                                 -9-
maker who enacts a trade liberalization. At period 1 the policy maker liberalizes the economy,
eliminating tariffs and other trade impediments. The public attaches a probability (4)) to the
success of the liberalization, in which case there will be free trade in period 2, and expects
that with portability (1 - 4)) the liberalization will fail and a tariff rate of 0 will be instated in
period 2. We denote the success and the failure states by s and f, respectively. The success
probability (4)) is affected by present policies. The public infers from the public investment
profile the degree to which the policy maker will have vested interest in preserving the
liberalization. Specifically, we assume that public investment in sector X will increase the
probability of successful liberalization, by increasing the cost for the policy maker of
reinstating the tariff. The opposite applies to sector y. Thus,
4)   = 4) (K;x; K!;y). with 1 > 0; 2 c 0 (where 4)                  denotes    the partial derivative with

respect to argument j)13. There are two complementary dimensions for the signaling. First, it
changes the composition of the capital stock to be inherited by future administrations,
affecting, thereby, the cost-benefit of policy reversal in the future. Second, if the present
policy maker will survive into the future, the present investment policy may signal his type.


3.     The allocation of resources
       We characterize the allocation of resources by considering the problem confronting the
representative agent who faces two intertemporal margins: the determination of savings (in
the form of the purchase of bonds, denominated in terms of the domestic good), and the
magnitude of investment in activities x and y. For ease of tractability, we solve these problems
sequentially. In general, however, the representative agent solves these two margins
simultaneously.


       13.     If private investment changes the probability of policy reversal, then
4)   = 'X;x;               K;y). with      1
                                               > 0;   2 <0;    4)     >0   ;   4)   c 0. Our analysis can

be readily extended to include this possibility.
                                                  - 10 -


3.1     The consumer's yrob]em
        We denote by H1 and H2 the consumer's first and second period income, and by B the

first period savings. The resources devoted to consumption (in terms of the domestic good)
are given:


        (7) Z1= H1-B                Z2= 112+B(l+r)
        Within the period, the consumer is allocating his consumption as to maximize a Cobb-
Douglas utility. We denote by U,
                                         Ifailure and by Uj-,z. Isuccess the utility in the event of
                                            .



failed and successful reform and find that,


        (8) U1= Z1

                               z2
        (9)U, Ifailure
                 .     =                 :1],   Isuccess
                              1+    e


where 1 + 0 is the price index deflating income when the tariff is set at rate e.14 Using the
properties of the Cobb-Douglas utility function, it is evident that depends positively on the
tariff rate, and is zero in the absence of tariFfs.
        Applying (8)-(9) to (3) we obtain the expected utility of the representative agent:


        14. Direct derivation reveals that U = (1 + 0)" - I - a 01(1 + 0)1       .
                                                                             In deriving this
result, we assume that the tariff proceeds are reimbursed to the public in the form of lump
sum transfers. If these proceeds are used to finance fiscal outlays that do not affect the private
utility, Ô will be larger [9 = (1 +     0"
                                       - 1],
                                             accounting for an adverse income effect of the tax
hike.
                                                - 11 -



      (10)
                                                                               (112 + B(1 + r))
- exp [-   'c               B)](4 exp [-t(H2 + B(l + r))]   -#   (l-) exp -
                                                                                      1+9
                                                                                           -

The consumer demands bonds such as to maximize (10), yielding the condition characterizing
the 'risk premium' associated with the future policy uncertainty:


      (11)              =0
                    p
                              (1 +   0)+(l     -)w
where s = exp ('r 2                ). The term w measures the utility gap introduced by the
                            1+9-
possibility of policy reversal, defined by the ratio of the utility attainable in the event of
                                                                              z2
successful and failed stabilization (i.e.,      = exp [- t Z2]/exp [-   t          - ]). The supply of
                                                                              1+0
saving may be inferred from (11): it can be shown that lower credibility of the trade reform
(either due to a lower probability of a success, or a higher tariff rate) will shift the supply of
saving leftward, depress savings'5. If the reform is credible, the domestic interest rate equals
the rate of time preferences, reflecting the assumption that the only source of uncertainty is
the possibility of policy reversal.




       15.      Applying (11) we get that the condition for an internal equilibrium with positive
saving is that
                        -          (1-)wo
      p + (1 + p) 0                 -                    ,where M'o = exp (t{Y2-1-X2} ____-
                            (I   + 0)$-i-(l   -)Mco                                            1+
Henceforth we assume that the marginal product of capital is high enough so that this condition
is satisfied.
                                                     - 12 -

      Equation (11) highlights the factors determining the gap between the interest rate and
the rate of time preference: it depends positively on the degree of risk aversion (t), and the
probability and magnitude of policy reversal (as measured by 1 - and Ô, respectively).

3.2 The investor's problem
      We focus now on the investor's problem. Suppose that the entrepreneur finances
investment by issuing bonds. An investment of
                                              y in activity Y will generate an income
profile of


      (12)                =         - (l-+-r)(l-sy)Iy; Z21fi1          = (1 +      -
                                                                              O)Y2        (l+f)(.l5y)ly
where the investment is subsidized at a rate of si,,. The investor's expected utility is given by



      (12') - exp [- t (1 + p)Z1]   (   exp [-      t           ] + (1 - )   exp [-   t Z2tf:ilure

Maximizing (12') with respect to the investment 1y yields the condition. determining the

optimal investment in sector y. While the first order condition tends to be tedious, it is
simplified considerably by applying the condition determining the domestic interest rate (11),
yielding:


      (13) MPK =                           -            O(r -
                         (l.i-r)(l-sy)(l            + p)O + O(r - p)
                                               (1
                                              - 13 -

Optimal investment requires that the marginal product of capital (denoted by MPK               ) is

equated to the cost of capital'6. Recall that the investment is financed by bonds denominated
in terms of the domestic good, x. A tariff at a rate of 0 reduces the real interest rate facing the
investor in sector y. This effect is captured by the last term in (13). The tariff effect on the
cost of capital is sector specific, and is absent for sector x. Applying the same procedure we
obtain that the investment in sector x is governed by the condition that

      (14)          MPK = (l+r)(l-s)

4. The role of policies
     We turn now to characterize optimal policies. We derive first the conditions
determining the optimal allocation of resources. This allows us to identify several
externalities. We then derive the value of the optimal sectorial investment tax-cum-subsidy
policies by finding the tax rates that will induce the private sector to internalize the
externalities. Finally, we characterize the relative shares of public and private capital, and
evaluate the dependency of taxes on the presence of sectorial policies.


4.1 The optimal resources allocation
       The policy maker determines investment and policies such as to maximize the expected
utility of the representative individual. We assume the presence of lump sum taxes and
transfers, such that the periodic budget constraints facing the representative agent are




       16 .   The condition for an interior solution with positive investment is that the marginal
 product of capital in the absence of new investment exceeds the cost (the right hand side of
 (13)). Henceforth we assume that the productivity of capital is high enough such that this
 condition is satisfied.
                                              - 14   -
        (15) Ci;x+ C1;yt = X1        +
                                         Yi—Ic;x_4;x_         Iç;y 4;y +F*,

        (16a)   C2;f;x + (1+0) C2;f;y = X2 + (1+9) Y2 — DB* + TR2 and

        (16b)   C2;s;x + C2;s;y = X2           —
                                                   DB*.


where F* is the external credit, DBt is the repayment of the external debt, and TR2 is the

lump sum transfer rebating the tariff proceeds (equals to 0 [C2;y — Y2]). Equations (16a)

and (16b) correspond to the liberalization success and failure possibilities. To simplify, we
assume a zero initial external debt. The demand for external credit is large enough, such that
the credit ceiling is binding:


        (17) F" = [aX2      -   (1-a) Y2]/(.1 + r; DB* = F*(:1 + r*).

Applying (8, 9, 15, 16) to (3) we obtain that the expected utility of the representative agent is
given by:

                                                                         z2
        (18)-exp[-t(1+p)Z1]          (exp[-tZ2]+(1-4)exp[-t
                                                                        1+9
where Z (t = 1,     2) denotes the consumption at period t,   measured in terms of the   domestic


good:



        (19) Z1 = X1    +Yi_Ic;x.J;x -        Iç;y            +F*;

        (20) Z2=X2+Y2DB*,
                                              - 15 -

where F* and DB* are given by (17). Optimal policies are derived in three
                                                                                stages. First, we
characterize the optimal investment by optimizing (18) with respect to

This yields four tedious equations that tie the marginal product of investment with its social
cost, expressed in terms of the utility ratio, w. To gain further insight it is constructive to
express the utility ratio in terms of the domestic interest rate, using the first order condition
determining the interest rate (11). After tedious collections of terms we can reduce the first
order conditions to

                              1+r                                       1+r
      (21) MPK =                                       (22) MK =
                        I- i(la)(rr*)                               1+ a(r_r*)
                               l+r                                        1+r
      (23) MP4                                ;    (24) MPK=
                        l+ky ê(1 cz)(rr*)                           1
                (Mc-1)(1+r)             —      e
where k =
            (l÷p)t(4+(l-)) >0 and e =         1+r*
      Equations (21) and (22) characterize the optimal private investment, and (23) and (24)
the optimal public investment. Optimality requires equating the marginal product of capital to
the marginal social cost. The marginal social cost adjusts the interest rate factor (1+r) to
reflect the externalities introduced by the investment. Two types of externalities are relevant.
First, the investment will affect the openness of the economy, changing, thereby, the credit
ceiling and generating an externality. This externality is proportional to the gap between the
domestic and the foreign interest rate (r_r*), times the resultant change in the credit ceiling
(Ea and - 1(1-a) for sectors X and Y, respectively). An outward-oriented investment
generates a positive externality, reducing, thereby, the social cost of capital invested in
                                               - 16 -

exportable (the opposite applies to the inward-oriented investment). The openness externality
applies to both the public and the private investment.17
      The second type of externality relates to the signaling effects of public investment,
affecting the probability of a credible liberalization. Public investment in outward-oriented
activities increases the prospect of successful trade liberalization; it increases the vested public
interest in these activities, raising, thereby, the cost of policy reversal. This generates a
positive externality, proportional to the raise in the probability of successful liberalization
    > 0) times a measure of the distortion introduced by the policy uncertainty, as depicted by

k. The policy uncertainty distortion k is proportional to the gap between the utility attainable
with successful liberalization and the utility attainable with policy reversal, as measured by
'v-1• The policy externality operates in the opposite direction for investment in the inward-
oriented sector: public investment in that sector will reduce the probability of a successful
liberalization, because it will reduce the losses (or increase the gains) from policy reversal.


4.2    Optimal sectorial investment tax-cum-subsidy policies
       The optimal investment tax-cum-subsidy policies are derived by solving the values of
the s x and 5y that equates the private sector's optimality condition with that of the policy

maker [equations (13) to (21) and (14) to (22)], yielding:




       17 .   If the externalities affecting the investment in sector y are powerful enough, we
may end up in a corner solution, where no investment will occur in that sector, corresponding
to the case where the right hand side of (21) or (23) is negative. Henceforth, we will assume
 that these externalities are not too large, such that we observe an internal equilibrium. All the
key results can be shown to apply for the alternative case.
                                                 - 17 -

                                            + (r - p)/(l+p)
                                             0                                      cz(rr*)
             (25)   s=-                 —
                                                                           s=
                                      1-e(l-a)(r-rt)                                1i.icz(r_r*)


Optimality calls for subsidizing private investment in the outward-oriented activity, and taxing
private investment in the inward activity. Investment in inward activities should be taxed due
to two reasons: first, to induce producers to internalize the cost introduced by the external
credit ceiling; second, to reduce the tendency of the private sector to over-invest in the
outward activities. The prospect of commercial policy reversal in an economy where the
investment is financed by local bonds (whose yield is denominated in terms of the domestic
good) introduces a distortion. A tariff hike generates an asymmetric response of the producers
real interest: it will reduce the real interest rate for investment in the inward-oriented activity
relative to the real interest rate for investment in the outward-oriented activity. This generates
a bias towards private investment in the inward-oriented activity, a bias that is the outcome of
the policy reversal and the financial stmcture of the economy. This bias is a distortion, whose
elimination calls for a tax on investment in the inward sector, at a rate that depends positively
on the gap between the domestic interest rate and the rate of time preferences, Consequently,
factors that increase the domestic interest rate, like a debt crisis that truncates the access of the
developing economy to the international credit market, will increase the distortion introduced
by the lack of credibility of the trade reform. The lack of full credibility of the trade reform
generates the prospect for immiserizing growth.'8 The purpose of the tax is to prevent such a
growth.




       18.   See Brecher and Diaz Alejandro (1977) and the references there for immiserizing
growth in a non-stochastic model.
                                                - 18 -

41    The relative shares of public and private capital
      Applying (21-24) to (1) and (2) we may infer the ratio of the desirable public relative
to the private capital stock in the two activities:


                '
              ____                   k4i
       (26)        =[X{1-i-
                 t;x              l+ecz(r-r )


              ____ = [Mi-i-           k(l)y
       (27)                                      }llf(l1)
                                 1Ua)(r_r*)
A useful benchmark is the case where there is no efficiency bias in favor of either types of
capital (X = 1), and there are no credibility externalities (4,, = =O). In that case, an equal

amount of public and private capital will be used in both activities. The introduction of
credibility externalities generates a bias in favor of public investment in the outward-oriented
sector (relative to the private investment), and against public investment in the inward-
oriented sector. As one may expect, relative inefficiency of public investment (X C 1) will
generate a bias in favor of private investment.19




        19. The informationconveycd in (26) and (27) refer to the public/private capital
 ratios. The levels of the capital stock may be solved by applying (1), (2) and (21-24). It can be
 shown that the credibility externality will increase the level of public investment in the
 outward-activities and will reduce the level of public investment in the inward-activities. The
 correlation between pubic and private investment is positive if the substitutability of the two
 types of capital is relatively low (yc ). In that case, the credibility externality increases the
 level of private investment in the outward activities and reduces the private investment in the
 inward activities. The opposite applies if the substitutability is high enough (y> 13).
                                                -19-
      So far we have assumed that the policy maker has enough instruments to discriminate
among the various activities, in the form of sectorial policies. This presumes the ability to
monitor private investment, preventing the abuse of subsidics by over-reporting investment,
or shifting funds from the designated investment towards other projects. These assumptions
are not always accurate, and it is useful to contrast the above equilibrium to the one obtained
in the absence of these polices. Specifically, let us assume that the policy maker does not apply
the investment tax-cum-subsidy policies. Following the logic of our previous discussion, we
can characterize the nature of the new equilibrium. It is easy to show that the conditions for
the private sector's investment are given by (13)-(l4), for the case where s,    = s>   = 0. The

optimal public investment continue to be characterized by (23)-(24). The ratios of the
public/private investment are now given by
                    K?.x
                             =
      (26')                      [X{l+k+a(rr*)}] l/(l—y)



      (27')
                    4
                    4y
                       '    =



Comparison of (26)-(27) and (26')-(27') reveals that the elimination of sectorial private
investment policy prevents the internalization of the openness externality by the private sector,
necessitating a compensating adjustment of the public investment. This adjustment works
toward magnifying the biases of public relative to private investment, identified in equations
(26) and (27). It calls for a rise in the public/private capital ratio in the outward-oriented
activities, and a drop in that ratio in the inwards-oriented activities.
                                              - 20 -

5.    Policies, risk aversion and the access to the international credit market
      It is constructive to conclude the analysis by reviewing the relevance of the degree of
risk aversion and the nature of the access to the international credit market on the policy
design. The degree of risk aversion plays an important role in determining the domestic
interest rate. From (11) we infer that a higher degree of risk aversion (t) increases the
domestic interest rate, whose values are in between

                                               1-
                   r1 —0= p+ 9(1÷p)                     ; and              = p+ Ô(l+p).
      (28)
                                              i+e                 r1


Note that the degree of risk aversion affects the domestic interest rate, which in turn affects
all the policy variables. Applying (25-27) we infer that a higher degree of risk aversion will
increase the subsidy called for outward investment, and the tax on inward investment. These
results are summarized in Figure 1, where the bold lines (curves s and s y) depict the

dependency of the various policies and shares on the degree of risk aversion.
       We turn now to evaluate the dependency of optimal policies on the access to the
international capital market. Throughout the paper we assumed that the country is facing an
endogenous credit ceiling, that depends positively on the openness of the economy. In such a
world, the openness externality influences policies. To clarify the role of the integration with
the international credit market, it is constructive to compare this case with two extreme
situations: no access, and unrestricted access to the international credit market. Formally.
cutting off the country from the international credit market implies that the credit ceiling is
zero. In terms of (25-27), i equals zero. This eliminates the subsidy on private investment in
the outward activities, and reduces the tax on private investment in the inward activities. In
 terms of Figure 1. the doted lines (curves    and Sy) depict the locations of the new curves.

       Finally, suppose that the country has unrestricted access to the international capital
 market, dominated by risk neutral agents demanding an expected yield of r*. This is
 equivalent to the elimination of the openness externality [setting    to zero in (25)-(27)] and
sx.sy




                               -   *    RJSKAR5jpj
                                       S.y




                                             Sly




                    FIGURE 1
           TAX-CUM-SU3y POLICIES
   LIMITED CAPITAL MARKETS INTEGRATION:
                                                   S,, 5
         DISJOINT CAPITAL MARKETS: 5' • S.
                                    x     y
   FULL CAPITAl MARKETS INTEGRATION: S .
                                             -21 -
replacing the internal interest rate r with the external one. It will have the consequences of
eliminating the subsidy for private investment in the outward activity, and reducing the tax on
the inward activity. The corresponding values are depicted by the broken lines (curves s

and    in Figure 1.



6. Concluding remarks
      This paper characterized the role of investment policies applied to support a
liberalization attempt. Rather than repeating the summary provided in the first section, we
close the paper with interpretive remarks. The externalities identified in this paper are
generated due to the lack of a credible commitment mechanism that may overcome the time
inconsistency problems. Ex ante, the optimal policy is to repay the external debt and to invoke
a permanent liberalization. This policy, however, may lack complete credibility: Ex post there
are forces that work toward partial default of external debt, and toward the reversal of trade
liberation. Selective investment provides a commitment mechanism that may reduce the
harmful consequences of time inconsistency. The lack of credibility of a reform generates a
role for investment policies. In an economy with various potential projects, investment in
projects that enhance the credibility of the reform should be encouraged. In the context of the
present paper, these are outward-oriented projects that benefit from specific public
investment. The identification of these investments may require detailed information beyond
the information provided by the aggregate public investment. For example, investment in
highways, telecommunications, and infrastructure in Tijuana and along the Mexican border
with California may generate positive externalities.20 It signals the willingness of the regime




      20. Note that investment in infrastructure in Mexico City may lack these externalities,
since it is not specific and thus may enhance both inward- and outward-orientation.
                                              - 22 -
to support an outward orientation, to enhance the productivity of future direct
                                                                                  investment by
U.S. corporations in Mexico.21
      While the details of the policies identified in the paper are model-dependent, the spirit
of the key results can be shown to be general. First, the degree of integration with the external
capital market plays an important role in the determination of policies. Second, refonns that
lack complete credibility generate non-optimal investment due to the absence of complete
markets, calling for tax-cum-subsidy policies. Third, there are linkages between public and
private investment, whose form is related to the degree to which policies are credible, and the
extent to which there are sectorial private investment policies. These results are relevant even
in the restricted case of symmetric information among the policy maker and the public. They
suggest that public invesunent may have a role as a signaling and commitment device, a role
that deserves further empirical scrutiny.




      21. More than half a million Mexicans are employed by foreign corporations in the
Maquiladoras plants along the U.S.-Mexican border. The large direct investment in these plants
illustrates that selective direct investment is highly profitable, even in the presence of debt-
overhang. For further details regarding the welfare effect of direct investment in thepresence
of debt-overhang see Aizenman (1989). While the focus of our paper is on domestic
investment, the message of the paper applies also to direct investment: higher credibility of the
trade reform wiil enhance this type of investment.
                                            - 23 -

                                         Appendix A
        In order to verify the role of private and public investment in accounting for the
growth rate, we regressed the growth rate on the private and public investment rate. This was
done for the 23 countries studied by Greene and Villanueva (1990). The regression results are
summarized in Table 1


                                              Table 1
                        Growth rates, and public and private investment


Dependent variable: Growth rates

Explanatory variables


Intercept          Public investment        Private investment                   S.E.
-1.926             -.058                    .319                    .359        1.785
                   (.468)                   (3.672)**


Notes
The data source is Pfefferman and Madarassy (1989). Number of countries: 23. All
observations are yearly averages over the period 1975-1987. Two asterisks denote
significance at 1% level.


       Figure 2 plots the association of growth and private and public investment rates. The
bold line is the regression line, whereas the other two lines correspond to the 95% confidence
limits for the slope of the regression line.
                   y    .305x    2.247, A-squared: .411




2




    5    7.5       10   12.5      15      17.5      20        22.5   25   27.5
                            Private Investment Rate




                    y a .10Th • .535, A-squared: .025




S




2




    -2   0     2        4     6        8      10
                            Public Investment Rate
                                                         12     14   16
                                                                           18
                                  FIGURE 2
                                                    - 24 -
                                                   REFERENCES

Aizenman, Joshua, "Inward versus outward growth orientation in the presence of country risk," 1989,
       forthcoming, Economica.
________________ 'Trade Dependency, bargaining and external debt,' 1989, forthcoming, Journal of
       International Economics.

Blejer, Mario I. and Mohsin S. Khan, "Government policy and private
                                                               investment in developing countries," IME

       Staff Papers. June 1984, 31, 379 -403.
Bulow I, Jeremy and Rogoff Kenneth • "A Constant recontracting model of sovereign debt," Journal of Political

     Economy, 1989. 97, 155 - 78.
Brecher Richard A. and Carlos F. Din Alejandro, "Tariffs, Foreign Capital and immiserizing Growth," Journal

     of International Economics. 1977,7,317-322.

Calvo, A. Guilermo, "Credibility and Economic Policy,' manuscript presented at the conference Spain and the

     European Monetary System, 1988.
Cholcsi Armeane, Michaely Michael, and Demetris Papageorgiou, (edts.) Liberalizing Foreign Trade. Basil

       Blackwell, forthcoming, 1990.
Dixit, Avinash, "Irreversible investment with price ceilings," manuscript. Princeton University, October 1989.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Notes on credibility and stabilization.' NBER Working paper No. 2970. December 1988.

Edwards, Sebastian. Real Exchange Rates. Devaluation. and Adjustment, MIT press, 1989.
Greene Joshua and Delano Villanueva, "Private investment in developing countries: an empirical analysis." 1990,

        forthcoming. IMF Staff Paners.
Kahn, Mohsin S. and Carmen Reinhart, "Private investment and economic growth in developing countries,"
      World Development , January 1990, 19-27.

 Pfefferman, Guy and Andrea Madarassy, "Trends in private investment in 30 developing countries." IFC
        Economics Department Discussion Paper, World Bank Group. July 1989.

 Pyndick, Robert S.. "Irreversible investment, capacity choice and the value of the firm," American Economic
        Review 78 (5), December 1988.

 Rodrik, Dani, "Promises, promises: credible policy reform via signaling,' Economic Journal, September 1989.

 van Wijnbergen, Sweder, "Trade reform, aggregate investment, and capital flight," Economic Letters, 1985, 19,

        369 - 72,
