NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

DESTABILIEING EFFECTS OF EXCHANGE-RATE ESCAPE CLAUSES

Maurice Obstfeld

Working Paper No. 3603

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1991

This paper was written while I was a visitor at the Department of
Economics, Harvard University, and at the National Bureau of
Economic Research. I thank both institutions for their
hospitality, and the National Science Foundation for financial
support. Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti made helpful comments. All
errors are mine. This paper is part of NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #3603
January 1991
DESTABILIZING EFFECTS OF EXC}IANGE—RATE ESCAPE CLAUSES

ABSTRACT
This paper studies the merits of policy rules with escape
clauses, analyzing as an example fixed exchange-rate systems that
allow member countries the freedom to realign in periods of

stress. Motivating this example is the debate within the
European Monetary System over how quickly to move from the
current regime of national currencies, linked by pegged but
adjustable exchange rates, to a single European currency.

The paper's main point is that while well—designed rules
with escape clauses can raise society's welfare in principle,

limited credibility makes it difficult for governments to

implement such rules in practice. An EMS-type institution -

which presumably imposes a political cost on policytnakers who
realign — may lead to an optimal escape-clause equilibrium, but

may just as well lead to alternative equilibria far inferior to

an irrevocably fixed exchange rate. Countries can suffer periods
in which no realignment occurs, yet unemployment, real wages, and
ex post real interest rates remain persistently and suboptimally
high.

Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
697 Evans Mall
University of California
at Berkeley

Berkeley, CA 94720

Institutional restraints on monetary policy typically make

special provision for exceptional circumstances. In times of
economic crisis, a gold standard may be suspended, a monetary
growth target breached, or an exchange rate realigned despite a
previous international agreement fixing its level. Underlying such

escape clauses is the idea that while institutional discipline is

on the whole a good thing, social welfare may be improved if

policymakers are granted discretion in the face of unusually
severe shocks.t

This paper studies the merits of policy rules with escape
clauses, analyzing as an example fixed exchange-rate systems that

allow member countries the freedom to realign in periods of
stress. Motivating this example is the debate within the European

Monetary System over how quickly to move from the current regime
of national currencies, linked by pegged but adjustable exchange
rates, to a single European currency.

The paper's main point is that while well-designed rules with
escape clauses can raise welfare in principle, limited credibility

makes it difficult for governments to implement thea in practice.

The problem is that an EMS-type institution — which presumably
imposes a political cost on policymakers who realign — may lead to

an optimal escape-clause equilibrium, but may just as well result

in alternative equilibria far inferior to an irrevocably fixed

exchange rate.2 Countries can suffer periods in which no

'Policy rules with escape clauses are examined by Flood and Isard
(1989, 1990), Lohmann (1990), and Persson and Tabellini (1990).

2Cukierman (1990) shows how multiple equilibria can arise in a
model with a costly devaluation option. In his model, however,
exchange-rate changes play no stabilization role, so rigidly fixed

1

realignment occurs, yet unemployment, real wages, and ax post real
interest rates remain persistently and suboptimally high (probably
a good description of Italy's recent experience).3

The paper is organized as follows. Section I sets out a model

along the lines of Kydlsnd and Prescott (1977) and Barro and
Gordon (1983), in which a policymaker faces an incentive to raise

employment above its natural rate through surprise currency
depreciation. The policymaker has an informational advantage over
the private sector, however, so policy interventions can play some

stabilizing role. But leaving the policymaker free to stabilize
entails a cost, as it imparts an inflationary bias to the economy.

An optimal fixed exchange rate with realignment clauses, analyzed

in section II, efficiently trades off higher mean inflation
against more effective stabilization.

The policy rule described in section II

i s not time

consistent. Section III describes how a fixed personal cost of

exchange rates are, by assumption, socially optimal. The model
developed below has very different properties. Lewis (1989)
mentions the possibility of multiple equilibria in a model where

governments face fixed costs of entering into temporary
For a general
international policy-coordination agreements.
discussion of the drawbacks of non-credible fixed exchange rates,
including possible multiple equilibria, see Obstfeld (1985).
3Despite the stated desire for policy convergence within the EMS,

Italy's 1989 unemployment rate stood at 12.0 percent (compared
with a European Community average of 9.6); its unit labor costs
increased in that year by 6.3 percent (compared with an EC average
of 2.6 percent); and its annualized nominal three-month treasury
bill rate was 12.7 percent (compared with three-month interbank
rates of 9.3 percent in France and 7.1 percent in Germany). (See
International Monetary Fund 1990.) Of course, Italy's large and
growing public debt/GNP ratio must be reckoned as an additional
source of credibility problems; and it may be part of the reason
why Italy has suffered persistent inflation above the EC average.

Calvo (1988) presents a theoretical analysis of multiple
equilibria in a setting of public-debt devaluation.

2

realigning, imposed on the policymaker by society, may induce him
to implement the socially optimal escape-clause rule.4 But this is

not the only possible outcome, as section IV shows. Even if
society imposes the "correct" fixed cost, there may well be
multiple equilibria, some leading to welfare levels far below the
one achieved under an unconditionally fixed exchange rate.
Section V summarizes the principal results and concludes.

I. Commitment vs. Discretion in a Standard Model

The analytical framework is a standard model of monetary policy
choice, adapted to a small open economy.

On each date t, a policymaker sets the (log) exchange rate e

(the price of foreign money in terms of domestic money). At the

same time, the labor market determines an economy-wide nominal
wage w1 (also a log), at which workers agree to supply all the
labor that firms demand on date t+l.

There is a single consumption good available; because its

foreign-currency price is fixed, the exchange rate can be
identified with the domestic price level. Labor-market equilibrium

is assumed to require a constant expected real wage of 1. Thus if

EJe I

Itll

is the date t—l conditional expectation of the date t

exchange rate, the wage negotiated on date t—l for date t is

4The general idea is related to Rogoff's (1985) argument that
society may be able to increase its welfare, not by altering
policymakers' incentives, but by choosing policymakers with
preferences different from its own.

3

(1) w E{et I

Itl}.

The information set 't—l' which is common to the government and

includes full and accurate data on the

private sector,

government's incentives and constraints.

Labor demand on date t is inversely related to the real wage

—

e

that is realized at the start

and an employment shock

of period t, before date t labor demand is determined but too late

to affect the prenegotiated nominal wage. The equation for date t

employment, n, is

(2)

—

*

+

—

E{et

I

Itl}] —

— k].

In (2), n* should be thought of as the employment level targeted
by the policymaker, while k > 0 represents a fixed distortion in
the economy that causes employment to deviate systematically from

n*. (Of course,

Ic will be the source of the policymaker's
is serially uncorrelated with

credibility problem.) The shock
zero mean.

The policymaker's preferences entail a tradeoff between
employment levels closer to n* and inflation rates farther from

his target of zero inflation. Specifically, on any date t the
policymaker would like to minimize the present discounted value of

current and future expected period-by-period losses L,

(3) At =

E{

s—t L
sE=t

I

i}
4

—

s—t

— E{

n*)2 + O(e —

5_zr

Above, e —

e1

e1)2]

i}.

is domestic inflation, 0 < $ < 1, and 0 > 0.

The costs measured by (3) are assumed to be true social costs.

While labor markets pre-set

in ignorance of the realized

value of u, the policymaker is assumed to set the exchange rate
after having observed the shock. In general the policymaker will

want to use the exchange rate to offset some of the effect of

on employment —

for

example, by unexpectedly depreciating the

(raising e above e1 by an amount exceeding

currency

labor-market expectations) when u turns out to be positive.

There are at least two distinct policymaking processes that

might govern this management of the exchange rate. Under
discretion authorities choose e each period to maximize
without regard to any policies that might have been announced in

the past; in particular, discretionary policymaking takes past
expectations as given. Since the model assumes no intertemporal

linkages,5 the optimal policy under diacretion is to maximize

Lt given E{et I It_l} as well as u. The exchange-rate change
chosen in a discretionary regime therefore is

(4) e —

e1

—

A[E{e

I

Itl} — etlJ + A(k + u) A a

m

Under commitment, however, the authority binds itself ox ante

for all t

0 to an irrevocable exchange-rate rule of the form

5Note that "reputational" trigger-strategy equilibria
considered.

5

are not

(5) e —

— e(uk).

In what follows I will use the unconditional expected policy loss

as a "Rawlsian" welfare criterion for ranking policy regimes.
Under commitment, then, the authority solves the problem: Find a

function e(u,k) that minimizes the unconditional expectation

E{A0} subject to e —

e1

E{E(uk) i} for all t

—

e(uk)

and E{e I

It_l}

—

e1 +

0.6 (Note that the choice of policy

rule is made in ignorance of the initial realization u0.7) In a

linear-quadratic setting the optimal policy rule c(uk) is
linear; it is easy to verify that the rule

(6) e(uIc) =

e

—

e1

= Au

is optimal under commitment, where A e [0,1] is defined in (4).

According to (6), the authority partially counters employment

shocks through exchange-rate surprises, to a degree inversely
related to the relative inflation-aversion coefficient G/m, but it

makes no attempt to offset the systematic employment distortion
k. Mean inflation is zero under this commitment regime, and the
(unconditional) expected policy loss is

61n fact, to obtain the commitment equilibrium it suffices that
for any t 0, the government be able to bind itself on date t—l
to the exchange-rate rule it will follow on date t.

71n reality a government choosing an optimal binding rule might do

so knowing u0 (or more generally, knowing something about the
state of the economy over the near future). This knowledge would
contaminate its choice of rule, with the degree of contamination
depending inversely on the size of the discount factor /3.

6

(7) EAC — cxk2 +

where

— 0

— (l—A)a,

,

is the variance of u. [In (7) and until further notice,

is assumed for notational convenience.8]

Under discretion the exchange rate is set by (4). Rational
expectations in the labor market ensure that in equilibrium

(8) et_etl_lAAk+Aut,
implying an expected loss of

(9) gAD —

YE(1Th

+ k +

= EAC + 9A2k2/(l — A)2

EAD exceeds EAC for a well-known reason: unless he can commit

to zero mean inflation, the policymaker is free to try offsetting

the distortion k through a surprise reduction in real wages. But
the cost of this distortion, ak2 in (7), is irreducible. Since the

labor market understands the authority's goals, equilibrium wages

incorporate inflation expectations and thus rise at rate Ak/(l —

A) [see eq. (8)]. As a result, the additional policy loss implied
by a discretionary regime is 9A2k2/(l — A)2.

One particular rule —

of the present model —

is

suboptimal within the narrow confines
a fixed exchange rate: e =

for

all t. The expected loss under this rule is

8To get general answers, divide the ex ante losses reported below
by 1 — fi.

7

(10) E/Y —

aE(k + u)2 —

mA2

+ ma2.

A fixed rate allows for no policy response to the disturbance u,
so E(AC —

IT) — (a — -y)a2,

the gain due to optimal stabilization.

However, the fixed rate does avoid the secular inflation, at rate

Ak/(l —

A),

implied by a discretionary regime. So in general, a

comparison of ElT (fixed rates) with EAD (pure discretion) is
ambiguous, depending in an obvious way on the values of 9/a, A,

and a.

II. Nondiscretionary Escape Clauses

When the potential gains from stabilization are significant, a
fixed exchange rate regime that allows discretion in exceptional

circumstances may raise welfare compared to an unconditionally
fixed rate. At the same time, a regime of pure discretion may be
improved if some statutory limits are placed on the policymaker's
exchange-rate choices. These observations give rise to the idea of
policy rules embodying escape clauses.

This section studies nondiscretionary escape clauses: binding

rules specifying when the exchange rate must be fixed, and when
discretion is permissible. There is an obvious problem with such
rules: How can society enforce thea if policy commitments are not

feasible? To address this problen, the next section will take up
discretionary escape clauses, which are invoked when the policymaker chooses, but at a personal cost. The present section remains
pertinent, though, as its results clarify the welfare inplications

8

of discretionary and nondiscretionary escape clauses alike.9
Consider a policymaker bound to the exchange-rate rule:

if —u<ut Cu

t—l

(11) e —4

—

or uu.

if

argminL

This rule instructs the policymaker to resort to discretion if
assumes an extreme value, i.e., one that lies outside (u,u).

Expectations under rule (11) reflect the possibility of a
reversion to discretion, and these expectations, in turn, affect

the exchange rate chosen when discretion is indeed "on" [recall
(4)1 .

Let F(u) be the cumulative distribution function for the

i.i.d. shock u, and define

U

it a F(u)

=

fdF(u),

it

— 1— F(u) —

fdF(u).
U

The expected exchange rate under the assumed regime is

E(e I

'c—P — !E{eIU

u} + irE{eIu

+ (1 — iv —

which can be solved, using (4), for the equilibrium expectation

91t may seem artificial to consider binding escape-clause rules;
after all, once binding rules are admitted to be feasible, many
other rules would be better — for example, keep the exchange rate
fixed within a set interval of u values, but use the optimal rule
(6) outside. The payoff, to repeat, is a benchmark for analyzing

escape clauses that arise in reality and are enforced through
sanctions applied to policymakers. As is discussed further below,

imposing fixed social costs of exercising escape options would
have little substantive impact on the analysis.
9

(12) E(e I 't—l e1 + 5(u,u),

where

10

+

A[7r[k + E{u I

(13) 6(u,u)

1 — A(r

+ E{u I

—
+ ii)

The unconditional expected loss is denoted by EA(u,u), where

(14) EA(u,u) = (1

—

+ k
— r)aE{[S(u,u)

+ (+

+ U]2

)E{[6(u,u) + k + u]2 I

u E (uu)}

u

(uu)}.

Equation (14) is best understood by reference to the last
section's results.

Under both pure discretion and a fixed

exchange rate, the policymaker's expected loss is proportional to

E( + k + u)2, where ço is the equilibrium expectation of
depreciation —

Ak/(1 —

A) under discretion, zero under a fixed

rate [see equations (9) and (10), respectively] .

With

a fixed rate

the proportionality constant is a, while under discretion it is
the smaller quantity -y, a reflection of the policymaker's ability
to stabilize employment at the cost of secular expected inflation.

'°Even if A = 1 (i.e., C — 0), so that the policymaker puts no
weight at all on inflation, the expected depreciation rate in (13)

is finite as long as at least one threshold is finite. In
contrast, equilibrium depreciation is infinite when A
case of pure discretion [equation (8)].

10

1 in the

The loss (14) averages over these two regimes in a particular

way. In states of nature where the fixed rate holds steady, the
expected loss is a times the corresponding conditional expectation

of (p +

k + u)2;

in states where it does not, the expected loss is

y times the conditional expectation of (p +
to

discretion.

Overall

k + u)2

expected loss is

corresponding

the appropriate

probability-weighted average. The trend expected depreciation rate

p — 6(u,u) is constant across realizations of u and leads to a
"peso problem": under fixed rates there is the possibility of a
parity change, while under discretionary exchange-rate management
there is the possibility of a return to fixed rates.1t In general,

6(u,u) may be positive or negative. If negative, it may exceed k
in absolute value; while if positive (as section IV shows), it may

even exceed the trend depreciation rate under pure discretion.
Naturally, the model implies pure discretion as u — u
fixed rate as ii

• 0,

a pure

and —u •

Nondiscretionary

escape clauses that strictly dominate both

pure discretion and an irrevocably fixed exchange rate often can
be designed.'2 It is thus meaningful to examine interior solutions

for the optimal escape-clause rule. Let f(u) be the derivative of

the distribution function F(u). Differentiation of EA(u,u)

"The expectation p is independent of u because that shock is
i.i.d. Allowing serial correlation in u would complicate the
results (and arguably add to their descriptive realism), but
wouldn't alter any fundamental insights. For example, for given
escape thresholds, positive serial correlation in u would make
wages an increasing function of u. Furthermore, the optimal
thresholds (to be described in a moment) generally would depend on
the previous period's shock realization.

'2See Persson and Tabellini (1990) for a good discussion of

a

special case. By construction, no such rule strictly dominates the
optimal rule (6).

11

[equation (14)] with respect to the thresholds u and u yields
first-order conditions for an interior optimum:

(15a) EA1(u,u) — —(a

— -y)[6(u,)

+ k + uJ2f(u)

+ 2aJ5l(u)[5(u) + k + u]dF(u)
uE(u,u)

+ 27JEi(u)[&(u) + k + U]dF(U) — 0,
u (u ,

(15b) EA2(u,u)= (a -

u)

-y)[6(u,u)

+ k + u]2E(u)

+ 2aJ52(u)[5(u) + k + u]dF(u)
uE(u,u)

+

2J&2(u)[S(u) + k +

u]dF(u)

0.

ue (u , u)

These conditions actually are not too hard to interpret. A
small increase in u, for example, has two effects. Given market

expectations, it marginally increases the range of shocks over
which the authority can exercise employment-stabilizing policy,
thereby reducing expected losses by (a —

-y)[5(u,u)

+ k + u}2f(u).

But it also affects equilibrium expectations across all states of
nature, shifting the entire functional relationship between u and

L. The incremental expectations effect, the sum of the two
integral expressions in (15a) ,

must just cancel the incremental

12

stabilization gain at an optimum (so in particular the former
effect must increase expected losses). A similar characterization
applies to (15b).13

Attaining the optimum described by (15) is problematic,
because the optimization assumes that a a binding rule governs the

circumstances in which discretion is permitted. In effect, the
policymaker, like Saint-Exupdry's Little Prince, is "commanded to
do exactly what he wants to do," but only in certain states of the

world. This policy rule is clearly time inconsistent: absent a
commitment mechanism, the policymaker will always do what he wsnts
to do, namely, exercise full discretion.

One way to impose a nonzero probability that a steady
exchange rate is optimal ex post is to posit a fixed social cost x

of currency realignment, over and above the costs captured by the

term O(e —

e1)2

in (3). Even under discretion, such a cost may

induce the policymaker to keep e fixed over a range of u
realizations. The time-inconsistency problem remains, however,
because the policymaker's discretionary behavior generally will
not minimize the ex ante social loss EA — (ir

+

A fixed private cost of realignment, imposed on the
policymaker

only,

could

reduce

the

divergence

between

discretionary behavior and the ex ante optimal escape-clause rule.

For example, a government might lose political capital if it has

to alter the exchange rate.

When the authority conducts a

t3Notice that when u is distributed symmetrically around zero, the

optimal bounds are not symmetric: u C —ii

because k > 0. Even

symmetric bounds, such as those analyzed by Persson and Tabellini
(1990), may raise welfare compared with discretion or fixed rates.

13

cost-benefit analysis of realignment each period, however, its
decision to exercise the escape clause is discretionary. The next

section analyzes escape clauses triggered by discretion rather
than by a rule.

III. Discretionary Escape Clauses

A well-designed escape clause is potentially welfare-improving,

but can fixed political costs of currency realignments induce
policymakers to implement it under discretion? The answer is of
particular interest in light of the EMS, which is often viewed as

an institution that imposes such costs. In this section I argue

that there can be no general presumption that a discretionary
escape clause will reproduce the social optimum.

Assume that the policymaker faces a cost a

of

revaluing the

currency (lowering e) and a cost c of devaluing (raising e). In a

discretionary regime the authority takes the market's expected
devaluation rate, p, as given; accordingly ex post period loss is

(16) LF(,u) m( + k +

if the fixed exchange rate is maintained, given u, and is
D
(17) L (rp,u)

y(ç2

+k

+ u)

2

if the choice is to realign.'4

The formulation here assumes that realignment carries no extra
fixed social costs. These could easily be incorporated without
14

Since the future is unsffected by decisions made today, the

sole concern

policymsker's

differential, L1' —

iP, net

short-run social-cost

the

is

of the fixed cost of any parity

adjustment. The policymaker's optimal decision rule is simple: it
is to devalue the currency for u

(18s) LF(w,u) —

LD(,u)

and to revalue for u

- (a

-y)(

ii, where

(18b) LF'(,u) — LD(4,,u) — (a

Figure

—

u, where u is the solution to

+

k +

—)2

u is the solution to

— y)(ç + k +

—

1 illustrates how u and u are determined.

The relationships shown in the figure suggest a way of
implementing the socially optimal escape-clause rule. Let u and u
be the optimal switch points characterized by (15); then set s and
c at the levels

(19) c - (a

—

)[6(u,u)

+

k +

c =

(a —

)[5(u,u)

+

k +

Faced with market depreciation expectations &(u,u), the authority
will pick the optimal boundaries u and u if the fixed realignment
costs specified in (19) are imposed [compare (18) with (19)].

There is one problem with this scheme. It works perfectly

changing the analysis below. The key point about such costs is the
one made at the end of the last section: fixed social costs alone

cannot induce the policymaker to implement the ex ante optimal
rule. An incentive structure that penalizes the policymaker
without penalizing the rest of society — for example, a salary
cut that accrues to the government budget —
15

is

indispensable.

LF (,u)

LD (.)

U

Figure 1: Determination of realignment threaholda
under dieeretinn

well if the market expects the currency to depreciate at rate

6(u,i)

—

on average. But there may be no way to ensure that this is

the market's expectation. As (18) shows, changing
will lead to different switch points, u' and u'

,

to q? ,

say,

even if the fixed

realignment costs do not change; and an additional rationalexpectations equilibrium will arise whenever 92' —

6(u' ,u'). In

general we would expect such an equilibrium to produce a

strictly

lower social welfare level than the one described by (15). In
particular, an equilibrium with a rate of expected depreciation

greater than under the optimal rule will also lead to a higher
real wage and thus to higher unemployment when the escape clause
is not exercised.

Why should multiple equilibria arise at all? The answer lies

in the policymaker's inability, under a discretionary regime, to

forswear credibly the accommodation of expected

depreciation. A

rise in expected depreciation on date t—l, other things the same,

can push the economy farther from full employment on date t; and
as (4) shows, the policymaker will create some date-t inflation to
mitigate this employment effect, with the propensity to accommodate

measured by A. Under a discretionary

escape clause, different

expected switch points imply different exchange rate expectations.

An accommodative (high A) policymaker may alter his preferred
switch point so as to ratify a change in expectations.

One might hope to be more successful at

implementing an

optimal escape-clause rule through more complicated
structures —

for

incentive

example, schemes that make the policymaker's

penalty depend on the size of a realignment. Such

considered below. As the subsequent

16

schemes are not

analysis will reveal, state-

dependent penalties would help only if they could be designed with

very detailed knowledge of the economy's structure,

Sufficiently

detailed knowledge is not available in practice, and clearly does
not inform the sanctions that real-world policymakers face.

Even for fixed realignment costs, the multiplicity of
equilibria, and their welfare properties, depend in a complicated
way on the distribution function F(u). For this reason, I now take
a detailed look at a specific, but empirically plausible, example.

IV. Multiple Equilibria: An Example

To simplify the analysis, I assume thst the fixed cost of
revaluation is big enough that only large positive realizations of

u occasion discretion, in which case a devaluation occurs.

assumption leads to a fairly realistic description

This

of the

positions of several countries: no one currently places great
weight on the possibility that the Italian lira will be

revalued

against the deutschemark. Also, having to solve only for a single
equilibrium boundary, u, simplifies the algebra considerably.

A devaluation option of this sort imparts a definite
inflation bias to the regime; a welfare gain over pure discretion

can arise only when the mean inflation bias falls as a result of

the limits on the exchange rate's flexibility. On the negative
side, the escape clause makes employment more variable compared
with a free float: in non-devaluation states, employment is below

the level that would prevail under discretion, while in
devaluation states, it is higher. Because employment is less
variable than under a rigidly fixed exchange rate, however, a
17

mixed regime may —

but

need not — dominate either polar regime.

In line with the simplifying assumption that only devaluation

is possible, define 6(u) as the expected depreciation rate when

the authority holds the exchange rate fixed for u < u, but
devalues otherwise:

6(u) —

lim

6(u,u)
—

[see equation (13)]. All the formulas derived above can be
extended to the present, simpler, setting by replacing 6(u,u) with

6(u). In particular, (15b), so modified, describes a fixed rate
with an interior optimal devaluation option.'5

The specific distribution assumed for u has the tent-shaped
density function:

—

u)/p2

for u C

f(u) —

0

for u

Under this distribution, a2 —

Direct

calculation yields the inflation bias of the regime,

+
Air{k

(20a)

E{u I

6(u)

— Air—

1
15

}]

.
.
Of course, there is no general presumption
of an interior
.

optimum. In the example of this section, u = —p is always a local
(and sometimes a global) minimum of the expected loss function.

18

— (p + u)2/2p2

1

(20b) ir —

I

(p —

(20c) E{u I u >

—

—2
2
u) /2p

-

[3 +

Naturally, 8(u) -. 0 as u -*

while 8(u) -.

for u E [—p,O]

Ak/(l

for u C (O,p]

2IuI -

3_2)/6_2

p (and the escape option disappears);

— A) as u -.

—p

(in which case discretion

prevails with probability one).

Before even searching for equilibria, it is illuminating to

ask how expected depreciation varies with the switch point u.
Figures 2a and 2b illustrate the parameter-dependent answer. In
figure 2a expected depreciation, 8(u), declines monotonically over

[—p,p]; in figure 2b, however, it rises initially before bending
downward and falling to zero.

The second pattern occurs whenever k/(l — A) < p. In this
second case, there exist values of u negative enough —

positive employment shocks large enough —

to

that

is,

cause currency

appreciation under pure discretion [see (4)]. Under the escape
clause, however, the exchange rate remains fixed in the face of

such shocks; the resulting truncation of the exchange rate's
distribution can raise expected inflation under the adjustable peg

above its free-float level. (Clearly such a situation is inferior
to discretion: mean inflation is raised at the same time that the
authority's ability to offset employment shocks is curtailed.)

Now consider equilibria. Equation (l8a) describes how the

19

0.it.(t)

0.04

q)

6(u)

-0,03

Figure 2a: Expected depreciation as a function of U

0.004

f(u)

0.02

Figure 2b: Expected depreciation as a function of u

0.03

policymaker will choose a switch point U

given

expected

depreciation ç; equilibrium requires, in addition, that —

6(u).

Given the fixed cost c, the set of equilibrium switch points are
the solutions to the equation in U,

— LD[S(u),u)

(a —

)[6() + k + U]2

c.

More simply, equilibria are described by values of u that solve'6

(21) 6(u) +

k +

u

r(u)

- Jc/(a — 7)

a.

Alternative equilibria are most easily studied by graphing the
function 1'(u) defined by (20) and (21). Several different shapes

for this function emerge as the parameters k and A — which
respectively measure the severity of the time-inconsistency
problem and the willingness to accommodate —

are varied. It will

be assumed in the four examples below that a = 3 and z =

0.03.

1. Equilibrium may be unique. Consider an economy with a
relatively small time-inconsistency problem (k

0.0075) whose

policymaker is fairly averse to accommodation (A =

0.5).

Figure 3

shows the expected loss EA(u) implied by the different possible
switch points u e

[—0.03,0.03)

(upper panel), along with the 1'(u)

function that arises in this case (lower panel).

about solutions to 6(u) + k + u — —Jc/(a — -') = —it, which
also satisfy the last equation? These define smallest positive
employment shocks such that the authority would be willing to
revalue — not devalue — at cost c. Such solutions can be
'6what

disregarded because revaluations have been ruled out.

20

Lu)

—0.01

—0.01

—0.01

Figure 31 Unique equilibrium with

=

5.5,

k

0.0075

The upper panel's vertical axis measures losses in terms of a

concrete metric. Given an employment distortion of size k and a

disturbance variance of a2, the lowest possible expected loss
under the assumed information structure is EAC = ak2

+ i'a2, which

is achieved if commitment is possible [equation (7)]. I measure
loss under any other regime by imagining an authority endowed with

a costless commitment mechanism, and computing the percent
increase in the standard deviation a that would raise his loss to
U

the

level sustained in the alternative regime. If the alternative

regime is one with a devaluation option starting at u, this loss
measure is

L(u)

J [g — 0k2]ha2.

In figure 3 the optimal switch point u* is .0063 (implying a

devaluation probability of 0.312). The policy loss at this point
is 25.6 percent — meaning that the cost of this regime relative to

the optimal regime is equivalent to allowing commitment, but
increasing the standard deviation a

U

from 0.0122 to 0.0154.

The optimal devaluation rule is an improvement over both pure

discretion (u — —0.03, with an associated cost of 0.323) and an
unconditional peg (u —

0.03, with a cost of 0.414). Note that a

free float dominates a rigidly fixed exchange rate. The example
shows that in principle, some limits to exchange-rate flexibility
can raise welfare, even though a rigidly fixed rate would not.

Can the optimal switch point be delegated under discretion by

imposing the appropriate devaluation cost on the policymaker? In

21

this example it can. As the lower panel of figure 3 shows, the

r(u) function is strictly increasing: setting n —

1'(ii*)

[as

equation (21) directs] induces the policymaker to devalue when,
and only when, u

—

0.4

u*. Expected depreciation in this regime is q*

percent per period (compared with 0.75 percent under a free

float, and zero under a fixed rate). And equilibrium is unique:
given s, no expected depreciation rate w' other than 0.4 percent
can lead the policymaker to a switch point u' where rp'

= 6(u').

2. There may be two equilibria, both of which dominate a
pure fixed rate. To obtain this case, imagine that all parameters

are as in the previous example, except that the policymaker is
much more accommodative: now, A

0.9.

Figure 4 again graphs the relevant functions. The top panel
indicates the optimal switch point u*

last example's boundary at u —

0.0049 (which is below the

0.0063, in line with the present

authority's greater intereat in stabilization). The loss implied
by this regime is 1.365, lower than under a fixed rate [L(0.03)

2.162] or pure discretion [L(—0.03) =

4.895].

The discretionary

regime does so poorly because it implies inflation at 6.75 percent

per period; under the optimal devaluation rule, however, expected
inflation is only 0.96 percent per period.

Now, however, the optimal escape-clause rule cannot always be

replicated by imposing a well-chosen cost on a discretionary
policymaker. As the lower part of figure 4 shows, just setting it

=

I'(u*) results

—

in two

equilibria.

—0.00061, expected depreciation is '

8(u*) = 0.96

At the switch point ti'

= 5(u')

percent; and since r(u') =

22

= 1.5 percent >

it, it

q* =

is just worthwhile

L(u)

u*
0.03

Cu)
0.04

0.035

Sigure 4 Multiple equilibria with

I = 0.9,

k = 0.0075

for the policymaker to devalue at this boundary. If markets
believe u' is the devaluation threshold, the policymaker will
ratify that belief rather than tolerate excessive ex post real
wages and unemployment.

Real wages in this second equilibrium are higher than in the

first in non-devaluation states; accordingly, unemployment is
higher whenever the exchange rate remains fixed. In devaluation
states, too, the real wage turns out to be higher, and employment
lower, in the second equilibrium.'7 Thia is true despite the fact

chat when currency depreciation does occur it is sharper in the
second equilibrium, because nominal wages are further out of line
with the authority's employment goals. A more detailed model would

predict higher ex post real interest rates in non-devaluation
states at the high-depreciation equilibrium, and a real exchange
rste less competitive in either state.

In this example the cost of being at the second equilibrium
is not too severe: the social cost is 1.504, compared with 1.365
at the optimum and 2.162 under a fixed rate. Because the authority

places so heavy a weight on reducing employment fluctustions, the

greater scope for stabilization at a' offsets to a large degree

the higher expected

inflation there,

leaving the

second

equilibrium still preferable to a pure fixed rate.

But remember the assumption that k = 0.0075: the time-incon-

sistency problem is not too serious. As the next example shows,
incressing the distortion k can reverse these welfsre rankings.

"tecause devaluation is more likely in the second equilibrium,
however, the expected wage and expected employment are the same
scross equilibria.

23

3. There may be two equilibria, one of which is worse than a

fixed rate. Now set k — 0.015. The optimal switch point, u* —

0.0144,

is considerably above that in the last case (greater

discretion now is more dangerous), and it results in a lower
expected depreciation rate of 0.48 percent per period. (See figure

5). The probability of devaluation is only 0.135. Attempting to
decentralize this optimum, however, may result in the equilibrium

switch point u'

0.00167, with expected depreciation at 1.75

percent per period and a 0.446 devaluation probability.

The optimal devaluation rule implies a loss of L(u*) — 1.902
compared with a greater loss of 2.162 under a fixed exchange rate.

But the alternative equilibrium is worse than either: L(u') —

2.653.

If there is a substantial risk of ending up at this second

equilibrium, it might be best to go for an irrevocably fixed
exchange rate — perhaps by confronting the policymaker with a
prohibitively high cost of devaluation.

One might think that the problem just described arises

because a serious distortion is combined with a very high
propensity to accommodate; reducing the latter might show the
escape-clause idea in a better light. My fourth and last example

therefore considers a policymaker who faces the same distortion
level as in the present example (A =

0.015),

but who is somewhat

less accommodative. The answer is quite surprising.

4. There may be three equilibria, two of which are very bad
compared with the best one or with a fixed rate. Now reduce A from
0.9 to 0.075. The best equilibrium would be at u* = 0.0145 (figure

6), with a baa of L(u*) = 0.867, expected depreciation of ç* =

24

10

L(u)

0.03

Figure 5: Multiple equilibria with

=

0.9,

k = 0.015

L (U)

-0.03

—0.0!

0 044

o .042

0.04

—0.03

—0.02

Figure 6: Three equilibria with S =

0.75, 6 = 5.015

0.39 percent, and a 0.133 chance of devaluation. This equilibrium
dominates the fixed-rate solution, since L(.03) —

Imposing the fixed devaluation cost K

1.

r(u*)

might not

suffice to replicate this relatively attractive equilibrium. The

figure's lower panel indicates two very different additional
equilibria, associated with the boundaries u' = —0.0123 and u"
—0.0256, and with the expected depreciation rates qf = 3.0 percent
and çf' =

4.4

percent, respectively. (Figure 2s used the parameters

of this example to plot expected depreciation.) The implied losses

are L(u') =

2.402,

L(u") =

3.291, both much highar than that under

a pure fixed-rate regime. Indeed, tha low-threshold equilibrium is

little better than unfettered discretion, where inflation runs at
4.5 percent per period and L(—.03) —

3.359.

In this last case, the

market forecasts that the authority has only a minimal chance of

defending the fixed exchange rate; these expectations lead to

nominal wages that are so high (compared with the existing
exchange rate) that devaluation nearly always is the outcome.

Figure 7 summarizes the effects of different propensities to
accommodate by showing how r(u) varies with A (for A =

0.015)18

The examples show that attempts to delegate to an agent a
rule with an escape clause can have a wide range of outcomes.
Allowing for additional economic disturbances, for complicated

distributions of these shocks, for revaluation as well as
devaluation options, and for the interaction of several official

5' (—p) + 1 = 1, and that 5(—p) = Ak/(l — A)
rises sharply with A. Figure 2 shows that 5(u) initially falls
slowly (or rises) as u is increased from —p, then falls at an
t8Notice that r' (—p) =

increasing rate, and finally falls slowly to 0. Figure 7 results.

25

A = 0.95

0.03

Fiyure 7: The function F(u) and

5 =

0.15

nhe propensity to accom—
nudate (k = 0.015)

decision makers within frameworks like the EMS, can only multiply
the possibilities.

In addition, there has been no formal analysia of the most
obvious practical obstacle to implementing schemea like those in
section II: uncertainty over the structure of the economy, which

makes it difficult to judge accurately the appropriate personal

coats to impose on policymakers. Acknowledging that such
uncertainty is pervasive only makes escape options look worse.

In judging the relevance even of the examples given above,
however, it is useful to have a rough idea of how accommodative
policymakers are likely to be in practice. To this end, imagine a
policymaker

in a nonstochastic environment who faces

no

0) and has an annual discount

time-inconsistency problem (k =

factor of $ — 0.90 (making him rather farsighted).

How many percentage point-years of unemployment would he be

willing to tolerate to reduce inflation permanently from 1 to 0
percent per year? A dedicated inflation fighter might be willing
to suffer three years of 2 percent unemployment (above the natural

rate) for this reduction. The loss function (3) then implies B —

1.08; and if a = 3,

the policymaker is revealed to have a fairly

high A of 3/(3 + 1.08) = 0.735 [recall (4)]19 Even governments
.
.
Observed policy outcomes might
reflect heavier discounting of the

19

.

future by politicians (lower values of fi), in which case B would
have to be higher to explain what we see. In one version of the
underlying model that generates equation (2), .f can be identified
with the reciprocal of capital's income share in CNP. This would
imply an estimate of a around 9, which seems unrealistically
large; but supposing a — 3 is reasonable, at least for small

deviations from the natural rate. On the other hand, if a
significant time-inconsistency problem is present, the behavior

described reveals different preferences:
recalculation leads to B =

2.96,

A =

26

0.503.

with k —

0.01,

that seem relatively inflation-averse may face problems in trying
to implement adjustable fixed exchange rates.

V. Conclusion

Simple policy rules

can often

be

amended

to

include

welfare-enhancing escape clauses, which allow the exercise of
discretion in well-defined circumstances. But even these emended

rules are inherently time inconsistent. To implement them in a

discretionary regime, society must confront policymakers with
personal (perhaps political) costs of overriding rules.
Unfortunately,

imposing the

appropriate

cost

on

the

policymaker is necessary, but not sufficient, for reaching a

socially preferred equilibrium. Market expectations can be
self-fulfilling, leading in general to any number of equilibria,
most of which are dominated by the original simple rule.

This paper illustrated these propositions by analyzing a

fixed exchange rate system amended to include a devaluation
option. Numerical examples suggested that a unique equilibrium may

exist when a fairly non-accommodative policymaker faces a small

time-inconsistency problem. In less favorable circumstances,

however, a multiplicity problem will plague the attempt to
delegate an optimal escape-clause rule. The problem is amplified

in practice by the uncertainty society faces over the accurate

measurement of both policymaker costs and their influence on
policy actions.

27

References

Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon. "A Positive Theory of

Monetary Policy in a Natural Rate Model." Journal of
Political Economy 91 (1983), 589-610.

Calvo, Guillermo A. "Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of
Expectations." American Economic Review 78 (1988), 1411-28.

Cukierman, Alex. "Discretion, Precommitments and the Prospects for

a European Central Bank — Fixed Parities versus a Commonly
Managed Currency." Manuscript, Tel-Aviv University, 1990.

Flood, Robert P., and Peter Isard. "Monetary Policy Strategies."
International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 36 (1989), 612-32.

______

"Monetary Policy Strategies — A Correction: Reply to

Lohmann." International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 37 (1990),
446-48.

International Monetary Fund. World Economic Outlook. Washington,
D.C. : International Monetary Fund, May 1990.

Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott. "Rules Rather Than
Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans." Journal of
Political Economy 85, 473-92.

28

Lewis, Karen K. "On Occasional Monetary Policy Coordinations that
Fix the Exchange Rate." Journal of International Economics 26
(1989), 139-55.

Lohinann, Suzanne. "Monetary Policy Strategies —

A Correction:

Comment on Flood and Isard." International Monetary Fund

Staff

Papers 37 (1990), 440-45.

Obstfeld, Maurice. "Floating Exchange Rates: Experience and
Prospects." Brookings Papers on Economics Activity, 2:1985,
369-450.

Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. Macroeconomic Policy,
Credibility and Politics. Fundamentals of Pure and Applied
Economics 38. Chur, Switzerland: Harwood Academic Publishers,
1990.

Rogoff, Kenneth.

"The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an

Intermediate Monetary Target." Quarterly Journal of Economics
100 (1985), 1169-90.

29

