                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




          GOVERNMENT REVENUE FROM FINANCIAL REPRESSION




                       Alberto Giovannini
                         Martha de Melo




                     Working Paper No. 3604




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          January 1991




We are grateful to Christine Corra for research assistance, and
to Reza Firuzabadi and the staff of the World Bank Debt Reporting
Service for valuable support. Alberto Giovannini's research was
supported by the World Bank and a CEPR grant from the Ford
Foundation and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. Part of this
paper was written while he was visiting the Institute for
International Economic Studies, University of Stockholm. This
paper is part of NBER's research programs in International
Studies, Taxation, and Financial Markets and Monetary Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper #3604
                                          January 1991


          GOVERNMENT REVENUE FROM FINANCIAL REPRESSION


                              ABS TRACT


     This paper presents an analysis of the theoretical
underpinnings and the relevance of the phenomenon of financial

repression from a public-finance perspective. The analysis
explicitly accounts for the interaction between capital controls

and financial repression. The proposed empirical estimate of the
revenue from financial repression is based on the difference
between the domestic and the foreign cost of borrowing of the
government. The correlations of the revenue from financial

repression with inflation, exchange rates and per-capita income
are discussed.




Alberto Giovannini                        Martha de Melo
Graduate School of Business               The World Bank
622 Uris Hall                             700 19th Street, NW
Columbia University                       Washington, DC 20431
New York, NY 10027
1 Introduction
Most developing countries impose controls on international capital
flows, coupled with controls on domestic financial intermediaries.
These phenomena have been extensively studied in development
economics, and are labelled "financial repression". Analyses of
the effects of financial repression, like those by McKinnon (1973),
Shaw (1073) and Fry (1988), point to the inefficiencies arising from
controls on international asset trade and domestic financial inter-
rncdia.ries and set forth clearcut policy prescriptions, which have
been followed, under thc auspices of international institutions, by
a number of countries. These prescriptions envisage a removal of
controls on international asset trade, together with the removal of
price and quantity rationing in domestic financial intermediation.1
   While the theoretical analyses of the effects of controls on fi-
nancial markets are clearly correct, their direct applications to
policy have neglected the presence of important additional distor-
tions in the economy. More satisfactory approaches to financial
liberalization should explicitly account for these pre-existing dis-
tortions, including the ones associated with government spending
and taxes. In particular, considering the effects of government rev-
ernie constraints and the distortions associated with different forms
of taxation would provide a more complete assessment of the costs
and benefits of financial controls and financial liberalization.2
   In this paper we provide empirical evidence to highlight the
interactions of financial controls and tax policies. Indeed, we re-
gard government-imposed controls on domestic financial markets
as a form of taxation, and we estimate the amount of revenue that
developing countries have obtained from it. Our approach is a nat-
ural extension of the ideas of Phelps (1973) and his followers, who
pioneered the study of government policies and their distortions
from the perspective of public finance.3 We do not, in this paper,
  1
    Recent work has stressed the importance of the appropriate sequencing of liberalization
policies. See for example Baffle (1985), Corbo and de Melo (1987) and Edwards (1984).
   2See, for analysis of public-finance aspects of the distortions in financial markets, Chamley
and Hussain (1988), Dornbusch and Giovannini (1988), Dornbusch and Reynoso (1989), East-
erly (1989), Giovaimini (1988), Tornell (1988). For public finance analyses of trade protection
in LDCs see in particular Mitra (1987) and Heady and Mitra (1987).
   3Fischer (1982), for example, estimates the government revenue from the inflation tax.



                                              1
attempt to provide any normative statement on whether or not
liberalization is a desirable strategy to follow.4 Our more limited
objective is to point to the first-order impact of liberalization poli-
cies on government budgets. The size and nature of government
revenue from financial repression will indicate the extent to which
liberalization policies affect public finances, and will raise the ques-
tion of adjusting the budget by changes in taxation or government
spending.
    Section 2 illustrates the budgetary impact of financial repres-
sion. The exposition highlights the linkage with international capi-
tal controls, and characterizes the choice between these distortions
and other types of taxes available to governments. Section 3 de-
scribes the methodology of the empirical analysis, and our data
set, which comprises 24 countries, over the 1972—1987 period. Sec-
tion 4 presents the results of the empirical analysis, while Section
5 offers some concluding remarks. The Appendices explain the cal-
culations and report all data sources used in the empirical work.

2 Interest-Rate Distortions and Public Finances
In this section we illustrate the effects of "financial repression" on
government budgets, and ask whether or not it could arise from op-
timizing behavior by governments. "Financial repression" is not a
precise concept since the controls on financial markets imposed by
developing countries' governments are typically the sum of price
and quantity restrictions. A typical set of restrictions includes
the prohibition on domestic residents from holding financial as-
sets abroad, coupled with compulsory quotas of government bonds
in financial iritcimncdiarics' portfolios. Since these quantitative re-
strictions are not administered efficiently (both prices and quanti-
tics arc typically fixed), they give rise to monopoly profits which
do not accrue directly to the government. Hence the conditions
that make quantity restrictions equivalent to price restrictions are
likely not to occur in most developing countries.
   To illustrate the effects of financial repression we set aside the
   4This would require working out the general-equilibrium effects of liberalization, including
the effects on the volume and composition of tax revenue.



                                              2
above-mentioned inefficiencies of its administration, and therefore
assume that it works like a tax, whose revenue (at least in the first
case we look at) is entirely appropriated by the government.5 This
approach is justified by the objective of emphasizing the effects
of financial repression on the government budget and considering
financial repression as part of an overall optimal taxation problem.

2.1 Financial Repression as Optimal Tax Policy
The essential features of financial repression are the distortions
on the intertemporal terms of trade faced by private individuals,
and the distortions in their portfolio allocation decisions. These
features are best highlighted in the standard two-period Fisherian
model of an open economy. Consider an economy populated by
identical consumers-investors maximizing a utility function of first-
and second-period consumption. Government spending, which oc-
curs in the first period only,6 also yields utility (but the utility
function is separable in consumption and government spending).
In the first period individuals purchase the consumption good, do-
mestic assets and foreign assets. In the second period they use
the net-of-tax return on their investment, and their second-period
endowment, to purchase the consumption good. Since the country
is small, its own savings and investments do not affect the world
rate of interest. The model is cast in real terms. The absence of
nominal aggregates like the exchange rate rules out important non-
neutralities from the interaction of nominal interest rate ceilings
and the rate of currency depreciation and inflation—which will be
discussed below in section 2.2—but does not affect the generality
of the results.
   We consider first the extreme case where individuals' endow-
ment is fixed and exogenous, but the government has no means of
raising revenue, except through the distortions resulting from fi-
nancial repression. The government spends only in the first period,
and finances its spending by borrowing domestically and abroad.
Financial repression is thus represented by a tax r on the second-
   5The effects of partly relaxing this a.sumption are also discussed.
   6Government spending in both periods does not change the nature of the problem in any
interesting way, but complicates the exposition slightly. Hence it is ruled out.


                                           3
period value of foreign assets owned by domestic residents.7
   The consumers' problem is:
                                max
                                c,c2 U(C1, C2) + v(G)                              (1)

subject    to:


                 C1    = E1—(A-FB)                                                 (2)
                 C2 = E2 + A(1 + r*)(1 — r) + B(1 + r),                            (3)
for given E1, E2 (endowment income in the two periods), r* (the
world rate of interest), r (domestic interest rate), r, and C (gov-
ernment spending). A represents holdings of foreign assets, while
B are domestic government bonds. Note that in a two-period set-
ting like this there is no important distinction between interest
payments and principal repayment, and to simplify the algebra we
assume the tax is levied both on interest and principal. Since there
is no uncertainty or transactions costs, investors require the same
after-tax return on all available assets, domestic and foreign (assets
are perfect substitutes). Equilibrium in private agents' portfolios
implies:
                     (1 + r*)(1 — r) = 1 + r.                   (4)
In other words, the tax on foreign interest income proportionally
lowers the interest paid on domestic liability. Equation (4) illus-
trates the concept of financial repression adopted in this paper.
Financial repression is a distortion that drives the domestic rate
of interest below the world rate. This distortion affects public
finances, and can be studied within an optimal-tax framework.
   The problem (1)—(3) implies the familiar first-order condition,
highlighting the effects of financial repression on the intertemporal
terms of trade faced by private agents:
                    U1(C1, C2) = (1 + r*)(1 — r)U2(C1, C2)                         (5)
where the subscripts on U indicate partial derivatives with respect
to the first and the second argument of the U function, respectively.
The distortion apparent in equation (5) has been the subject of
   TOnce again, the absence of imperfections and uncertainty does not induce differences
between gross and net. holdings of foreign assets.


                                              4
much theoretical and empirical work, stressing the effects of finan-
cial repression on savings (see, for example, Fry (1982, 1988) and
Giovannini (1985)). The recent evidence pointing to low elasticity
of intertemporal substitution in consumption suggests that the wel-
fare cost of this distortion should not be very high.8 Solution of the
system (2), (3), (4) and (5) gives the optimal consumption-savings
decision of individuals, for given values of the tax. Notice that,
since domestic and foreign investments are perfectly substitutable
and yield the same net return, their shares in private portfolios are
indeterminate. The solution of the consumption problem only tells
us how much consumers will save (total accumulation of assets),
but not the composition of the portfolios. B can be chosen freely
by the government: any choice of B implies a choice of A by the
private sector. The sequence of government budget constraints in
periods one and two, respectively, is:
                                             G=B+F                                    (6)
                   F(1 + r*) + B(1 + r) = A(1 + r*).r                                 (7)
Government spending occurs only in the first period, and is fi-
nanced by domestic borrowing (B) and foreign borrowing (F). In
the second period tax revenue has to equal the costs of servicing
domestic and foreign loans (equation (7)). The net cost of foreign
loans equals r, while the net cost of domestic loans, from equation
(4), is r*(1 — ) — T.9 Solving (7) for F, and substituting it into
(6) we have:
                                   G=(A+B)r                     (8)
Equation (8) says that interest-rate distortions generate a revenue
to the government that is proportional to the total stock of assets
held by investors in the first period. The optimal choice of r can
now be easily determined:10 the government chooses G to maxi-
mize (1) subject to the private-sector budget constraints (2) and
   80n the other hand, financial repression might give rise to much more serious production
distortions, associated with suboptimal investment in domestic productive activities.
   9The second term is the tax on the principal. In this two period model, however, the
distinction between gross (1 + r) and net (r) payments is not meaningful, since capital is
worthless in the second period.
  '°Since spending occurs in the first period only, dynamic inconsistency is ruled out by
construction.


                                            5
(3), its own constraint (8), and the private sector's intertemporal
decision rule (5). The first-order condition is:
                    dv d[(A + B)rJ        —
                    dC         dT
                                          — U2(A      + B)(1 + r ),
it equalizes the marginal welfare cost of the tax with the marginal
welfare gain.'1
   This model highlights the basic effects of financial repression on
the government and consumers, but also raises several issues. First,
financial repression may not be enforced by levying an explicit tax
on domestic-residents' foreign- asset income. Developing countries'
governments restrict international capital flows—thereby forcing a
differential between foreign and domestic interest rates—but are
not in general able to raise any revenue from income produced
by domestic residents' foreign investments,12 and, as we argued
above, they might not be efficiently allocating the rents arising
from any quantitative restrictions. These problems can be tackled
by assuming that financial repression and capital controls still in-
duce a wedge between domestic and foreign interest rates, but the
government is unable to obtain revenue from this implicit tax on
foreign investments' income: the quota rents become a deadweight
loss.13 The government's intertemporal budget constraint (8) is
thus transformed:
                                     F+B=BT
With a tax rate less than 100 percent the government would in this
case want to borrow domestically at a lower rate to lend abroad
(F < 0), in order to gain from the interest-rate differential.
   This result leads to the second issue—namely, that considera-
tion of a more general model, featuring several alternative revenue
sources together with financial repression, might modify the op-
timal choice of financial repression characterized above. Would
financial repression still be chosen by a government that followed
optimal public finance rules?
  "The effects of the tax on savings disappear from the first-order condition, by the envelope
theorem.
  '2lndeed, those very foreign investments are often motivated by the desire to evade or avoid
domestic taxes. See, for example, Tanzi (1983).
  '3Alternatively, one could rely on an explicit model of international tax evasion, whereby
the fraction of revenue lost to foreign investments would be determined endogenously.


                                              6
   Such model of an open economy with (possibly many) produc-
tion technologies and (possibly many) sources of government rev-
enue falls within the model optimal taxation with international
trade surveyed, for example, by Dixit (1985, section 3.2).' J
the presence of constant-returns-to-scale domestic production tech-
nologies, and maintaining the constraint that lump-sum income—
or first-period endowment—cannot be taxed directly, the standard
production efficiency theorem (Diamond and Mirrlees (1971)) ap-
plies: taxes can drive wedges between the marginal rate of substi-
tution of any two commodities in consumption and the marginal
rate of transformation, but they should not distort the marginal
rate of transformation away from the foreign rate of transforma-
tion, which is represented by the world relative price of any two
commodities. Specifically, assume that second-period goods can
be produced with domestic technologies that use labor and capital,
and that investment transforms first-period goods into productive
capital. Then the marginal rate of transformation of first-period
goods into second-period goods would equal the domestic rate of
interest, and production efficiency implies that taxes should not
drive a wedge between the latter and the world interest rate—
the foreign marginal rate of transformation of first-period goods
into second-period goods. Under these conditions output is max-
imized at world prices,15 and production efficiency implies that,
when there are no constraints on the choice of taxes by the gov-
ernment, financial repression should be avoided.
    This result has two implications: first, financial repression might
be justified as an efficient means to raise government revenue only
if there are constraints on the types of taxes that governments can
impose. We discuss these constraints below. Second, the elimi-
nation of financial repression is a justifiable policy when the gov-
ernment can indeed rely on a relatively broad tax base, and an
efficient system of imposition. In other words, financial liberaliza-
tion might require a fiscal reform to cover the revenue shortfall.
The revenue from financial repression—and hence the amount of
  14The intertempot-al nature of the model discussed here is of course fully consistent with
the Arrow-Debreu setup employed by Dixit.
  15Notice, from equation (7), that the relevant relative price of second-period goods for the
government is the world rate of interest.


                                             7
additional revenue to be raised after the liberalization of financial
markets—is estimated in Section 4•16
   We conclude this section with a discussion of the factors that
might justify the imposition of financial repression as a means of
taxation. The first is the presence of costs in the administration
of alternative forms of taxation. Gordon and Levinsohn (1989),
for example, suggest modeling the administrative costs associated
with the use of different tax bases as fixed costs: in order to set up
the necessary bureaucracy to organize, administer, and monitor a
given tax, the government has to incur an initial "capital" expense.
In some countries, and for certain taxes, this initial expense may
be very high. Income taxes or value-added taxes, for example,
can be costly to raise in developing countries.'7 Using the mod-
els discussed above one could show, trivially, that when the fixed
costs required to levy other taxes are high enough, the government
uses only financial repression.'8 The second factor justifying the
use of financial repression is the application of distributional crite-
ria by the government. Redistribution objectives can be achieved
by taxing the return to capital, thereby inducing the production
distortions illustrated above, and transferring income away from
capitalists to wage earners. Finally, political considerations may
favor the less transparent means of taxation that is characteristic
of financial repression.

2.2 The Financial Repression Tax and the Inflalion Tax
The discussion in the previous section has relied on models where
money has no role. In practice, however, financial repression is
typically the result of nominal interest rate ceilings that are well
below the prevailing rate of inflation and currency depreciation. It
           revenue is implicit;, since, as the discussion above has illustrated, iL is really reflected
in a fall in budgetary expenditures, rather than in an increase in revenues.
   '7Lndeed, many countries (including industrial countries) estimate income taxes based on
tangible wealth holdings of the taxpayers (see OECD (1988)). A more accurate, voluntary
system of tax assessment with the backup of government audits might not be viable in many
poor countries. Value-added taxes require an efficient system of border adjustments, as well
as a sophisticated method of tax assessment based on individual producers' returns.
   '8Deviations from production efficiency are justified also when domestic production gives
rise to pure profits, that are not easily taxable by the government. See Giovannini (1988) for
an illustration.



                                                  8
is often argued, based on this fact, that the distortions in the real
interest rates arising from inflation should be included in the def-
inition of the inflation tax. This argument is incorrect, however,
since the inflation-tax base is high-powered money, while financial
repression affects the portfolio of non-monetary assets held by do-
mestic residents, and the base for the financial-repression tax we
concentrate on is government debt. Indeed, the models discussed
in the previous section show that the presence of inflation in the
economy is by no means a necessary condition for governments to
be able to extract revenue from financial repression. Therefore it
is appropriate to distinguish financial repression from the inflation
tax.
   The potential complementarities between the financial-repression
tax and the inflation tax should, however, be stressed. First of all,
the interest savings on government liabilities can be obtained fol-
lowing an inflation policy that—given nominal interest rate ceilings—
implies very low real interest rates: we will consider below to what
extent this proposition is borne out in the data. Second, the pres-
ence of a limited array of financial instruments and negative real
interest rates increases, other things equal, money demand—i. e.
the inflation tax base.19 Another form of financial repression, the
imposition of reserve requirements, directly increases the inflation
tax base (by increasing demand for high powered money, whenever
required reserves are in cash).2°
   For all of these reasons, it is to be expected that the inflation tax
is used together with financial repression in developing countries.
The complementarity between these two forms of imposition, how-
ever, will break down at very high rates of inflation. In these cases
the real return on domestic investments is so heavily depressed that
there is flight towards safety—represented for example by gold, dol-
lars or other foreign assets—even if that entails substantial costs,
and risks of penalties. These phenomena have been documented,
for instance, by Makinen and Woodward (1990): the flight towards
safety dries out financial markets and at the same time produces a
  '9See Dornbusdi and Giovannini (1988). In addition, it might be possible to produce
examples where the production distortions induced by the inflation tax are offset by the low
domestic real interest rates that result from financial repression.
  20In several countries, required reserves are in terms of government securities.


                                            9
drop in money demand: financial repression and the inflation tax
become substitutes.

3 Data and Calculations
The discussion above suggests that we can measure the govern-
ment revenue from financial repression as the difference between
the foreign cost of borrowing and the domestic cost of borrowing.
This difference is an implicit tax on domestic lenders that is often
implemented with a combination of international capital controls
arid requirements for domestic financial institutions (often public)
to hold government debt at less than market interest rates. Thus
the tax revenue from financial repression equals the differential be-
tween the foreign and domestic cost of borrowing multiplied by the
stock of domestic government debt.
    This measure of government revenue from financial repression
is a conservative one since it relates to central government only, ex-
cluding the central bank, state and local government, and government-
owned enterprises whose low interest payments on their liabilities
also represent budgetary savings, although indirect ones. The do-
mestic and foreign borrowing costs are measured ex post. That
is, the foreign borrowing cost includes the dollar interest rate on
external debt, the realized change in the value of the domestic cur-
rency vis-à-Vi3 the dollar, and the change in value of liabilities in
currencies other than the dollar (the "dollar revaluation effect" to
be described in detail below), while the domestic interest cost is
the domestic-currency interest rate on domestic debt.
    The sample is composed of countries considered to be "devel-
oping" at some point (luring the period covered, which is 1972
through 1987. Given the basic approach explained above, the se-
lection criteria have been (i) the existence of significant foreign
commercial borrowing by the central government—indicated by
a stock of commercial debt outstanding and disbursed (DOD) of
about $ 200 million or more21—and (ii) the availability of data on
the stock and cost of central government domestic debt. A total of
  21Foreign commercial debt is defined as LIBOR-based borrowing in creditor categories 2
(financial institutions) and 6/7 (bonds floated on international finandal markets) of the World
Bank Debt Reporting System.


                                              10
38 countries can be identified by criterion (i). Criterion (ii) reduces
the coverage to 24 countries, and entails dropping primarily coun-
tries in Africa and Latin America. In addition, data are available
for only part of the time period chosen for any one country.
    The Appendices contain a detailed description of the data sources.
The general strategy was to rely to the maximum extent pos-
sible on the same statistical sources, including the World Bank
Debtor Reporting System (DRS) and the IMF Government Fi-
nancial Statistics.
   The same approach is used to measure foreign and domestic
interest costs—namely, the calculation of an effective interest rate.
For the foreign interest rate, total annual dollar interest payments
(INTP$) plus the change in interest arrears as reported to the DRS
by the debtor (INTA$) are taken as a percentage of average annual
dollar DOD. Arrears are included because we assume that countries
face given world rates of interest, thus including arrears allows us to
obtain an estimate of the "normal" cost of borrowing.22 The DRS
includes in interest payments any front-end or other fees where
these are known: there were no rescheduled interest payments on
commercial debt in the years and countries included in our sample.
Thus the nominal effective dollar interest rate (EFFINT$) is:

            EFFIN T$(t) =               [INTP$(t) + INTA$(t)]
                                    [(DOD$(t — 1) + DOD$(t))/2]
where DOD$(t) indicates dollar debt outstanding and disbursed at
the end of year t, and the average debt outstanding and disbursed
during the year t is estimated through linear interpolation.23 LIBOR-
based borrowing of the central government only is used to deter-
mine the foreign cost—except for Algeria, Greece and India, where
LIB OR-based borrowing of public corporations is used as a proxy.
  For the domestic interest rate, annual local-currency interest
payments on central government domestic debt (INTP) are taken
 22To the extent that actual arrears are greater than reported arrears, the normal cost of
foreign borrowing—and hence the government revenue reported below—will be understated.
  231t is possible to perform a rough check of the accuracy of our method by comparing the
effective interest rate we obtain with LIBOR. This comparison indicates that our estimates
covary closely with LIBOR. Discrepancies are likely to arise because our estimates, correctly,
include any commercial fees as part of the cost of the loan, and other reasons discussed
elsewhere in this section.


                                             11
as a percentage of the average domestic debt outstanding. Typi-
cally, governments do not incur arrears on their domestic debt; but,
to the extent that they do, arrears are another form of financial
repression, and are correctly included with out effective-interest-
rate method. Thus the nominal effective domestic interest rate
(EFFINT) is:
             EFFINT(t) =                        INTP(t)
                                   [(DOD(t — 1) + DOD(t))/2]
where DOD(t) denotes total—including holdings of monetary au-
thorities—domestic debt outstanding and disbursed (expressed in
domestic currency).24 The taxable status of interest on internal
government debt is ignored, since it can differ by debt holder as well
as by debt instrument. Furthermore, it is arguably more transpar-
ent to consider revenues and expenditures separately (and there-
fore preferential treatment becomes a separate tax expenditure).
   An alternative to the calculation of these effective interest rates
would be to compute the weighted value of the contractual interest
rates on foreign and domestic debt, taking into account the out-
standing stock and maturity of each category as well as changes
in the applicable interest rate over time. Much of the informa-
tion required for this method is however lacking, especially on the
domestic side, where in many countries a breakdown of all the
different types of government bonds, together with their contrac-
tual interest rates, is simply not available. Hence the potential for
error of our method is much smaller. Independently of problems
of data availability, our effective rates can differ from contractual
rates for two reasons. First, there might be fluctuations in the
timing of interest payments and in the declaration of foreign ar-
rears. And second, there may he differences between the actual
average stock outstanding and our estimates based on the average
of end-of-period stocks.
   In addition to the foreign interest rate on dollar-denominated
debt, there are two other components to the foreign cost of bor-
rowing. One is of course the average annual change in the value
  24The holdings of monetary authorities are included in the calculations of the effective
interest rate because the treasury normally pays interest to the central bank on interest-
bearing debt.


                                           12
of the domestic currency vis-d-vis the dollar, which is used to ag-
gregate country debt data. This indicates the change in the local-
currency value of the stock of external dollar-denominated debt.
The other is the revaluation (in dollars) of external debt denom-
inated in non-dollar currencies. It is captured by subtracting net
dollar disbursements from the change in dollar DOD (adjusted for
any rescheduling) from the beginning to the end of the year.25
   Finally, the government revenue from financial repression is cal-
culated by computing the differential between foreign borrowing
costs and the domestic borrowing cost, times the average annual
stock of domestic debt. In this calculation, an important adjust-
ment has been made to central government domestic debt, namely,
the elimination of debt held by the monetary authorities. Even
though the central bank receives interest on its holdings, the ac-
quisition of government debt is financed by increases in the money
supply, and not borrowing within a resource-constrained environ-
ment. Thus it has little to do with the existence or absence of
financial repression and is different from, rather than a substitute
for, foreign borrowing. Moreover, the interest rate paid on gov-
ernment debt held by the central bank is not really a cost, since
interest receipts contribute to central bank profits which are typi-
cally returned to the budget.
   Aside from restricting the government sector to central govern-
ment, there are three other reasons why the estimates of the rev-
enue from financial repression we report may be understated. First,
we disregard the second-order effect of changes in the exchange rate
on foreign interest payments. Second, arrears on foreign debt may
be understated. And third, the stock of non-interest-bearing do-
mestic government debt may be underreported: its inclusion would
lower the estimate of the effective interest rate, thus raising the im-
plicit tax on domestic lenders. It would also increase the estimate
of the financial-repression tax base, thus raising the revenue from
financial repression.
  25These items can be positive or negative but have typically added to the foreign cost of
borrowing. Both of these non-interest elements represent accrued cost, of which only part is
amortized annually.




                                            13
4 Results
As we explained above, the measure of the revenue from finan-
cial repression used here is the ex-post differential between foreign
and domestic interest rates, times the stock of government debt
held outside the central bank. This measure, however, cannot be
used as a formal statistical test of the presence or absence of finan-
cial repression. The reason is that surprise exchange-rate changes
would significantly affect the relative cost of domestic debt even in
countries where financial markets are relatively free, and capital
controls are virtually absent. In a small sample, our estimate of
revenue from financial repression would be biased towards rejection
of the null hypothesis (absence of controls) whenever devaluations
have occurred—and have been greater than anticipated. In the
cases where devaluations have not occurred, or have been less than
anticipated, our measure would be biased in the opposite direction,
since domestic liabilities would, in the sample, be more costly than
foreign liabilities: this is the well-known "peso problem" •26 We re-
frain from carrying out formal statistical testing also because the
time coverage of the countries in the sample varies widely. In any
case, however, the data we report do represent budgetary savings
to central governments—whether voluntary or involuntary.
   Tables 1 and 2 contain the estimates of the annual revenue from
financial repression for each of the countries, in the years for which
data are available. We measure this revenue both as a fraction of
GDP (table 1) and as a fraction of total central government revenue
(table 2). The tables also report the average revenue by country
across years. The last column on the right of table 1 reports the
average financial repression tax rate, that is the difference between
foreign and domestic interest costs.
   Table 1 shows that revenue from financial repression has ranged
from 0 in Indonesia, where domestic government debt is held ex-
clusively by the central bank, to 6 percent of GDP in Mexico and
Zimbabwe, where the effect of unanticipated exchange-rate changes
probably plays an important role, due to the short sample. In
seven countries it exceeds 2 percent of GDP, and in five countries
 26S Lizondo (1983).



                                 14
it exceeds 3 percent. The significant cross-country variation is ac-
companied by substantial time-variation.
    Table 2 shows that financial repression has been as high as 40
percent of government revenue in Mexico (where in 1987 it was as
high as 83 percent of GDP, see below for discussion), and about 20
percent in India, Pakistan, Portugal, Sri Lanka, and Zimbabwe. In
general, tables 1 and 2 suggest that in many countries a financial
liberalization will generate a substantial budgetary problem, and
should be accompanied by a fiscal reform aimed at substituting for
the revenue loss.27
   The possible effects of financial liberalization can be gauged
from table 3, reporting the breakdown of ownership of domestic
government debt. For completeness, the table includes central-
bank holdings, even though those are not included in the calcu-
lation of the financial-repression tax base. The second column in
the table includes holdings of deposit money banks only—a sub-
set of domestic financial intermediaries. The table shows that,
for the years where we have data, on average 24 percent of to-
tal government domestic debt, and 37 percent of domestic debt
in the hands of the public, is held by deposit money banks. The
holdings of other financial institutions are included in the column
labelled "other", but unfortunately could not be singled out for
lack of data. Financial intermediaries, and among them deposit
money banks, typically offset artificially low rates on their assets
by paying low rates on their liabilities—savings and time deposits:
this is an example of the translation of the financial repression tax.
In these cases the effect of a financial liberalization is an increase
in the cost of liabilities to financial intermediaries, since domes-
tic residents can access higher-yielding portfolio investments else-
where. In absence of an increase in interest rates on government
securities, financial intermediaries would thus risk bankruptcy, and
would possibly require public bailout. Hence the likely budgetary
impact of financial liberalization is either the cost of the bailout of
these intermediaries, or an increased cost of debt servicing, which
would occur if government securities were mostly short-term.
  27Q this topic, see, for example, Thirsk (1990). This conclusion is based on the assumption
that the world rate of interest paid by the government on its foreign debt is exogenous, i.e.
the small country assumption.



                                             15
   Tables 4 and 5 report the two components of the revenue from
financial repression: interest-rate differentials and changes in ex-
change rates (inclusive of the "dollar revaluation effect"). In the
majority of countries the time-variation of exchange-rate changes
account for most of time-variation of the gains from financial re-
pression. This is confirmed by the decomposition of the variance
(over the sample for each country) of financial repression: on aver-
age the variance of the exchange-rate component is three times the
variance of the interest-differential component.28 We do not report
separate data on the dollar revaluation effect since it is small (less
than one-half of one percent) for most years and for all countries
if averaged over time. This is due to the fact that in the majority
of countries almost all foreign commercial debt is denominated in
dollars 29
   The evidence in tables 4 and 5 is suggestive of the way finan-
cial repression works in practice. Domestic interest-rate ceilings
are maintained with high rates of currency depreciation and high
domestic inflation. With free capital markets, this source of rev-
enue would be limited, since expectations of exchange-rate changes
would be reflected in the differential between domestic and foreign
interest rates. Table 6 reports information about the geographic
and time distribution of financial-repression tax revenue. The data
in the table should be interpreted cautiously, since the non-uniform
time coverage of the countries in the sample makes regional aver-
ages contain different time periods in different regions, while time-
averages contain different countries in different subperiods. Yet
table 6 seems to reveal a number of suggestive facts, worthy of
closer inspection in future research: financial repression appears
to be more relevant in African countries (excluding North Africa),
and least important in Asian countries. It is also much more evi-
dent in the recent years (1979—1987), than in the early part of the
sample. This last phenomenon is associated with the growth of
fiscal imbalances among LDCs in the 1980s.
    In section 2.1 we showed that financial repression would not be
used by an optimizing government, if all the assumptions of the
  28The results of this variance decomposition are available from us on request.
  29We verified this by looking at data on the currency of denomination of external debt from
the World Bank DRS. Detailed data on the dollar revaluation effect are available on request.


                                             16
Diamond-Mirrlees optimal tax problem are satisfied, and in partic-
ular if a government does not face costs in the use of certain types of
taxes. We also argued that in poorer countries these costs are likely
to be more significant; therefore taxes that distort production—
like financial repression—might be used more frequently. To verify
this proposition we compute the correlation between per-capita in-
come and the revenue from financial repression.3° Figure 1 shows
cross-country correlation coefficients, computed for each year in
the sample-period. Once again, note that since the time-coverage
of each country differs, the number of elements in each year dif-
fers as well: for each year, the figure reports the sample size in
parenthesis.
    The correlation between per capita income and financial-repression
tax revenue as a fraction of GDP tends to be positive, even though
it is very low for all years, except 1985. The correlation between
per-capita income and financial-repression tax revenue as a per-
centage of total government revenue is instead often negative. The
latter is closer to our predictions, while the former is not. The
difference between the two histograms is in part explained by the
positive correlation between total tax revenue as a fraction of GDP
and per-capita income: with higher per-capita income total tax
revenue increases more than the revenue from financial repres-
sion, and therefore the financial-repression tax revenue accounts
for smaller fractions of total tax revenue.
   To highlight the contribution of each country in Figures 2 and
3 we report scatter plots of time averages—which should also to
some extent dampen the effects of exchange-rate surprises. Figure
2 shows a positive but very small covariation of the revenue from
financial repression as a fraction of CDP and per-capita income,
while figure 3 show a negative covariation between the revenue
from financial repression as a fraction of total revenue and per-
capita GDP. On the whole, Figures 1 to 3 do not seem to indicate
the existence of a clearly-noticeable inverse relation between per-
capita income and financial-repression, even though we find that
the latter decreases somewhat in importance as a source of tax
revenue in richer countries. We would expect results that more
  °Per capita income is per-capita GDP expressed in US dollars.


                                           17
strongly support our predictions if the sample included industrial
countries.
   The relationship between inflation and financial repression was
discussed in section 2.2. Here we report the correlations between
the financial-repression tax revenue and both inflation and changes
in nominal exchange rates. As shown in figures 4 and 5, the cor-
relations are all positive, except for the years 1984 and 1985. A
comparison of the two figures seems to suggest that the revenue
from financial repression is however more highly correlated with
the change in the nominal exchange rate than with the rate of
inflation.31
    Figures 6 and 7 report the scatter plot of the time-averages.
The figures show the presence of two outliers: Mexico and Brazil.
In the former country both inflation and the revenue from finan-
cial repression are very high; in the latter country the inflation
rate is very high but the revenue from financial repression is lower
than in the rest of the sample. The Mexico data cover the period
1984—1987, during which there were extensive trade and foreign ex-
change controls. The very high government revenues from financial
repression in the last two years of this period follow the drop in oil
prices in 1985. They are due to the substantial and largely unantic-
ipated inflation and exchange-rate devaluation.32 The Brazil data
cover the period 1983—1987. They reflect the flexible exchange
rate regime, as well as the sophistication of the country's financial
markets.33 The combination of high inflation and low financial re-
pression in Brazil is suggestive of the difficulties of rasing revenue
from financial repression in countries where markets are relatively
free and surprise exchange-rate devaluations are not possible. This
  31 An
        issue we have not addressed directly is the correlation of financial repression with the
real exchange rate, that is the nominal exchange rate corrected for the relative price levels.
The reason for this omission is that, in the absence of short run "surprises" in exchange-rate
changes, we have no strong theoretical priors about what this correlation should be. Ofcourse,
when exchange—rate surprises are taken into account, we expect this correlation to be high
due to short—run price stickiness, and the fact that financial repression is correlated with the
nominal exchange rate. Indeed, we have found that the year-to-year variation of financial
repression is relatively highly correlated with the change in the real exchange rate. When we
compute time-averages, we find that the cross-country correlation of financial repression and
the change in the real exchange rate is about 30 percent—for both measures of revenue.
  32See Easterly (1989). He finds that the total tax on financial intermediation was 2 percent
of GDP in 1985, and 9 percent in 1986.
  33See, for example, Ghosh (1990) for a description of financial markets in Brazil.


                                              18
high elasticity of the, financial repression tax base to the tax rate,
would manifest itself at very high rates of inflation—as we argued
above in section 2.2.
   Finally, to illustrate the extent to which domestic interest rates
do not reflect subsequent exchange-rate changes we plot in figure
10 the cross-country correlations between interest-rate differentials
(dollar interest rates on foreign debt minus domestic currency in-
terest rate on domestic debt) and exchange rate changes (percent
increase in the price of the dollar in domestic currency terms). If
domestic interest rates were allowed to reflect expectations about
exchange changes, and these expectations were on average correct,
this correlation should be negative, and close to -1. We find instead
that over many years in the 1970s the correlation is positive and
rather large. It turns negative, and close to -1 in the 1980s, in part
because of the inclusion of an outlier, Brazil, whose experience is
discussed above.

5 Summary and Concluding Remarks
This paper has presented an exploratory analysis of the theoreti-
cal underpinnings and the empirical relevance of the phenomenon
of financial repression from a public-finance perspective. We have
shown that financial repression is not an efficient policy when coun-
tries face no constraints in the use of different forms of taxation.
However, whenever there are costs of administering certain types
of taxes or whenever income distribution becomes an objective of
the government, an implicit tax on domestic financial markets may
be part of an optimal taxation program. We also argued that there
should be complementarities between the financial-repression tax
and the inflation tax. Throughout, we relied on explicit open econ-
omy assumptions, and stressed the interactions of capital controls
and financial repression.
    Our empirical investigation suggests that the revenue from fi-
nancial repression can be quite substantial: the unweighted cross-
country average is about 2 percent of GDP and 9 percent of to-
tal government revenue (excluding the revenue from financial re-
pression), but varies significantly across countries. Hence, reforms


                                  19
aimed at liberalizing financial markets and removing capital con-
trols will in many countries pose the following questions: what is
the size of the budgetary impact of the liberalization, and how
can the revenue shortfall resulting from the liberalization be dealt
with?
   We also uncovered convincing evidence of some complementar-
ity between inflation and financial repression: in general countries
with higher rates of inflation, and therefore higher rates of currency
depreciation, tend to raise more revenue from financial repression.
This occurs because the relative costs of domestic borrowing is
influenced by the rate of depreciation of the domestic currency,
since domestic nominal interest rates are normally fixed adminis-
trat ively.
   This prima-facic evidence on the quantitative importance of
financial repression opens in our view important questions for re-
search and policymaking. First, it would be useful to carry out a
theoretical assessment and empirical estimation—based on general-
equilibrium analysis—of the production distortions generated by
financial repression. Second, from the policymakers' viewpoint, it
is important to identify, at the country level, those reforms of tax
systems that would replace financial repression with more efficient
means of raising revenue.




                                  20
Appendix A Data Sources
In order to achieve maximum cross-country comparability, we try
to use the same statistical sources. Calculations of the foreign cost
of borrowing are based on external debt statistics from the World
Bank Debtor Reporting System. To the extent possible, stocks of
central government domestic debt and holdings of these stocks by
the monetary authorities and deposit money banks are taken from
the IMF Government Financial Statistics (GFS). This is possible
for 8 countries, and the preferred concept of consolidated central
government is used for all these countries except Jordan, where
only budgetary data are available. GFS data on total interest pay-
ments are broken down into their foreign and domestic components
by locating a country-specific source with this information. Total
interest payments from this country source approximate, but do
 not always equal, the GFS total.
     For another 7 countries, country-specific data on the domestic
 debt stock are quite close—within ten percent—to GFS data, and
 the domestic interest payments used are consistent with this debt
 stock. For another 6 countries, domestic debt stocks are signifi-
 cantly different—more than ten percent—from GFS data (higher
 for 3 and lower for 3) but are the only central government domestic
 debt figures for which associated interest payments could be iden-
 tified. Finally, GFS has no data on domestic debt for 3 countries
 (Algeria, Mexico and Portugal) and therefore direct comparison
 with GFS standard definitions is not possible. Again, budgetary
 data are occasionally used when consolidated accounts, which in-
  clude social security and extra-budgetary funds, are not available.
  Country-specific sources for these data and central government rev-
  enues are shown in Appendix B. Data on GDP, population, and
  the GDP deflator are also taken from GFS, and exchange rates are
  from the IMF Internationai Financial Statistics.
     Below we describe in detail the calculations performed to obtain
  the government revenue from financial repression, and the sources
  used for each country. For each country we prepared a worksheet,
  whose columns contain the years for which data is available, and
  rows contain the items reported below.


                                 21
LINE        ENTRIES                    SOURCE OR FORMULA



 1. Total domestic debt outstand-      IMF Government Finance
    ing and disbursed                  Statistics (GFS) and Country
                                       Source A
 2. Domestic Debt held by Mone-        GFS and Country Source B
    tary Authorities
 3. Interest payments on #   1:
    a) Total from GFS                  a) GFS
    b) Domestic                        b) Country Source C
   c) Foreign                          c) Country Source C
   d) Total of b) and c)               d) 3a and # 3b
 4. Effective Domestic Interest        #   3a   divided by (#1(t) +
    Rate                               #1(t— 1))/2
 5. Total                  Cen-        World Bank Debtor Report-
    tral Government Libor-based        ing System (DRS) Table 2
    External Debt (US$ ,000)           Creditor types 2,6, & 7
 6. Marginal Foreign Central           World Bank DRS
    Government Interest Rate on
   #5
 7. Average     Effective  For-        Interest payments from DRS
    eign Central Government In-        Table 2 plus change in
   terest Rate                         reported interest arrears
                                       (from DRS intermediate
                                       spreadsheets) divided by an-
                                       nual average of # 5
 8. Exchange Rate, Average An-         International Financial Statis-
    nual LC/$                          tics (IFS)
 9. Percent change in # 8              (#8(t) — #8(t — 1))/#8(t — 1)




                                  22
10. Dollar Revaluation Cost          World Bank DRS Table 2, col-
                                     umn 9 (adjusted to eliminate
                                     the effects of reschedulings) at
                                     t divided by column         1 at
                                     i—i
11. Foreign Cost of Borrowing        #7+#9+#10
12. Cost Difference                  #11-#4
13. Revenue from Financial Re-       #12 * [(#1(t)        #2(t)) +
    pression                         (#1(t — 1)— #2(t — 1))]/2
14. GDP                              IFS
15. Total Central Government         GFS and Country Source D
    Revenue
16. Revenue as percent of GDP        #13/#14
17. Revenue as percent of total      #13/#15
    tax revenue
18. GDP Deflator                     IFS
19. Inflation                        Percent change in     18.
20. Per Capita Income                IFS




                                23
Appendix B Country Sources

Couniry Source A


   Algeria         Data base from World Bank country desk.
   Brazil          Data base from World Bank country desk.
   Colombia        Informe Financiero Vagencia de 1984, published
                   by the Controlor General; GFS.
   Costa Rica      1971—1981, from Situation Fiscal de Costa Rica
                   January 1983; published by the Departmento de
                   Estudios Economicos; 1981—1984 from GFS and
                   the Boletin Estadistico published by Banco Cen-
                   tral de Costa Rica.
   Greece          Economic Research Division, Central Bank of
                   Greece.
   India           The Reserve Bank of India, Occasional Papers
                   June 1987, pp. 63-64 (figure referred to as GAIL)
   Jamaica         Statistical Digest, Bank of Jamaica Research &
                   Dev't Division, various years.
   Jordan          1085-1987 from the Monthly Statistical Bulletin
                   published by the Central Bank of Jordan, Jan-
                   uary 1989.
   Malaysia        Ministry of Finance Economic Report, 1981—82 &
                   1986—87; GFS.
   Mexico          Report to Congress, 1989 and data from World
                   Bank country desk.
   Panama          Informe del Controlor General de la Republica,
                   October 1983 and March 1988.
   Papua New       Quarterly Economic Bulletin, Bank of Papua
   Guinea          New Guinea, September 1988.



                             24
 Philippines       Budget Receipts & Expenditures Pursuant to the
                   Program of Government as Approved by the Pres-
                   ident, various years.
 Portugal          Banco de Portugal, Report of the Board of Direc-
                   tors for the Year, various years.
 Thailand          Thailand Statistical Yearbook, 1981, 1984 &
                   1987—88; published by the National Statistical of-
                   fice.
 Tunisia           World Bank country data.
 Turkey            Quarterly report submitted by the World Bank
                   Resident Representative and country desk data
                   base for consolidated central government.
 Zimbabwe          Ministry of Finance, Financial Statements, annu-
                   alized.

Couninj Source B


 Algeria           Same as Source A
 Brazil            Same as Source A
 Costa Rica        Same as Source A, Table entitled Credito Bruto.
 Greece            Same as Source A.
 India             Reserve Bank of India, Report on Currency &
                   Finance; 1986-87 Edition, Statements 90 & 86;
                   1978-79 Edition, Statements 79 8z 83
 Mexico            Same as Source A.
 Papua New Same as Source A.
 Guinea
 Portugal          Same as Source A.
 Tunisia           Same as Source A.
 Turkey            Same as Source A.

                             25
 Zimbabwe          Same as Source A.

Country Source C


 Algeria           Same as Source A less foreign interest payments
                   per DRS.
 Brazil            Same as Source A.
 Colombia          Same as Source A.
 Costa Rica        Same as Source A.
 Greece            Same as Source A.
 India             Same as Source A, pp. 72—73.
 Indonesia         Same as Source A.
 Jamaica           Financial Statements & Revenue Estimates as
                   Presented to the House of Representatives, com-
                   piled by the Ministry of Finance and Planning
                   (various years).
 Jordan            Central Bank of Jordan, Monthly Statistical Bul-
                   let tin.
 Korea             Korea Statistical Yearbook, 1987, p. 505, pub-
                   lished by the National Bureau of Statistics.
 Malaysia          Ministry of Finance Economic Report, various is-
                   sues.
 Mexico            Same as Source A.
 Morocco           Unpublished data from the Morocco Ministry of
                   Finance, per World Bank country desk.
 Pakistan          Budget in Brief, Gov't of Pakistan, Finance Di-
                   vision, Islamabad (various years).
 Panama            Same as Source A.



                             26
 Papua New         1984-1987 From the Bank of Papua New Guinea
 Guinea            Economic Bulletin; 1975-1983 PNG Ministry of
                   Finance Estimates of Revenue & Expenditure.
 Philippines       Same as Source A.
 Portugal          Same as Source A.
 Sri Lanka         Country Economic Memorandum;              Re-
                   port #4482-CE; entitled An Interim Assessment
                   of Experience & Priorities, May 4, 1983.
 Thailand          Same as Source A.
 Tunisia           Same as Source A.
 Turkey            Ministry of Finance per World Bank country
                   desk; also unpublished spreadsheet provided by
                   World Bank Country Desk.
 Zaire             Data from IMF country desk.
 Zimbabwe          Same as Source A.

Country Source D


 Algeria           Same as Source A.
 Brazil            IFS for 1983—86; country desk for 1987.
 Mexico            Same as Source A.
 Panama            GFS through 1985, IFS thereafter.
 Tunisia           Same as Source A.




                            27
References

Buffie, E., "Macroeconomics of Trade Liberalization," Journal of
 International Economics, 17, 1985, pp. 121—127.
Chamley, C. and Q. Hussain, "The Effects of Financial Liberaliza-
 tion in Thailand, Indonesia, and the Philippines", The World
  Bank Country Economics Department WPS 125, October 1988.
 Corbo, V. and J. de Melo, "Lessons from the Southern Cone
  Policy Reforms," The World Bank Research Observer, 2, July
  1987, pp. 111—142.
Diamond, P.A. and J. Mirrlees, "Optimal Taxation and Public
 Production I: Production Efficiency," American Economic Re-
  view,61, 1971, pp. 8—27.
Dixit, A., "Tax Policy in Open Economies," in Auerbach, A.J.
  and M. Feldstein, editors, Handbook of Public Economics, Am-
  sterdam: North Holland, 1985.
Dornbusch, R. and A. Giovannini, "Monetary Policy in the Open
 Economy", forthcoming in Hahn and Friedman, eds. Handbook
 of Monetary Economics, Amsterdam: North Holland. Manuscript:
 February 1988.
Dornbusch, R. and A. Reynoso, "Financial Factors in Economic
 Development", National Bureau of Economic Research Working
 Paper No. 2889, March 1989.
Easterly, W.R., "Fiscal Adjustment and Deficit Financing during
  the Debt Crisis", The World Bank Country Economics Depart-
 ment WPS 138, January 1989.
Edwards, S., "The Order of Liberalization and the Real Exchange
 Rate in Developing Countries," Essays in International Finance,
 No. 156, 1984.
Fischer, S. "Seigniorage and the Case for a National Money" Jour-
  nal of Political Economy, 90, April 1982, pp. 295—313.


                               28
Fry, M., "Models of Financially Repressed Developing Economies,"
  World Development 10, 1982, pp. 731—750.
Fry, M., Money, Interest and Banking in Economic Development,
  London: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1988.
Ghosh, S., "Bond Financed Deficits and the Development of Eq-
 uity Markets in Brazil," mimeo, World Bank, June 1990.
Giovannini, A. "Savings and the Real Interest Rate in LDCs",
  Journal of Development Economics, 1985.
 Giovannini, A. "International Capital Mobility and Tax Eva-
  sion", National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
  No. 2460, 1988.
Gordon, R.H. and J. Levinsohn, "The Linkage Between Domes-
 tic Taxes and Border Taxes," mimeo, University of Michigan,
  March 1989.
Heady, C. and P. Mitra, "Distributional and Revenue-Raising Ar-
 guments for Tariffs," Journal of Development Economics, 26,
  1987, 77—101.
Lizondo, J.S., "Foreign Exchange Futures Prices Under Fixed Ex-
  change Rates," Journal of International Economics, 14, 1983,
  pp. 69—84.
Makinen, G.E. and G.T. Woodward, "Funding Crises in the Af-
 termath of the Great War" in It. Dornbusch and M. Draghi,
 editors, Capital Markets and Public Debt Management Cam-
 bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
McKinnon, R. Money and Capital in Economic Development,
 Washington, D.C.: Brookings, 1973.
Mitra, P., "Protective and Revenue-Raising Trade Taxes: Theory
 and Application to India," World Bank CPD Discussion Paper
  No. 1987—4, 1987.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD),
  Taxation of Wealth, Paris: OECD, 1988.


                              29
Phelps, E.S. "Inflation in the Theory of Public Finance," Swedish
  Journal of Economics 75, January/March 1973, pp. 67—82.
Shaw, E., Financial Deepening in Economic Development , New
 York: Oxford University Press, 1973.
Tanzi, V. "Quantitative Characteristics of the Tax Systems of
 Developing Countries," mimeo International Monetary Fund,
  1983.
Thirsk, W.R., "The Experience with Tax Reform in Developing
 Countries," mimeo, World Bank, June 1990.
Tornell, A. "Capital Controls, Welfare, and Reputation," mimeo,
  Columbia University, 1988.




                              30
</ref_section>
                                                       Table 1: Financial Repression Tax Revenue
                                                                             (Pcrcent of GDP)

              1972 1973         1974   1975    1976    1977    1978   1979   1980 1981     1982   1983    1984   1985    1986   1987    AVERAGE     iMPLICIT
                                                                                                                                                    TAX RATE

Algeria                          5.0    0.6      4.5    2.5    0.9     3.0    4.0    7.0    6.3    5.3     5.8    6.1    2.4      6.8        4.30       10.6
Brazil                                                                                             4.7   —1.0     0.0   —0.8    —0.5         0.48       13.4
Colombia                                                                      0.2    0.2    0.2    0.3     0.4                               0.24       22.4
Costa Rica     0.1       0.1     2.6    1.0      0.3   —0.6    1.2    —0.3   —1.6   18.2    5.6    2.2     1.4                               2.33       25.1
Greece                           1.2    1.2      0.9    0.2   —0.1     0.5    2.8    5.6    3.5    4.8     3.8    6.3                        2.53       16.0
bdia                                                                         —0.1    3.1    3.5    3.3    3.5     3.9                        2.86       11.0
Indonesia                                        0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0                 0.00        0.0
Jamaica                                                                       1.3           1.5                                              1.38        7.4
Jordan                                                        —0.6     0.5    0.5    2.4    1.4    0.8     1.6    0.7   —1.0    —0.4         0.60        7.2
Korea                                   0.5    —0.0    —0.1   —0.1    —0.1    0.5    0.7    0.8    0.6    0.4     0.6   —0.1    —0.6         0.25        6.0
Malaysia                         1.6 —3.5        2.5   —0.9 —1.9      —1.5    1.5    3.1                                                     0.12        0.5
Mexico                                                                                                    0.5     0.8   10.8    11.0         5.77       45.8
Morocco                                                 0.3   —0.6    —0.1    1.1    5.5    2.9    3.7    4.7     3.3                        2.31       16.1
Pakistan                                                                                    3.6    2.9                                       3.23       25.3
Panama                                                  0.1    0.3     0.5    1.3    1.3    2.1    0.9    0.9     0.6    0.3    —0.6         0.69        4.4
PapuaNew
 Guinea                                                                              0.4    1.1    0.9    0.7    0.8    —0.5    —0.7         0.40        5.6
Philippines                             0.4     0.2    —0.0    0.2    0.1     0.2    0.5    0.6    1.3    1.6    0.3     0.0                 0.45       11.9
Portugal                                                       0.5    0.7     0.7    5.6    5.7    4.8    4.8    3.4    —6.3                 2.22       15.8
Sn Lanka                                                                            4.7     2.2    3.3                                       3.40       14.5
Thailand                                       —0.0     0.0    0.0    0.1     0.5    1.2    0.9    0.2    0.5    1.7    —0.9                0.38         4.3
Tunisia                                                       —0.1    0.3     1.4   3.5     3.5    2.1    2.4    1.3    —0.5     0.9        1.49        13.4
Turkey                                                                        6.9    1.8    1.9    1.5    2.3    1.9     0.8     0.6        2.20        55.8
Zaire                            0.1    0.2     1.5     0.4    0.2     1.3    0.7                         0.3    0.0     0.0                0.46        54.5
Zimbabwe                                                                            5.8    4.6     9.1    6.7    7.4    —0.5                5.52        19.5

Country Average:                                                                                                                            1.82       17.7


Note: The Implicit Tax   Rate   is the annual average of the difference between the foreign and domestic costs of borrowing by the government.

SOURCE: Country worksheets as described in Appendices A and B.
                                           Table 2; Financial Repression Tax Revenue
                                                  (Percent of Central Government Revenue)


              1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979                   1980    1981    1982 1983     1984    1985    1986    1987 AVERAGE




                           11.7      1.4   12.1    6.1    2.5     8.1    10.6    16.1   16.9   14.2    14.6    16.2     7.9   21.5    11.42
Algena
Brazil                                                                                         18.2     4.3    0.0      3.7   -2.3     1.57
Colombia                                                                  1.2     1.7    1.6    2.5     3.5                            2.11
CO6ta Rica     0.9   0.7   14.2     5.8     1.9   -3.6    6.3    -1.8    -8.8   102.3   32.2    9.8    6.2                            12.76

Greece                      4.6     4.3     3.0    0.6   -0.4     1.5    9.1     19.2   10.4   12.5   10.6    17.6                     7.76
india                                                                    -0.9    25.3   27.8   26.6   26.8    28.6                    22.38
Indonesia                                   0.0   0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0      0.0            0.00
Jamaica                                                                  4.4             5.1                                           4.74
Jordan                                                   —2.3     2.3    2.5     9.7     5.2    2.8    6.2      2.6    -3.6   —1.3     2.40
Korea                               3.2    -0.0   -0.4   -0.4    -0.3    2.8     3.6     4.4    3.0    2.3      3.2    -0.3   -3.4     1.36
                            7.9   —15.4    11.6   —3.7   —8.1    —6.8    5.8     11.1                                                  0.31
Malaysia
Mexico                                                                                                 3.4      4.6    68.1   82.6   39.65

Morocco                                            1.2   -2.4    -0.3    4.6     20.7   10.8   14.3    18.4    12.8                   8.89
Pakistan                                                                                22.7   18.3                                  20.50
Panama                                            0.3     1.2     1.8    4.6     4.9     7.5    3.0    3.1      2.0     1.1   -2.1     2.49
Papua New
Guinea                                                                           2.0     5.4    4.3    3.1      3.7    -2.2   —3.0     1.90
                                    2.9     1.6   -0.2    1.2     1.1     1.3    4.4     5.0   11.0    15.0     3.0     0.4            3.88
Philippines
                                                          1.9     2.5    2.2     17.0   17.6   13.5    14.2    10.3   -16.9            6.93
Portugal
Sn Lanka                                                                         27.1   13.4   17.2                                   19.24
Thailand                                   -0.3   0.1     0.1     0.8    3.7     8.1     6.4    1.4    3.2     10.8    -6.0            2.57
Tunisia                                                  -0.3     0.9    4.8     11.9   11.0   6.7     7.0     4.1      1.4    3.1     4.79

                                                                        31.1     8.0     7.1   7.6     15.3   10.6      4.4    3.1    10.89
Turkey
Zaire                       0.4     0.7     8.5   2.4     1.3     7.2    3.0                           1.2     0.2      0.1            2.48

Zimbabwe                                                                        22.9    15.8 30.4     21.0    26.3    -1.6            19.13



Countzy Average:                                                                                                                       8.76


SOURCE: Countiy worksheets as described in Appendices A and B.
               Table 3: Distribution of Holdings of Government Domestic Debt
                                                        (Percent)

                            Time Period (a)       Central Bank        Deposit Money Banka         Other

Algeria                         1974-87                 18.7                 56.2                  25.1
Brazil                          1983-87                 46.9                 N/A                   53.1 (b)
Colombia                        1980—84                 47.3                 N/A                   52.7 (b)
Costa Rica                      1972-83                 19.0                 20.1                  61.0
Greece                          1974—81                 21.7                 26.2                  52.2
India                           1980-85                 23.1                  7.4                  69.5
Indonesia                       1976—80                100.0                  0.0                   0.0
Jamaica                       1980/1982                 60.3                 14.1                  25.7
Jordan                          1978-87                 46.3                 36.0                  17.7
Korea                           1975—87                 23.9                 37.5                  38.6
Malaysia                        1974-81                  4.4                 23.2                  72.4
Mexico                          1984-87                 53.7                 19.1                  27.2
Morocco                         1977-85                 10.6                 56.2                  33.2
Pakistan                        1982—83                 43.5                 26.5                  29.9
Panama                          1977—78                  0.0                 33.7                  66.3
Papua New Guinea                1981—87                 18.3                49.6                   32.1
Philippines                     1975—86                 51.6                 23.0                  25.4
Portugal                        1983-86                 46.9                 10.7                  42.4
Sri Lanka                       1981—83                 32.4                20.2                   47.4
Thailand                        1976—86                 43.0                34.3                   22.7
Tunisia                         1978-87                  0.0                55.0                   45.0
Turkey                          1980-87                 40.3                 N/A                   59.7 (b)
Zaire                     1974—SO, 84—86                92.8                  6.8                   0.4
Zimbabwe                       1981—86                  16.8                 18.4                  64.8


Country Average: (c)                                    34.6                27.3                   38.0




Note: (a) Years over which average holdings are calculated. Due to data limitations on holdings
           of deposit money banks, the time period may differ from tables 1 and 2.

        (b) Includes holdings of deposit money banks

        (c) Excludes Brazil, Colombia, and Turkey.


SOURCE: Country worksheets as described in Appendices A and B.
                               Table 4: Financial Repression Tax Revenue due to Interest Rate Differentials
                                                                         (Percent ol GDP)


               1972 1973 1974 1975 1976            1977   1978    1979    1980    1981      1982   1983    1984    1985    1986    1987    AVERAGE


Algeria                         2.5   2.9    2.3    2.1     1.7    4.4      4.0     3.5      4.4     3.6    4.3      4.8     4.4   3.2        3.44
Brazil                                                                                              -4.6   10.0    -14.4    -8.4 -11.4        —9.75

Colombia                                                                    0.0     0.0      0.0     00     0.0                               0.03
Coat.. Rica        0.1   0.1    0.4   0.2    0.3   -0.6     1.2   -0.3     -1.6     1.0      1.2     1.3    0.6                               0.31
Greece                          1.0   0.3   -0.9    0.0   -0.1     0.3      0.6     1.2      0.6     0.0   -0.2     -0.3                      0.22
India                                                                       0.8     1.0      1.2     1.5    0.5      0.1                      0.85
Indonesia                                   0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0     0.0    0.0      0.0    0.0               0.00
Jamaica                                                                     1.1              1.5                                               1.30
Jordan                                                     0.4     0.8      0.6     1.6      0.8     0.5     1.0     0.3    0.6      0.2      0.67
Korea                                 0.1   -0.0   -0.1   -0.1    -0.1     -0.3     0.2      0.4     0.2    0.2      0.1    -0.1    -0.2      0.02
MaLaysia                        1.8   0.5    0.6    0.1   -0.1     0.3      1.6     1.1                                                        0.73
Mexico                                                                                                      -0.9    -2.1    -5.8   -10.5      -4.81
Morocco                                             0.1    0.2     0.6      1.0     1.7      0.9    0.9     0.6      0.6                      0.75
Pakistan                                                                                     1.2     1.4                                       1.31
Panama                                              0.1    0.3     0.5      1.3     1.3      2.1     0.9    0.9      0.6    0.3     -0.6      0.69
Papua New
Guinea                                                                              0.4      0.4    -0.0    0.2     -0.0    -0.3    -0.3      0.07
                                      0.1   0.1    -0.0    0.2     0.1      0.1     0.3      0.2    0.1     0.1     -0.0   -0.4               0.07
Pbilippinca
                                                           -0.5   -0.1      0.4     1.3      0.6    -0.9    —0.7    -1.2   -2.8               —0.44
Portugal
Sri Lanka                                                                           1.0      0.3    0.1                                       0.46
Thailand                                    -0.0    0.0    0.0     0.1      0.5     0.7      0.4    0.2     0.2      0.3    04                0.13
Tuniaia                                                    0.2     0.5      1.4     1.2      1.4    0.4     0.7      0.4    0.1      0.1      0.64
                                                                            0.6     0.2      0.3    0.3     0.1      0.0    0.7    -1.2       -0.04
Turkey
Zaire                           0.1   0.2   0.1     0.2    0.2     0.!      0.1                             0.0      0.0   -0.0               0.11
Zimbabwe                                                                            3.7      2.9    0.6     0.4     -1.4   -1.5               0.65



                                                                                                                                             -0.11
Country Average:

SOURCE:Country worksheetsas described in appendices A and B.
                         Table 5: Financial Repression Tax Revenue due to changes in the Exchange Rate
                                                                    (Percent of GOP)

                 1972     1973   1974   1975   1976   1977   1978   1979    1980       1981   1982   1983    1984    1985   1986   1987   AVERAGE



Algeria                           2.5   —2.3    2.0   —0.1   -1.5   -1.0    —01         4.2    2.5     1.8     1.8    0.4   -3.4    1.7       0.59
 Brazil                                                                                               9.3     9.0    14.4    7.6   10.9      10.24
Colombia                                                                     0.1        0.1    0.1    0.3     0.4                             0.21
Costa     Rica     0.0     0.0    2.2    0.8    0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0       17.3    4.4    0.9     0.7                             2.02
Greece                            0.2    0.8    1.8    0.1   —0.0    0.1     2.3        4.4    2.9    5.0     5.0     4.8                     2.28
India                                                                       -0.7        2.3    2.3    1.8     3.4     2.6                     1.95
Indonesia                                       0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0        0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0              0.00
Jamaica                                                                      0.2               0.0                                            0.08
Jordan                                                        0.9 -0.2      -0.1        0.9    0.5    0.3     0.6     0.4   -1.6    0.6       007
Korea                                    0.4    0.0    0.0 0.0       0.0     0.8        0.5    0.4    0.4     0.3     0.5    0.1   -0.4      0.23
Malaysia                         -0.4   -0.2    2.0   -1.1 -1.9     -1.7    -0.2        2.0                                                 -0.18
Mexico                                                                                                        1.4     2.8   16.6   21.4      10.59
Morocco                                                0.2   -08 -07         0.1        3.8    2.0    2.7     4.1     2.7                     1.57
Pakistan                                                                                       2.3    1.5                                    1.92
Panama                                                0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0        0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0   0.0       0.00
Papua New
Guinea                                                                                  0.0    0.7    0.9     0.5     0.8   0.2    0.5       0.32
Philippines                              0.4   0.1    -0.0   -0.0    0.0     0.1        0.2    0.4    1.2     1.5     0.3    0.4             0.38
Portugal                                                      1.1    0.8     0.3        4.3    5.1    5.7     5.6     4.2   -4.4             2.51
SriLanka                                                                                3.7    1.9    3.2                                    2.94
Thailand                                       0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0         0.5    0.5    0.0     0.3     1.9   0.5              0.25
Tunisia                                                      0.3    0.2     0.0         2.3    2.2    1.7     1.7    0.9    -0.7   0.6       0.81
Turkey                                                                       6.3        1.6    1.6    1.3    2.2      1.8    1.4   1.6       2.22
Zaire                            0.0     0.0    1.3   0.2    -0.0    1.2    0.5                              0.3     0.1    0.0              0.36
Zimbabwe                                                                               2.2    2.7    1.7     7.3     8.5    1.0              5.06



Country Average:                                                                                                                             1.93


SOURCE: Country worksheets as descnbed in appendices A and B.
Table 6: Average Annual Savings by Region and Time Period
                         (Percent of GDP)




                         1972—78            1979—87   1972—87




AFRICA                      0.5%               3.0%         3.0%

ASIA                       -0.0%               1.4%         1.1%

EMENA                       0.7%               2.7%         2.2%

LAC                          0.4%              2.2%         1.8%



Average of Total             0.3%              2.1%         1.8%
                                    Figure 1:
                   Per-Capita Income and Financial Repression
                           Cross-Section Correlations
Correlation Coefficient
 0.4
                                                                                         %0fGDP
 0.3

 0.2


 0.1

   0

(0.1)
                                                           % of Rev.     ..
(0.2)

                                                                   __J                                   I        I        I

(0.3)
                    L...._L___1__
         74(5)             76(9)                 78(14)            80(18)            82(20)            84(20)            86(15)
                 75(7)                77(11)              79(14)            81(19)            83(20)            85(18)            87(7)
                                                                       Year
The number of countries   in each   year is in
parentheses.
                     Figure 2:
Per-Capita Income and Financial Repression (% of GDP)


      6

 0
 0
 05
 0
 C
      4
 U,
 U,
 t)
 a

 0
 C
 Ct
                                           H
      2




      o
          0   500   1,000      1,500   2,000   2,500   3,000   3,500

                            Per-Capitaincome
                     Figure 3:
Per-Capita Income and Financial Repression (% of Revenue)
                - -----——-—            —              -—-—-_________     _____
       50




 a)
                                            Mexico
       40
 >
 a)

 0

 oC    30
 U,
 (I)
 a)
 0.
 C)
 cr
 cC
 5     20
 C
 CC
 C
 LL



       10




                -         --——---•            -   -
       0                                                 ___L___L_____
            0       500         1000       1500        2,000   2,500   3,000     3500
                                     Per-Capita Income
                                            Figure 4:
                               Inflation and Financial Repression
                                      Cross-Section Correlations
Corre'ation Coefficient

  0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

    0

(0.2)

(0.4)

(0.6)
          74(5)            76(9)              78(14)            80(18)            82(20)            84(20)            86(15)
                  75(7)            77(11)              79(14)            81(19)            83(20)            85(18)            87(7)
                                                                  Year
The number of countries for each year is in
parentheses.
                             Figure 5:
       Exchange-Rate Changes and Financial Repression
                     Cross-Section Correlations
Correlation Coefficient

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

    0

(0.2)

(0.4)

(0.6)
         74(5)             76(9)              78(14)            80(18)            82(20)            84(20)            86(15)
                  75(7)            77(11)              79(14)            81(19)            83(20)            85(18)            87(7)
                                                                  Year
The number of countries for each year is in
parentheses.
                                  Figure 6:
                               Hnancial Repression (% of GDP)
             _____and

     6
                                      I
              Zimbabwe                    Mexico
             [1
a
05
0
                II
.2
a)
c.
a)           ii
             [I
•0
                      H
C                                                                 —
IL   2                             ———————————
                                                   —-—---------


                                                         Brazil
                  I       I
         1111
                  II
     0                                                            200
         0                50                100    150

                                     Inflation
                           Figure 7:
       Inflation and Financial
                                Repression_(%of Revenue)


                          Mexico
      40                   H
a)
>
a)
a:
0

c0    30
'I)
Cl,
a)
0
a)
a:             H
      20       H
o
Ca

LL


      10




                                                 Brazil

                                    I      ________
       0
           0       50              100    150             200
                           Inflation
                    Figure 8:
                      and Rnancial Represon (% of GDP)
Exchange-Rate_Changes


        6

  3..                   L               Mexico
                      Zimbabwe
  9
  0
                 Algeria
  C               H
  0     4
  .
  (I)

  a
  a,

  .
  C)
        3
        2




                                                                 Brazil


                              _______        1
        0   _________
                  0              50         100        150            200   250
        (50)
                            Per-Cent Increase in Price of US Dollar
                       Figure 9:
Exchange-Rate Changes and Financial Repression (% of Revenue)


                                   Mexico
         40
    >
    a)

   0
         30
   U,
   U,
   a)
   a
   a)

   •     20
                     [1i
   C
   LI.


         10




                                                           Brazil

         0
          (50)   0          50        100        150           200   250

                     Per-Cent Increase in Price of US Dollar
                                Figure 10:
               Exchange-Rate Changes and lnt.Rate Differentials
                                     Cross-Country Correlations
Correlation Coefficient
    1




 0.5


    0


(0.5)



  (1)



(1.5)
          74(5)           76(9)               78(14)            80(18)            82(20)            84(20)            86(15)
                  75(7)            77(11)              79(14)            81(19)            83(20)            85(18)            87(7)
                                                                  Year
The number of countries for each year is in
parentheses.
