NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

HOST COUNTRY BENEFITS OF FOREIGN INVESTMENT

Magnus BlomstrOrn

Working Paper No. 3615

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1991

This paper is part of NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3615
February 1991
HOST COUNTRY BENEFITS OF FOREIGN INVESTMENT

ABSTRACT

This

paper reviews the empirical evidence on the very

different conclusions that can be drawn about productivity

spillovers of foreign direct investment. It explains the concept
of host country spillover benefits, describes the various forms
these benefits can take, both within and between industries, and
summarizes the evidence regarding the relative magnitudes of the

various forms of spillovers. Moreover, the paper discusses host
country policy measures which can accelerate both the BC
affiliates' technology imports and the diffusion of their
technology in the host economies.

Magnus BlomstrOm
Stockholm School of Economics
P.O. Box 6501
113 83 Stockholm, SWEDEN

HOST COUNTRY BENEFITS OF FOREIGN INVESTMENT*

Magnus Blomström

1. Introduction
The possibility of getting access to modern technology is

perhaps the most important reason why countries wish to attract

foreign investment. By inviting multinational corporations
(MNC5), host countries may get access to technologies that they

cannot produce by themselves. Foreign direct investment can also
lead to indirect productivity gains for host country firms

through the realization of external economies. Generally these
benefits are referred to as "spillovers", which indicates the
importance of the way in which the influence is transmitted.

There are several ways in which technology spillovers may

occur. Multinational firms may, for instance, increase the
degree of competition in host—country markets and in that way
force existing inefficient firms to make themselves more

productive by investing in physical or human capital. MNCs may
also provide training of labor and management which may then

become available to the economy in general. Another possible
channel for spillovers is the training of local suppliers of

*1 am grateful to An Kokko, Robert Lipsey, and Don McFetridge
for comments on an earlier draft of this paper, and to Investment
Canada for financial support.

intermediate products to meet the higher standards of quality
control, reliability, and speed of delivery required by the
technology and method of operation of the foreign-owned company.
The purpose of this paper is to discuss the very different
conclusions that can be drawn about productivity spillovers from

foreign investment. Since the technology transferred abroad by
multinationals constitutes the potential for spillovers to local
firms, the paper begins by considering MNCS as carriers of

technology and examining the determinants of their technology

transfer activities. Second, it explains the concept of host
country spillover benefits, describes the various forms these
benefits can take, both within and between industries, and
summarizes the evidence regarding the relative magnitudes of the

various forms of spillovers. Third, the paper discusses host
country policy measures which can accelerate both the MNC
affiliates' technology imports and the diffusion of their

technology in the host economies. Finally, Section 5 summarizes
and concludes the paper.

2. International Technology Transfer and the MNC
The attention given to the role of multinationals in the
international transfers of technology is not surprising, for at

least two reasons. First, multinational corporations undertake a
major part of the world's research and development efforts and
produce, own, and control most of the advanced production

technology. R&D is crucial for MNC5,

since

such efforts create

ownership—specific advantages that enables firms to operate in

foreign countries (see e.g. Caves, 1982). Secondly, MNCs and
their host countries can often be expected to have different

objectives with respect to technology transfers. The technology
recipients are interested in obtaining technology at as low a

price as possible. The MNCs, on the other hand, have to protect
their intangible assets and other similar advantages needed to
make foreign investment possible.

The characteristics of the technology brought overseas by
multinationals seem to depend on a number of factors, one of
them being the form of engagement by the multinationals.

Evidence confirms that the more modern and complex the
technology, the less willing the multinationals are to accept any
arrangements other than wholly owned subsidiaries, in order to

avoid leakages. For example, Mansfield and Romeo (1980) found
that technologies transferred to affiliates were of a later

vintage than those sold to outsiders. The average age of a
sample of technologies at the time of their first transfer to
subsidiaries in developed countries was 5.8 years (and that for
developing countries was 9.8 years), whereas the corresponding
figure for outside licensing and joint ventures was 13.1 years.

Results reported for Canada by McFetridge (1987) are consistent

with these findings. His results confirmed that the type of
technology influences the mode of transfer and that transfer lags

4

tend to be shorter for intra—firm (internal) transfers than for
other transfer types.
Also Behrman and Wallender (1976) ,

in

a detailed study of

several cases of technology transfers, emphasized the
qualitative differences between technology transfers within
multinationals and transactions between independent parties.

More advanced technologies were transferred on an intra—firm

basis. They also stressed the continuous character of intra—firm
technology flows and identified five general mechanisms of
technology transfers, that are more or less intensively used
throughout an affiliates entire lifetime, namely:
-

documentation, in the form of manuals and technical
publications,

—

instruction,

—

visits

-

development and transfer of specialized equipment, and

—

trouble

education, and training of employees,

and exchanges of technical personnel,

shooting, i.e. continuing oral and written

communication to solve problems.

Furthermore, various characteristics of the transferors
seem to influence the costs of technology transfer and, thus, the

type of technology brought overseas by multinationals. For
instance, Teece (1976) demonstrated learning by doing in
international technology transfers, in the sense that the

transfer costs decreased with the number of transfers. Moreover,

Davidson (1980) suggested that transfer costs declined as firms
became more familiar with international operations in general,

and with their individual markets in particular (see also

Blomstrom and Zejan, 1991). Thus, a firm's experience in foreign
operations is likely to speed up the technology transfer process
to affiliates, other thing being equal.

Host country characteristics also influence the level of

technology exports. To a large extent, the host country's
technological capability, for example in terms of a well educated
work force, determines what sort of technology is possible to

transfer. As Teece (1976) finds, the cost of transferring
specific technologies decreases with increasing capabilities in
the host economies; Behrman and Wallender (1976) and Cortes and

Bocock (1984) provide illustrative examples for certain
industries. Kokko (1990) ,

in

a study of technology imports by

U.S. affiliates in 32 countries, also concludes that the amount
of technology transferred increases with the host country's
technological capability (see also Mansfield and Romeo, 1980,

Chen, 1983, and Dahlman, et al., 1987). Thus, it seems safe to
conclude that more technology is transferred, the more advanced
the recipient country or firm.

The willingness of multinationals to bring technology is

also influenced by host country policies. Many countries apply
various technology transfer requirements, that typically mean
that MNCs are forced to employ a minimum of local labor, make

technologies available for local firms, restrict imports, or use

local suppliers. These requirements increase the cost of certain
types of technology transfer and should, therefore, depress the
affiliates' technology imports. (See e.g. McFetridge, 1987 and
Grosse, 1989 for evidence)

3. Foreign Investment and Spillovers
It might be argued that the MNC affiliates' technology
imports lead only to a geographical diffusion of technology, but
not to transfers to new users, because the ownership and control
of technologies are largely kept in the MNC5' possession.
However, since technology to some extent is a public good,

foreign investment can also result in indirect gains for host
countries through the realization of external economies or
spillovers.

In what follows, we shall discuss both the

influence of foreign firms on the efficiency of their host
country competitors ('intra—industry spillovers') and the
influence of foreign firms on their local suppliers and customers

("inter-industry spillovers)

Intra-industry spillovers
There are several ways in which intra—industry spillovers

may occure. One potential channel is competition. Although
multinationals may suffer from some disadvantages vis—à-vis the
domestic entrants —

for

example, as far as knowledge of consumer

7

and factor markets and the favor of local governments are
concerned -

it is likely that they enjoy other and more important

advantages in overcoming barriers to entry such as capital

requirements, risks, and research and development intensity. We
therefore expect MNCs to have better possibilities to enter

markets where barriers to entry for new firms are high (see
Gorecki, 1976, for affirmative evidence), and that foreign entry

may increase competition in host—country markets and force
inefficient domestic firms to adopt more efficient methods.
Existing inefficient local finns may be forced by the competition
of foreigners to make themselves more productive by investing in

physical or human capital, or simply by paying more attention to

possibilities for raising productivity. Moreover, the least
efficient local firms may be driven out of business, freeing the
resources they had controlled to more productive companies.

Another source of gain to the host economy is the training
of labor and management which takes place in the multinationals

and may then become available to the economy in general. The
local employees who are trained in the multinationals may find it
advantageous to exploit the human capital thus acquired by moving
to locally-owned firms or by becoming entrepreneurs on their own.

An employee trained and educated or experienced at a certain
level by a multinational corporation may add much more to the
profitability of a locally-owned firm, with no such employees,
than to that of the multinational that provided the training,

8
because in the foreign—owned firm, the trained employee is only
one of a large number of similar employees. Since Inanegerial
talent, scientists, and skilled workers are in short supply in

developing countries, we expect this type of spillover efficiency
to be more important there than in developed countries.

A third possible source of intra—industry spillover
efficiency benefits is that MNCs may speed up the transfer of

technology. For both process and product technology, such a
transfer is a central activity of MNCs, and this may stimulate
domestic firms to hasten their access to a specific technology,

because they would not otherwise have been aware of the
technology's existence, or they would not have felt it profitable
to try to obtain the technology.
Several of the early studies of foreign investment provided
anecdotal evidence on indirect productivity gains for host
countries from the presence of multinationals (see e.g. Dunning,
1958, Brash, 1966, Safarian, 1966, and Deane, 1970) .

More direct

(although rough) tests of foreign investment and spillovers have
been undertaken in a study for Australia by Caves (1974) ,

for

Canada by Globerxnan (1979), for Hong Kong by Chen (1983), and for
Mexico by Blomstrdm and Persson (1983) and Blonistrdmn (1989)

Although none of these studies was able to analyze the nature of

spillover efficiency in any depth, they all found evidence to

support the spillover benefit hypothesis. Productivity levels of
domestic firms increased with the foreign subsidiaries' share of

9

the market.

The existence of leakage of technology from multinationals
to host country competitors was also confirmed by Mansfield and
Romeo (1980) in a detailed study of technology exports by U.S.
firms (see also Mansfield, 1982) .

introduction of MNC

technology

They found that the

abroad speeded up the appearance

of competing products or process by at least 2.5 years in about

one—third of their cases. Moreover, they used information from a
sample of British firms to examine whether these had been

affected by technology transfers by U.S.-based firms to their

U.K. subsidiaries. Over half of them believed that at least some
of their products and processes had been introduced, or
introduced more quickly, because of the transfer of new products
or processes by U.S. multinationals.

Also Blomstrdm and Wolff (1989), in a study of Mexican
manufacturing industries, found that there were notable

productivity spillovers within industries. Furthermore, they
tried to measure the size of these spillovers by asking if they
were large enough to generate international productivity catch-

up. They found strong evidence that the presence of
multinationals acted as a catalyst to the productivity growth in
Mexico and that foreign direct investment speeded up the
productivity convergence process between Mexico and the United
States.

There is also some evidence available regarding the

10

relationship between spillover efficiency benefits and industrial

and national characteristics. A recent study by Cantwell (1989)
analyzes the impact of U.S. investment in Europe on the
competitiveness of European industries and firms, and he finds
that the effects vary strongly between countries and industries.

According to him, countries are likely to enjoy spillovers only
in the areas in which their firms have been successful in the

past. Hence, the competitive stimulus of the entry of U.S. firms
into Europe helped to spur an indigenous revival in areas of
traditional technological strength1.
Also Blomstrbm (1986) ,

in

a study of the effects of

foreign investment on the productive efficiency of the industrial
structure in Mexico, pointed to the competitive stimulus of

multinational participation as an important channel for

spillovers. In fact, his findings suggested that the competitive
pressure induced by the foreign firms was the most important

source of spillover efficiency. Although there is no other
statistical investigation to support this conclusion, there is a

lot of indirect support for it in the literature. A number of
studies have confirmed that the rate of entry of multinationals
is negatively related to the changes in market concentration (see
e.g. Rosenbluth, 1970, Dunning, 1974, and Knickerbocker, 1976).
Thus, it seems that foreign investment tends to reduce the level

of concentration and increase competition in host country
industries, which in turn may promote greater efficiency in

4

11

domestic firms.

The available evidence on spillovers from the training of
employees by multinationals is more sketchy and comes mainly from

developing countries. Katz (1987) points out that many
manegerial people in locally owned firms in Latin America started
their careers in foreign companies and claims that the host

countries have recieved important spillovers in this way; A
study of recent development in Southeast Asia by Yoshihara (1988)

suggests the importance to Chinese—owned firms of both training
in foreign companies and education in foreign schools;

Gerschenberg (1987), using career data from 72 top and middle
level managers employed in 41 firms

multinationals

in Kenya, concludes that

have played an important role in the dissemination

of managerial know—how in that country; Wasow (in Shelp et al.,
1984) describes the loss of trained employees to other firms as
one of the main ways in which insurance industry technology is
transferred outside the company he studied (AIG) .

For instance,

'in the Philippines, AIG is known as the 'training ground' for
the insurance industry" (p. 45) ;

Behrman and Wallender (1976)

find not only that managers trained by multinationals move on to
join other firms, but also that multinational companies transfer

management technology through assistance to their local
suppliers. (see also Gabriel, 1967, Balasubramanyam, 1973, Lall,

1980, Buckley and Artisien, 1987, and Lipsey, 1990). Thus, the
available evidence from developing countries seems to suggest

12

that there exist spillovers from the training of employees by

multinationals. Although MNCs may have smaller training effects
in developed countries, they may still have an incubator effect
(i.e. incubating new spin-off local business), but to the best of
my knowledge, there is no evidence regarding multinationals as
incubators.

Even if technology leaks out from multinationals to host
country firms, it is worth pointing out that such leakages do not
occur automatically, but require major investment by the

recipient. The learning of technology to the point of mastery is
an active process, Searching for information, reverse
engineering, personnel training for the new production methods,

et cetera, make learning costly and time consuming. Thus, it is
via the investment mechanism that new technologies are diffused.
I will come back to discuss this later.

Inter-industry spillovers

Another potential source of spillover efficiency benefits
is the impact made by the foreign subsidiaries on their local

suppliers and customers. The new technology brought in by
multinationals may stimulate local suppliers of intermediate
products to improve product quality and lower cost in order to

compete for the MNC market. New products introduced by the
foreign firms may also stimulate productivity improvements in
local firms purchasing these products.

13

Systematic analyses of the effects of foreign participation

on industries outside their own are lacking, although this

presumably is an important source of technology transfer. Some
studies have shown that the local purchases of inputs tend to
increase as the multinationals' subsidiaries mature (see e.g.
Safarian, 1966, Forsyth, 1972, and McAleese and McDonald, 1978),

but none of these investigations deal with spillover effects. A
number of case studies, however, have touched on the spillover

issue. In his study of Anerican investment in Britan, Dunning
(1958) found that foreign firms were generally engaged in the

training of local suppliers and suggested that inter—industry

spillovers were significant. Another suggestive study is that of
Brash (1966), who discussed the impact made by General Motors in

Australia on its local suppliers, by insisting that they meet

standards of quality control. Lim and Pang (1982), who surveyed
the electronic industry in Singapore, found that multinationals
were willing to assist in the establishment of local supplier
firms, suggesting entrepreneurial possibilities, providing
technical assistance, financial aid, managerial advice,

guaranteed business, and marketing information. Also Reuber, et
al. (1973), Behrman and Wallender (1976), Germidis (1977), and
Lall (1980) provided some empirical evidence on spillover effects
of foreign investment on industries outside their own, but nobody
has followed up this line of research with statistical analyses2.

Before drawing strong conclusions about inter—industry

14

spillovers, more research is needed. However, the limited
evidence still suggests that technology is leaking out also to

the multinationals' suppliers and customers. Some recent
developments also seem to suggest that this kind of spillovers

might become more important in the future. Data show, for
instance, that multinationals from Sweden, to an increasing
extent, are using independent subcontractors, both at home and
abroad (see Eliasson, 1985) ,

which would enlarge the potentials

for "backward" spillovers.

Because of the rapid technological change that is
currently taken place, I also believe that spillovers to the
multinationals' customers in the host economies will become much

more important in the future. The reason for this is that the
newly emerging technologies, like microelectronics and the new
generation of computer-based automation and information
technologies, are generally so knowledge and research intensive,
and expensive to develop, that only a few, large firms (MNC5) can

afford such efforts. Small countries facing the technological
revolution, thus, have to accept a certain degree of dependence

on the MNCs' technology. For them, it is more important to have
the capability to

advanced technologies than to produce them,

something which is clearly shown in the history of the smaller

European countries (see Blomstrdm and Meller, 1991). Small
countries should, therefore, put less emphasis on developing
entirely new, cutting-edge technologies, than on promoting the

15

widespread dissemination of technological capabilities throughout
the economy.

In discussing these new technologies, it is essential to
recognize that their main influence on the behaviour of the

economic aggregates is indirect rather than direct. For example,
while the computer industry by itself makes only slight
contributions to the output and employment in the countries where
production takes place, the computer has found applications

everywhere. In all countries, computers are now used in every
service, but they are also used in different functions within the
enterprises (administration, production, design, marketing, and

research). Thus, access to these new high—technology fields will
become increasingly essential for firms to sustain
competitiveness.

Moreover, it has been shown that whilst thresholds in some
advanced technology areas are high for both R&D and investment,

there are relatively low threshold costs in a number of software
applications and in many specialized areas of instrumentation and

machinery (OECD, 1989). This suggests that the recently emerging
technologies open up many new possibilities and opportunities for

small countries. The fact, for instance, that Sweden today
produces advanced technologies does not mean that it has become

independent of foreign technology. On the contrary, Sweden is
more dependent on foreign technology today than ever before. For
example, the Swedish success in high—tech areas, such as

16

telecommunication equipment, is based partly on U.S. technology
(see Bloinstrdin, Lipsey, and Ohisson, 1989). Thus, by importing

technology and high-tech components from the United States (and
other countries), Swedish firms can stay competitive on world
markets in various high-tech "niches".

This also suggests important implications for trade

policies. Since technology has become so complex and expensive
to develop, the access to foreign products and technology via
imports has become more important than ever for firms in all

countries, including the United States. Import restrictions may
have devastating effects on economic growth, as shown, for

example, by the recent experience of Brazil. In 1984, the
Brazilian Congress overwhelmingly voted to reserve the market for
micro— and mini—computers for national manufacturers for eight
years. As a consequence, after six years of limited access, to
the world computer revolution, the cost of Brazilian personal
computers is generally twice that of their foreign equivalents on

the international market; a facsimile machine costs seven timas
more (New York Times, July 9, 1990). This policy has now become
too costly to retain and Brazil has therefore decided to do away
with it.

4. How to Influence the Size of Spillovers

What policy measures countries hosting multinationals
should adopt to get these firms to transfer more technology, and

4

17

in that way increase the potential for spillovers, have been

widely discussed over the years. Generally it has been thought,
that in order to increase benefits from an MNC

project,

governments have to use different types of proscriptions. Many
countries have, therefore, started to frame the environment
within which multinational firms operate and have introduced

various performance requirements for their behavior. Special
attention has been given to policies regarding technology
transfer, and a number of measures intended to encourage
multinational firms to increase their technology transfer have
been introduced over the years, including requirements for local
content and local R&D.

A different view on how to influence the potential and the
size of spillovers has recently been suggested by Blomström and
Wang (1989) .

They develop a model in which international

technology transfer through foreign direct investment emerges as
an endogenized equilibrium phenomenon, resulting from the
strategic interaction between subsidiaries of multinational

corporations and host country firms. Their model highlights the
essential role played by competing host country firms in
increasing the rate at which the multinationals transfer
technology and suggests that countries hosting multinationals
should concentrate on supporting their domestic firms in their
efforts to learn from the foreigners, rather than stipulating
performance requirements for the multinationals, if they want to

18

increase the technology transfer from the multinationals.

Empirical evidence from U.S. majority owned foreign
affiliates in some 32 countries largely confirms this
theoretical hypothesis (see Kokko, 1990) .

that technology imports by MNC

affiliates

His findings suggest
increase with the

income level of the host country and (proxies for) the

competitive pressure in the host economy, and decrease with the
level of distortions and various host country performance

requirements. The negative impact of different performance
requirements on the multinationals technology transfer
activities is also confirmed in McFetridge (1987) ,

while

Lake

(1979) demonstrates the positive effect of competition. In his
study of the semi-conductor industry in the United States and the
United Kingdom, he found that technology diffusion was faster the
more competitive was the industry in which it occurred.

These findings have important policy implications. If the
MNC affiliates actually adapt their behavior to local conditions

— read local competition and supply of educated labor — then the
set of instruments for the host countries technology policy
increases notably. Rather than relying on controls and direct
supervision of MNCs to secure some benefits from their
operations, local governments have the option to create an
environment which fosters spillovers and continuing technology

transfers, Supporting competition in the industry where a MNC
enters, e.g. through subsidies to education and training in local

19

firms (or by inviting another competing MNC) has dual benefits.

•

Firstly, the MNC is forced to adjust to competition by upgrading

its production processes and importing technology, in pace with

the competitiors' productivity improvements, Secondly, the
continuous inflow of technology increases the spillover
potential, while the support to local firms increases the

likelihood of actual spillovers. In other words, a 'virtuous
circle' of productivity and technology growth is possible, in
contrast to the 'vicious circle' that occurs when the MNC is
allowed to operate without any competition, and risks to fall
further and further behind the global standards.
Recently there has also been a lot of concern, both in home

and host countries, over the multinationals' research and

development activities. Home—country governments are mainly
worried about the negative effects of R&D investment overseas and
emphasize the risk of facilitating, for actual or potential
competitors, the access to technology on which the home country's
competitive position relies (see Zejan, 1990) .

In

the host

countries, there is generally a positive attitude towards the

development of R&D activities in the foreign subsidiaries. Such
activities are expected to contribute in different ways to local

technological capability, and have come to be identified as vital
to industrial competitiveness.

Research alone, however, does not guarantee that the
economic benefits of research investment will be realized by the

20

nation making the investment. As we have shown in several
studies, the competitiveness of countries can behave very
differently from that of the firms that are located there, if
these firms produce abroad as well (see e.g. Lipsey and Kravis,
1985 and Blomstrdm and Lipsey, 1989) .

National

policies aimed at

improving the competitiveness of a country may therefore fail, if
they create or subsidize assets that improve the competitiveness

of firms that can exploit these assets in other countries. Let
me give one example.

The Swedish government has, for a long time, supported

firms to undertake research and development in Sweden. And as
can be seen from Figure 1, in the 1980s, Sweden became the OECD

country with the highest ratio of business enterprise R&D to
industry output. The idea behind this policy is that an increase
in research and development will upgrade the Swedish production
over time and raise Sweden's competitiveness in high—tech
products.

Insert Figure 1.

However, there is little impact from this policy, so far,

if we look at the type of products Sweden is exporting. Dividing
Swedish exports into three categories, high, medium, and low

21

tech, it can seen (from Figure 2) that there has been no shift

towards exports of high-tech products in Sweden since 1970. On
the contrary, the big devaluation in 1982 increased the
competitiveness of low—tech industries.

Insert Figure 2.

There are several possible explanations as to why Swedish
exports have not been shifting towards high-tech products,

despite the increasing R&D activities in Swedish firms. One is
that research and development is a long term investment and that

the effects have yet not appeared in Swedish exports. If this is
correct, a shift to high—tech export is to be expected. However,
given that Swedish firms have spent more on R&D as a per cent of
value added than their main competitors since the mid—1970s, and
even more than U.S. firms since the end of the 1970s, this
explanation is not very likely.

A second possibility is that research and development has
been misdirected in Sweden, and that the output from it will

never appear in the trade statistics. According to OECD (1986)
there seems to be some truth in this explanation. In general,
the OECD suggests that Swedish R&D is inefficient in generating
the production and export of new products.

22

Thirdly, it is argued that Swedish R&D has mainly been

directed towards rationalizing techniques for the production of

low-tech products, such as pulp and paper. This has certainly
been the case, but the weighted impact of these improvements has

not been large enough to prevent Sweden from falling behind many
of its competitors in terms of income per capita.

The fourth and final possibility is that Swedish
multinationals base their R&D for the whole organization in
Sweden, while carrying out a large chunk of high-tech production

abroad. In other words, Swedish firms' R&D efforts in Sweden
might raise their competitiveness in high—tech products, but the
firms do not find Sweden the most suitable location for high-tech

production. Since the results of R&D are transferable across
international borders within firms, Swedish multinationals might

choose to do their high—tech exporting from other countries than

Sweden. At least two observations support this explanation for
why Swedish R&D does not generate Swedish production and export

of high-tech products. One is that more than 85 per cent of
Swedish MNC5' R&D is based in Sweden (Swedenborg, 1988). The
other is that the competitiveness of Swedish multinationals,

defined as their share of world or developed country exports, has
increased since the mid—l960s, while that of Sweden has decreased
(Blomstrdm and Lipsey, 1989)

23

5. Concludino Remarks
The particular concern of this paper has been to review the

evidence on the very different conclusions that can be drawn

about productivity spillovers of foreign direct investment. The
general picture that emerges from the empirical spillover
literature is that such effects exist, and that they may be

quite substantial both within and between industries, but there

is no strong evidence on their exact nature. Moreover, recent
research suggests that spillovers vary between countries and
industries and are likely to increase with the level of local
capability and competition.
The perception of spillovers as endogenous phenomena
complicates the discussion of what policy measures can
accelerate the MNC affiliates' technology imports and the

diffusion of their technology in the host economies. Evidence
suggests that various technology transfer requirements may not
always produce the intended results. At best, requirements may
secure diffusion of a large share of a smaller technology stock;
alternative policies, such as support to education and
competition in the domestic markets may, on the other hand,
increase both the inflow of technology and the absorbtive

capacity of domestic firms. Thus, from an investment policy
perspective, prescriptions seem more effective than

proscriptions. This is not only because individual host
countries have limited possibilities to influence the

24

multinationals in their choice of production location, but also
because technology transfer via MNCs depends, to a large extent,
on the performance of the host country firms.
Foreign technologies may, of course, be acquired in other

ways than foreign direct investment. Multinationals may
transfer technologies through a number of other arrangements,
for instance, joint ventures, licensing, and technical service

contracts. Technology may also cross international borders
through trade. Empirical evidence suggest, however, that these
different avenues of technology transfer should be seen as

complements rather than substitutes. The type of technology
seems to influence the mode of transfer and certain advanced
technologies are simply not available through other means than
foreign direct investment. Thus, keeping the doors open for the
acquisition of technical information through various channels

will eventually lead to more technology transfer and higher
productivity growth.

Another issue, which is indirectly related to the spillover

question, has to do with the economic benefits of R&D. Several
studies have shown that the fruits of R&D are transferable
across international borders within firms and that they can be
realized in other geographic locations than where the R&D

activity was originally undertaken. Thus, subsidising research
and development in multinational firms (foreign or domestic) does

not guarantee benefits to the nation providing the subsidy if

25

the economic environment at large is not favorable.
In sum, there is strong evidence that multinational firms

have contributed to a geographical diffusion of technology end
that active host countries can get access to modern technology

via foreign direct investment. With the increasing global
interdependence in the economic and technological spheres it can

also be expected that multinationals will remain an important
vehicle in the international diffusion of technology.

26

NOTES
l.Cantwell's model is interesting in the sence that it stresses
the importance of the relative technological capacity of the
sector in the host country in analyzing the effects of foreign
investment. I find it troublesome, however, that this
technological competence in a way is given from the beginning in
his analysis, because that makes his model rather
"deterministic". How can his static model, for instance, explain
the success of Japanese firms on the world market? Or the
emergence and success of Newly Industrializing Countries? An
alternative, dynamic approach is given in Blomatrom and Wang
(1989), discussed below.
2. Although there are no statistical analyses of foreign
investment and inter—industry spillovers, there are several
studies of technological or R&D spillovers between industries.
The work of Bernstein is particularly relevant (see e.g.
Bernstein 1988, 1989, and his chapter in this volume). See also
Terleckyj (1980), Scherer (1982), Jaffe (1986), Wolff and Nadiri
(1987) , Bernstein and Nadiri (1989) , and Mohnen (1990)

27

REFERENCES
Balasubramanyam, U. N., International Transfer of Technology to
India. New York, Praeger, 1973.

Behrman, J. and H. Wallender, Transfer of Manufacturing
Technology within Multinational Enterprises.
Cambridge, Mass., Ballinger, 1976.
Bernstein, J. I., "Cost of Production, Intra— and Interindustry
R&D Spillovers: Canadian Evidence." Canadian Journal of
Economics, 21 (2) ,

1988.

Bernstein, J. I., "The Structure of Canadian Interindustry R&D
Spillovers, and the Rates of Return to R&D." Journal of
Industrial Economics, 37 (3), 1989.
Bernstein, J. I. and M. I. Nadiri, "Research and Development and
Intraindustry Spillovers: An Empirical Application of
Dynamic Duality." Review of Economic Studies, 56, 1989.
Blomstrtin, M., "Foreign Investment and Productive
Efficiency: The Case of Mexico." Journal of Industrial
Economics, 15 (1), 1986.

Blomstrdm, M., Foreign Investment and Spillovers: A Study of
Technology Transfer to Mexico. London, Routledge,
1989.

Blomstrdm, M. and R.E. Lipsey, "The Export Performance of
U.S. and Swedish Multinationals." Review of Income and
Wealth, 35 (3), 1989.
Blomstrdm, M., R.E. Lipsey and L. Ohlsson, Economic Relations
between the United States and Sweden. New York and
Stockholm, Svenska Handelsbanken, 1989.
Blomstrdm, M. and P. Meller, Eds., Diverging Paths.
Comparing a Century of Scandinavian and Latin American
Economic Development. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins, 1991.

Blomstrbm, M. and H. Persson, "Foreign Investment and
Spillover Efficiency in an Underdeveloped Economy:
Evidence from the Mexican Manufacturing Industry."
World Development, 11 (6), 1983.

28

Blomstrdiu, M. and 1. Wang, "Foreign Investment and Technology
Transfer: A Simple Model." NBER Working Paper No. 2958, May,
1989.

Blomstrdm, M. and E. Wolff, "Multinational Corporations and
Productivity Convergence in Mexico." NBER Working Paper No.
3141, October, 1989.
Blomstrdm, M. and M. Zejan, "Why Do Multinational Firms Seek Out
Joint Ventures?" Journal of International Development, 3
(1), 1991.
Brash, D.T., American Investment in Australian Industry.
Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press, 1966.
Buckley, P.J. and P. Artisien, North-South Direct Investment in
theEuropean Communities. London, Macmillan, 1987.
Cantwell, J., Technological Innovation and Multinational
corporations. Oxford, Basil Blackwell, 1989.

Caves, R.E., "Multinational Firms, Competition, and
Productivity in Host-Country Markets." Economica, 41,
1974.

Caves, R.E., Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1982.

Chen, E.K.Y., Multinational Corporations, Technology and
Employment. London, Macmillan, 1983.
Cortes, M. and P. Bocock, North-South Technology Transfer. A Case
Study of Petrochemicals in Latin America. Baltimore, Johns
Hopkins, 1984.
Dahlman, C.J., B. Ross-Larsen, and L.E. Westphal, "Managing
Technological Development: Lessons from the Newly
Industrializing Countries." World Development, 15 (6),
1987.

Davidson, W.H., Experience Effects in International Investment
and Technology Transfer. Ann Arbor, Mich., UMI Research
Press, 1930.
Deane, R.S., Foreign Investment in New Zealand
Manufacturing. Wellington, Sweet & Maxwell, 1970.
Dunning, J., American Investment in British Manufacturing
Industry. London, George Allen & Unwin, 1958.

29

Dunning, J., "Multinational Enterprises, Market Structure,
Economic Power and Industrial Policy." Journal of
World Trade Law, 8, 1974.

Eliasson, G., et al., De Svenska Storfdretagen. (Large
Swedish Companies) , Stockholm, Industriens
Utredningsinstitut, 1985.
Forsyth, D., U.S. Investment in Scotland. New York, Praeger,
1972.

Gabriel, P.P., The International Transfer of Corporate Skills:
Manager Contracts in Less Developed Countries. Cambridge,
Mass., Harvard University Press, 1967.
Germidis, D., Ed., Transfer of Technology by Multinational
Corporations. Volume 1. Paris, OECD, 1977.
Gershenberg, I., "The Training and Spread of Nanegerial Know—How.
A Comparative Analysis of Multinational and Other Firms in
Kenya." World Development, 15 (7), 1987.
Globerman, S., "Foreign Direct Investment and "Spillover"
Efficiency Benefits in Canadian Manufacturing
Industries." Canadian Journal of Economics, 12 (1),
1979.

Gorecki, P.K., "The Determinants of Entry by Domestic and
Foreign Enterprises in Canadian Manufacturing
Industries: Some Comments and Empirical Results."
Review of Economics and Statistics, 58 (4), 1976.
Grosse, R., Multinatiopals in Latin America. London,
Routledge, 1989.

Jaffe, A. B., "Technology Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D:
Evidence from Firms' Patents, Profits, and Market
Value." American Economic Review, 76, 1986.
Katz, J.M., Ed., Technology Generation in Latin American
Manufacturing Industries. New York, St. Martins Press,
1987.

Knickerbocker, F.T., "Market Structure and Market Power
Consequences of Foreign Direct Investment by
Multinational Companies." Occasional Paper No. 8,
Washington, DC., Center for Multinational Studies,
1976.

30

Kokko, A., 'Host Country Competition and Technology Transfer
by U.S. Multinationals.' Mimeo, Stockholm School of
Economics, 1990.
Lake, A. W., "Technology Creation and Technology Transfer by
Multinational Firms." in R.G. Hawkins, Ed., Research in
International Business and Finance. Vol. 1. Greenwich, CT.,
JAI Press, 1979.
Lall, S., "Vertical Inter-Firm Linkages in LDCs: An Empirical
Study." Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 42
(3) ,

1980.

Lim, L. and P.E. Fong, "Vertical Linkages and Multinational
Enterprises in Developing Countries." World Development, 10
(7) ,

1982.

Lipsey, R.E., The Impact of Service TNCs on Developing Countries.
New York, UNCTC, 1990.
Lipsey, R.E. and I.E. Kravis, "The Competitive Position of
U.S. Manufacturing Firms." Banca Nazionale del Lavoro
Quarterly Review, 153, 1985.
Mansfield, E. and Associates, Technology Transfer, Productivity,
and Economic Policy. New York, Norton, 1982.

Mansfield, E. and A. Romeo, "Technology Transfer to Overseas
Subsidiaries by US—based Firms." quarterly Journal of
Economics, 95, 1980.
McAleese, D. and D. McDonald, "Employment Growth and
Developmnent of Linkages in Foreign—Owned and Domestic
Manufacturing Enterprises." Oxford Bulletin of
Economics and Statistics, 40, 1978.
McFetridge, D.G., "The Timing, Mode and Terms of Technology
Transfer: Some Recent Findings" in A.E. Safarian and G.Y.
Bertin, Eds., Multinationals. Governments and International
Technology Transfer. London, Croom Helm, 1987.
Mohnen, P., "The Impact of Foreign R&D on Canadian Manufacturing
Total Factor Productivity Growth." University of Montreal,
CERPE Working Paper 58, July, 1990.
OECD, OECD Science and Technology Indicators. No. 2. R&D,

Invention and Competitiven. Paris, OECD, 1986.
OECD, New Technologies in the 1990s. A Soclo—economic
Strategy. Paris, OECD, 1988.

31
OECD, Technology and Global Competition. Paris, OECD
Development Center, 1989.
Reuber, G., et al., Private Foreign Investment in
Development. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1973.
Rosenbiuth, G., "The Relation Between Foreign Control and
Concentration in Canadian Industry." Canadian Journal
of Economics, 3 (1), 1970.
Safarian, A.E., Foreign Ownership of Canadian Industry.
Toronto, McGraw—Hill, 1966.

Scherer, F.M., "Interindustry Technology Flows and
Productivity Growth." Review of Economics and
Statistics, 64, 1982.
Shelp, R.K., et. al, Service Industries and Economic Development.
New York, Praeger, 1984.

Swedenborg, B., Den svenska industrns utlandsinvesteringar
1960—1986. (Swedish Investment Abroad 1960—1986)
Stockholm, Industriens Utredningsinstitut, 1988.
Teece, D., The Multinational Corporation and the Resource Cost of
International Technology Transfer. Cambridge, Mass.,
Ballinger, 1976.
Terleckyj, N. W., "Direct and Indirect Effects of Industrial
Research and Development on the Productivity Growth of
Industries." in J. W. Kendrick and B. Vaccara, Eds.,
New Developments in Productivity Measurement. New York,
National Bureau of Economic Research, 1980.
Wolff, E. N. and M.I. Nadiri, "Spillover Effects, Linkage
Structure, Technical Change, and Research and
Development." Draft, New York University, 1986.
Yoshihara, K., The Rise of Ersatz Capitalism in South—East Asia.
Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1988.
Zejan, M., "R&D Activities in Affiliates of Swedish MNEs."
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 92 (3), 1990.

32

p

Figurel. R&D expenditure in the business enterprise sector
As a percent of valua added
%
3.C

2
0'/0

Major economies

Small economies

:'"

3.6
2.6

2.6

2.
2.0
1.2
1.2

,,
1._

nQ

0.6

0.4

0.4

70

I,75II I 80

— USA
———-Japan

Germany
United Kingdom
France
Canada
Italy
Source: OECD 1986

85

2

...—--—

.----

.

y__
—
70

75

\.
80

— Sweden
— — --Netherlands

——Belgium
Austria
Denmark

Norway

— Finland

85

33

Figure 2.

Global revealed comparative advantages of
Sweden 1970-85

Index
150

Index
150

IO°IH1J'1EI!
High R&D intensity
Medium R&D intensity
Low R&D intensity
Revealed comparative advantages are tar a sector detined as
the ratio between the country's sectoral share at OECD exports
and its overall export share.

Source: BlornsträrTl, Lipsey and Ohlssori, 1 9139

