                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




                  ASSET SALES AND DEBT CAPACITY




                         Andrei Shleifer

                        Robert N, Vishny




                     Working   Paper No. 3618




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                         Februa' 1991




We are grateful Eo Eugene Fama, Robert Oertner, Milton Harris,
Glenn Hubbard, Steven Kaplan, Robert Mooonald, Merton Miller and
Artur Raviv for helpful coments. We are also grateful to the
NSF, Bradley and Sloan Foundations, and Dimensional Fund Advisors
for finanrial support. First draft, August 1990, this draft,
January 1991. This paper is part of NBER's researth program in
Financial Markets and Noneta' Economics. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economio Research.
                                              flEER Working Paper #3618
                                              February 1991

                   ASSET SALES AND DEBT CAPACITY


                               ABSTRACT


    In this paper, we explore the link between asset sales end

debt capacity.    Asset sales are a cormon way far firms to raise

saab, and so present an alternative to security issues for firms

near financial distress.    We argue that liquid assets --          those
tba c con be resold   at attractive   terms   --   are   good candidates for

debt finance because financial distress for          fis
                                                  with such
assets    relatively inexpensive. We apply  this logic to explain
variocion in debt capacity across industries and over the
bosiness cycle, as well as to the rise in g.5. corporate leverage
in the   1980s.

Andrei Shleifer                                Robert 91. Vishny
Harvard University                             University of Chicago
Cambridge, MA t2l38                            Chicago, IL 68637
1. Introduction.

      How do firms choose debt levels, and why do firms or even whole industries

sometimes change how much debt they have? Why, for example, have American firms

increased their leverage tremendously in the 1980s (Berrianke and Campbell 1988,
                                                                   in some industries,
Warshassky 1990), and why has this debt increase been the greatest

such as food and timber? Despite substantial progress in research on leverage, these

                                                         an approach to debt capacity
questions remain largely open. In this paper, we explore

based on the cost of asset sales. We argue that this approach helps understand the cross-

sectional determinants of leverage, and also sheds light on the debt—increases of the 1980s.

       Asset sales are an effective way in which firms can aenerate cash fast, pay off some

debt and reduce leverage. A lot of assets are sold by perfeutly healthy firms, which might
                                                                                        in
need cash to acquire other assets or to invest internally, in the 1980s, many companies

                                                                 firms in financial trouble
very good shape sold divisions. But asset saics are also used by

to raise cash and avoid default on their debt. As the examples of Texaco, Pan Am and

                                                       sales are common both in and Out
many LBOs illustrate, for highly leveraged firms asset

of bankruptcy.

       For troubled firms selling assets     is an   alternative to conventional financial

                                                                      or         fresh loans.
restructuring, such as debt rescheduling, issuing equity to the public obtaining

Much research has shown that these means of restructuring can be very costly to the firm.
                                                   2
 Reschedulingdebt creates free rider problems,whereby bondholders hold out for a better

 deal when they think other bondholders are                       a rescheduling. Geriner and
                                            agreeing to

 Scharfstein (1990) show that these problems can be severe. Issuing
                                                                    equity has the well
known problem of buyer concern that only overvalued firms issue equity. As
                                                                           Myers (1984)
shows, this asymmetric information problem substantially raises the costs of
                                                                             equity issue.

In addition, a pubiic equity issue preserves the control of possibly incompetent incumbents,

which keeps down the prices investors are willing to pay. Issuing new debt is often no

easier than issuing equity, because buyers of new debt are the last in line in
                                                                               claiming the

firm's cash flow. The costs of raising new money to pay interest and fund
                                                                          necessary capital

etependitures    are thus often   prohibitive.   These costs of financial—restructuring are well

understood in the literature.

       Asset sales are a form of financial restructuring that      is   often more attractive than

the approaches mentioned above. Such a sale can have two advantages over a
                                                                           public

equity issue. First, the buyer of this equity claim can be better informed about          its   true

value than a diffuse set of outside shareholderswho buy the public equity issue. This would

be particularly important if the buyer-is already in the same industry as the assets
                                                                                     being
sold. Second, unlike in a public equity sale the buyer gains effective control of the assets,

and so can reduce agency costs by for example replacing the manager. These factors

suggest that asset sales might be an attractive alternative to the conventional financial

restructuring.
                                                    3

            In fact, some legal scholars have advocated automatic liquidationof firms in financial

distress, on the theory that such liquidationallocates assets to the highest vaiue users and

so   is    cheap and efficient. Financial economists, in contrast, have typically assumed that

liquidation is costly, and focused on traditional financial restructuring without spelling out

why selling assets is more costly. This paper focuses on the cost of asset 50i05 to gain

greater insight into this alternative to conventional financial restructunng. By doing so, we

describe this other aspect of the costs of financial distress. Since troobled firms presumably

choose the cheapest way of dealing with distress, we hope that this stody will provide

torther insight into corporate debt capacity.

            T'ne cost of asset sales that we focus on is the lquiditv cost, defined as the difference

oet-.een the net present value of an asset's rash fioss in best ose and the price it fetches

     a quick sale. Some assets, like commodities, are extremelyliquid and can be         easily sold

fast      at a price   close to value in best use. Other assets, such as tankers or oil rigs might

fetch very low prices relative to value in best use when sold rapidly. Part of the problem

may be the scarcity         of buyers who can use the asset; the asset   may   be non-fungible   and

some buyers may be precluded from bidding by regulation such as antitrust. Perhaps as

important is the problem of costly credit to the buyers. At the time an asset a sold buyers

from the same industry are often themselves in financial trouble and so can pay only a

fractton of the full value of the asset in their use. To gauge the cost of asset sales, we

focus on the potential buyers: their participation and ability to pay.
                                                  4

       Limited asset liquidity implies that asset sales, like equity issues, can be very costly

to the firm. The costs of financial distress are then high
                                                           regardless of how the firm deals
with it. This in turn implies that corporate debt capacity is limited, and more so for firms

with illiquid assets. This result allows us to reinterpret some of the available evidence on

cross-sectional financing patterns and to generate some new predictions.

       Moreover, asset liquidity changes over time, as buyer participation and ability to pay

changes. As   a consequence, debt       capacity changes over time, and in particular becomes

very high when assets are very liquid. We rely on changes in asset liquidity over time to

etcplain why high markets tend to be liquid markets, why takeover waves are procyclical,

and why increases in leverage in the 1980s have occured in some      bt not all industries.
       The next section sets out the buyer' approach to the liquidity of assets. Sections

3 through 5 deal with the various types of potential buyers, and what limits the prices they

pay for assets, Section 6 spells Out the relationship between asset liquidity and debt

capacity. Section 7 presents the implications of changes of liquidity over time, and section

8 applies the analysis to takeovers and leverage increases in the 1980s. Section 9 concludes.




2. Determinants   of asset liquidity:   an overview.

      To   fix ideas,   consider a heavily indebted farmer whose farm        is   not currently

generating a sufficient cash flow to cover both his interest payments and necessary capital
                                                 5

expenditures. Assume, as we do throughout this paper, that it is costly to this farmer to

barrow more or to issue equity in his farm. The lenders are unsure about the quality of

the farmer and his land, and suspect that he is selling overvaluedsecurtties. In addition,

the farmer cannot get a new mortgage because it would be junior to his current one. In

this case, the farmer must sell all or a part of his farm to avoid turning it over to the bank.

          There are three   distinct types of potential buyers of the land.    It can be   sold to an

outsider who would convert it to a baseball field or some other use. It could be sold to a

neighbor who would farm it himself, Finally, it could be sold to a New York deep pocket

nvestor who would hire the current or some other farmer to farm the land, at least until

he could tind a higher value buyer. This list of alternative buyers pretty much exhausts the

relevant ct tor most assets. We argue below that each of these buyers may be unwilling

to pay the price equal to value in best use.

          Suppose that the asset, namely land, is converted to another use, such as the

baseball field, If the land is as valuable as a baseball field as it   is as   a farm, this solution

is very   attractive in that the farmer gets a price close to the value in best use. He would

do especially well if several people want to build a baseball held on his farm, and if they

have access to credit. Fungible assets, such as a farm that can be made into a popular

baseball field, tend to be liquid. But of course farms and other assets only rarely have

alternative uses as good as the current use. In this case, baseball promoters will not be the

buyers.
                                              6

        When the land is not funbie, the more likely high valuation buyer is one of the

neighboring farmers. These buyers have the enormous advantage of knong the quality

of the land and perhaps    even   the quality of the current farmer The adverse selection

problems that might plague outsiders interested in the farm are much less important for

the neiehbors. Moreover, the neighbors can work the land themselves, thereby avoiding

the   agen problems resulting from hiring employees. In fact, if the neighbors are actually
allowed to bid for the farm and if they have access to credit at attractive terms, they are

likely to buy the farm. Tne competition between neighbors ensures a price close to value

in best use, making the land very liquid.

        The caveats of participation and credit are very important, however. First, neighbors

might not be allowed to bid because of government limits on farm size (this obviously
                                                                           is


more relevant for companies).       In addition, unless the farmer got in trouble for some


idiosyncratic reason such as mismanagement, the neighbors are likely to
                                                                        have cash flow


problems of their own at the time the farmer      is   distressed. Because the neighbors' net

worth is low as well, their cost of capital is high, and so they can bid much less for the farm

than its fundamental value in their use. The credit constraint problems of the buyers are

the result of concern of the buyers' lenders that he is undertaking a bad project or has the
                                                      when the buyer's net worth, which
wrong incentives. This problem is particularly severe

determines the value of his collateral,is low. When buyers cannot participate, or when they

 face credit constraints, the price realized from the sale   of the land is below value in best
                                                   7

use, making this land ilhiquid.

           In this case, the land would probably   be sold to a deep pocket New York investor

who does not face as severe credit constraints as the farmer's neighbors. Sale to such an

investor has some of the same problems as simply swapping equity for some of the esting

debt. The New York investor must worry about the quality of the farm, which he knows

little about and so is afraid to overpay. In addition, the New York investor must hire either

the current farmer or someone else to run the farm. The agency cost is a further burden

on   hfs   purchase. Because of these adverse selection and moral hazard problems, the price

that a deep pocket outsider will pay for the farm will again fall below value in best use.

In this sale as well, the farm is illiquid.

           The moral of the story is that regardless of whom   tim   farm is sold to,   it is likely   to

bring a price below value in best use. When the farmer dectied on how much debt to take

on, he must have thought of these problems and restricted his borrowing.

           Table 1 summarizesthe taxonomy of buyers considered in this paper. The first type

of buyer changes the use      of the assets, the second and third do not. The second           type is

industry insiders, defined as those with information about the quality of the asset and with

the ability to mandge it. The third type      of buyers   is industry   outsiders who nonetheless

keep the asset in current use. Such buyers typically Cannot easily evaluate the quality of

an asset, and must hire     a manager to run it. To understand liquidity      of a given asset, we

must understand how much a buyer of each of these types will pay relative to value in best
                        Tabie   1




                FINANCIAL TROUBLE




FINANCIAL RESTRUCTURING               ASSET SALES




                  Alternative         Same Use,       Same Use,
                    Use             Industry Buyer Buyer Outside Indusüy
                                                       8
    use. If any one of the three types of buyers can afford to pay close to value in best use,
a
    the asset   is   liquid. If none of the three types can, the asset   is illiquid.   The next three

    sections will focus on these three types of buyers.



    3. Asset fungibility.

           Sale of an asset brings     a price close   to value in best usc when there are several

    participatIngbuyers to whom the asset is worth nearly its value in best use. In some cases,

    the best use for an asset is different from the current use. For example, land can have

    many ditterent things built on it; a building may be easily converted from one use to

    another; a car or truck can similarly be turned to another use; coal and oil can be used as

    an input    by   a ariety if buyers.   Assets which have severol uses with comparably high

    valuations are called funtble, Obviously, most physical capital is fairly specialized and is

    not very fungible.

           Fungible assets tend to be fairly liquid because they can be transferred to another

    use if buyers in this asset's current industry cannot pay prices close to value in best use2.

    This is particularly important when the whole industry in which the asset is currently used

    experiences an adverse shock, and so both the fundamental value and the liquidity of the

    asset is higher elsewhere. For example, many industrial buildings in downtown New York


         2Even with fungible assets, there may be adverse selection problems resulting from
    buyer uncertainty about the quality of these assets. Such problems make the buyers more
    like deep pocket outsiders. Nonetheless, holding adverse selection problems constant,
    iungibil;tv raises liquidity.
                                                 9

were converted to residential use when manufacturers left the city. These buildings were

liquid because they had an alternative use and so a seller did not need to dump them on

industrial buyers who had low fundamental valuations and faced severe credit constraints.

In contrast, non-fungibie assets, such as oil tankers or machine tools, tend to be less liquid

because they cannot be transferred to another indust' when the indust' they are

employed in suffers an advers shock.

       Fungibility encompasses several characteristics of assets that other studies have

described as conducive to debt finance.          Titman and Wessels (1988) argue that asset

uniqueness is bad and tangibility    is   good for debt finance. Their reason for focusing on

uniqueness and tangibility is not liquidity, however. They argue that firms with unique
assets are poor candidates for debt finance because customers cannot find substitutes for

these finns' products, and so insist that such firms avoid debt finance and the resulting

possibility   of bankruptcy before they rely on their products. Titman and Wessels also argue

that tangible assets are good candidates for debt finance because their value cannot easily

be dissipated by management.        The moral hazard problems with debt      finance of these

assets are less severe. For this reason, land is a good candidate for debt finance.

       We would argue that non-unique and tangible assets are better candidates for debt

finance primarily because they tend to be more liquid. Unique assets tend to be less liquid

because by definition they have fewer potential uses and therefore fewer buyers. But even

                                                                          are traded by deep
unique assets can be liquid, and therefore have debt capacity, 'vhen they
                                                    10

pocket investors willing to pay prices close to values. For example,some fashion and food

brand names, such as Gucci or Moet-Chandon, are very liquid because they have many

interested buyers even though all these buyers put them to the same use. These assets are

good collateral largely because they can be easily resold despite their unique use. Even if

art asset is not very fungible, it can be liquid and have debt capacity when high valuation

buyers participate and have money to bid.

          Similarly, the essential aspect    of tangibility of some assets such   as general purpose

buildings is that they have multiple uses and buyers, and so are fairly liquid.               Some

specialized tangible assets, such as oil rigs, might not be very liquid at all even though they

are quite durable and     it is difficult   for the user to substantially diminish their value, In

contrast, some intangible assets, such as food brand names, have been extremelyliquid in

the 1980s beaause of a large number of interested potential buyers. These assets' high

debt capac.t derises from their easy salcability their ntangibility notwithstanding.

         Williamson (198S) uses a concept of redeployability that is close to fungibility.      He

says that assets are good candidates for debt finance if they can be used elsewhere, Debt

is   a hair-trigger mechanism which forces the redeployment of assets as soon as interest         is

not paid or some covenant is violated.          Williamson stresses that non-unique and tangible

assets might be good candidates for debt finance because they are easily redeployable.

Similarly, Harris and Raviv (1990) argue that debt levels will he set high enough to force

managers to take value-enhancing liquidationdecisions. When the value of assets in their
                                                11

current use falls below the value of the debt, a costly reevaluation is triggered. If the firm's

assets are found to be more valuable in other use, the firm        is liquidated.   Ome implication

of their theory is that leverage will be high where liquidationvalue is high.

       These studies, like ours, show that assets with several alternative uses have a higher

debt capacity. But fungibility    is   only one aspect   of liquidity,   and probably not the most

important one. As we mentioned, most physical assets are not fungible, and so putting

them to alternative use   is impossible.     Buyers   of non-fungibie assets    must keep them in

current use. In the next two sections, we examine the liquidity of such assets. In many

cases, they have a high debt capacity as well.



4. Buyers in the same industry.

       For most non-fungible and even fungible assets, the highest valuation buyers are

those already using similar assets in the same way. In our earlier example, they are the

next door farmers. These buyers have two critical advantages over all others. First, they

can evaluate the assets most easily and so do not worry as much as others about overpaytng

for low quality assets. Second, they know how to manage these assets and so the agency

costs that they must incur are the lowest. For these reasons, buyers from the same industry

tend to value these assets the most. Moreover, when such buyers compete with each other,

they will in many circumstances pay close to the value in best use for the assets.

       Indeed, the vast majority of aslet sales are to such buyers. Buildings are usually sold
                                                       12

    and bought by real estate developers, machine tools by manufactureres, and companies by
a
    other companies in their industry. As long as industry buyers are allowed to participate,

    and can afford to bid the value of assets under their management, assets tend to be liquid.

    The main reason for illiquidity of non-fungible assets     is   participation and credit restrictions

    on industry buyers.




    Participation restrictions.

            Several factors reduce participationof industry buyers and so create illiquidity. First,

    some markets are toni in that some buyers might not know about the asset being for sale,

    or might oN      show up. Although      an asset would   be liquid if buyers are brought to bid, it

    is illiquid   occouse some    t   them are not available. Such ilL1uidity is important in housing

    markets. where many potential buyers are not currently in the market, or in markets for

                                                                                         sale.
    smaller    urab1e   goods. where it is too costly to bring some of the buyers to the

    Thinness is unlikely to be important in the market tor companies, where the stakes are too
                                                                         show up.
    large and the sale too widely publicized for important buyers not to

              In many cases, regulation is the reason that industry buyers do not participate,

                                                                              be prevented
    particularly in the sales of companies. For example, foreign buyers might

    from participating by protectionist laws. As the case of United Airlines illustrates, airlines
j   as a   whole and individual routes are cheaper because foreigners cannot bid for the United

    States airline assets.       The same       is   true about assets of microchip manufacturers.
                                                  13

Conversely,the United States takeover market has Probably become much more liquid in
the 1980s as   forei buyers in most industries have been both actively interested and free
to participate.

        Antitrust has also been an important constraint on buyers, particularly before 1980,

since it eliminated competitors from bidding. In the late 1960s, for example,it was virtually

impossible to sell assets to competitors because of aggressive antitrust enforcement. As        a

result, many conglomerates were formed. When competitors are highest valuation buyers,

as they most commonly       are even when they do not plan to raise prices, keeping them out

dramaticallyreduces the liquidity of assets.

        Finally, even when regulatory restrictions do not prevent an acquisition   of assets by
a firm in the same industry, there may be a problem of compatibility" of buyers and sellers.

Not every two firms in      an industry are a good match; Even when one can manage the

other's assets, there may be a problem with control change because of different corporate

cultures, difficulties   of keeping key people,   and problems   of allocating control   rights to

managers and so on. Especially with intangible assets, where human capital is important,

these participation restrictions further reduce asset liquidity.



Credit Constroirits.

       The assumption that industry buyers can afford to pay the fundamental value of the

asset under their ownership is often invalid because these buyers are constrained in the
                                                 14

capital market. That is, it is costly for these buyers to raise external debt or equity capital

for the exact same reason that such financing      is costly   for asset sellers. The cost of funds

to these buyers exceeds the appropriate risk-adjusteddiscount rate for the asset, and so the

asset is worth to them less than    its   fundamental value under their ownership.

       Buyers   of some assets, such as     very large companies. are likely to always be credit

constrained. No buyer can purchase GM or IBM with internal funds or even with                    a

moderate amount of borrowing. As a result, these assets are always illiquid. This reasoning

suggests that smaller assets are more liquid than larger assets, and that assets that can       be

broken up, such as conglomerates,are more liquid than assets that cannot be, such as pure

play firms of equal size.

       Eqlly impurtont.     ndostry insiders are likely      to be credit constrained precisely at

the time when an asset used in this industry      is   put up for sale, since the whole industry is

likely to cc adversely affected at the same time.              Precisely when the seller is credit

constrained and needs to raise funds, potential buyers tend to be credit constrained

themselves and therefore have lower reservation values. The reason for this, stressed by

Greenwald et al (1984), Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Gertler and Hubbard (1988), Froot

and Stein (1991) and others. is that when buyers net worth s low, lenders demand higher

returns on the loans they make to control adverse selection dnd moral hazard problems.

With industry or economy.wide shocks, sellers and buyers of assets are in a symmetric

situation: they both have a   lOW   net worth and so both have a very high cost of external
                                                 15

finance.     This problem makes asset sales to industry buyers costly, just as it makes

conventional financial restructuring costly.

       Consider a hypothetical case of an airline (Eastern) that puts its gates, routes, and

planes up for sale when it gets into trouble. One possibility is that the adverse shock

Eastern has experienced is idiosyncratic; for example it has union problems. In this case,

Eastern puts its assets up for sale when other airlines are doing well, and so are not credit

constrained, These firms can then bid their true reseriation values for the assets of Eastern

and as long as these assets are fungible enough, the auction will bring very attractive prices.

In fact, if other airlines can manage Eastern's assets better than Eastern, they will bid more

for them then their value under Eastern's management, and the costs of financial distress

will be negative. In this case, asset sales work very well from       the viewpoint of Eastern's

creditors since not only do these creditors avoid the probletn of illiquidity but they also

benefit from the reallocation of assets to higher valued use3.

           If, in contrast, that Eastern puts its assets on the block at the time that the rest of

the airline industry is in a downturn as well, perhaps as a result of an oil price shock, a

recession or an overordering of planes. In this case, at the time Eastern's assets are on the

block, other airlines have a very high shadow price of funds, and so cannot afford to pay



     3Negative costs of financial distress raise the obvious question of why the
                                                                                    the firm's
underperforming assets are not sold even without financial distress. Clearly,
          as
managers opposed       to its creditors and shareholders may be reluctant to give up  personal
control of key assets unless forced to. Nonetheless, managers acting in their own interest
will be more inclined to take on debt if a reasonable number of asset sales can extricate
them from a control battle with creditors.
                                                       16

     their perfect capital market reservationvalues. As the willingness to pay falls, the sale price

     also falls below the second highest valuation absent credit constraints. In this ease, airline

     assets   are iiiiquid.

              The point       this example illustrates is more general.       A firm is likely to run into

    financial trouble when its cash flow is low, If the reason for low cash flow            is an   industn'-

    wide or an economy-wide shock, then the cash flows of other firms in the industty are also

    law and thetr cost of capital is hign. Other firms in the industty do not then value the

    distressed firm's assets as much as they would absent credit constraints. But these firms

    probably have the highest fundamentalvolonnons of the distressed firm's assets, since they

    eon manoge them better than industcy jotsiders and they ore not as worried about adverse

    selection.      set sales then bring low prices relai',e t j ton      I   mentais since the potentially

    highest bidders have a high cost of funds.

              Severai factors determine the liquidity of assets wnen industiy buyers are credit

    constratned. Most important, assets with cyclical cash flows, such as oil tankers and steel

    mills,    are   likely to be less liquid in recessions than assets with non-cyclical cash flows.

    Cyclical assets are extremely illiquid during recessions, when the cost of capital of industry

    buyers is high but are liquid during booms when it         is low.


              Similarly, the more distant are the cash flows on an asset, the less liquid it is. When
S
    cash flows      are discounted using interest rates reflecting credit constraints, the value of

    distant cash flows        is   reduced. Growth assets are then discounted the most relative to
                                                17

fundamentals,whereas assets with high current and relatively low future cash flows are

discounted the least.

         Funbi1ityof assets also raises liquidity when industry buyers face credit constraints

beyond     its contribution with unconstrained buyers.       When its industry experiences   an

adverse shock, a fungible asset can be transferred to another industry. Without credit

constraints, it would only be transferred if it can generate a higher fundamental value there.

But with credit constraints, an asset can be sold to a firm in another industrybecause that

industry is not hit by an adverse shock and so is not facing credit constraints. By increasing

the number of unconstrained buyers,       fungibility raises liquidity.

          We conclude that the ability of industry buyers to pay the fundamental value of this

industry's assets in best use cannot be taken for granted. Industry buyers are often kept

from bidding by regulation. In othe cases, industry buyers face severe credit constraints

and so can oniy afford prices that reflect this high cost of capital. The resulting ihliquidity

                                                                 and non-fungible assets. Selling
is   particularly severe in recessions, and for cyclical, growth

such assets to industry insiders would bring prices much below values in best use.



5. Deep pocket buyers.

          The third type of potential buyer for an asset is deep pocket investors. These

investors by definition have access to fairly inexpensive capital because their other assets

give them a high     net worth that can be used as collateral.
                                                18

       Purchases by deep pocket investors are in some ways similar to financial

restructuring such as the issue of new equity. Like buyers of equity these investors are

likely to be less capable   of evaluating the   quality   of the asset than   mdustry insiders.   In

addition, deep pocket investors typically need to hire a manager to manage the assets,

which entails agency costs.     Unlike equity buyers, however, deep pocket investors gain

control of the assets from the current managers, and so can design control mechanisms to

reduce these agency costs. In particular, they cart fire the current manager. In this respect,

purchases by deep pocket investors may be superior to equity issues. Even so, the prices

that such investors pay for the assets reflect the adverse selection and moral hazard

problems that theywill face with these assets.       In this   case, assets sold to such investors

fetch prices below values in best use.

       Access to cheaper capital gives deep pocket buyers an edge over industry insiders.

On the other hand, their inferior knowledge and ability to manage assets puts them at a

disadvantage relative to industry insiders. Presumably, they acquire the assets when these

problems do not reduce valuation as much as the credit constraints of industry insiders do.

This is the case when the deep pocket investors can learn to both evaluate and to manage

the assets. Such deep pocket investors can be in related tndustries, so they can bring some

of their knowledge to bear on     the acquisition. In addition, deep pockets investors might

be attracted to assets which are   in relatively stable industries and so are relatively easy to

manage.     Chandler (1990) argues that such assets are particularly attractive for
                                               19

conglomerate acquirers, who can be thought of as deep pocket investors.

           There are many examples of deep pocket      investors who have to some extent

overcome their informationaland managerial handicaps. Cellular telephone properties are

traded by phone companies, who are deep pocket investors who understand these assets.

As a result, cellular telephone properties are extremely liquid even though they are

intangible growth assets. The reason     is   that they can always be sold to deep pocket

telephone companies. Similarly, food brand names, which are not fungible, have recently

become very liquid because they are traded by deep pocket tobacco companies that have

tried to solve some of the agency and adverse selection problems that plague other deep

pocket investors. Finally, in our airline examples, leasing companies represent such deep

pocket investors who use detailed contracts designed to avoid the need to dump planes on

the market when airlines' cash flow is low. When deep pocket investors manage to solve

the information problems inherent in purchases of assets outslde their industry,they become

an effective substitute for industry buyers and so greatly enhance the liquidity   of assets.

          Such lucky outcomes are not pervasive, however.     In many cases, deep pocket

investors are the uninformed buyers who might have trouble valuing and managing the

assets.    In these cases, these buyers require deep discounts to buy   the assets.     In our

example,when Eastern's assets are put up for sale, the high bidders might be deep pocket

investors who have a lower fundamental valuation of assets as well as     a greater fear of

overpaying but also a lower shadow price of funds. In fact, successfulbuyers of the assets
                                                20

need not even be the better managers;just the ones with the deepest pockets. Eventually,

as liquidity improves, these buyers probably sell assets for a higher price to industry insiders

who cars afford to bid their true valuations. These buyers are thus providing temporary

liquidity in   a highly   illiquid market4. As long   as the market for airline assets is   illiquid,

sale prices are even lower than the already mw fundamental valuations.

        The oil shipping business provides a similar example. As cash flows from that

business temporarily plummeted in the mid 1980s, and tankers sold for scrap value, astute

investors outside the industry stepped in and bought tankers, mothballing them instead            of

selling them for scrap. Five years later, these investors have made a 700 percent return on

investment. The oil shipping business is now less risky and has a lOgher debt capacity.

       These examples illustrate that assets might be extremely llhiquid even when some

deep pocket investors are in the market. When assets are not-fungible, industry buyers are

credit constrained, and outside deep pocket investors are not informed, assets are extremely

illiquid. They cannot be sold for anywhere near their fundamental value in best use,



6. Asset liquidity and debt capacity.

       Asset illiquidity becomes particularly important for sellers in or near financial

distress, who face the choice between selling assets and going through a costly financial


    4Grossman and Miller (1988) provide a theory of liquidity in which liquidity suppliers
temporarily hold the asse.t while higher valuation buyers are brought in to buy it. Their
theory applies to financial instruments which are vastly more liquid than the physical assets
that we are concerned about.
                                                   21

restructuring. Our analysis suggests that asset sales are not a panacea for a firm io financial

distress, unless these assets arc extremely liquid. Most assets however arc oat liquid. A

distressed firm must then choose between costly financial restructuring, with all the

problems identified in the literature, and costly asset sales. Either way, dissross         is costly.


       V/hen financial distress is costly, firms will choose their capitol structure to reduce

the expected value of these costs. Having more debt in the capital structure raises the

likelihood of default, and hence the need to either restructure or to sell assets, Because

their sale   is costly, illiquid   assets are poor candidates for debt finance, and vice versa for

liquid assets, This logic suggests that asset liquidity creates debt capacity because liquid

assets arc in effect better collateral.

       Asset illiquidity might help explain relatively low debt equity ratios io the United

States. Debt is significantly tax favored relative to equity in the United States even after

taking account     of personal      taxes.   If firms can sell assets costlessly whoa they become

distressed,the only reason for them to avoid nearly complete debt finance          is   the managerial

preference for independence. If, however, firms have to sell illiquid assets when they are

in financial difficulty, or choose to sell illiquid assets to avoid expensive claimholder

conflicts, debt avoidance becomes in the interest of shareholders as well.

       It is hard to know how big the illiquidity costs of distress are. Real estate appraisers

typically assume that the rapid sale          of real estate   leads to price discounts   of 15 to 25

                                                                                   cites
percent relative to the orderly sale that might take several months. Kaplan (1989)
                                                   22
Merrill Lyitch estimates that    the distressed sale of the Campeau retail empire would bring

about 68 percent of what an orderly sale would bring. The New York Times reported that

the rapid sale discount on the Trump Shuttle may be as much as 50 percent. Holland

(1989) Cites discounts of 50 to 70 percent off normal prices in a case study of liquidation

of assets of a machine tool manufacturer, Discounts of such magnitudes               can drastically

reduce or even eliminate the tax advantage of debt. Asset illiquidity may be the reason

that firms use much less debt than       is   optimal in standard models.

       Although we have taken the shareholders' perspective on optimal debt levels,

corporate managers also have selfish reasons to avoid debt when the firm's assets are

illiquid. A firm's manager is typically intercsted in tosintaining his control      of the firm.   If

a firm with liquid assets runs into cash flow problems,        its   managers can sell off some of

these assets, pay down debt, and retain control. If, on the other hand, the firm's assets are

illiquid, a manager cannot attractively soil some of them to generate cash. If he does not

sell the assets and tries a conventional restructuring, he might lose control.           If he sells


illiquid assets at too low a price and pays down debt, he only worsens his future interest

coverage problem and is likely to lose control anyway. It       is   clear that a manager committed

to keeping control of the firm will take on more debt when the firm's assets are more

liquid, just like   a manager maximizing shareholder wealth,
        In addition to suggesting that debt capacity is mited, our approach has a variety of

implications   for cross-sectional   financing patterns. Liquid assets should be more extensively
                                                 23

financed by debt. We have already mentioned that         funble assets are liquid, because they
have many different buyers and because some of these buyers are likely to hove relatively

mild credit constraints. As a result, fungible assets are better candidates for debt finance

than non-fungible assets.

          in contrast,   groah and   cyclical assets are iiiquid because industry buyers are likely

to have a high cost       of funds when these assets are     distressed.   These assets are poor

candidates fur debt finance, unless they are commonly traded by deep pocket investors.

Oroah and cyclical assets are usually considered to be poor candidates for debt             finance

because they have a high probability of a low cash flow and default on debt. Bat even an

asset   th a reasonable chance of default may have a high debt capacity if         it coo be easily


sold for fundamental value when default occurs. If, on the other hand, cyclical and growth

assets are extremelyilliquid in a recession,costs of financial distress are large, and financing

these assets with debt is costly. Airline gates and routes, tankers and industrial uquipment

are poor candidates for debt finance precisely because industry buyers arc themselves in

trouble in a recession, and so these assets are highly illiquid. Illiquidity      is   an important

reason for low debt capacity of cyclical and growth assets.

         Cyclical industries might have an industry debt capacity even when debt capacity        of

individual firms is not well-defined. If other firms in the industry have little debt, a given

firm can afford to take on a lot      of debt since it knows that in distress it can sell its assets

without concessions to other firms who have significant unused debt capacity.               On thc
                                               24
other hand, if other firms have substantial debt, a given firm's assets become much less

liquid and so it   is much   more costly for it to take on more debt itself. There might thus

be an optimal debt level for the industry in which    the benefits of debt are exactly offset by

the extra illiquidity of the industry assets that additional debt entails This notion of

industry debt capacity is particularly appraprtate for ndustries with industry-specific assets,

such as airlines. Managers of American Airlines and TWA -- the two remaining large

airlines with a lot of cash and unused debt capacity in 1990 -- have repeatedly said that they

are waiting for the next crunch in the industry to    pick up planes and routes from all the

other firms that have taken on a lot of debt. With firm-specific or fungible assets, the

notion of industry debt capacay s not well-defined.

       Tne theory also predicts that    smaller firms arc -etera parihus better candidates for

debt finance than very large firms. The caveat is important because small firms might be

uninteresting to very many buyers, since they are too specialized, in which case the thin

market reason for illiquidiry might be more important than credit constraints of buyers.

The way to test this prediction is to look at a market where firms of different sizes operate

together, and to see if smaller ones have more debt. The theory also predicts that

conglomerates are better candidates for debt finance than pure plays of the same size

because they can be broken up into smaller pieces that are more liquid. Similarly, any

business consisting of a loose affiliatiua of different parts should have a high degree of debt

capacity.   For example, a company whose principal assets are 10 cable franchises in
                                                  25

different cities has siiiflcant debt capacity.

        A further important implicationof       the theory is that some assets have debt capacity

because they are traded by deep pocket investors though they would not have it if traded

by industry buyers. For these assets, default is not very costly because they can he resold

for a price close to value in best use. For example, cellular or cable TV properties have

a high debt capacity because they are traded        by deep pockets investors such as telephone

or media companies,who have         access to cheap capital. Similarly, art favored by many rich

investors,such as American Fop art or impressionistart, can be debt-financedeven though

it yields   as   cash flow.   The   a   main features of this art is first that mauy people like   it,

and second that these people have a high and persistent cash flow. The nuraher of

potential interested buyers is critical: American pop art has a liquid market in the United

States but no market in Europe, whereas German Expressionist paintings are liquid in

Germany. These examples illustrate a key point:             it is   not just the low pruhubility of

financial distress but the low liquidity cost that creates debt capacity5.

       The empirical esidence of Titman and             Wessels (1988) bears on some of the

predictionsof our approach, although the authors are motivated by ether theories. Titman

and Wessels find that firms with unique assets, where uniqueness is measured by R&D


    5Mset illiquidity also has implications for the structure of corporate debt and or
corporate assets, For example, firms with illiquid assets are likely to cheese longer term
debt (see Diamond 1991). Firms would also alter the composition of their assets toward
more liquid ones even at the cost of operational efficiency, to reduce the illiquidity costs
discussed in this paper. For example, restaurants might buy furniture and equipment with
greater resale value to get more money out in case they go bankrupt.
                                             26

intensity and selling expenses, have lower debt to equity ratios. They also find that firms

with more intangible assets have lower debt equity ratios.       Both of these results are

consistent with asset non-fungibility deterring debt finance. Finally, Titman and Wessels

find that smaller firms have higher debt equity ratios, also consistentwith our theory. Most

theories predict the opposite since smaller firms have higher transaction costs of external

finance. Overall, the evidence lends some support for the importance of asset liquidity, but

the tests clearly were not designed with this theory in mind.



7. Changes in liquidity over time,

       Our discussion thus far has focused on cross-sectional variation in liquidity and in

debt capacity. We next focus art changes in liquidity over time. Debt capacity is created

not by today's liquidity, but by liquidity over some planning horizon during which it might

become necessary to sell the asset. An asset has debt capacity during the period the

market is expected to be liquid, so should the need arise to sell the asset, the discount to

fundamental value will be small.

       For most non-fungible assets, the twa key determinants of liquidity are participation

of industry and other informed buyers and the cash flow of these buyers. Industry buyer

participation tends to be determined by laws and other major institutional changes, and so

is highly   persistent. Corporate cash flows tend to be fairly persistent as well, largely

because the conditions in an industry and in the economy typically change fairly slowly.
                                                    27

Corporate cash reserves are probably even more persistent than cash flows, since stocks

change less rapidly than flows. Because industry buyer participation and cash flow are

persistent, it seems reasonable to assume that liquidity is fairly persistent as well. if a

market    is liquid   today people probably expect liquidity to persist for a couple of years,

during which    it might become necessary      to sell the asset. Today's liquidity   is   then generally

associated with today's debt capacity.

         Although liquidity   is   persistent, it does change over time. Changes in liquidity lead

to changes in debt capacity. High markets are generally believed to be liquid and low

markets to be ihiquid. That is, fundamental values rise at the same time as prices come

closer to fundamental values. Housing markets and markets for companies illustrate this

principle. Below, we offer some reasons for the association between values and liquidity.




Why high markets are liquid markets.

         The most important reason that liquidity changes over time, and that high liquidity

goes together with high asset values,          is   that industry cash flows drive both value and

liquidity and cash flows change over time.               In particular, industry cash flows change


dramaticallyover the business cycle. When industry            ggs cash flows are high, their cost
of capital is   low since they can use internal funds to pay      for the assets and can borrow on

better terms.         a result, they can bid closer to their fundamental valuationsfor the assets.

Also, fundamental values of assets rise with their         o    cash flows. In part, this      is   because
                                               28

current cash Cows are part of the value, but also because there is a lot of persistence in

cash flow, so buyers extrapolate current cash flow lesels into the future.

         We see, then, that the fundamental value of an asset rises with its own cash flow,

and its liquidity rises with its potential buyers' cash flow. When cash flows of the asset and

of its potential buyers    rise at the same time, as they would in         an   industry or general

business upturn, both fundamental values and liquidity risc. In such markets, prices are

high both because fundamental values are high, and because prices assets fetch are closer

to these values. High markets are thus liquid markets. A lot of transactions often take

place in such markets, since sellers are willing to part with their assets at prices close to

already high fundamental values esen without financial distress. In low markets, in contrast,

sellers get prices below already low fundamentals because assets are illiquid. As a result,

the only transactions that take place are those where sellers have to sell.

         In high markets, a   firm can borrow more in anticipation      of being able   to sell assets

to other firms whose debt levels have not risen despite increases in their cash flow and

value. As long   as potential buyers hase not leveraged up, a firm cancounton unused debt

capacity   of other   firms to increase its own debt. For example, buyers of real estate in a

boom rely on debt finance because they expect to be able to resell the buildings to others

whose high cash flow can support greater debt, Lenders see this liquid resale market as

well,   and so lend on better   terms.   When so much new debt is taken on that no unused

debt capacity remains, the only factor that sustains liquidity   iS   self'fuifilling beliefs of buyers
                                                   29

that they can sell. Such self-fulfilling equilibria can   b very fragile, however, and cannot be
sustained when liquidity falls for an exogenous reason, such as a scare in the junk bond

market.

       Other than cash flow, the critical determinant of both fundamental values and liquidity

is   the number of buyers. Changes in government regulation. or in buyer tsstes, can bring

new buyers into the market, particularly from the same industry. If these are high valuation

buyers, this has The effect   of raising fundamental values. The entry of new buyers         also

raises the liquidity of the assets as the opportunities for selling assets to these buyers are

created. As liquidity rises, debt capacity rises as well because of the possibility of rosciling

to one of these new buyers.



Self-fulfilling   liquidi and debt   capacity.

         In   our discussion so far, we have focused on exogenous changes, such as those       iii


cash flow     or in the number of buyers,        as the reasons for increased liquidity and debt


capacity. But to some extent, these processes are self-reinforcing. When liquidity increases,

by definition it becomes easier to sell assets at prices close to their values under best

management. Someone who wants to buy a different asset from the one he owns can sell

the asset for a good price and buy another one. Such buyers would avoid an illiquid

market because they would not be sure that they can sell their own assets on good terms.

As such buyers enter the market, liquidity increases, in this way, liquidity is self-reinforcing,
                                                  30

leading to muiriple equilibria without exogenous shocks.

      This analysis might be germane to housing markets, where people might try to buy

houses only if they know that they can sell theirs on attractive terms. So when a housing

market   is liquid,   many people are willing to be buyers and sellers, reinforcing this liquidity.

In contrast, when a market is illiquid, people do not become buyers because they can't sell

their old house at a good price, and so the market stays ilhiquid. In liquid markets, there

are many transactions, high prices, and high debt capacity because the resale market is

good. The reverse is true in illiquid markets. Similarly, corporations might trade divisions

to find best matches in liquid markets because they know they can sell poor matches, and

abstain from trading in illiquid markets thus keeping them illiquid.

         There is an additional important feedback effect from debt          capacity to liquidity.

People borrow in liquid markets because resale is attractive. But resale
                                                                                    is   made   mor
attractive by the opportunity for those future buyers to borrow at attractive terms. So good

borrowing opportunities increase liquidity, which in turn improves borrowing opportunities.

In our real estate example,buyers might choose debt finance precisely because they know

that if they need to resell, other buyers would have access to debt finance. In this way, not

                                                        creates liquidity.
only liquidity creates debt capacity, but debt capacity

         This feedback might be strong enough to generate multiple equilibria as well. In one

                                                         debt because buyers recognize that
equilibrium, assets are illiquid and are not bought with
                                                                                          In another
other buyers in resale could not themselves borrow at attractive terms.
                                                    31

equilibrium,assets are liquid and buyers use debt to finance them because they expect they

can resell them to other buyers who will also have access to debt at attractive terms,

People can borrow solely because others they trade with can borrow. in principle, these

o    equilibria can coest holding constant both the number of potential buyers and the

cash flow. Liquidio and debt capacity can be self-fulfilling.

         All these arguments point in the same direction. Some of the time, asset markets

are high and liquid, with many transactions and substantial use of debt. This liquidity may

be self-sustaining, but more likely it   is   helped by exogenous increases in cash flow or in the

number of buyers. At other times, markets are low and illiquid, with few transactions, and

much less reliance on debt to finance asset acquisitions.



8. Takeover waves and leverage increases: the experience of the 1980s.

         Perhaps the most interesting application of our theoty is to the analysis of takeover

waves.     set acquisitions    -- such as takeovers, selloffs and divestitures -- are
                                                                                      highly

pro'ciical (Golbe and White      1988), This fact is surprising unless one focuses on asset

liquidity. If assets sell for their fundamentalvalues, and if capital markets are perfect, there

should be no cyclical pattern to acquisitions.           If, in addition, some firms are sold off

involuntarilywhen they are in financial distress, acquisitions should be countereyclical. In

fact we observe the opposite.

         Asset liquidity helps account for the evidence. In recessions, many asset buyers are
                                                  32
credit constrained and cannot afford to pay the fundamental values for the assets. The

sellers should then try to postpone the sale of assets until markets become more liquid. It

is not so much that fundamental values are low when cash flows are low, but that prices

are even    lower than fundamental values when cash flows are low. By comparison, when

cash flows are high, sellers can get prices close to fundamentalvalues since buyers are not

credit constrained. Sellers should therefore be willing to part with their assets more readily.

As a result, the volume of transactions is highly procyclical.

         High corporate cash flows have characterized every takeover wave in this century.

In the 1980s, however, an additional reason for increased liquidtty was the increase in the

number of buyers. Before l986, the General Utilities doctrine combined with accelerated

depreciation provided a tax reason tor churning assets.          In   addition, there has been an

influx   of foreign acquirers,   particularly in food, chemical, electronicsand financial services

industries. Even more importantly, much of the ncrease in the takeover activity in the

1980s was in horizontal mergers owing to relaxation of antitrust enforcement (Bhagat,

Shleifer, and Vishny 1990). Bhagat et al demonstrate that, once selloffs are accounted for,

over 70 percent of the assets of targets of hostile takeovers ended up in the hands of firms

in the same industry as these assets.

         The increase in the number and the cash flow of industry       buyers raised liquidity and

debt capacity, since firms could more easily take on debt expecting that they can sell assets

and divisions at close to fundamental values if they cannot meet interest payments. In fact,
                                               33

many loans during this period were made with a clear understanding that cash flow was

insufficient to pay interest from the beginning and assets must he sold to pay         do debt.
Asset sales were not an unlikely contingency, but a certaintyfor these loans, Asset liquidity

was therefore essential    for these loans to be made,   In this way, the liquid market for firms

and disisions made possible     large increases in bank debt and junk bond financing to the

1980s (Bernanke and Campbell 1988, Warshawsky 1999).

       Some      of the   increases in debt were part    of the takeover   financing, but many

compahics not involved in takeovers also increased debt.             In fact   the   1980s saw     an

                                                                       in net retirements
unprecedented increase in share repurchases by corporations, resulting

of equity   by   the corporate sector as a whole    (Bagwell and Shoven 1988). Although one

reason for these leverage increases may be takeover defense, another reason           is   the rtce in

the liquidity of assets, which greatly increased debt capacity. Quite aside from hostile

takeovers, the liquid market for divisions enabled firms to take in more dcht. ltttercctitigly,

Seth (1990) reports that debt increases have been particularly pronounced in cyciicai

industries, in which liquidity of assets rises sharply in economic expansions.
                                                                               would not
       Many of the leveraged acquisitions of the l980s, particularly the LBOs,

have been possible were it not for the liquid market for divisions. This- t•tcw active market

for large firms and their didisions --      spawned      in part by the relaxation of antitrust

enforcement and in part by financial innovation -- created the possibilities for debt finance

conditional on rapid resale of assets, a practice essential for LBOs. Bhagat et al (1990)
                                               34

document that on average 30 percent of assetswere sold following a hostile takeover in the

1980s; this average is 40 percent for LBOs. Bustup takeovers is the extreme example of

borrowing in anticipation of selling assets. Debt finance in anticipation of a resale of parts

in a liquid market made the takeover wave of the 1980s so large and so concentrated

among the large companies.

       When companies were not optimally managed, their assets could be sold at prices

above their values as part of these companies. In this case, the costs of financial distress

were negative, since assets could be liquidated for more than their status quo values. The

increased liquidity of the market for assets raised division prices in divestitures enough that

busting up mismanagedconglomerates became profitable when it was not        profitble before.
In this way, increased liquidity might have made efficiency improvements possible.

       The view that the liquidity in the market for corporate assets increased debt capacity

contrasts with the conventional view. That view credits junk bonds and other financial

innovations with increased takeovers since junk bonds permitted the raiders to attack large

companies. Our view     is   that the liquidity of the market for companies made junk bonds

possible and not the other way around. First, takeover waves take place in many economic

booms, and many takeovers were financed with debt before junk bonds were invented.

Second, junk bonds did not really become important until 1985, several years after the

takeover wave of the 1980s became big (Kaplan and Stein 1990). This fact suggests that

taking on   junk debt became attractive     only after the market for assets became liquid
                                                       35

enough.      Liquidity seems to have created debt capacity and not the other way around in

the 1980s takeovers, although of course there were important feedback effects as well.



9. Conclusion.

        The starting point of this paper          is   that asset liquidity is an extrerneiy important

determinant of the costs of financial distress. Among several reasons for asset illiquidity

we have identified are non-fungibiliny as well as regulation and credit coostraintsthat reduce

participation and ability to pay of the industry buyers. Because assets of firms io fioanciai

difficulty   are particularly illiquid --   as   their buyers are likely to be io fioaneiai difficulty

themselves -- selling off these assets might be very costly. The high dbocessions seilers must

make if they sell off assets in illiquid markets reduce cx ante debt capacity since they raise

the costs of     financial distress.   We have argued that this approach cao be used to

understand both cross-sectionalvariation in leverage, and the changes in leverage over time.

        We have not addressed the sudden end of the takeover wave of site idStis, and in

particular of junk bond issues and LBOs. Many of the leveraged buyouts and takeovers of

the   late 1980s were carried out on        the expectation that the      liquidity   of the market for

divisions would persist.    The persistent liquidity assured attractive asset sales and therefore

made debt financing possible. In 1989, asset liquidity suddenly declined. Some of the

causes were exogenous, such as the forecasted recession, the collapse of Drexel and the

junk bond market, and the troubles of some visible LBOs such as Campeau and Southland.
                                                36

In addition, investors, scared by the few bad episodes, no longer expected markets for

divisions to   be liquid,   which of course meant that they no longer were.

       The troubles of the junk bond market meant that new LBOs could not be easily

financed and old ones refinanced. But even seasoned LBOs that did not rely on further

junk bond financing ran into trouble because their assets became ifliquid. Many of these

LBOs counted on asset sales to pay down debt. Asset illiquidity reduced proceeds from

asset sales below previously expected levels, making debt repayment mote difficult. In

addition, asset illiquidity further weakened the junk bond market, since investors in junk

bonds relied on asset sales for principal repayments. The troubles of the junk bond market

and declines in asset liquidLty reinforced each other, stnce asset liquidity crucially depends

on financing, and financing relics art liquidity.      Until the liquidity of corporate assets

recovers, the troubles of many EBOs are likely to continue.
                                          37

                                     Biblioaphy.

Bagwell, Laurie S. and John B. Shoven. Cash Distributions to Sharehoidcrs'Journal   of
En.rIcPerspctives3 (Summer 1989), 129-140.
Bernanke, Ben and John Y. Campbell. "Is there a Corporate Debt Crisis? Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity (1988:1), 83-125.

Bernanke, Ben,John Y, Campbell and T. Whited. "US. Corporate Leverage: Developments
in 1987 and 1988." BrookingPaperson Economic Activity (1990:1), 83-139.

Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gértler. "Agency Costs, Collateral, and Business Fluctuationrf'
Aricanconomic Review 79 (March, 1989), 14-31.
Bhagat, Sanjai, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. "Hostile Takeovers in the 19805:
the Return to Corporate Specialization." rookings PaptJ oFnthJcActivi.ty
Micrneconomics (1990), 1-84.

Diamond, Douglas W.."Debt Maturity Structure and Liquidity Risk.   Qr1erl? Journal of
Economics CV (1991), forthcoming.

Froot, Ken and Jeremy C. Stein. 'Exchange Rates and Foreign Direct Investment: an
Imperfect Capital Markets Approach." Quaerlv Journal of.c1nmkt CV (1991).
forthcoming.

Gertler, Mark and R. Glenn Hubbard. 'Financial Factors in Business Fluctuations." in
Financial Market Volatilim, Federal Resee Bank of Kansas City (1988).

Gertner, Robert and David S. Scharfstein. "A Theory of Workouts and the Effects of
Reorganization Law." University of Chicago Manuscript (1990).

Golbe, Devra L and Lawrence 3. White. "A Time Series Analysis of Mergers and
Acquisitions in the U.S. Economy. In Alan J. Auerbach, editor, cpateTake1)y9rs:
Causes and Consequences. Chicago: Universityof Chicago Press (1988).

Greenwald,Bruce, Joseph E. Stiglitz and Andrew Weiss. "Information Imperfections in the
Capital Market and Economic Fluctuations." American Economic Review 74 (May 1984),
194-199.
                                           38
Grossman, Sanford J. and Merton H. Miller. "Uquidity and Market Structure' Journal of
Finance 43 (July 1988), 617-633.

Harris, Milton and Artur Raviv. 'Capital Structure and the Informational Role of Debt:'
Journal of Finance 45 (June 1990), 321-349.

Holland, Max. When the Machine Stopped. Harvard Business School Press (1990).

Kaplan, Steven N. "Campeau's Acquisition of Federated: Value Destroyed or Value
Added?" Journal of Financial Economics 25 (December 1989), 191-212.

Kaplan, Steven N. and Jeremy C. Stein. "How Risky is Debt in Highly Leveraged
Transactions: Evidence from Public Recapitalizations." Journal of Financial Economics
(1990), forthcoming.

Myers, Stewart. 'The Capoal Structure Puzzle." Journal   of Finance 39 (July 1984), 575-92.

Seth, Rama. "Leverage and Cyclicality." Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New
York (September 1990),

Titman, Sheridan and Roberto Wessels. The Determinants of Capital Structure Choice."
Journal of Finance 43 (March 1988), 1-20.

Warshawsky, Mark 'Is there a Corporate Debt Crisis? Another Look" Finance and
Economics Discussion Series Paper No. 110, Federal Reserve Board (February, 1990).

Williamson, Oliver E. "Corporate Finance and Corporate Governance." Journal of Finance
43 (July 1988), 567-592.
