NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

MULTIPLE EQUILIBRIA AND PERSISTENCE IN
AGGREGATE FLUCTUATIONS

Steven N. Durlauf

Working Paper No. 3629

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1991

This paper has been prepared for the "Path Dependence in
Economics" session of the American Economic Association 1990
Winter meetings. The Center for Economic Policy Research has
generously supported this work. I thank Charles Bean, Suzanne
Cooper, Avner Greif, Douglas Steigerwald and Jeroen Swinkels for
detailed comments on an earlier draft, Paul David for many
helpful discussions, and my discussant Robert Solow for several
valuable insights. All errors are mine. This paper is part of
NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3629
February 1991

MULTIPLE EQUILIBRIA AND PERSISTENCE IN
AGGREGATE FLUCTUATIONS

ABSTRACT
This paper explores the impact of incomplete markets and
strong complementarities on the time series properties of

aggregate activity. We consider an economy which consists of a
large number of industries whose production functions both are
nonconvex and exhibit localized technological complementarities.
The productivity of each industry at t is determined by the

production decisions of technologically similar industries at t -

1.

No markets exist to coordinate production decisions. This

feature implies that aggregate output dynamics for the model are
quite different from those predicted by the associated

Arrow-Debreu economy. First, multiple stochastic equilibria
exist in aggregate activity. These equilibria are distinguished
by differences in the mean and the variance of output. Second,
output movements are persistent as aggregate productivity shocks
indefinitely affect real activity by shifting the economy across

equilibria. As a result, the model can exhibit periods of boom
and depression.
Steven N. Durlauf
Department of Economics
Encina Hall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072

Introduction
ReCCILt developments in theoretical macroeconomics have emphasized the

potential for multiple, Pareto-rankable equilibria to exist for economies where various
Arrow-Debreu assumptions are violated. Authors such as Diamond [1982] have
emphasized how incomplete markets can allow economies to become trapped in Paretoinferior equilibria; Helter [1986] has obtained similar results due to imperfect competition.

These different approaches share the idea that strong complementarities in behavior can
lead to multiplicity. Intuitively, when technological or demand spillovers make agents

sufficiently interdependent, high and low levels of activity can represent internally
consistent equilibria in the absence of complete, competitive markets. Most of these
models describe multiple steady states in economies rather than multiple nondegenerate

time series paths and consequently cannot address issues of aggregate fluctuations.
Further, this literature has not shown how economies can shift across equilibria, inducing
periods of boom and depression.

An independent literature has argued that aggregate fluctuations are strongly
persistent. Researchers have concluded from a variety of perspectives that aggregate
output in advanced industrialized economies contains a unit root. Despite controversy
over the exact magnitude of the permanent component, the effects of current events on
real activity apparently persist over long horizons.

The purpose of the current paper is to link the new multiplicity results in
macroeconomic theory with the evidence on output persistence. We do this by modelling

coordination problems in an explicitly stochastic framework. As developed in Durlauf
[1990,1991), the microeconomic specification of the economy is expressed as a set of

conditional probability measures describing how individual agents behave given the
economy's history. An aggregate equilibrium exists when one can find a joint probability
measure over all agents which is consistent with these conditional measures; multiplicity
occurs when several such measures exist. This approach permits one to directly describe

1

the time series properties of aggregate fluctuations along different equilibrium paths.
Specifically, we examine the capital accumulation problems of a set of infinitelylived industries. We deviate from standard analyses in two respects. First, each industry

faces a nonconvex production technology. Second, industries experience technological
complementarities as past high production decisions by each industry increase the current

productivity of several industries through dynamic learning-by-doing or other effects.

Industries do not coordinate production decisions because of incomplete markets. By
describing how output levels and productivity evolve as industries interact over time, the

model characterizes the impact of complementarities and incomplete markets on the

structure of aggregate fluctuations.
Our basic results are twofold. First, we show that with strong complementarities

and incomplete markets, multiple stochastic equilibria exist in aggregate activity. These
equilibria are distinguished by differences in both the mean and the variance of output.
Second, we illustrate how aggregate output movements will be persistent as aggregate

productivity shocks indefinitely affect real activity by shifting the economy across
equilibria. Although the current model does not exhibit a unit root, one will emerge if
deterministic technical change is introduced.

I. A model of interacting industries

Consider a countable infinity of industries indexed by i. Each industry consists

of many small, identical firms. All firms produce a homogeneous good; industries are

distinguished by distinct production functions rather than distinct outputs.

The

homogeneous final good may be consumed by the owners of the firms or converted to a

Industry i's behavior is
capital good which fully depreciates after one period.
proportional to the behavior of a representative firm which chooses a capital stock
sequence {K,1} to maximize the present discounted value of profits Jl

1Durlauf [1990] derives a general equilibrium version of this economy.
2

= E(E fl'(Y1— K11) ff).
V11

(1)

equals the output of the i'th industry's representative firm at

equals all

available information at 2. Initial endowments V10 provide starting capital.

Aggregate behavior is determined by the interactions of many heterogencous
industries employing nonconvex technologies. Production occurs with a one period lag;

firms at 1—I employ both one of two production techniques and a level of capital to
determine output at 1. Only one technique may be used at a time. Cooper [1987] and

Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny [1989] exploit similar technologies to analyze multiple
equilibria; Milgrom and Roberts (1990] discuss how this type of nonconvexity can arise as

firms internally coordinate many complementary activities.
through
production functions produce Y1 and

The technique-specific

Y2

= 11(1(1,1_i— F1,(111_1,(...1)

I, t

= f2(''I, t—1'1, —1'E—1)-

(2)

and q1 are industry-specific productivity shocks; ( is an aggregate productivity
shock and F1 is a fixed overhead capital cost. Cl.t_1, q111, and ( are elements of

Recalling that firms within an industry are identical, we define 'H which equals 1

if technique 1 is used by industry i at 1, 0 otherwise and =
which equals the joint set of techniques employed at 2.

We make the following assumptions.
curvature conditions.

First, each technique fulfills standard

Further, we associate technique 1 with high production.

Specifically, net capital NK, which equals K11—F1 for technique 1 and

for

technique 2, has a strictly higher marginal (and by implication total) product when used
with technique 1 than technique 2. A firm chooses technique 1 if it is willing to pay fixed

3

capital costs in exchange for higher output.

Assumption 1. Rtrictions on techniquc.-specific production functions

For all realizations

of(,

= f2(0,q1

A.

and NK,

= 0.

af2(o,'
—
B. ___________ —
8/1K
8/1K

—

°°'.

8fi(°°,(,,) —— ___________—.
8/1K

8/1K

8fi(NK,c,.) > 8f2(NK,q,()
0/1K

8/1K

Both techniques are assumed to exhibit technological complementarities, as the

history of realized activity determines the parameters of the production function at t.

Romer's [1986] model of social increasing returns shares this feature.

Our

complementarities differ from Romer's in two respects. First, all complementarities are
local as the production function of each firm is affected by the production decisions of a

finite number of industries. The index i

orders

industries by similarity in technology;
spillovers occur only between similar technologies. David [1988] describes the historical
importance of local complementarities in the evolution of technical innovations. Second,

our complementarities are explicitly dynamic. Past production decisions affect current
productivity, which captures the idea of learning-by-doing.

Specifically, we model the complementarities through the dependence of the
productivity shocks ( and q on the history of technique choices (See Durlauf [1990]
for a justification). Complementarities are assumed to be the only source of dependence
across shocks. Prob(r I y) denotes the conditional probability measure of z given

information y x(y)

= {i—k...i...i+l)

denotes

the random variable associated with this measure.

indexes the industries which affect industry i's productivity.
4

Assumption 2. Conditional probability structure of productivity shocks

.4. Frob((11 I _1) = Pro6(C11 I w11_1

'U'

iE

B. Prob(vj1 I 1_1) = Prob(q1 t I '.'—i V j
C.

The

random pairs (C — 1(a1_1)1'i1 — q,(a_1)) are mutually independent of

each other and of C — C1(ff1_1) V I.

No markets exist whereby individual firms can coordinate to exploit
Consequently, no industry may be compensated for choosing
technique 1 in order to expand the production sets of other industries; nor, given our

complementarities.

conceptualization of industries as aggregates of many small producers, can firms within
an industry strategically choose a technique in order to induce higher future productivity

Market incompleteness combines with the production

through complementarities.

nonconvexity to fundamentally affect aggregate dynamics.

II. Local complementaritics and multiple equilibria

We initially analyze the economy without aggregate shocks, by setting = 0 V t.
From our assumptions, one may show that equilibrium industry technique choices obey
conditional probabilities of the form

I

a1_) = Prob(wj,t I w1,1_1

V .f

Ak,:).

(3)

Once technique choices are determined, one can solve for the optimal levels of capital and

output for each firm. In fact, a sufficient condition for the existence of equilibrium
5

capital and output sequences forall firms is the existence of a joint probability measure
over all technique choices which is consistent with the conditional measures (3). Durlauf
(1990] verifies that such a joint measure exists for any initial conditions tu0.

We now restrict the conditional probabilities in order to discuss multiplicity and

dynamics. Past choices of technique 1 are assumed to improve the current relative
productivity of the technique. As a result, technique 1 choices will propagate over time.

Further, we assume that

is a steady state, which means that when all productivity

spillovers are active, the effects are so strong that high production is always optimal.
Assumption 3. Impact of past technique choices on current technique prohabilitics2

Let w and u/ denote two realizations of_. If w1
A. Prob(w1t = lj
B. Proh(w111 =

i

= wV 5€ Ak,,) Frob(a1 =

V j E Ak,, then

i

=

V

l€Ak,,).

= 1 Vjc ''k,t) = L

Whenever some industry chooses L' = 0, a positive productivity feedback is lost.
Different configurations of choices at t — 1 determine different production sets and

conditional technique choice probabilities for each industry. We bound the technique
choice probabilities from below and above by O'r and ert respectively.

rr

Proó(w1,1 =

ii

= 0 for some 5€ Ak,,)

rr

(4)

w1=1 is an equilibrium, multiple equilibria exist if for some initial
conditions, w=1 fails to emerge as t grows. Notice that even if c' = 0, favorable
Since

2This assumption can be reformulated in terms of restrictions on the techniquespecific production functions.
6

productivity shocks will periodically induceindustries to produce using technique 1. The

choice of technique 1 by one industry, through the complementaritics, increases the
probability that the technique is subsequently chosen in several industries. With strong
spillovers, these effects may build up, allowing g=1 to emerge from any initial
conditions. The model therefore allows us to analyze the stability of a high aggregate
output equilibrium from arbitrary initial conditions.

In fact, the limiting behavior of the economy is determined by the bounds
and err. If the probability of high production by an industry is sufficiently large for
all production histories, then the spillover effects induced by spontaneous technique 1
choices cause the economy to iterate towards high production. Alternatively, if technique

probabilities are too low in the absence of active spillovers, spontaneous technique 1
choices will not generate sufficient momentum to achieve the w=1 equilibrium. er;8
1

and G' bound the degree of complementarity in the economy. Large values of

imply complementarities are weak as technique I is chosen relatively frequently regardless

of the past.

Conversely, small values of err imply strong complementarities; the
probability of current high production is very sensitive to past technique choices.
Theorem 1, proven in Durlauf (1990], shows how long run industry behavior is jointly
determined by initial conditions and conditional technique probabilities.
Theorem 1. Conditions for uniqueness Versus multiplicity of long run equilibrium

there exist numbers 0 <Ak,z

For every nonnull index set

A. Jferr

Ak,' then

li1m,

Prob(w, = ii

<GAL.,, <

1

such that

= 9) <1.

If complementarities are sufficiently strong, no industry converges to the high production
technique almost sureig from economy-wide low production technique initial conditions.

7

B. f err?

Ak,'

then tim

Prob(w11 = 11w0 =

= 1.

If complementarities are sufficiently weak, each industry converges to the high production
technique almost surely from economy-wide low production technique initial conditions.
One can associate =J with the equilibrium which would emerge if all firms

chose their production levels cooperatively. If production through technique 1 is
sufficiently large for '=! versus any other configuration, then g= emerges as the

cooperative equilibrium after one period. Consequently, incompleteness of markets lowers
the mean and increases the variance of industry and aggregate output along the
inefficient equilibrium path, as technique choices fluctuate over time. When industries
fail to coordinate, production decisions become dependent on idiosyncratic productivity

shocks. Observe that the volatility associated with the inefficient equilibrium is caused
by fundamentals. Simulations in Durlauf [1990,1991] show that aggregate output can
obey a wide range of AR processes, depending on A.

ifi. Path dependence and aggregate shocks
Now consider the role of the aggregate shocks . By affecting many industries
simultaneously, these shocks act in a way analogous to changing the initial conditions of
the economy. Path dependence occurs as one realization of

permanently changes the

equilibrium in the absence of future offsetting shocks. We assume that sufficiently
unfavorable aggregate productivity draws make technique 1 unlikely whereas sufficiently
favorable draws ensure the use of the technique.

Assumption 4. Impact of aggregate shocks on technique choice
There

exist numbers a and b, with Prob(e, a) and Prob( 6) both nonzero, such that
8

A. Prob(w = 1 E a,
B. Pro6(we =

ii t

= 1 ViE 'k,1)

er.3

Jj,t.-i = 0 V i€ A',,) = 1.

When this assumption holds, aggregate shocks can have an indefinite effect on
real activity. Durlauf [1991] verifies
Theorcm 2. Path dependence due to aggregate shocks

Let = 0 V t> T and Or?Z S
realization of ..

. The economy erhibits pat/i dependence as the

affects the limiting technique choice probabilities for all industries.

A. Urn

Prob(w1 = fl C' 5 a) C

B. lim

— b)1.
Prob(ca
'' = 1kr>

t*oo

1.

This result shows how fluctuations can be persistent. For example, once many

sectors simultaneously decline due to an adverse aggregate shock, productivity enhancing

complementarities are lost until a subsequent favorable draw restores them. If

is

ergodic, then the economy will cycle between the equilibria.

Several interpretations beyond productivity can be applied to the aggregate
shocks. Interpreting . as a proxy for the financial sector, the model indicates how the
breakdown of financial institutions, such as occurred during the Depression, can cause
indefinite output toss. Alternatively, Durlauf [1990] shows how

can represent the cost

of production inputs provided by leading sectors such as transportation or steel. In this
case, the growth of leading sectors improves the relative profitability of high production,
3This bound is defined in Theorem I.
9

which can lead to a takeoff in growth as the economy shifts across equilibria.

IV. Summary and conclusions

This paper has explored how economies can exhibit multiple equilibria and
output persistence as a consequence of dynamic coordination failure. These features arise

when strong technological complementarities interact with incomplete markets. Low
production initial conditions prevent an economy from realizing positive technological
complementarities. Further, aggregate shocks can generate indefinite movements in total
output as productivity feedbacks induced by complementarities emerge or disappear. The
model exhibits both persistence of shocks as well as a mechanism for reversals of booms

and downturns. One application of these ideas is to explore whether output behavior
during the Depression and World War IT can be interpreted along these lines.

10

References

Cooper, Russell, "Dynamic Behavior of Imperfectly Competitive Economies with Multiple
Equilibria," NBER Working Paper no. 2388, 1987.

David, Paul A., "Path Dependence: Putting the Past in the Future of Economics,"
Stanford University, 1988.

Diamond, Peter A., "Aggregate Demand In Search Equilibrium," Journal of Political
Economy, October 1982, 90, 881-894.

Durlauf, Steven N., "Nonergodic Economic Growth," Stanford University, 1990.
_______ "Path Dependence in Aggregate Output," Stanford University, 1991.

Heller, Walter P., "Coordination Failure Under Complete Markets with Applications to
Effective Demand," in W. P. Heller, It. Starr and D. Starrett1 eds., Essays in Honor of
Kenneth L Arrow. Volume II, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press1 1986.

Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts, "The Economics of Modern Manufacturing:
Technology, Strategy and Organization," American Economic Review, June 1990, 80,
511-528.

Murphy, Kevin, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, "Industrialization and the Big
Push," Journal f Political Economy, October 1989, 97, 1003-1026.

Rorner, Paul M., "Increasing Returns and Long Run Growth," Journal of Political
Economy, October 1986, 94, 1002-1037.

11

