                    NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




                HABIT PERSISTENCE AND DURABILITY
                   IN AGGREGATE CONSUMPTION:
                        EMPIRICAL TESTS




                        Wayne E. Ferson
                    George M. Constaritinides




                     Working Paper No. 3631




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                         February 1991




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Financial
Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #3631
                                         February 1991

                 HABIT PERSISTENCE AND DURABILITY
                     IN AGGREGATE CONSUMPTION:
                          EMPIRICAL TESTS


                              ABSTRACT

     Habit persistence in consumption preferences and durability
of consumption goods are two hypotheses which imply
time-nonseparability in the derived utility for consumption
expenditures. We study a simple model with both effects, in
which lagged consumption expenditures enter the Euler equation.
Habit persistence implies that the coefficients on the lagged

expenditures are negative, while durability implies positive
coefficients. If both effects are present, then estimating the
sign of the coefficients addresses the question as to which of
the two effects is dominant. Earlier empirical work on monthly

data supported the durability of consumption expenditures. We
estimate and test the Euler equation using monthly, quarterly and
annual data and find evidence that habit persistence dominates
the effect of durability.


Wayne E. Ferson                          George M. Constantinides
Graduate School of Business              Graduate School of
University of Chicago                     Business
1101 East 58th Street                    University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637                        1101 East 58th Street
                                         Chicago, IL 60637
                                               and
                                         National Bureau of
                                          Economic Research
                             1. Introduction

     The consumption-based asset pricing model tested by Hansen and

Singleton (1982, 1983), Ferson (1983), Grossman, Melino and Shiller (1987),

Breeden, Gibbons and Litzenberger (1989) and others was derived under the

assumptions that the utility function is time and state separable and that

the consumption good is nondurable. Habit persistence in consumption

preferences and durability of consumption goods both imply time

nonseparability in the derived utility for consumption expenditures.

     We illustrate the combined effects of durability in consumption

expenditures and of habit persistence in preferences, using a simple

theoretical model in which the durable good depreciates exponentially. Habit

persistence is modelled by assuming that a consumers subsistence level is a

weighted sum of the past flows of consumption services. In this model, both

current and lagged consumption expenditures enter the Euler equation. Habit

persistence implies that the coefficients on the lagged expenditures are

negative, while durability implies positive coefficients. If both effects

are present, then the sign of the coefficients indicates which of the two

effects is dominant.

      In earlier work, Dunn and Singleton (1986), Eichenbaum, Hansen and

Singleton (1988) and Eichenbaum and Hansen (1988) estimated a positive

coefficient on lagged consumption in Euler equations for monthly data. They

interpreted their results as evidence of durability in consumption

expenditures. These studies used lagged consumption and returns as the

predetermined information variables in the model.

     We find that the results for monthly data are sensitive to the

experimental design; in particular, to the choice of the instrumental
                                        3


variables. The evidence for durability is not robust. The signs of the

coefficients on the lagged consuniptions are no longer significantly

positive, or they become negative when we experiment with different

instrument sets. We argue that alternative instruments are preferable to

those used in earlier studies and conclude that the effect of habit

persistence dominates the effect of durability in monthly consumption

expenditures.

     We extend the investigation to quarterly and annual data and find

evidence that habit persistence dominates durability at these frequencies as

well. The evidence of habit persistence at the quarterly and annual

frequencies is robust to the choice of instrumental variables. It is

possible that durability of consumption expenditures has a sufficiently

short half-life, in which case it is suppressed in the quarterly and annual

data. Then habit persistence is more easily detected in the quarterly and

annual data, provided that habit persists for longer than a quarter or year.

In a calibration exercise to explain Mehra and Prescott's (1985) equity

premium puzzle, Constantinides (1989) found evidence that habit persists for

longer than a year.

     Our results are reinforced by the recent work of Hansen and Jagannathan

(1990) and Gallant, Hansen and Tauchen (1989), who study the moment

inequality restrictions implied by the Euler equations. Winder and Palm

(1989) estimate a linearized form of the Euler equation and find support for

habit persistence in the Netherlands. Heaton (1990) considers an explicit

consumption process, assumes that the interest rate is constant and formally

models the time-averaging of monthly and quarterly consumption data in a

linearized version of the Euler equation. He finds evidence for short-
                                               4

lived durability in consumption expenditures and some evidence for habit

persistence. Backus, Gregory and Telmer (1990) find that habit persistence

helps to account for the variability of expected returns on currencies.

      The paper is organized as follows. The model is stated and the Euler

equation which incorporates nonseparable preferences and durability of

consumption expenditures is derived in section 2. The methodology is

presented in section 3. In section 4 we discuss the monthly, quarterly, and

annual consumption expenditures data, the asset returns data and the

predetermined instrumental variables. The main empirical, results, presented

in Tables 3-6 are discussed in section 5. The robustness of the empirical

results is further examined in section 6. In section 7 we reconsider the

equity premium puzzle. In the concluding section 8 we offer suggestions for

future work. An appendix illustrates the interpretation of the concavity

parameter of the representative utility function under time-nonseparability.

We argue that the parameter more closely approximates the risk aversion

coefficient than the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of

substitution.




                                      2. The Xodel

      We consider a single-good economy in discrete time. Expenditures on

the good at time t    by a representative consumer are denoted by c. The
good is durable and durability is modelled as in Dunn and Singleton (1986),

Eichenbaum, Hansen and Singleton (1988), and Eichenbaum and Hansen (1988).

Each period the new expenditures c produce a flow of consumption services

 rt in period t
6 c                  + r, r   0, where 6
                                           r
                                                   0 and     6 —
                                                           i—Or 1.
                                                                     The total flow

of consumption services   at time t   is       given by
                                             S




                                       rtt                                      (1)

The representative consumer's utility is defined over the flow of services c'.

      We model habit persistence with a time nonseparable von Neumann-

Morgenstern utility function


              (1 -    A)E     t(F - hE     ac )i-A        ,                           (2)


where A >    0,   a    0, E a — 1 and h   0. The time-preference parameter is
                        s—i
j9.    The habit parameter h represents the fraction of the weighted sum of

lagged consumption flows which establishes a subsistence level of

consumption. If h—0 the utility function is time-separable in consumption

flows (but not in consumption expenditures, unless & —         0, r   1).
      Ryder and Heal (1973) studied the optimal consumption policy when the

utility at time t        is   defined as a concave function of the consumption flow

at time t    and   of a weighted sum of the lagged consumption flows. Sundaresan

(1989) and Constantinides (1990) studied special cases in which the utility

at time t    is    a power of the difference between the consumption flow at time t

and     a fraction of a weighted sum of lagged consumption flows, as in equation

 (2).

      In the case of time separable preferences over consumption services (h —

0) the concavity parameter A is the relative risk aversion coefficient
 (RRA) and the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. With

habit persistence (h >        0) we show in the appendix that the parameter A
approximately equals the RRA coefficient but may differ substantially from

the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.
                                                                              6

         We combine equations (1) and (2) and write the utility function as


                                           (1 -   A)              t-O
                                                                        tclA

where


                        C —
                         t
                                            6c
                                             T t-1•
                                                          -        h     E E a6c
                                                                              S  t-r-s
                                     r—O                                s—I r—O


                             —        0
                                            E     bc
                                                   i t-r                                                                       (4)



and

                             b0 —l
                                                              T
                             b
                                 r
                                      — (6
                                           r
                                                  -   h                a.6
                                                                        Lr-i )/6 0,
                                                                                             r     1



         It is       instructive to consider an example with 6 — (1 - 6)6T                                            and

a — (1           -    )sl             where 0                 6 < 1          and 0           a <   1.   Then the coefficients

b         become:
    7.




                             —             -                                 (1    -   a)har       r    1                       (5)
                        b                             : a)hJ6r
                                                                         +                                  .




If expenditures are not durable (6 —                                         0), we obtain b — -(1              -   a)ha1     and

the coefficients are negative for r                                               1. In the absence of habit

persistence (h —                     0) but with durability, we obtain b —                                          and the

coefficients are positive. When both habit persistence and durability are

present, the coefficients b are positive or negative depending on the

relative magnitude of the durability parameter 6 and the habit persistence

parameters h and a. If 6 a +                                                 h(l   -
                                                                                       a),       the coefficient b       is


positive for all r;                            if 6           h(1 -          a) then b is negative for all r                        1;
                                                              7

finally, if h(l -               a)   < & <       + h(l -      a),      b is positive for recent lags

and negative for distant ones. The example illustrates the opposing role of

habit persistence and durability on the coefficients of lagged consumption

expenditures.

    To derive the stochastic Euler equation in the general case, we consider a

reduction of the representative consumer's expenditures in period t from

c    to c        -
                     s,   where id          is   small. The investment of c in an asset with

(stochastic) return                          over one period increases the consumption

expenditures in period t + 1 from c1 to c÷i + c R1. The rational

consumer takes into account the effect of the changes in consumption

expenditures in periods t and t + I on the flow of consumption services

and on the subsistence level in all future periods through equation (4) and

calculates the change in C
                                             t-r ,
                                                     C
                                                         C
                                                             and C t+r       ,   r     1 as:

         acC-f
            as
                      — 0   ,    r     1;
         ac
         —s-
         8c
             - &0                ,                                                                     (6)

         3C           —     (br-lRt+l-b)6,                    rl.
            öc                         r 0

Optimality requires that the expectation in period t of the utility of the

consumption flows is maximized at s —                             0,    that is,


                     -
                          A)lE        pt+TCIA + E[(l -                 A)Z                       0     (7)
                                                                                      t+ri-A]]
We combine equations (6) and (7), simplify and obtain the Euler equation



         E[E p(C+ /C)(b lRt+l -                                    b)    -            — 0   ,          (8)
                                                                                 1]
where C is defined by equation (4).
                                             8


  In the absence of habit persistence (h —            0)   and durability (6 — 0,

    1) we obtain b — 0,    r    1, and the Euler equation (8) becomes the

time and state separable model examined by Hansen and Singleton (1982):


                                                      0                             (9)
                  Et[(ct÷l/ct)A Rt+l 1]

   We consider a sequence of nested models of the Euler equation, starting

with the time-separable model (b —      0,       T   1), and proceeding to a model with

a one-lag specification (b —   0,   r    2) and a model with a two-lag

specification (b — 0,     3). Formally, the one-lag model captures habit

persistence based on one lag in consumption, in the absence of durability; or

it captures durability of one period only, in the absence of habit

persistence. The two-lag model captures habit persistence based on two lags

in consumption, in the absence of durability; or it captures durability of

two periods, in the absence of habit persistence; or it captures habit

persistence based on one lag in consumption and durability of one period.



                                3. Nethodology

   The Euler equation is tested and the model parameters are estimated using

Hansen's (1982) Generalized Method of Moments (GMM). Equation (8) defines an

error term uj for each asset i, i—l,. ..,N, such that Et[uj(t+l)] —                 0,
where E[.] denotes the conditional expectation given information at time t.

With a set of L instruments,             j—l,...,L, known to the market at time

t, we obtain E(u1Izt] — 0       and therefore E[u+i z — 0, where u+ is

the vector of N error terms and z is the vector of L instruments. Given N

assets and L instruments there are NL orthogoriality conditions. The GMM

estimates are based on minimizing the quadratic form g'Wg where g is the
                                        9

NL vector of the elements of (l/T)          U1 z   and W is the inverse of a

consistent estimate of the covariance matrix of these orthogonality

conditions. Hansen (1982) discussed the weighting matrix W and provided

conditions under which the parameter estimates are consistent and

asymptotically normal and the minimized value of the quadratic form is

asymptotically chi-square under the null hypothesis. The model is

overidentified provided that the number of orthogonality conditions, NL,

exceeds the number of parameters. The minimized quadratic form provides a

test statistic for the goodness-of-fit of the model; the number of degrees of

freedom is the difference between the number of orthogonality conditions and

the number of parameters. The parameters are fl,A,(b).

   In the time-separable model u is a function of the variables Rt, cr1,

and ct, which are known at time t. The Euler equation therefore implies that

E(u+5Iu]_O, s1, and we say that u follows an MA(0) process. The time

separable model implies the null hypothesis,



             H0: b — 0,   s    1, with an MA(O) error term u.


   In the one-lag model (b —   0,   s   2), u is a function of R, c2,

c1, c     and c1. Since c1 is not in the time t information set,

the model does not imply that E[u÷iIu] — 0         but implies that

E(u+5lu1_O. s    2. We say that u in this case follows an MA(l)

process. In general, the model implies that the error term u will be MA(q),

where q is the smallest number such that       for all j>q. The one-lag model

therefore implies the hypothesis,
                                            10

              H :    b — 0,   s      2 with MA(l) error term u
                 a    s                                          t



The autocorrelation of the error term under Ha is related to the parameter

in a complex way. The weighting matrix is adjusted to account for the moving

average terms, as described by Hansen (1982). When b1 is zero, the model

implies that the aucocorrelation of the error becomes zero, hence the null

hypothesis H0.

  We model the consumer's decisions at fixed intervals, and we measure asset

returns and consumption over the same intervals. Consumption decisions may

actually occur more frequently. If the decisions are made within the

observation interval and the measured consumption expenditures are the sum of

the expenditures over the interval, then the consumption data are said to be

time-aggregated. Formally modelling time-aggregation in the Euler equation is

difficult and results for time-aggregation are only available in the

literature, imposing a first-order approximation to the marginal utility

function. We conduct several experiments Co asses the likely importance of

time-aggregation for our results.1

  Using a linear approximation to the Euler equation, it can be shown that

one effect of time-aggregation is to increase the order of the MA process

followed by u.2 Therefore, under time aggregation, the residuals may

appear to behave like an FIA(l) process even if the nonseparability parameter

b1 is zero. Time-aggregation can also induce a spurious correlation between

the error terms and the information set for time t. Therefore, variables in

the market's information set at t which were not in the market's

information set at t - 1          may not be valid instruments for the equation

E[u÷i] — 0.
                                         11

   Time aggregation is not the only feature of the aggregate Consumption data

which creates methodological problems. Other features of the data could

induce autocorrelation in the error terms and spurious correlation between

the error terms and the instruments. Examples include imperfect timing and

interpolation of the consumption data, measurement errors and seasonal

adjustment. A rejection of H0 could be interpreted as evidence that these

other features of the data are important, rather than evidence that b1 is not

zero. We therefore examine the modified null hypothesis,



   H0': b1—O, with an MA(l) error term u,



against the alternative hypothesis Ha We further asses the sensitivity of

our results to these data issues by conducting experiments in which the order

of the MA process of the errors is varied and in which the instruments for

the information set at time t   either   admit or do not admit the most recent

lagged values of the variables.

   The parameter estimates and statistical tests using the GMM are justified

from asymptotic distribution theory. There is a natural concern about the

properties of these procedures in small samples. Tauchen (1986) and

Kocherlakota (1990) provided simulation evidence for the time-separable

model. Tauchen found that the test statistics perform well with as few as 50

annual observations, although he found a slight tendency to reject the model

too infrequently. Kocherlakota (1990), using a different set of parameter

values, found cases where the model is rejected too often. When the tests

exploit only unconditional moment restrictions, i.e., when the instrument is

a constant vector of ones (a case we examine below), he found that the test
                                        12

statistics perform well in small samples. Both of these studies found that

the coefficient estimates and their standard errors can be unreliable in

small samples.

   Although we report the coefficient estimates and their asymptotic standard

errors, we stress that the reliability of these estimates cannot be assessed

until simulation studies of the finite sample properties of the CMM become

available for nonseparable consumption models. We therefore refrain from

deriving detailed implications from the models which depend on the point

estimates of the coefficients.

   Ferson and Foerster (1990) studied the finite sample properties of the GMM

in a linear asset pricing context with cross-equation restrictions. They

found that a two-stage CMM approach, as described in Hansen and Singleton

(1982), tends to reject the model too often in larger systems, while an

iterated GHN approach provides more accurate test statistics. We use an

iterated GMM approach in this study.3




                                 4. The Data

   We study the returns of Treasury bills, bonds and value-weighted

portfolios of common stocks traded on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). The

stocks are grouped into size deciles, based on the market value of equity

outstanding at the beginning of each year. We examine a subset of the 10

deciles: deciles 1,5. and 10. Decile 1 represents the common stocks of small

firms, and decile 10 represents large firms. Three portfolios are chosen to

keep the number small, while capturing most of the stock return behavior that

would be reflected in a design using all ten deciles or using value- and
                                      13

equally-weighted stock indices. We include a long-term government bond return

and the return to a strategy of rolling over one-month Treasury bills. Thus,

a total of 5 portfolio returns are examined. All of the asset return data are

from the Center for Research in Security Prices of the University of Chicago

(CRSP) -

   Our primary measure of consumption is real, per capita expenditures on

consumer nondurable goods. These data are seasonally adjusted by the Commerce

Department, using the X-ll seasonal adjustment program. The quarterly data

are in real terms, as reported by Data Resources Inc. (DRI). The annual

consumption data are from the Commerce Department's Business Statistics, 1959

edition, and DRI.4   Monthly data are obtained from Citibase. The real

expenditure totals are divided by the population to obtain the per capita

real consumption series. The population figure is the total United States

residential population (excluding armed forces abroad) from Statistical

Abstract of the U.S., DRI, and Citibase.

   We examine data for durable goods expenditures and for seasonally

unadjusted consumption in some experiments. The seasonally unadjusted data

are the quarterly nominal expenditures from DRI, divided by the population

and deflated by a seasonally unadjusted component of the consumer price index

(CPI)

   The real asset returns are the nominal returns deflated by the price

deflator for the measure of consumption in a given model. For example, when

we use nondurable goods expenditure data we deflate the asset returns by the

deflator for consumer nondurable goods. When we use the seasonally unadjusted

consumer durables expenditure data, we deflate the returns by the seasonally

unadjusted consumer price index for consumer durables.
                                     14

  The earlier studies of Dunn and Singleton (1986), Eichenbaum, Hansen and

Singleton (1988) and Eichenbaum and Hansen (1988) used monthly consumption

data to explore time-nonseparable models. We focus mostly on the quarterly

and annual data. Monthly consumption data are suspect for at least two

reasons. First, measurement error which can induce negative serial

autocorrelation in consumption growth, is likely to be proportionately more

important in monthly data. Second, components of the monthly consumption

expenditures are calculated by interpolation, which may induce positive

serial autocorrelation. Durability of consumption expenditures induces

negative autocorrelation in consumption growth. For example, a consumer

purchasing an automobile in one period is likely to refrain from purchasing

another automobile for several periods. Habit persistence induces positive

autocorrelation in consumption growth since the consumer maximizes utility by

smoothing consumption more than would be optimal with time-separable

preferences. Therefore, spurious positive (negative) autocorrelation in

consumption growth may lead to the erroneous conclusion that durability of

consumption expenditures dominates (is dominated by) habit persistence.

   Previous studies of consumption-based models have used lagged values of

consumption and returns as instruments to estimate the parameters and test

the Euler equation. However, as discussed above, measurement errors and other

data problems can result in spurious correlation between the consumption and

real returns and their lagged values. The spurious correlation can lead to

spurious rejections of the Euler equations and can bias the parameter

estimates. We use lagged consumption and returns in some experiments for

comparison purposes, and to. check the sensitivity of our results. However, we

focus mostly on instruments that are distinct from the lagged
                                             15

values, but which can predict both asset returns and measures of consumption

growth. Such instruments should provide powerful tests of the Euler equation

restrictions. The instrumental variables are summarized in Figure 1.



                                   insert figure 1 here




   VWYLD(-l)      is   the average dividend yield on a value-weighted index of

common   stocks   traded on the New York stock exchange, provided by CRSP. The

dividend yield is the sum       of the   most recent year's dividends divided by the

price level on the last trading day of the quarter. The symbol (-1) indicates

that a variable is lagged one period relative to the date of the asset return

realization in the Euler equation. For example, the dividend yield used to

predict returns for the first quarter uses the price level at the end of the

previous December and dividends over the previous year. Using the annual

dividends avoids the seasonality of dividend payments. Dividend yields are a

component of the return of stocks, so the ex-ante dividend yield is a natural

instrument for capturing variation in expected stock returns. Campbell and

Shiller (1988), Cutler, Poterba and Summers (1988), Fama         and   French (1988),

and others found that dividend yields predict future stock and bond returns.

The symbol (-2) indicates that a variable is lagged two periods.

   DIVDIFF(-l) is the dividend yield of the CRSP equally-weighted stock

index less the dividend yield of the value-weighted stock index. Movements in

this   variable over time reflect the differences between the dividend yields

of small and large firms. We find that the difference contributes additional

explanatory power, given the level of the yield, in regressions for the

future returns and consumption measures.
                                     16

  TBIMO(-l) is the nominal, one-month Treasury bill rate. The ability of

short-term bills to predict monthly returns of bonds and stocks is documented

by Fama and Schwert (1977) and others.

   Pl(-l) is a measure of the detrended price level for the smallest decile

of common stocks. This is the inverse of the price index level, relative to

the average level over the preceding twelve months. Keim and Stambaugh (1986)

studied a similar variable and found that it predicts both bond and stock

returns. This variable may capture the reversion of expected returns to their

long-run means. Mean reversion implies that if stock returns are below

average (so that prices are relatively low), then conditional expected

returns are higher than average.

   CIPX(-l) is the continuously-compounded annual growth rate of an index of

U.S. industrial production, lagged one quarter.

   SSLOPE(-l) is the three-month Treasury bill rate, less the one-month

return of a one-month bill. This is one of three instruments which decompose

risky debt yields into short-term and long-term default-free slope variables,

and an ex ante default premium for corporate debt. Fama (1984), Campbell

(1987), and Stanibaugh (1988) found that short term measures of the term

structure can predict bond returns of different maturities and stock returns.

   LSLOPE(-l) is the long-term slope, measured as the lagged value of the

yield-to-maturity of Aaa corporate bonds, less the one-month Treasury bill

rate.

   CBPREX(-1) is the lagged value of the average monthly yield-to-maturity of

corporate bonds rated Baa by Moody's Investor Services, less the lagged value

of the Aaa corporate bond yield. Keim and Starnbaugh (1986) found that a yield

spread has predictive power for bond and stock returns.
                                      17

   The predetermined variables follow empirical studies which document their

ability to predict the returns of portfolios similar to the ones we study.

Statistical inference is complicated if the variables are the result of

collective "data snooping" by a series of researchers. We do not attempt to

formally account for these effects in our analysis.6

   Tables 1 and 2 present summary statistics for the basic data. The sample

period of the quarterly analysis is 1948-1986; the annual data are for 1929-

1986; monthly data cover 1959-1986. For annual data we use a subset of the

instrumental variables. These are VWYLD, DIVDIFF, TB1MO, P1 and SSLOPE.

Table 1 shows that some of the autocorrelations of the instruments are above

0.9 (the quarterly CBPREM. VWYLD, DIVDIFF and TBIMO, and also GIPX in monthly

data). In the case of WYLD AND DIVDIFF, this is expected given the

overlapping nature of the numerators. GIPX is an annual growth rate. The

autocorrelations decay toward zero at longer lags for all of the variables.

Table 2 shows the contemporaneous correlations among the instruments. The

correlations suggest that none of the instruments are redundant and that

multicollinearity should not be a problem. Only three (two) of the

correlations among the quarterly (annual) instruments exceed 0.5, and the

largest is 0.67 (0.69). In monthly data, five of the correlations exceed 0.5

and the largest is 0.74.



                           insert tables 1 and 2 here



   We examine time-series regressions, using the instruments to predict the

future returns of the common stock and bond portfolios and the future growth

rates of consumption. The asset returns are measured in excess of the three-
                                     18

month Treasury bill return.7 These regressions suggest that the instruments

should allow us to construct powerful tests of the Euler equation. The signs

and magnitudes of the coefficients on the asset returns are consistent with

earlier studies. For example, VWYLD(-1) enters with a positive coefficient

and TB1MO enters with a negative coefficient in each of the regressions. The

R-squares (right-tail probability values) for the quarterly sample range from

0.12 (0.02) to 0.26 (0.00) across the portfolio returns. In annual

regressions, the range is from 0.12 (0.29) to 0,48 (0.00). In monthly data,

the range is from 0.06 (0.01) to 0.11 (0.00). The instruments seem to

capture changing expected excess returns in both the bond and stock markets.

The instruments are less strongly related to the growth rates of future

consumption expenditures. The R-squares in regressions predicting the growth

of nondurables consumption expenditures are 0.09 ,   0.12,   and 0.02,

respectively, in quarterly, annual and monthly data. The corresponding right-

tail probability values are 0.09, 0.29, and 0.66. respectively.




                             5. Empirical Results

   In Tables 3-6 we present the results of estimating and testing the models

using monthly, quarterly and annual consumption expenditures and returns

data. Since earlier work focussed on monthly data we examine first the

monthly data. We use five assets: the three common stock portfolios from

size deciles 1, 5 and 10; a long-terni government bond portfolio; and a one-

month Treasury bill.



                              insert table 3 here
                                       19

   In the first panel of Table 3 we present results using seven instruments:

a constant and three variables lagged once and twice relative to the date of

the realization of the five asset returns. The three variables used as

instruments are the real consumption growth over one month, the real return

of a one-month Treasury bill and the real one-month return of the small stock

portfolio. The errors u41 itt   the   Euler equation E(u+i] — 0    are assumed

to follow an MA(0) process in the time separable model and an MA(l)

process in the one-lag model.

   In the first row of Table 3 the notation b1 — 0   states that the

nonseparability parameter is set equal to zero and we are then estimating and

testing the time separable model. The point estimate of the subjective

discount rate in this case is .993 and the estimate of the concavity

parameter A is 0.31. However, the right tail p-value for the goodness-of-fit

test is .006 and the model is rejected. Rejecting this model is consistent

with the earlier conclusions of Hansen and Singleton (1982) and others.

   In the second row of Table 3 the nonseparability parameter b1 is

unrestricted and is estimated along with the parameters $    and   A.8    The

model is not rejected by the goodness-of-fit test, the p-value being .15.

The subjective discount rate is very close to one and the concavity parameter

is A — 2.1.   As we argue in the Appendix, in the nonseparable model the

concavity parameter is approximately equal to the RRA coefficient but may

differ substantially from the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of

substitution in consumption. The point estimate of the nonseparability

parameter b1 is positive and significantly different from zero. Taking the

result at face value, it provides evidence that durability of consumption

expenditures dominates the effect of habit persistence in a one-lag model,
                                      20

consistent with the earlier findings of Dunn and Singleton (1986),

Eichenbauxn, Hansen and Singleton (1988) and Eichenbaum and Hansen (1990).

However, this result is not robust.

   In the lower portion of panel 1, Table 3, we replace the lagged

consumption and return instruments by a constant and the lagged financial

variables summarized in figure 1. The point estimate of b1 is now -0.72

and is significantly different from zero. The p-value of the goodness-of-fit

test is high, .347. These numbers suggest that the effect of habit

persistence dominates the effect of durability of consumption expenditures.

   These results serve two purposes. First, they demonstrate that we can

replicate earlier results using our data sample. Second, they provide a

warning that the estimation of the nonseparability parameter is potentially

sensitive to the choice of instruments.

   In panel 2 of Table 3 we exclude the first lagged values of the variables

from the set of instruments, using only the second lagged values. This

experiment can be motivated by concerns about measurement errors in the data,

publication lag or by time aggregation. In the first subpanel with

consumption and returns as instruments the point estimate of b1 is .065 and

the standard error is 227, providing no evidence that either habit

persistence or durability plays a dominant role. Moreover, the tests do not

reject the time-separable model. In the lower part of panel 2, using the

second lags of the financial variables as instruments, we estimate a negative

value of b1 which is nearly three standard errors from zero. The time-

separable model is strongly rejected by the goodness-of-fit test.

    In panel 3 of Table 3 we repeat the experiment of panel 2, except that we

 increase the order of the moving average process that is assumed for the
                                      21

error terms. In the time-separable model (b1 — 0) we use an MA(l) assumption

and in the one-lag model we use an MA(2). The results are comparable to those

of panel 2. When lagged consumption and returns are the instruments the

estimate of b1 is close to zero and the time-separable model is not rejected.

When the lagged financial variables are the instruments the time-separable

model is rejected. The point estimate of b1 is negative and the time-

nonseparable model is not rejected.

   We conclude from Table 3 that the evidence of durability in the monthly

consumption expenditures relies on using the most recent lagged values of the

endogenous variables as instruments. However, there are reasons to be

suspicious of results that rely on these instruments. The first lagged values

of consumption and returns are suspect, given the potential problems with

measurement errors, publication lag and time aggregation. In contrast,

whether we use the first or the second lags of the financial variables as

instruments, we estimate negative b1 coefficients, which suggests that habit

persistence dominates the effects of durability, Of course, given the

problems with monthly consumption data, evidence based on the monthly data is

not conclusive.

   In Tables 4 and 5 we present results using quarterly and annual

consumption expenditures and returns. We use as instruments either the

financial variables lagged by one period, the financial variables lagged by

two periods or the consumption and return variables lagged by one and two

periods. Tables 4 and 5 summarize the results for the one-lag model. Table 4

presents quarterly data, assuming that decisions are made quarterly. In Table

5 we assume an annual decision interval and use annual data.
                                       22




                             insert table 4 here



   In Table 4, the results for quarterly data use two systems of asset

returns. The first system is similar to the monthly, five-asset system and

consists of the three size portfolios of stocks (deciles 1, 5 and 10), a

portfolio of long-term government bonds and a strategy of rolling over one-

month Treasury bills. In this system of asset returns the model is

challenged to explain the differences in the returns of conunon stocks grouped

by firm size, which have served as an acid test of the Capital Asset Pricing

Model. The second system consisting of just two assets, the Treasury bills

and the large stocks, directs attention to the differences in the return of

Treasury bills and stocks.

   In panel 1 of Table 4 the instruments are a constant and the eight

financial variables lagged once relative to the date of the realization of

the asset returns. In panel 2 the financial instruments at lag two are used.

The point estimates of the parameter b1 all lie between - .95 and - .97 and

they are many standard errors away from zero. The goodness-of-fit tests

indicate a markedly improved fit when the nonseparability parameter is

included. The results suggest that the effects of habit persistence dominate

the effects of durability in the quarterly data.9

   In the monthly data evidence of durability in consumption expenditures

emerged only when the first lagged values of the consumption and returns were

used as instruments. In panel 3 of Table 4 we replicate this experiment with

quarterly data. The results show that, merely by switching from monthly to

quarterly data, the evidence in favor of durability of consumption
                                        23

expenditures disappears. For the five-asset system the coefficient b1 is

negative and statistically different from zero and for the two-asset system

the point estimate of b1 is negative but insignificantly different from

zero.

   In Table 5 we repeat the tests reported in Table 4 with annual rather than

quarterly data. These results provide further evidence that the effects of

habit persistence dominate the effects of durability. All of the point

estimates of b1 are negative and the goodness-of-fit test results are

improved. The annual data,   of   course cover a longer sample period and may be

less influenced by measurement errors. Furthermore, results using the annual

data should not be affected by problems with the seasonality of consumption

expenditures and returns within the year)°

   These results may be understood in terms of the time series properties of

consumption and the predictive ability of the different instruments for asset

returns and consumption. In monthly data, consumption growth rates are

negatively autocorrelated. In quarterly data the autocorrelation is closer to

zero and in annual data the autocorrelation is positive (see Table 1).

Positive autocorrelation in consumption combines with a negative

nonseparability parameter to raise the volatility of the intertemporal

marginal rate of substitution. This is one dimension along which habit

persistence improves the fit of the model in quarterly and annual data.

Negative autocorrelation in consumption combines with a positive

nonseparability parameter in a similar ways which suggests durability. Using

lagged consumption and returns as the instruments, the autocorrelation

properties of consumption are given more weight in the Euler restrictions.

Therefore, when we use monthly consumption data and lagged consumption
                                      24

instruments, we find evidence for durability in monthly data.

  When the lagged financial instruments are used in the Euler equation, the

predictive power is relatively higher for the asset returns, and lower for

the future consumption, than when lagged consumption growth rates and returns

are used as the instruments. Habit persistence tends to reduce the

intertemporal elasticity of substitution, which suggests relatively higher

volatility in expected returns relative to consumption changes. These effects

receive more weight in the Euler restrictions when the lagged financial

variables are the instruments. We therefore find evidence for habit

persistence, even in the monthly data, when the lagged financial variables

are used.



                             insert figure 2 here



   Figure 2 illustrates the sensitivity of the one-lag model to the value of

the nonseparability parameter b1. The values of the objective function are

plotted, minimized over the choice of A and fi,   for   given values of b1. An

MA(l) weighting matrix is used. Results for annual data and five assets are

plotted. (Similar patterns are observed in the other cases.) The objective

function is highly nonlinear in the parameter b1. Typically, we find that

there is a local minimum in the region of durability (b1 >      0),   and there is a

"hill" in the objective function over which the algorithm must climb to

attain the global minimum in the habit persistence region <b1 <        0).
   Table 6 reports tests of the hypothesis H', that the parameter b1 is

zero, allowing the error term to be KA(l), against the alternative that b1 is

not zero. Two test statistics are reported. The two statistics have the same
                                     25

asymptotic distribution under the null hypothesis, H'. One statistic is the

square of the t-ratio for the b1 parameter. The second test uses the approach

described in Eichenbaum, Hansen and Singleton (1988). The restricted system

(imposing b1—O) is estimated using the GMM weighing matrix from the

unrestricted system, allowing the MA(1) error structure. The difference

between quadratic forms using the restricted and the unrestricted objective

function is asymptotically distributed as a chi-square variate with one

degree of freedom.



                             insert table 6 here



   Table 6 shows that the two statistics imply the same inferences, so there

is no signal of departures from the large-sample properties of the

statistics. The tests reject the null hypothesis H0' against Ha in three of

four cases. In the fourth case, the two asset system with annual data,

neither test can reject the null hypothesis. Overall, a negative value of the

nonseparability parameter is supported by the evidence.



                            insert figure 3 here



   We find that direct estimation of the two-lag nonseparable model is

problematic. It is difficult to estimate both b1 and b2 with precision.

Figure 3 illustrates the problem. We establish a grid of values for b1 and

b2, in increments of 0.1. At each point in the grid we condition on these

values and we search for A and   to minimize the objective function. Figure 3

shows the right-tail probability value associated with the minimized value of
                                     26

the objective function on the vertical axis, plotted against the specified

values of (-b1) on the x-axis and (-b2) on the relief axis. The figure

therefore provides a representation of the goodness-of-fit of the model for

particular values of the nonseparability parameters. An MA(2) weighting

matrix is used for every point on the grid. Results for the five-asset system

and quarterly data are shown. A point in the center of the x-relief plane

corresponds to the time-separable model (b1—0, b2—O). Moving toward the right

rear corner implies increasing durability and moving toward the left front

corner implies habit persistence. There is a "ridge," along which b1 and b2

add up to about -0.90, in the habit persistence region of the figure. The

value of the objective function is insensitive to the individual coefficients

b1 and b2. Therefore, the individual coefficients cannot be estimated

reliably. We found a similar result when we estimated the two-lag model with

annual data. Although our results suggest that habit persistence is

empirically relevant, the two coefficients cannot be estimated reliably.

Therefore, we cannot infer the half-life of habit persistence.




                  6. The Robustness of the Empirical Results

6.1 Seasonal Adjustment of Consumption

   The estimates and test results reported in Tables 3-6 are based on

seasonally-adjusted data, as explained in section 4. The nonseparable models

imply that the flow of services and the subsistence level are averages of

lagged consumption expenditures. But seasonally-adjusted consumption data

have already been smoothed with the X-1l seasonal adjustment program. The

smoothing by X-ll could bias the tests and the estimates of the parameters.
                                     27

   The similarity of our findings using quarterly and annual data suggests

that the results are not driven by seasonality or by the particular seasonal

adjustment employed within the year. An appealing way to further verify that

the results are not sensitive to seasonal adjustment is to use unadjusted

quarterly expenditures data and to allow for seasonal variation in the

utility function as in Miron (1986), Ferson and Harvey (1990) and English,

Miron and Wilcox (1989). These studies introduced multiplicative "taste

shift" parameters which allowed the utility for a given level of consumption

to vary with the season. We attempted in some experiments to incorporate

seasonal taste shift parameters together with the nonseparability parameter

b1 in the model. We were unable to reliably estimate a model with the

additional parameters.

   We report the results of a simple experiment which is less ambitious than

the above. We adopt a two-step approach. In the first step, we regress the

logarithm of unadjusted, quarterly real per capita consumption expenditures

on a time trend and dummy variables indicating the quarter. We take the

residuals from these regressions, add back the sample means and exponentiate.

The resulting consumption series is seasonally adjusted, but avoids the

moving averages used by X-ll)2 The procedure is similar to assuming

multiplicative seasonal taste shock parameters, as in Miron (1986). In the

second step, we use the dummy-adjusted data to estimate and test the Euler

equations (8) and (9). In principle, one would like to combine the two

steps; but the two-step approach does provide some indication of the

potential sensitivity of our findings to the method of seasonal adjustment.13
                                     28



                             insert table 7 here



  The results are summarized in Table 7 and are similar to Table 4. The

goodness of fit statistics imply that habit persistence improves the fit of

the model. The point estimates of the nonseparability parameter b1 are

negative and they are several standard errors from zero.


6.2 Expenditures on Durable Goods

   The Commerce Department provides data on three groups of consumer

expenditures, which are labelled as durables, nondurables and services. Our

estimates and tests reported in sections 5 and 6.1 used the nondurables

series, excluding the durables and services. We recognized that the Commerce

department's nondurables series may in fact be durable, and we accounted for

the durability in the derivation of the nonseparable models. Our approach is

formally justified under the assumption that the consumer's preferences are

separable over the flow of services from the Commerce department's durables,

nondurables and services.

   Dunn and Singleton (1986), Eichenbaum, Hansen and Singleton (1988), and

Eichenbauni and Hansen (1990) derived, estimated and tested Euler equations

for models with nonseparable preferences across goods. The degree of

substitution across the goods is parameterized. If we allow for such

preferences, which are both tiine-nonseparable and nonseparable across goods,

the number of parameters in the model becomes large.



                              insert table 8 here
                                           29

     In this section we adopt the maintained hypothesis that the preferences

are separable across goods and focus on the Euler equation implied by time-

nonseparable preferences, defined over the flow of services from the Commerce

department's durable goods expenditure series. Results for annual and

quarterly data (both X-ll and dummy adjusted versions) are reported in Table

8. One might expect b1 to be positive for consumer durables, but the point

estimates of b1 - -    although   greater than the point estimates for nondurables

-   - are   less than zero in all six cases. The goodness-of-fit tests indicate an

improved fit with the negative b1 coefficients. We conclude that our earlier

finding that habit persistence dominates durability is not due to the fact

that we excluded the consumption flows from the durable goods expenditure

series.

     Figure 4 illustrates the sensitivity of the objective function to the

value of the nonseparability parameter b1, using durable goods expenditures.

The values of the objective function, minimized over the choice of A and ,

are plotted for fixed values of b1. Results for quarterly (X-ll adjusted)
data and all five assets are plotted. Similar patterns are observed in the

other cases, and the conclusion is similar to that obtained from figure 2.

Typically, however, a local minimum in the region of durability is closer to

the global minimum in the region of habit persistence, when durable goods

expenditures are used than when nondurables are used.



                                  insert figure 4 here



      Since the results for nondurable and durable goods are similar, it is

unlikely that the sum of the two would lead to different conclusions.
                                     30

However, there are potential difficulties in the interpretation of the

experiments in Table 8 and Figure 4. If preferences are not separable across

durable and nondurable goods, then applying the model to data on durable

goods creates a missing variables problem. Because nondurables and durable

goods expenditures are correlated, the durable goods expenditures may proxy

for the missing nondurables expenditures. The estimates of the

nonseparability parameter may thus be biased toward habit persistence. A

multigood model could potentially control for this effect, although the

larger number of parameters will create econometric difficulties. We leave

for future research a complete study of the interaction between habit

persistence and the complementarity or substitutability of different

consumption goods.




                      7. The Equity Premium Revisited

   Mehra and Prescott (1985) introduced the equity premium puzzle. They

considered a pure exchange economy in which the representative consumer has

time- and state-separable preferences with constant RRA coefficient. They

assumed that consumption growth is a two-state Markov process and calibrated

this process to match the sample mean, variance and first-order

autocorrelation of the annual growth rate of per capita consumption in the

years 1889-1978. They were unable to find a plausible pair of the subjective

discount rate and the RRA coefficient to match the sample mean of the annual

real rate of interest and of the equity (stock market) return over the same

90-year period.

   The calibration exercise of Mehra and Prescott is not directly comparable
                                        31

to the estimation and testing of Euler equations which we reported in the

earlier sections. Our starting point was a system of Euler equations:



                  Et(Ri(t+l) MRS÷11 — 1,                                    (10)

where Rj(t+l) is the one-plus-return on asset i over [t, t+1J and

MRS1 is the marginal rate of substitution between dates t and t + 1.

The Euler restrictions that we tested included in particular the

unconditional Euler equation:



                  EERi(t+l) MRS+i] —
                                         1.                                 (11)


Using predetermined variables z as instruments, we included additional

implications of the Euler equation, specifically:



                  E[Rj(t+l) MRSt+llz.tJ —
                                              I   .                         (12)

Including the predetermined instruments, our estimates of the RRA coefficient

were reasonable in magnitude, for both the time separable and the

nonseparable models. In contrast. Mehra and Prescott found that a large RRA

coefficient is implied by the mean equity premium.



                                insert table 9 here



   Hansen and Singleton (1983) and Ferson and Harvey (1990) observed that

when the Euler equation with b1—0 is estimated using only unconditional

moments, large but imprecise estimates of the risk aversion coefficient are

found. In Table 9 we repeat the tests of Tables 4, 5, 7 and 8 using a

constant as the only instrument. The five-asset system is examined, because

the two-asset systems are not overidentified. The estimates of the concavity
                                        32

parameter A are typically larger than in the previous tables. Using

nondurable goods the estimates of b1 are negative in two of the three

experiments, which suggests habit persistence. Using durable goods

expenditures all three point estimates are positive, which suggests

durability in expenditures. However, none of the estimates in Table 9 are

precise and the goodness of fit statistics do not indicate an improved fit

when we allow for nonseparable preferences)4

   In what sense then, does habit persistence explain the equity premium

puzzle, as claimed in Constantinides (1989)? To provide an answer to this

question, consider adding a mean preserving spread e÷1         to the asset return

                              where E(e+i] — 0 and E[e+i MRS+I1            —   0.
Ri(t÷l) as R.(t÷l) +   e1,
If equation (10) holds, so does the equation


                  EtE(Ri(t+l) +   ei)    MRSt+i]
                                                   —   1   .                   (13)


This implies that conditional and unconditional tests of the Euler equation

do not focus on the variance of asset returns. Likewise, matching the

variance of the equity premium was not one of the goals addressed by Mehra

and Prescott (1985).

    By contrast, Cotistantinides' (1990) goal was to match both the mean and

 the variance of the equity premium. He demonstrated that habit persistence

 improves upon time separable preferences. The mean equity premium is      driven

by the ERA coefficient rather than the elasticity of substitution in

 consumption. As we demonstrate in the Appendix, habit persistence has a

 second-order effect on the ERA coefficient and, predictably, does not improve

 significantly on the mean equity premium. The variance of the equity premium

 is driven by the elasticity of substitution in consumption. As we
                                     33

demonstrate in the Appendix, habit persistence decreases substantially the

elasticity of substitution and implies that a small variance of consumption

growth is associated with a large variance of the equity premium.

   In Table 10 we provide additional evidence on this issue. We repeat the

tests of Table 4, but we replace the real return of the Treasury bill in the

Euler equation with the real return plus a parameter L. This parameter

allows the unconditional mean return of the bill, and therefore the mean

excess return or premium of an asset relative to the bill, to be

unrestricted. Any rejection of this model will not be driven by an inability

to fit the mean bill return. The L parameter can be interpreted as a pricing

error, similar to a "Jensen's alpha" in the Capital Asset Pricing Model, or

as a liquidity premium on the bill return that is not captured by the model.



                            insert table 10 here



   Table 10 shows that the point estimates of L are positive and, in the two-

asset system, are significantly different from zero. This implies that the

average bill return which best fits the model is higher than the historical

average return, consistent with the pattern in Mehra and Prescott (1985). But

the goodness-of-fit tests and the estimates of b1 do not change much from the

results in Table 4. Thus, the tests are not highly sensitive to the average

level of the interest rate. This supports the interpretation that habit

persistence improves the fit of the model largely through its effect on

moments other than the mean equity premium.15
                                     34

                    8. suggestions for Future Research

   Our study suggests several avenues for future research. One extension is a

multiple-good model, which may provide further evidence on substitution

across consumption goods in the presence of habit persistence and durability.

Such a model could potentially identify the separate effects, but our results

suggest that more complex specifications will be econometrically challenging.

Further work is required to better understand the relation of seasonality and

habit persistence. Another challenge is to model several frequencies of

consumption and asset holding period returns simultaneously. Such an approach

is potentially promising, given the different time-series properties of asset

returns and consumption over different holding periods and given our evidence

which suggests nonseparabilities that operate at different frequencies.
                                                35

                                          APPENDIX

    With habit persistence and/or durability the RRA coefficient and the

intertemporal elasticity of substitution depend on the parameters of the

probability distribution of the asset returns. With plausible assumptions on

the parameters of the probability distribution, Constantinides (1990) proved

that the RRA coefficient approximately equals the parameter A and that the

intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption can be substantially

lower than the inverse of the relative risk aversion coefficient. These

insights are important in the interpretation of our empirical findings and

are illustrated here in the context of a simple deterministic economy.

    We assume that the investment opportunity set consists of just one asset

which is riskiess and has (one plus) rate of return R each period. The

representative consumer's preferences are the special case of the preferences

represented by equations (3)-(4) with                —1, b1 —   -h and b —   0   for r

2. The preferences then become


                 (1 -   A)    tO
                                       fltt -   hci)1      .                          (A.1)

The consumer's initial endowment is V0. The consumer receives zero

endowment or labor income. Therefore the equation of motion of wealth, in

units of the consumption good, is


                   Vt —     (Wi ci)R
                                   -             .                                    (A.2)

An admissible consumption plan is defined by the properties 0 c <                 •
o    c hci
        -        and 0
                            Vt     for all t.        The conditions

                   V    -
                       o R-h
                            hRc
                                  -0                                                  (A.3)
                                                   36

and


                    R>h                                                                 (A.4)


guarantee that the set of admissible plans is non-empty. For example, the

consumption plan c —          htc1          is feasible because it implies c > 0,       c -
hci    — 0   and has a discounted present value E0 R c1 —
                                                                                  hRc1/(R-h)
which is less than or equal to W0, by the condition (A.3). Finally, the

right-hand part of the inequality


                    1 <                < R                                              (A.S)


guarantees that the utility of consumption over the infinite horizon is
finite under all feasible consumption plans.

   Define the derived utility of wealth at time t by the recursive equation


v(w, c1) — max((l         -
                              A)(c      -
                                            hc     )lA + flV((W   -
                                                                      c)R,   ce)] .     (A.6)

The first order condition with respect to c is


(c -   hci)     -
                    RVi((W
                                  -
                                      c)R, c) + 2t - c)R,              c) — 0           (A.7)


where V1 and V2 are the derivatives of V with respect to its first and

second arguments, respectively. The solution of equations (A.6) and (A.7)

gives the optimal consumption plan as


         c —   (R -(R)"'}(R -
                                       h)R2W + (R)1"'hRci                               (A.8)



and the derived utility of wealth as

                                             hRc         1-A
                                                                                        (A.9)
        V(w, cci) — 1         -   A [w - R         t1)
                                                             37


where


            K — (R      (R)A)A(R - h)1A                      R2A1 .                                                 (A.lO)

     We proceed to derive the time series of consumption. Equation (A.8) gives

      in terms of c and cci; and the one-lag version of (A.8) gives W1

in terms of ctl and cr2. We eliminate W and W1 from equation

(A.2) and obtain


                                ct —   ((R)l'A      +   h)ci h(R)1'c2     -                     .                   (A.1l)

with solution

                -                                                                  -l
c —
 t
            °
                            il (R)(t+ + T                                                   ol ht+l                     (A.12)
        I
            (R)V h                                      1
                                                              (flR)                 -   h

Since (flR)L'A > 1 and 0                    h < 1, the first term in equation (A.12)

dominates the second term. As t -.                          , the              ratio c/c1 tends to (R)1'.
                                                                                    (R)l//A -         >   0    as   t    -.
 It can also be shown that ci/W tends to

     The RRA coefficient is defined as


                RRA —
                        :;tvll
                          1                                                                                             (A.l3)

                    —                      -                          (by (A.9))
                        1   -
                                hRc1/(R         h)W

                    —                                                                (in the steady state).
                                         -1/A       l)/(R              h)
                        I -     h(R(R)          -                 -



 We use the condition (A.5) to obtain

                                                    A                                                                   (A.14)
                        A   PRA          - h(R                        -
                                                                              h)

 The upper bound of the RRA coefficient is increasing in h. For example, for

 a large value of Ii, h — .9                    and R — 1.03 we obtain A                            RRA       l.3A. We
                                                38

conclude that the RRA coefficient approximately equals the parameter A and

that the approximation is not sensitive to the value of the parameter h.

   The intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption is defined as

                I
        S   —




            — ((flR)"'ci/c - h(flR)hh/Ac2/)/A
                                                                                 (A.15)
            — (1    -
                        h(PR)]h/A)/A    (in the steady state).

If R is approximately one, for example, we obtain s              (l-h)/A. We conclude

that the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is highly sensitive to the

parameter h.

   The product s x REA in the steady state equals


                              s x RRA — 1   -   hR1                              (A.16)


Whereas the product equals one in the absence of habit persistence (h —            0),
habit persistence drives a wedge between the RRA coefficient and the inverse

of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution in the sense that the product

may be substantially below one.
                        ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The first author acknowledges financial support from the Center
for Research in Security Prices at the University of Chicago.
The second author acknowledges financial support from a National
Science Foundation research grant and from a gift to the Graduate
School of Business, University of Chicago, by Dimensional Fund
Advisors. The authors thank Phillip Braun, John Cochrane, U.
Kimball Dietrich, Eugene Fama, Lars Hansen, Campbell Harvey, John
Heaton, Ravi Jagannathan, Yuming Li, Franz Palm, Peter Rossi,
Kenneth Singleton, George Tauchen, an anonymous referee, and
participants at seminars at the University of Chicago, the
Cleveland Federal Reserve Bank, Columbia University, Duke
University, the London Business School, the 1988 American Finance
Association, the 1989 European Finance Association and the 1990
Western Finance Association annual meetings for helpful
discussions. We thank Ed Allen for numerous discussions and
extremely capable research assistance. The authors are solely
responsible for the content of this paper. First draft: October,
1987; current draft: December, 1990.
                                           39

                                       REFERENCES

Backus, D., A. W. Gregory and C. I. Telrner, 1990, Accounting for forward

     rates in markets for forward currency, working paper, New York

     University.

Bossaerts, P. and R. Green, 1989, A General Equilibrium Model of Changing

     Risk Premia: Theory and Tests, Review of Financial Studies.

Campbell, J. Y., 1987. Stock Returns and the Term Structure, Journal of

     Financial Economics 18, 373-399.

Campbell, 3. Y. and Y. Hamao, 1989, Predictable Bond and Stock Returns in

     the United States and Japan: A Study of Long-Term Capital Market

     Integration, working paper. Princeton University and the University of

     California at San Diego.

Campbell, 3. Y., and R. J. Shiller, 1988a. The Dividend-Price Ratio and

     Expectations of Future Dividends and Discount Factors, Review of

     Financial Studies 3, 195-228.

Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller, 1988b, Stock Prices, Earnings, and

     Expected Dividends, Journal of Finance 43, 661-676.

Cecchetti, S., P. Lam and N. Mark, 1990, The Equity Premium and the Risk

     Free Rate: Matching the Moments, working paper, Ohio State

     University.

Constantinides, C. M., 1990, Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity

     Premium Puzzle,       Journal of Political Economy 98, 519-543.

Cutler, D. M. ,   J.   Poterba and L. Summers, 1988, International Evidence on the

     Predictability of Stock Returns, working paper presented at the Center

     for Research in Security Prices, October, 1988.
                                       40

Dunn, K. B., and K. J. Singleton, 1986, Modelling the Term Structure of

    Interest Rates under Non-Separable Utility and Durability of Goods,

    Journal of Financial Economics 17, 27-55.

Eichenbauxn, M. S., and L. P. Hansen, 1990, Estimating Models with

     Intertemporal Substitution Using Aggregate Time Series Data, Journal

     of Business and Economic Statistics, 8, 53-69.

Eichenbaum, M. S., L. P. Hansen, and K. J. Singleton, 1988, A Time Series

     Analysis of Representative Agent Models of Consumption and Leisure Choices

     under Uncertainty, Quarterly Journal of Economics 103, 51-78.

English, W. B, J. Miron and D. W. Wilcox, 1989, Seasonal Fluctuations and the

     Life Cycle Model of Consumption: A Correction, Journal of Political

     Economy 97, 988-991.

Epstein, L. C., and Zin, S. E. 1989, Substitution, Risk Aversion and the

     Temporal Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical

     Framework, Econometrica 57, 937-969.

Fama, E., 1984, Information in the Term Structure, Journal of Financial

     Economics 13, 509-528.

Fama, E. F., and K. R. French, 1988, Dividend Yields and Expected Stock

     Returns, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 3-25.

Fama, E. F., and G. W. Schwert, 1977, Asset Returns and Inflation, Journal of

     Financial Economics 5, 115-146.

Ferson, W. E., 1983, Expectations of Real Interest Rates and Aggregate

     Consumption: Empirical Tests, Journal of Financial and Quantitative

     Analysis 18, 477-497.

Ferson, W. E. and S. Foerster, 1990, Finite Sample properties of Methods of

     Moments in Latent Variable Tests of Asset Pricing Models, working
                                       41

    paper, University of Chicago and the University of Western Ontario.

Ferson, W. E. and C. Harvey. 1990, Seasonality and Consumption-based Asset

     Pricing, working paper, Duke University and the University of Chicago.

Gallant, R. A., and C. Tauchen, 1989, Seminonparametric Estimation of

     Conditionally Constrained Heterogeneous Processes: Asset Pricing

     Applications, EconometriCs, 57, 1091-1120.

Grossman, S. J., A. Melino, and R. J. Shiller, 1987, Estimating the

     Continuous-Time Consumption Based Asset-Pricing Model, Journal of

     Business and Economic Statistics 5, 315-327.

Hall, R. E. 1988, Intertemporal substitution in consumption, Journal of

     Political Economy 96, 339-357.

Hansen, L. P., 1982, Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments

     Estimators, Econometrica 50, 1029-1054.

Hansen, L. P., and R. Jagannathan, 1990, Implications of Security Market Data

     for Models of Dynamic Economies, Journal of Political Economy,

     forthcoming.

Hansen, L. P., and K. J. Singleton, 1982, Generalized Instrumental Variables

     Estimation of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models, Econometrica 50,

     1269-1286.

Hansen, L. P., and K. J. Singleton, 1983, Stochastic Consumption, Risk

     Aversion and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns, Journal of Political

     Economy 91, 249-266.

Heaton, J., 1990, The Interaction between Time-Nonseparable Preferences and

     Time Aggregation, working paper '318l-90-EFA, Massachusetts Institute of

     Technology.

Keim, D. B., and R. F. Stambaugh, 1986, Predicting Returns in the Stock and
                                          42

     Bond Markets, Journal of Financial Economics 17, 357-390.

Kocherlakota, N. ,   1990, On tests of representative consumer asset pricing

     models, working paper, Northwestern University.

Lo, A. W. and A. C. MacKinlay, 1990, Data Snooping and Biases in Tests of

     Finincial Models, Review of Financial Studies 3, 431-468.

Mehra, R., and E. C. Prescott, 1985, The Equity Premium: A Puzzle, Journal

     of Monetary Economics 15, 145-161.

Miron, Jeffrey A., 1986, Seasonal fluctuations and the life cycle-permanent

     income model of consumption, Journal of Political Economy 94, 1258-

     1279.

Ryder, H. E., Jr., and C. K. Heal, 1973, Optimal Growth with

     Intertemporally Dependent Preferences, Review of Economic Studies 40,

     1-31.

Singleton, K. 1990, On the Specification and Estimation of Representative

     Consumer Asset Pricing Models, Proceedings of the 6-th world congress

     of the Econometric Society (forthcoming).

Stambaugh, R., 1988, The information in forward rates: Implications for models

      of the term structure, Journal of Financial Economics 21 (May ),   41-70.

Sundaresan, S.M., 1989, Interteinporally Dependent Preferences and the

      Volatility of Consumption and Wealth, Review of Financial Studies 2,73-89.

Tauchen, C. 1986, Statistical properties of generalized method-of-moments

      estimators of structural parameters obtained from financial market

      data, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 4, 397-425.

Winder, C. A. and Franz C. Palm, 1990, Stochastic implications of the life

      cycle consumption model under rational habit formation, working paper,

      University of Limburg.
                                      43

                                  FOOTNOTES


I. Heaton (1990) studies monthly data using a first order approximation of
the Euler equation in this paper. He uses lagged consumption and dividends
as the information set and he models time-aggregation. Heaton finds evidence
for both durability and habit persistence in monthly expenditures. His
evidence suggests that the half-life of durability is relatively short and
that habit persistence dominates durability at horizons beyond about two
months. These results are consistent with our estimates of b1, which
suggests that the effects of time-aggregation are not a very important factor
in the estimates.

2. Given a linear approximation time aggregation increases the order of the
MA process by one. In the general, nonlinear Euler equation the results of
time-aggregation can be more complex.

3. Specifically, we construct the weighting matrix W using the parameter
estimates from the n-th stage, use this matrix to find parameters for stage
n + I which minimize the quadratic form, and then use the new parameters to
update the weighting matrix. The iterations continue until a minimum value
of the quadratic form is obtained.

4. The annual data for 1929-49 are spliced into the annual sums of the
quarterly Commerce department data, in real, per capita terms, using 1949
levels as the splicing factor.

5. Price deflators for personal consumption expenditures are only available
to us in seasonally adjusted form. We use the seasonally unadjusted
components of the CPI for consumer nondurable goods to deflate the nominal
nondurables expenditure totals, and the CPI for consumer durables to deflate
the durable goods expenditures. In other experiments, we used the overall
CPI as the deflator for both categories, and the results were similar.

6. See Lo and MacKinlay (1990) for an analysis of data snooping in financial
models. Note that if there is spurious predictability, then it will be
difficult for the Euler equation to "explain" this predictability. Such a
bias is conservative, given our result that habit persistence helps to
explain the predictability through the Euler equation.

7. Deflated returns produce similar results.

8. The GMM   estimate of b   minimizes a quadratic form which is infinite for
c + b1c -    —0and undehned for c + b1c   < 0. Our estimates of b1
esure ta the argument of the utility function, c + b1c1, is positive
at all dates. In our quarterly (annual, monthly) sample the minimum ratio
(c /c      is 0.98 (0.92, .975), verifying that the argument of the utility
fucton is positive at all dates and for all point estimates of b1
presented in Tables 3-6.
                                     44

9. We repeated the tests in panel 2, except that we used an MA(l) assumption
for the error terms in the time separable model and an MA(2) assumption in
the one-lag, nonseparable model. The point estimates of the parameters are
very similar but the standard errors are typically larger. The goodness-of-
f it statistics are typically smaller than in panel 2. For example, the time
separable model is not longer rejected in the five-asset system (the p-
value is 0.44) but it is rejected in the two-asset system (p-value— 0.006).
The one-lag, nonseparable model is not rejected. Including additional moving
average terms, when the autocorrelations are not significant, implies that
the estimate of the covariance matrix of the orthogonality conditions will be
noisier. We would expect this to reduce the efficiency of the estimates and
the power of the goodness-of-fit tests.

10. We repeated the tests in panel 2, using the financial variables at lag
two as instruments, but we used alternative moving average assumptions for
the error terms (i.e. MA(l) for the time-separable and MA(2) for the one-lag
model. These experiments show that the results are robust. In the five-asset
system the point estimate of b1 is -0.87 (standard error 0.03). However, none
of the models can be rejected y the goodness-of-fit statistics and the
standard errors of the coefficients are often larger than in table 5.

11. Even is the absence of durability two parameters (h and a) determine the
half-life of habit persistence. Three parameters would be needed to isolate
the separate effects of durability and habit persistence.

12. The seasonally adjusted consumption levels are given by
c exp(y'(D - Dr]), where c is the unadjusted consumption, -y is a vector of
three shift parameters reiahve to the first quarter, Dt is a vector of dummy
variables for quarters 2-4 and D is the vector of sample means of the dummy
variables.

13. Miron (1986) included a time-squared term in his regressions for the log
of consumption. In a previous version of this paper we followed Miron by
including the squared term. Our results using this alternative series were
very similar to those reported in Tables 7, 8 and 9.

14. We replicated the tests in Table 6 using only a constant as the
instrument and we are unable to reject the hypothesis that b1 is zero.

15. Singleton (1990) provides an analysis of Euler equation errors which also
suggests that habit persistence improves the fit of consumption models
through the time series properties of the data.
                            Figure 1: THE INSTRU1(ENTS
SYMBOL         DEFINITION                                        SOURCE


VWYLD(-l)      Dividend yield on the CRSP value-weighted stock    CRSP
               index.

DIVDIFF(-l)    Dividend yield on the CRSP equally-weighted stock CRSP
               index less the dividend yield of the value-
               weighted stock index.


TBLMO          Nominal, one-month Treasury bill rate.             CRSP

Pl(-l)         Inverse of the price level index for the smallest CRSP
               decile of common stocks, multiplied by the
               average of the price level over the previous
               year.

CIPX(-l)       Annual growth rate of the U.S. industrial         Federal
               production index.                                 Reserve
                                                                 Bulletin

LSLOPE(-l)     Average monthly yield-to-maturity of             Federal
               corporate bonds rated Aaa by Moody's Investor    Reserve
               Services, less the one-month Treasury bill rate. Bulletin

SSLOPE(-l)     Three-month Treasury bill rate less the one-       CRSP
               month Treasury bill rate.

CBPREM(-l)     Average monthly yield-to-maturity of              Federal
               corporate bonds rated Baa by Moody's Investor     Reserve
               Services, less the Aaa corporate bond yield.      Bulletin



Notes: CRSP stands for the Center for Research in Security Prices at the
University of Chicago.
                                Table 1 - Summary Statistics

Consumption growth rates are for real per capita expenditures. Returns are arithmetic
nominal rates of return per annum. The return of treasury bills corresponds to a strategy of
rolling over one-month bills each month. DecN refers to a value weighted portfolio of common
stocks of the N-th size decile. Cbprern is the annualized yield-to-maturity of corporate
bonds rated BAA by Moodys investor services less the yield of AAA rated bonds. TBIMO is the
continuously-compounded rate of return of a 1-month treasury bill. Vwyld in the dividend
yield on the CRSP value-weighted index, measured as the previous 12-months dividend payments
divided by the level of the index. Divdiff is the difference between the dividend yield of
the CRSI' equally-weighted index and that of the value-weighted index. ISlope is the AAA
corporate bond yield less the one-month treasury bill rate. SSlope is the difference between
the three-month and one the one-month treasury bill yield. Cipx is the continuously-
compounded annual growth rate of the Index of industrial production. P1 is the inverse of
index level of prices of the smallest decile of common stocks on the NYSE, relative to the
average of the level for the preceding 12 months. X-ll indicates data seasonally adjusted by
the Commerce Department using the X-ll program. DSA indicates consumption data seasonally
adjusted by the authors using dummy variables. NSA denotes a not seasonally adjusted
component of the CPI.


Part I: Quarterly Data                                 Autocorrelations

Variable                 Mean      Std. Dcv.                   p3     p4     p8   p12   p24   p36
                                                 p1    p2
seal Consumption Growth Rates (1948.2-1986.2: 153 observations, in percent)

Nondurables (X-ll)   0.302          0852        0.07 0.08 0.12 -0.05 -0.17 -0.01 -0.01 -0.16
Durables (X-ll)      0.942          4.236      -0.09 0.15 -0.14 -0.03 -0.20 -0.09 0.03 0.02
Nondurables (DSA)    0.000          2.233      -0.31 -0.21 -0.14 0.56 0.40 0.50 0.31 0.11
Durables   (DSA)     0.167          5.236      -0.24 0.22 -0.27 0.19 -0.02 0.01 -0.01 0.01

Asset Returns (1947.1-1986.4: 160 observations)

1   Month bill       0.012          0.008       0.96 0.92 0.90 0.87 0.75 0.68 0.51 0.38
Government Bond      0.012          0.049      -0.06 0.07 0.15 0.06 -0.06 -0.01 0.00 -0.11
Stocks: Decl         0.047          0.133       0.01 -0.11 -0.08 0.15 -0.04 0.13 -0.07 0.1S
Stocks: DecS         0.037          0.099       0.10 -0.10 -0.06 -0.01 -0.07 0.03 -0.17 0.09
Stocks: Dec10        0.029          0.071       0.13 -0.06 -0.05 -0.01 -0.07 0.05 -0.13 0.09

Instrumental Variables (1947.1.1987.3: 163 observations)

Cbprem               0.946          0.474       0.92   0.85    0.80   0.73   0.54 0.41 0.39 0.26
Thlmo                0.047          0.031       0.91   0.90    0.88   0.85   0.75 0.67 0.50 0.37
Vwyld                0.041          0.011       0.94   0.88    0.83   0.78   0.64 0.55 0.08 -0.19
divdiff              -0.002         0.005       0.92   0.87    0.79   0.74   0.53 0.44 0.24 0.14
LSlope               0.019          0.013       0.66   0.61    0.55   0.45   0.17 -0.04 0.02 0.02
Cipx                 0.037          0.066        0.81 0.47 0.10 -0.25 .0.16 -0.05 -0.00 -0.00
 P1                  0.922          0.149        0.60 0.27 0.06 .0.02 -0.17 0.08 -0.29 0.00
 SSlope              0.323          0.455        0.15 035 0.21 0.50 0.37 0.07 0.15 006
Inflation Rates (1948.2-1986.2: 153 observations, in percent)

Nondurables   (X-11)   0.906     1.084      0.69    0.54   0.48   0.31.   0.09   0.18   0.23 -0.01
Durables      (X-l1)   0.694     1.218      0.08    0.09   0.14   0.08    0.36   0.00   0.25   0.03
Nondurables   (NSA)    0.904     1.366      0.44    0.33   0.43   0.34    0.05   0.16   0.20 -0.03
Durables      (NSA)    0.789     1.260      0.37    0.36   0.26   0.49    0.61   0.34   0.25   0.13




Part II: Annual Data                                Autocorrelations

Variable                Mean    Std. Dev.
                                               p1    p2 3         P4      P5      p6     p7     p8

Real Consumption Crowth Rates (1930-1986: 57 observations)

Nondurables            0.014    0.031       0.41 0.10 -0.09 .0.21 -0.02 -0.14 -0.05 -0.08
Durables               0.040    0.164       0.26 -0.09 -0.28 -0.22 -0.02 -0.00 -0,01 -0.26

s$et Peturns (1926-1986: 61 observations)

1 Month bill           0.035    0.034       0.92 0.85 0.80 0.75 0.70      0.64 0.59 0.53
Government Bond        0.066    0.085       0.10 0.02 0.11 0.10 -0.14     0.09 -0.10 -0.00
Stocks: Dccl           0.228    0.469       0.15 -0.15 -0.13 -0.34 -0.14 -0.14 -0.03 0.07
Stocks: Dec5           0.153    0.290       0.04 -0.15 -0.09 -0.20 -0,03 -0.14 0.01 -0.04
Stocks: Dec10          0.108    0.195       0.04 -0.21 -0.04 -0.14 -0.01 -0.07 0.10 0.05

Instrumental Variables (1926-1986: 61 observations)

ThImo                  0.033     0.029      0.91 0.84 0.79 0.76 0.71             0.66   0.59   0.53
Vvyld                  0.045     0.014      0.62 0.30 0.20 0.21 0.29             0.30   0.22   0.15
djvdjff                -0.004    0.008      0.70 0.39 0.28 0.32 0.35             0.33   0.30   0.19
P1                      1.004    0.334      0.26 0.02 -0.10 -0.21 -0.16          0.16   0.11   0.09
SSlope                 0.342     0.594      0.59 0.38 0.12 0.20 0.36             0.32   0.22   0.13

Inflation Rates (1930-1986: 57 observations)

Nondurables             0.031    0.133      0.32 -0,06 -0.28 -0.32 -0.06         0.00 -0.07 -0.05
Durables
Part III: Monthly Data                               Autocorrelations

Variable                 Mean   Std. 0ev.            p2    p3     p4     P8     p12    p24    p36
                                             P1


Real Consumption Crowth Rates (1959.02-1986.12: 335 observations)

Nondurables   (X-1l)   0.0010    0.0078     -0.36   0.03 0.11 -0.08 0.01 -0.04 -0.24 -0.06
Services      (X-11)   0.0022    0.0038     -0.16   0.00 -0.03 -0.08 0.10 -0.04 -0.05 0.09
Durables      (X-11)   0.0036    0.0300     -0.11   -0.09 -0.17 -0.01 0.05 0.11 -0.12 -0.02
Total         (X-11)   0.0019    0.0059     -0.14   -0.01 -0.01 0.00 0.05 0.02 -0.21 -0.06

Asset Returns (1959.01-1986.12: 336 observations)

1 Month bill           0.0048    0.0024     0.96 0.93 0.90 0.88 0.83 0.76 0.58 0.45
Covernmenc 8ond        0.0052    0.0290      0.02   0.02 -0.15 0.06 0.01 -0.05 -0.07 0.01
Stocks: Dccl           0.0151    0.0714      0.08   -0.02 -0.03 -0.01 -0.12 0.23 0.03 0.10
Stocks: DecS           0.0117    0.0536      0.12   -0.03 0.02 0.04 -0.13 0.10 0.01 0.00
Stocks: Dec10          0.0078    0.0405     -0.03   -0.02 0.05 0.08 -0.02 0.07 -0.02 -0.03

Instriunentat Variables (1958.12-1986.11: 336 observations)

                       0.011     0.005      0.97    0.93   0.91   0.89   0.78   0.67   0.47   0.31
Cbprem
Tblmo                  0.059     0.029      0.96    0.93   0.90   0.88   0.84   0.77   0.58   0.45
                       0.038     0.009      0.98    0.96   0.94   0.92   0.82   0.75   0.67   0.66
Vwyld
divdiff                -0.003    0.004      0.97    0.96   0.94   0.92   0.85   0.81   0.54   0.34
LSlope                  0020     0.015       0.89 0.80 0.73 0.67 0.57 0.40 0.08 -0.16
GI9X                   0.039     0.058       0.96 0.90 0.81 0.72 0.37 -0.02 -0.33 -0.07
P1                     2.548     47.67       0.07 0.11 0.36 -0.11 -0.03 -0.05 0.03 0.01
SSlope                 0.434     0.432       0.34 0.30 0.20 0.19 0.22 0.43 0.26 0.02
Inflation Rates (1959.02-1986.12: 335 observations)
Nondurables (X-1l)      0.004    0.005       0.36   0.36   0.23 0.31 0.27 0.14 0.07 -0.04
Durables      (X-l1)    0.003    0.005       0.01   0.23   0.11 0.13 0.13 0.11 -0.02 0.03
Services      (X-11)    0.004    0.003       0.58   0.65   0.64 0.59 0.60 0.60 0.51 0.45
Total         (X-l1)    0.004    0.003       0.49   0.56   0.44 0.51 0.45 0.45 0.29 0.23
                     TABLE 2: CORRElATIONS OF THE INSTRUMENTS

Cbprem is the annualized yield-to-maturity of corporate bonds rated BAA by
Moodys investor services less the yield of AAA rated bonds. TBIMO is the
continuously-compounded race of return of a 1-month treasury bill. Vwyld in the
dividend yield on the CRSPvalue-weighted index, measured as the previous 12-
months dividend payments divided by the level of the index. Divdiff is the
difference between the dividend yield of the CRSP equally-weighted index and
that of the value-weighted index. LSlope is the AAA corporate bond yield less
the one-month treasury bill rate. SSlope is the difference between the three-
month and one the one-month treasury bill yield. Gipx is the continuously-
compounded annual growth rate of the index of industrial production. P1 is the
inverse of index level of prices of the smallest decile of common stocks on the
NYSE, relative to the average of the level for the preceding 12 months.


PART I: QUARTERLY DATA (SAMPLE PERIOD 1948.1-1987.3: 163 observations)

          Cbprem     Thlmo     Vwyld      Divdiff LSlope Cipx          P1        SSlope
Cbprem     1.000
Tblmo      0.674     1.000
Vwyld     0.178      0.015      1.000
Divdiff -0.476      -0.598     -0.036     1.000
LSlope     0.512    -0.017      0.017    -0.287     1.000
Cipx      -0.448    -0.089     -0.181    -0.152    -0.222     1.000
P1        -0.06      0.05      0.1].      0.45     -0.12     -0.14     1.000
SSlope     0.44      0.37      0.05      -0.28      0.29      -0.17    0.03      1.000


PART II: ANNUAL DATA (SAMPLE PERIOD 1926-1986: 61 observations)

          Thliuo    Vwyld     Divdiff       P1      Slope
Thlmo      1.00
Vwyld      -0.23     1.00
Divdiff     0.10    -0.21       1.00
P1         -0.07     0.54      0.09         1.00
SSlope      0.69    -0.15      0.09        -0.12      1.00


PART III: MONTHLY DATA (SAMPLE PERIOD 1958.12-1986.11: 336 observations)

          Cbprem   Thlrno    Vwyld      Divdiff Lslope       Gipx       P1     Sslope
Cbprem     1.0
Tblmo    0.59        1.0
Vwyld    0.68       0.74        1.0
Divdiff -0.42      -0.50      -0.56        1.0
Lslope   0.49      -0.18       0.18      -0.25       1.0
Gipx    -0.56      -0.20      -0.37      -0.013    -0.23      1.0
P1       0.14       0.16       0.09      -0.10     -0.014     0.013    1.0
Sslope   0.39       0.25       0.36      -0.23     0.30      -0.23    0.066      1.0
                                         Table 3

Test results using monthly returns data for 1959.5 - 1986.10 (330 observations)
and monthly consumption. The model assumes that a representative agent maximizes:


                       E0[(l -   A)1          tdl]
                                       t.-O
where C —
            c + b1 c1 and  c is consumption expenditures at date t. A is the
                       is the rate of time discount, and b1 is the parameter
concavity parameter,
representing habit persistence (b1 < 0) or durability (b1 > 0). In the time-
separable model, b1 is set equal to zero. Estimation is by generalized method of
moments (CMM). Asymptotic standard errors (s.e) are in parentheses. P-value is
the probability that a x2 variate exceeds the minimized sample value of the CMN
criterion function. The tests use a system of five asset returns: the common
stock portfolios from size deciles 1,5 and 10, a long-term government bond and a
one-month Treasury bill. Real returns are the nominal returns deflated by the
price deflator corresponding to the measure of consumption.


                                                         A                           x2
                                                                   b1
                                              (s.e.)   (s.e)      (s.e)         (p-value)


  PANEL 1: USING THE MOST RECENT LAGS OF THE INSTRUMENTS
               b                c
  INSTRUMENTS:     CONSUMPTION:
                                                                            a
  Coris.& Rets.(-l) Nondurables          0.993           0.305          0          57.23
                                        (0.000)         (0.073)                   (0.006)

                                         1.001           2.112      0.427          40.25
                                        (0.001)         (0.531)    (0.065)        (0.150)



                                                                            a
  Financial(-l)        Nondurables       0.999          -0.046       .0            77.87
                                        (0.000)         (0.186)                   (0.001)

                                         0.838           8.437     -0.717          45.02
                                        (0.062)        (10.397)    (0.194)        (0.347)
table3 page 2

                                                     A                         X2
                                          (s.e.)    (s.e)     (s.e)       (p-value)


  PANEL 2: USING THE SECOND LAGGED VALUES OF THE INSTRUMENTS
               b                c
  INSTRUMENTS:     CONSUMPTION:
                                                                      a
 Cons.& Rets.(-2) Nondurables            0.999       1.105       —O          21.26
                                        (0.001)     (0.408)                 (0.266)

                                         0.999       1.154      0.065        18.50
                                        (0.001)     (0.565)    (0.227)      (0.358)



                                                                      a
  Financial(-2)      Nondurables         0.999       0.657       —O          75.14
                                        (0.000)     (0.239)                 (0.002)

                                         0.837      12.152     -0.642        55.85
                                        (0.060)    (13.538)    (0.215)      (0.075)



  PANEL 3: USING THE SECOND LAGGED VALUES OF THE 1NSTRUMENT AND A HIGHER
           ORDER MOVING AVERAGE PROCESS FOR THE ERROR TERMS
                 b                  c
  INSTRUMENTS:       CONSUMPTION:
                                                                      a
  Cons.& Rets.(-2) Notdurab1es           0.999       1.020       —0          18.32
                                        (0.001)     (0.381)                 (0.435)
                                         0.999       1.204      0.083        16.76
                                        (0.001)     (0.585)    (0.228)      (0.471)


                                                                      a
  Financial(-2)       Nondurables        0.999       1.113        0          63.20
                                        (0.001)     (0.291)                 (0.024)

                                         0.999       1.918     -0.361        47.60
                                        (0.002)     (1.753)    (0.223)      (0.255)
table3 page 3

a
    An "NO" indicates that the parameter is set to zero.
b   The financial instruments consist of a constant and the eight variables
summarized in figure 1. The notation (-1) indicates that the variables are lagged
back one month relative to the asset returns in the Euler equations. When the
financial instruments are denoted "financial(-2)." they are lagged back two
months relative to the asset returns in the Euler equations. "Cons. & Rets.
denotes an instrument set composed of: a constant, the growth of the consumption
measure, the real treasury bill return and the real return of the size portfolio
from the smallest decile of firms. When denoted "Cons.& Rets.(-l), each of the
variables are lagged one period and two periods back relative to the asset
returns in the Euler equation, and there are seven instruments. When the
instruments are Cons.& Rets.(-2), the lagged consumption and returns are lagged
back two periods only and there are only four instruments.
c    Monthly consumption data are real, per capita consumer expenditures for
nondurable goods.
d    In panel 3, the error terms are assumed to follow an MA(l) process when the
time-separable model (b1—O) is estimated and an MA(2) process when the one-lag
model is estimated.
                                            Table 4

Tests Results Using Quarterly Returns Data for 1948:2 -              1986:2   (153
observations). The model assumes that a representative agent maximizes:


                       E0[(l -   A)'   tO flt]
where C —
            c + b1 c1 and c is real, per capita nondurables consumption
expenditures at date t. The consumption expenditures are seasonally-adjusted by
the Commerce department using the X-l1 seasonal adjustment program. A is the
concavity parameter,      is the rate of time discount, and b1 is the parameter
representing habit persistence (b1 < 0) or durability (b1 > 0). Estimation is by
generalized method of moments (GMM). Asymptotic standard errors are in
parentheses. P-value is the probability that a              variate exceeds the minimized
sample value of the GMM criterion function. DecN is the real return of common
stocks from market value decile N. The real returns are the nominal returns
deflated by the nondurables price deflator.


                                       I
                                                       A                              p-value
                                                             b1
 PANEL 1: USING THE FINANCIAL INSTRUHENTS' HOST RECENT LAGGED VALUESb

                                                                 a
 System: Treasury Bill                      1.042     6.31 0                  61.43    0.034
         Government Bond                   (0.009) (1.31)
         Stocks: Decl
         Stocks: DecS                       0.883   0.78   -0.95              37.08    0.686
         Stocks: Dec10                     (0.049) (1.19) (0.05)




 System: Treasury Bill                     0.995 -0.36      mO                38.69    0.001
         Stocks: Dec10                     (0.003) (0.40)

                                            0.575   4.94   -0.95              22.36    0.099
                                           (0.162) (8.71) (0.08)
table 4 page 2

                                              A                            p-value
                                                     b1
  PANEL 2: USING THE FINANCIAL INSTR!JMENTS LAGGED TWO PERIODS BACKb

                                                         a
  System: Treasury Bill            1.002   2.82     aO             65.14     0.016
          Government Bond         (0.002) (0.35)
          Stocks: Deci
          Stocks: Dec5             0.998    1.81   -0.97           34.39     0.792
          Stocks: Dec10           (0.002) (0.83) (0.01)




  System: Treasury Bill            0.998   2.09     aO             46.85     0.000
          Stocks: Dec10           (0.002) (0.37)

                                   0.930    1.82   -0.97           13.45    0.568
                                  (0.082) (1.59) (0.01)

  PANEL 3: USING LAGGED CONSUNPTIO N AND RETURNS AS INSTRUMENTSL

                                                         a
  System: Treasury Bill            0.999   0.63     nO             48.92    0.037
          Government Bond         (0.001) (0.23)
          Stocks: Deci
          Stocks: DecS             0.998   0.67   -0.28            34.95    0.329
          Stocks: Dec10           (0.001) (0.29) (0.10)




  System: Treasury Bill            0.999   0.71     nO             29.49    0.003
          Stocks: Dec10           (0.001) (0.28)

                                   0.999    1.70   -0.21           19.98    0.046
                                  (0.005)   (1.08) (0.15)

 An "E0" indicates that the parameter is set to zero.

b The financial instrumental variables are a constant and the eight variables
summarized in Figure 1.

c The intrwnents are seven: a constant, the growth of the consumption measure,
the real treasury bill return and the real return of the size portfolio from the
smallest decile of firms, each lagged one period and two periods back relative to
the asset returns in the Euler equation.
                                     Table 5

Tests Results Using Annual Returns for 1932 - 1984 (53 observations). The model
assumes that a representative agent maximizes:


                    E0[(l -   A)1
                                    tO
where C —     + b1 ci and c is real, per capita nondurables consumption
expenditures at date t. A is the concavity parameter,         is the rate of time
discount, and b1 is the parameter representing habit persistence (b1 < 0) or
durability (b1 > 0). Estimation is by generalized method of moments (GMM).
Standard errors are in parentheses. P-value is the probability that a           variate
exceeds the minimized sample value of the GMM criterion function. DecN is the
real return of common stocks from market value decile N. The real returns are the
nominal returns deflated by the nondurables price deflator.


                                               A                             p-value
                                                      b1
 PANEL 1: USING THE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS HOST RECENT LAGGED VALUESb

                                                          a
 System: Treasury Bill               1.015   0.85    cO              35.76     0.149
         Government Bond            (0.004) (0.35)
         Stocks: Dccl
         Stocks: Dec5                1.167   0.03   -0.85            21.01     0.786
         Stocks: Dec10              (0.021) (0.52) (0.16)



 System: Treasury Bill               0.966 -2.24     mU              19.67    0.033
         Stocks: Dec10              (0.008) (0.34)

                                     0.995   0.05   -0.79            16.62    0.055
                                    (0.014) (0.55) (1.16)
table S page 2

                                     $        A                            p-value
                                                      b1
  PANEL 2: USING THE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS LAGGED TWO PERIODS BACKb

                                                          a
  System: Treasury Bill            0.966 -3.09       aO            34.17    0.195
          Government Bond         (0.007) (0.59)
          Stocks: Decl
          Stocks: Dec5             0.978   0.45   -0.92            20.50     0.809
          Stocks: Dec10           (0.001) (0.02) (0.01)



  System: Treasury Bill            0.947 -3.70       EO            19.29     0.037
          Stocks: Dec10           (0.017)   (0.97)

                                   0.994    -3.30    -0.62          8.47     0.487
                                  (0.099) (4.19) (0.18)
  PANEL 3: USING LAGGED CONSUMPTIO N AND RETURNS AS INSTRUMENTSC

                                                          a
  System: Treasury Bill            0.999   0.54      mO            35.06     0.371
          Government Bond         (0.005) (0.32)
          Stocks: Deci
          Stocks: Dec5             1.025   2.58   -0.12            23.55     0.860
          Stocks: Dec10           (0.004) (0.37) (0.06)



  System: Treasury Bill            0.997 -1.09       mO            26.48     0.009
          Stocks: Dec10           (0.010) (0.44)

                                   0.988   0.07      -0.74         14.05     0.230
                                  (0.007) (0.40)     (0.64)



a An "mO" indicates that the parameter is set to zero.

b The financial instrumental variables are a constant and the eight variables
summarized in Figure 1.

c The intruments are seven: a constant, the growth of the consumption measure,
the real treasury bill return and the real return of the size portfolio from the
smallest decile of firms, each lagged one period and two periods back relative to
the asset returns in the Euler equation.
                       Objective Function Value




                       -1           -0.5           0           0.5         1   1.5
                                           habit '- bi         durabihty




Figure 2: Sensitivity of the Objective Function to the Nonseparability
Parameter

The y-axis is the value of the generalized method of moments objective
function, minimized over the choice of the parameters A and fi, for given
values of b,. The b1 values are shown on the x-axis. Negative values
indicate habit pers.stence and positive values indicate durability of goods.
The model assumes that a representative agent maximizes:


                              E0[(1 -      A)1         tc1A]
                                                 t—O
where
        Ct —   c
                   t
                        +b 1 ct-l
and c is consumption expenditures at date t.

The consumption data are annual expenditures for consumer nondurable goods.
The real asset returns are common stocks from size deciles 1,5, and 10, a
long term government bond and the return to rolling over one-month treasury
bills for 1932-1984 (53 observations).
                                      Table 6

Tests for the importance of a nonzero nonseparability parameter with a moving
average error structure. Quarterly returns data are for 1948.2-1986.2 (153
observations) and the annual returns data are for 1932-1984 (53 observations).
The model assumes that a representative agent maximizes:


                     E0[(l -   A)1         tc1-A]
                                     t—O

where C —   c + b1 c1 and c is nondurables consumption expenditures at date t.
                               is the rate of time discount, and b1 is the
A is the concavity parameter,
parameter representing habit persistence (b1 < 0) or durability (b1 > 0).
Estimation is by generalized method of moments (GMM), using a weighting matrix
which assumes that the error terms are autocorrelated at lag one and uncorrelated
at longer lags. P-value is the probability that a x2 variate exceeds the
minimized sample value of the test statistic. The x(l) statistic is the
difference between the GMM criterion functions, imposing the hypothesis that b1
is zero and leaving b1 unrestricted. The t(b1)2 statistic is the square of the t-
statistic   of b1 from tables 4 and 5.


                                           x21      (p-value)   t(b1)2 (p-value)

  QUARTERLY DATA:

  System: Five Assets                      23.86        0.00     329.9    0.00

  System: Two Assets                       4.06         0.04     126.1    0.00

  ANNUAL DATA:

  System: Five Assets                       9.75        0.00     28.22    0.00

  System: Two Assets                        1.90        0.17      0.46    0.49
                              Right-tail p-value of objective function




        0.94
        0.92
         0.9
        0.88
                                                                              -0.5
        0.86
        0.84
        0.82
               0.90.8 0.70.80.50.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0 -0.0.20.30.40.5O.&O.O.8O.9
                                                  -bi




Figure 3: Sensitivity of the Objective Function to the Nonseparability
Parameters in a Two-lag Model

The model assumes that a representative agent maximizes:

                                - A)1
                                         t—O   tc1A]

where C —     +
                  bc +    b2 c2 and c is
date t. A is the concavity parameter,
                                           consumption expenditures at
                                         is the rate of time discount, and b1
and b2 are the parameters representing habit persistence or durability. The
vertical axis is the right-tail probability value for the generalized method
of moments objective function, minimized over the choice of the parameters A
and /3, for fixed values of b1 and b2. The negative of the b-values are shown
on the other two axes. Negative values of the b1s (positive numbers on the
axes) indicate habit persistence and positive values of the b's indicate
durability of goods. The quarterly real asset returns are common stocks from
size deciles 1,5, and 10, a long term government bond and the return to
rolling over one-month treasury bills for 1948:2-1986:2 (153 observations).
The real returns are the nominal returns deflated by the nondurables price
deflator. The consumption data are real, per capita expenditures for
consumer nondurable goods (X-ll adjusted).
                                      Table 7

Tests Results Using Quarterly Data for 1948:2-1986:2 (153 observations) and
Seasonal Adjustment via Dummy Variables. The model assumes that a representative
agent maximizes:

                            -
                                A)1

where C —
            c   +
                b1 ctl and c is consumption expenditures for nondurable goods
at date t. A is the concavity parameter,          is the rate of time discount, and
is the parameter representing habit persistence (b1 < 0) or durability (b1 >            0).
Estimation is by generalized method of moments (CMX). Asymptotic standard errors
are in parentheses. P-value is the probability that a x2 variate exceeds the
minimized sample value of the CMX criterion function. The instrumental variables
are a constant and the eight variables summarized in Figure 1. DecN is the real
return of common stocks from market value decile N. The real returns are the
nominal returns deflated by the nondurables price deflator.


                                                A                     x2      p-value
                                                        b1
                                                             a
  System: Treasury Bill               0.997     0.441 0               57.97     0.063
          Government Bond             (0.001) (0.235)
          Stocks: Decl
          Stocks: DecS                 0.926    1.724 -0.791          39.54     0.579
          Stocks: Dec10               (0.061) (1.833) (0.113)



  System: Treasury Bill                0.998   0.213    0             37.89     0.001
          Stocks: Dec10               (0.001) (0.238)

                                       0.946   3.104 -0.621           23.31     0.078
                                      (0.044) (4.496) (0.261)



a An "—0" indicates that the parameter is set to zero.
                                        Table 8

Tests Results Using Consumer durable goods expenditures. The model assumes that a
representative agent maximizes:


                       E0[(l -   A)1
                                       t0
where C —
            c + b1   c1 and        Is consumption expenditures at date t. A is the

concavity parameter,      is the rate of time discount, and b1 is the parameter
representing habit persistence (b1 < 0) or durability (b1 > 0). Estimation is by
generalized method of moments (GMM). Asymptotic standard errors are in
parentheses. P-value is the probability that a x2        variate   exceeds the minimized
sample value of the CM1( criterion function. The instrumental variables are a
constant and the eight variables summarized in Figure 1. DecN is the real return
of common stocks from market value decile N.


                                                  A                      x2       p-value
                                                           b1
  X-ll ADJUSTED QUARTERLY DATA: 1948:2-1986:2 (153 observations)
                                                     a
  System: Treasury Bill            0.995   0.042          0      63.18             0.024
          Government Bond         (0.006) (0.037)
          Stocks: Deci
          Stocks: Dec5             0.996   0.023 -0.772          42.55             0.447
          Stocks: Dec10           (0.002) (0.084) (0.338)


  System: Treasury Bill                 0.994 -0.042      0              42.61      0.003
          Stocks: Dec10                (0.009) (0.058)

                                        1.274   1.011 -0.652             25.507     0.044
                                       (5.906) (0.088) (0.639)


  DUMMY-ADJUSTED QUARTERLY DATA:       948:2-1986:2 (153 observations)

  System: Treasury Bill                 0.995   0.079     E0             62.85      0.026
          Government Bond              (0.001) (0.035)
          Stocks: DecI
          Stocks: Dec5                  0.953   1.307 -0.700             41.93      0.474
          Stocks: Dec10                (0.059) (1.096) (0.102)

  System: Treasury Bill                 0.995 -0.025 0                   42.87      0.0003
          Stocks: Dec10                (0.001) (0.052)

                                        0.845   2.439 -0.620             22.52      0.095
                                       (0.085) (3.130) (0.240)
table 8 page 2




 ANNUAL DATA: 1932-1984 (53 observations)

                                   1.085   1.211    —o      34.99   0.170
 System: Treasury Bill
         Government Bond          (0.011) (0.284)
         Stocks: Deci
         Stocks: DecS              1.011   0.333 -0.442     21.96   0.739
         Stocks: Dec10            (0.018) (0.589) (0.366)


                                   0.964 -0.484      0      26.16   0.004
  System: Treasury Bill
          Stocks: Dec10           (0.007) (0.134)

                                   1.016   1.075 -0.225     15.56   0.077
                                  (0.077) (2.467) (0.703)




a An ".0" indicates that the parameter is set to zero.
              Objective function value
         54

         52


         50

         48

         46

         44


         42    -
              —1             -0.5                    0        0.5
                            habit               bi       durability




Figure 4: Sensitivity of the Objective Function to the Nonseparability
Parameter in a One-lag Model with Durable Goods Expenditures

The y-axis is the value of the generalized method of moments objective
function, minimized over the choice of the parameters A and 3, for given
values of b . The b1 values are shown on the x-axis. Negative values
indicate habit persistence and positive values indicate durability of goods.
The model assumes that a representative agent maximizes:


                         E0[(l -    A)1         tcl-A1
                                          t—0
where

        ct_ c+bic1
and c is consumption expenditures at date t.

The consumption data are quarterly expenditures for consumer durable goods
(seasonally adjusted by X-ll). The real asset returns are common stocks from
size deciles 1,5, and 10, a long term government bond and the return to
rolling over one-month treasury bills for 1948:2-1986:2 (153 observations).
The real returns are the nominal returns deflated by the consumer
nondurables price deflator.
                                        Table 9

Tests Results Using Unconditional Moment Restrictions. The model assumes that a

representative agent maximizes:


                       E0[(l -   A)1        tc1-A]
                                       tO
where C —   c + b1 c1 and c is consumption expenditures at date t. A is the
                       is the rate of time discount, and b1 is the parameter
concavity parameter,
representing habit persistence (b1 <        0)   or durability (b1 >   0).   Estimation is by
generalized method of moments (GMM). Asymptotic standard errors are in
parentheses. P-value is the probability that a            variate exceeds the minimized
sample value of the GMM criterion function. The instrumental variable is a
constant vector of ones. DecN is the real return of common stocks from market
value decile N. The real returns are the nominal returns deflated by the
nondurables price deflator.


                                                      A                              p-value
                                                              b1

  PANEL 1: CONSIThIER NONDURABLE GOODS

  X-ll ADJUSTED QUARTERLY DATA: 1948:2-1986:2 (153 observations)
                                                                  a
  System: Treasury Bill                 1.018   79.40        0                3.95     0.267
          Government Bond              (0.138) (43.72)
          Stocks: Decl
          Stocks: Dec5                  0.461    7.44       -0.903            3.50     0.174
          Stocks: Dec10                (0.762) (87.09)      (0.906)

  DUMMY ADJUSTED QUARTERLY DATA: 1948:2-1986:2 (153 observations)

  System: Treasury Bill                  0.951   13.865      —O              12.53     0.006
          Government Bond               (0.131) (20.590)
          Stocks: Decl
          Stocks: Dec5                   0.908   27.321   0.360               9.58     0.008
          Stocks: Dec10                 (0.194) (82.393) (4.066)

  ANNUAL DATA: 1932 - 1984 (53 observations)

  System: Treasury Bill                  1.119   12.20        0               7.62     0.054
          Government Bond               (0.089) (14.10)
          Stocks: Decl
          Stocks: DecS                   0.959   18.67      -0.293            6.26     0.044
          Stocks: Dec10                 (0.391) (25.61)     (0.819)
table 9 page 2




  PANEL 2: CONSUNER DURABLE GOODS

 X-ll ADJUSTED QUARTERLY DATA: 1948:2-1986:4 (153 observations)

 System: Treasury Bill                   1.014   7.055       —O   11.46    0.009
            Government Bond             (0.038) (8.347)
            Stocks: Dccl
            Stocks: DecS                 0.980 15.399    0.375      6.97   0.031
            Stocks: Dec10               (0.085) (8.001) (0.784)

  DUMMY ADJUSTED QUARTERLY DATA: 1948:2-1986:2 (153 observations)

  System: Treasury Bill                  0.970   4.633       —0   11.38    0.010
          Government Bond               (0.093) (7.644)
          Stocks: Dccl
          Stocks: Dec5                   0.895 11.797    0.352      7.36   0.025
          Stocks: Dec10                 (0.228)(15.395) (0.803)


 ANNUAL DATA: 1932-1984 (53 obse rvations)

  System: Treasury Bill                  0.531 -6.206         0   10.79    0.013
          Government Bond               (0.131) (1.945)
          Stocks: Dccl
          Stocks: DecS                   1.039   1.461   0.476      9.73   0.008
          Stocks: Dec10                 (0.057) (11.06) (19.42)



a An "—0" indicates that the parameter is set to zero.
                                        Table 10

Models with unrestricted mean Treasury bill returns: Quarterly Data, 1948:2-
1986:2 (153 observations). The model assumes that a representative agent
maximizes:


                       E0[(l -   A)1
                                       tO
where C —     +b   ci and c is consumption expenditures at date t. A is the
concavity parameter,      is the rate of time discount, and b1 is the parameter
representing habit persistence (b1 < 0) or durability (b1 > 0). The real Treasury
bill return in the model is replaced by the real return plus the parameter, L, to
leave the mean real return of the bill unrestricted. Estimation is by generalized
method of moments (GMM). Asymptotic standard errors are in parentheses. P-value
is the probability that a        variate exceeds the minimized sample value of the
CM criterion function. The instrumental variables are a constant and the eight
variables summarized in Figure 1. DecN is the real return of common stocks from
market value decile N. The real returns are the nominal returns deflated by the
nondurables price deflator.


                                                    A      b1      L(xlOO)       x2
                                        (s.e.)     (s.e)   (s.e) (s.e xlOO) (p-value)

  CONSUMER NONDURABLE GOODS (X-ll'L
                                                            a
  System: Treasury Bill                 0.997      0.13 O           0.07       61.23
          Government Bond              (0.002) (0.22)              (0.19)     (0.028)
          Stocks: Deci
          Stocks: DecS                   0.862   0.85   -0.95       0.47       36.83
          Stocks: Dec10                 (0.049) (1.21) (0.05)      (0.20)     (0.656)




  System: Treasury Bill                  0.982   0.04       0        1.61      37.91
          Stocks: Dec10                 (0.005) (0.29)              (0.51)    (0.001)

                                         0.976   0.87   -0.86        1.52      21.08
                                        (0.021) (3.55) (0.31)       (0.55)    (0.100)




 a An "—0" indicates that the parameter is set to zero.
