                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




                     DECOUPLING LIABILITY:
           OPTIMAL INCENTIVES FOR CARE AND LITIGATION




                      A. Mitchell Polinsky
                          Yeon-Koo Che




                     Working Paper No. 3634




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                         February 1991




Stanford University and National Bureau of Economic Research; and
Stanford University. respectively. Both authors' research on
this article was supported by the John N. Olin Program in Law and
Economics at Stanford Law School. Helpful comments were provided
by Keith Hylton, Avery Katz, Daniel Rubinfeld, Steven Shavell,
Warren Schwartz, and participants at a seminar at Stanford. This
paper is part of NBER's research program in Law and Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        I'IBER Working Paper #3634
                                        February 1991


                     DECOUPLING LIABILITY:
           OPTIMAL INCENTIVES FOR CARE AND LITIGATION


                            ABSTRACT


     A decoupled" liability system is one in which the award to
the plaintiff differs from the payment by the defendant. The
optimal system of decoupling makes the defendant's payment as
high as possible. Such a policy allows the award to the
plaintiff to be lowered, thereby reducing the plaintiff's
incentive to sue -- and hence litigation costs --   without
sacrificing the defendant's incentive to exercise care. The
optimal award to the plaintiff may be less than or greater than
the optimal payment by the defendant. The possibility of an
out-of-court settlement does not qualitatively affect these
results. If the settlement can be monitored, it may be desirable
to decouple it as well.


A. Mitchell Polinsky                   Yeon-Koo Che
Stanford Law School                    Stanford Law School
Stanford University                    Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305                     Stanford, CA 94305
        and
National Bureau
 of Economic Research
1. Introduction and Summary

      In suits between private individuals, liability usually is coupled" in

the sense that, aside from the parties' litigation costs, a successful

plaintiff receives what the defendant pays. This article studies a system of

decoupledk liability --   in   which the plaintiff is awarded an amount different

from what the defendant is made to pay. If the plaintiff is awarded less than

what the defendant pays, the government obtains the difference; if the

plaintiff is awarded more, the government provides the difference.

      Decoupled liability already occurs in certain circumstances. For

example, in several states punitive damages are decoupled, with the plaintiff

receiving 25% to 67% of the punitive danage amount paid by the defendant (the

percentage depends on the state) the rest goes to the state treasury or to a

public compensation fund.1 Also, decoupled liability has been proposed in

the context of private antitrust suits.2

      The rationale for decoupling liability that wilL be investigated here is

easily explained. Consider any level of Liability when liability is coupled.

This level of liability will determine the incentive of the victim to sue (the

higher the award, the greater the incentive) and the incentive of the injurer

to take care. The parties' behavior in turn will determine the level of

social costs -- assumed to be the sum of the injurer's cost of taking care,


       The plaintiff receives 67% of the punitive damage amount in Colorado.
40% in Florida, and 25% in Iowa (under specified circumstances). The
remainder goes to the State General Fund in Colorado, the General Revenue Fund
or the Public Medical Assistance Trust Fund in Florida, and the Civil
Reparations Trust Fund in Iowa. See Cob, Rev. Stat. sec. 13-21-102 (Supp.
1987); Fla. Stat. sec. 768.73(2)-(4); and Iowa Code Se. 668A.l(l)-(2).

     2 See, for example, Schwartz (1980, pp. 1092-1096; 1981, pp. 10-15),
Sabop and White (1986, p. 1037), and Polinsky (1986); these articles are
briefly commented upon in note 28 below. (The term "decoupling" apparently
was first used by Salop and White.)

                                        -I-
the victim's expected harm, and the parties' expected litigation costs.3

      Now consider decoupling liability, starting at the specified level of

coupled liability. First raise the amount paid by the injurer, which will

cause him to take note care. Then lower the amount awarded to the

victim - -   which    will reduce his incentive to sue and thereby cause the injurer

to take less care --      until   the injurer's care is back to its level under

coupled liability. Since the level of care is the same under this decoupled

system and the original coupled system, so is the injurer's cost of taking

care and the victim's expected harm. But since the plaintiff is awarded less

under the decoupled system, he will sue less often and, consequently,

litigation costs will be lower. Thus, starting from any level of coupled

liability, there always exists a decoupled system of liability that reduces

social costs.

      This logic also can be used to establish one of the main results of the

article -    - that   in the optimal system of decoupled liability the defendant's

payment is as high as possible. For if the payment by the defendant is not at

its upper bound, it is possible to raise the defendant's payment and lower the

plaintiff's award in such a way that the injurer's care is not affected but

the parties' expected litigation costs are lowered.

      With the payment by the defendant set at its upper bound, the optimal

award to the plaintiff depends on how the plaintiff's award affects the

injurer's care (through the plaintiff's incentive to sue) and the parties'

litigation costs. The optimal award to the plaintiff minimizes the sum of the

cost of the defendant's care, the expected harm to the victim, and the

expected litigation costs of the parties.


        See generally Polinsky and Rubinfeld (1988).

                                           -2-
      It will be shown that the optimal award to the plaintiff may be less

than or greater than the optimal payment by the defendant. To understand why

either relationship is possible consider two limiting cases involving the

level of harm. As the level of harm approaches zero, the optimal award to the

plaintiff must approach zero; it is not worthwhile to encourage the plaintiff

to sue since the value of inducing the injurer to take care becomes small, and

litigation is costly. In this case, the optimal award to the plaintiff will

be less than the optimal payment by the defendant (which is at its upper

bound). Conversely, as the level of harm becomes large, suits become more

valuable, and it is optimal to continue to raise the award to the plaintiff.

In this case, the optimal award to the pLaintiff will exceed the optimal

payment by the defendant.

      Thus far, the discussion has assumed implicitly that all suits result in

trials. In practice, however, most cases settle out of court. It will be

demonstrated that the possibility of a settlement does not affect the result

that the optimal payment by the defendant if the case goes to trial is as high

as possible. This is for two reasons. First, as before, by making the

defendant's payment as high as possible, the award to the plaintiff     and his

incentive to sue - can be lowered. This will reduce either trial costs or

settlement costs (which are assumed to be positive). Second, given a suit, by

raising the defendant's trial payment and lowering the plaintiff's trial

award, the likelihood of a settlement is enhanced because the defendant will

be willing to pay more in settlement and the plaintiff will be willing to

accept less. Increasing the likelihood of a settlement is beneficial because

settlement costs are less than trial costs.

      In addition to decoupling the trial outcome, a court sometimes may be


                                     -3-
able to monitor, and therefore decouple, the settlement.4 (For instance, in

class action suits, settlements often have to be approved by the court.) It

will be shown that if suits otherwise would not settle, It is beneficial to be

able to decouple settlements. This is because, by decoupling the settlement

as well as the trial outcome, the likelihood of a settlement can be increased,

For example, given any decoupled trial outcome, settling can be made more

attractive if the settlement amount paid by the defendant to the plaintiff is

supplemented by the government.

      The article is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the basic

model, in which suits are assumed to result in trials, and Section 3 derives

the optimal system of decoupling in this context. Section 4 extends the model

to include the possibility of settlements. Section 5 derives the optimal

system of detoupling in the extended model, first when only the trial outcome

can be decoupled, and then when both the trial outcome and the settlement can

be decoupled. Section 6 contains several concluding remarks, including about

the prior literature that discusses decoupling liability, and the relationship

between our decoupling analysis and the economic theory of public enforcement.



2. The Basic Model

      There is one risk-neutral injurer and many risk-neutral potential

victims. The injurer chooses a level of care that affects the probability of




       Although we will refer to a court' as having control over the policy
instruments, in practice liability may be decoupled by an administrative
agency or the legislature. The decoupling of antitrust damages, for example,
presumably would be implemented through Congressional legislation.

                                     -4-
an accident.5 If an accident occurs, one of the potential victims is harmed

(hereafter frequently referred to as "the victim"). The level of harm is

fixed and the same for all potential victims. Let

      c — injurer's         level of care,

  p(c) —        probability   of an accident (p' < 0; p' >   0),
            —   loss   if an accident occurs.

Care is measured in units that cost one dollar each, so c also represents the

injurer's cost of care.

           If the victim sues the injurer, each side bears its own      legal   costs.6

The   injurer's    cost of litigation is fixed. Each potential victim's cost of

litigation also is fixed, but is assumed to vary among victims.7 This

variation might be attributed, for example, to differences among individuals

in the value of their time or to differences among lawyers in their fees. Let

       a    —   potential   victim's trial cost (a >   0),
  f(s) —        probability   density of a (f(a) > 0 for all a > 0),8

       b — injurer's        trial cost (b >   0).


       Although the present article discusses liability in the context of
accidents, it will be clear that the analysis also generally applies to non-
accidental harms, such as antitrust violations.

     6 The basic ideas in this article also would apply under other rules for
allocating legal costs, such as the rule that the loser pays the winner's
costs.

     7 An equivalent interpretation of this assumption is that there is one
potential victim whose litigation cost is uncertain before an accident but
known after an accident. (An alternative assumption that would generate
similar results is that the level of harm varies among potential victims,
rather than their cost of litigation.)

       The assumption that a has positive density for all positive values of a
is made mainly for expositional convenience. See note 14 below for a
discussion of how the results would be affected if this assumption were
changed.

                                              -5-
           It is assumed   without loss of     generality that the victim will prevail at

trial if he brings a suit.9 The plaintiff then receives an award and the

defendant makes a payment. There is some upper bound on the defendant's

payment. Let

        x — award      to the plaintiff at trial,

        y —    payment by the defendant at trial,
        m —    maximum possible payment of defendant (y in).

The defendant's payment may be bounded for any number            of   reasons -   - his
limited wealth, considerations of fairness, and so forth. For purposes of our

analysis, it does not matter which reason applies or what the bound is.

         If there is an accident, the victim will bring a suit if his trial cost

is less than the award he will receive at trial --             that   is, if a C x)0

Thus, the probability that a suit will be brought is F(x), where F(.) is the

cumulative distribution of a.

         Given the victim's suit decision and the payment the injurer will have

to make at trial, the injurer will choose his level of care to minimize the

sum   of   his cost of care, his expected payment at trial, and his expected trial

cost:

(1)                          bUN c +     p(c)F(x)(y    ÷ bi.
                               c

         The social problem is to choose the award to the victim and the payment

by the injurer that minimize the sum of the injurer's cost of taking care, the


       If the victim were to win at trial with probability less than one, the
qualitative results of our analysis would not be affected. The assumption in
the text corresponds to the rule of strict liability; for a discussion of how
the analysis would apply to a rule of negligence, see comment (a) in section 6
below.

        There is no loss of generality in assuming that the victim will not
sue if a — x.

                                               -6-
victim's expected harm, and the parties' expected trial costs.11 This

problem ts solved subject to the constraints that there is some upper bound on

the payment by the injurer, and that the victim and the injurer are each

maximizing his own welfare.

      Thus, the social problem can be written as

                                      x
(2)              KIN c +   p(c)(t   + f af(a)da + F(x)b),
                 x,y                  0

where it is understood that c is determined by x and y according to (1). and

that y   m.lZ The integral in (2) is the expected value of the potential

victims' trial cost, conditional on a.suit being brought (that is, for values

of a between 0 and x).

      The optimal values of x and y will be denoted x* and y*, It is assumed

that x* is positive and unique.



3. Optimal Decoupling in the Basic Model

      It will first be shown that the optimal payment by the injurer at trial

is as high as possible: y* — m.

      This can be proved by contradiction. Suppose that the optimal value of

y were y0 'c m and that the optimal value of x were some x0 > 0. Then, if an

accident occurs, the sum of the injurer's expected payment at trial and his

expected trial cost is F(x0)[y0 + bi. Now raise yo    to    m and lower x,0 to

such that



        The injurer's payment and the victim's award are not added to or
subtracted from this sum because they are transfers of income rather than
social costs or benefits.

     12 Both (1) and (2) already incorporate the constraint that the victim
will bring a suit if a C x.

                                       -7-
                        F(x0)[y0 + bJ   —
(3)                                          F(x1flm+ bJ.
By construction, the expected costs borne by the injurer if there is an

accident are unchanged. Therefore, the injurer will choose the same level of

care as before: see (1). Now observe from the social problem (2) that the sum

of the injurer's cost of care and the victim's expected loss is unaffected,

but that, because x is lower, both the victim's and the injurer's expected

trial cost are reduced. Thus, the original Yc and x,0 could not have been

optimal.

      Given y' — m, the optimal award to the victim, x*, can be determined by

minimizing the objective function in (2) just over x, where c now is

determined by x from

(6)                         FUN c + p(c)F(x)(m +
                            c
                                                        b.
It is clear from (4) that the injurer's care c is increasing in the victim's

award x (since raising x raises F(x), the probability that a suit will be

brought). Let c(x) be the solution to (4), with c >              0.
      The first-order condition (recall chat a unique interior solution is

assumed) that determines the optimal award to the victim, x*, can be written

as

                        x
(5)        .p'c'(( 4-   J af(a)da + F(x)b)     —   c'   +    pf(x)[x   +   b).
                        0


The left-hand side of (5) is the marginal benefit of raising x. As x goes up,

the injurer's care rises and the probability of an accident therefore falls.

The fall in the accident probability reduces the expected harm to the victim

and the expected trial cost of both parties (trials can only occur if an

accident occurs). The right-hand side of (5) is the marginal cost of raising



                                            -8-
x. The marginal cost consists of the increased care that the injurer ia

induced to take, and the increase in the parties' expected trial costs caused

by the greater likelihood that a suit will be brought (the increase in trial

costs is x + b because, for the "marginal" suit, a —       x).
      It should be clear at this point that there is no simple relationship

between the opcimal award to the victim, x*, and the optimal payment by the

injurer, y*. The factors that determine x* -     - such   as the responsiveness of

the accident probability to the injurer's choice of care, end the magnitude of

the parties' trial costs    -
                                may have nothing per Se to do with the factors

that determine y* --   such as the injurer's wealth or considerations of
fairness.

      In general, x* may be less than or greater than y*. To illustrate the

former possibility, consider what happens to x* and y* as the victim's loss,

t, approaches zero. For the usual reason, y* remains at In.       But x* must

approach zero as t approaches zero. This can be demonstrated by

contradiction. Suppose that x* is bounded away from 0, say by i        >   0. ,This

implies some minimum level of care, say & > 0.13 Thus, sociaL costs at x*

are at least &.    Compare this to social costs when x — 0; then, since there

are no suits, c is zero and social costs are simply p(Ofl. But as

approaches 0, these social costs approach 0, and become less than &.

Therefore,   x* must also approach 0 as t approaches zero, showing that for I




     13 That & must be positive can be proved by contradiction. Suppose
x* > 0 and & — 0. Then social welfare could be improved by setting x — 0
(since the level of care would be the same and expected trial costs would be
lower). So it must be that c > 0 when x* > 0.

                                        .9.
low enough, x* C   y*,'4
      By similar reasoning, it can be demonstrated chat as t tends to

infinity, x' tends to infinity. The details are omitted here, but the

intuition is straightforward. As t tends to infinity, the value of taking

additional care to reduce the probability of an accident increases without

bound. The only way to induce the defendant to take more care is by raising

the award to the plaintiff, x, so that the defendant will be sued with a

higher probability if an accident occurs.     (The defendants payment cannot be

raised because y* — in.)   Therefore x* also must tend to infinity as I tends

to infinity, showing that for £ sufficiently large, x* >                   -



      In   general, as suggested by the preceding discussion, x is an

increasing function of the magnitude of the loss, 1.16 Thus, for accidents

with relatively low losses, x* will be less than y*, and for accidents with

relatively high losses, x* will be greater than y*.




     14 If the trial costs of potential victims have a positive lower bound,
then x* would tend to that lower bound as £ tends to zero. Assuming this
lower bound is less than y* — a, then for £ low enough, x* C y*, as claimed.
However, if the lower bound exceeds m, then x* always would exceed y*.
(Analogous observations apply to the discussion in the next paragraph if the
trial costs of victims have an upper bound.)

     15 A potential problem with setting x greater than y is that this creates
an incentive for individuals to "fabricate" harms -. to claim that an accident
has occurred when one has not     in order to obtain the implicit government
subsidy equal to x - y. If individuals cannot be deterred from fabricating
harms (say by criminal penalties), it may be desirable to narrow the "gap
between x and y.

     16 It can be seen from (5) that raising I does not affect the marginal
cost of raising x, but it does increase the marginal benefit of raising x.

                                     -   10
I. The    Extended Model

      The model of section 2 will be modified to allow for the possibility of

a settlement in the following way. After an accident occurs, the plaintiff

makes a "take it or leave it" settlement demand)7 If it is accepted by the

defendant, the case is settled for this amount. During the settlenent

process, both parties incur settlement costs (which are assumed to be less

than their respective trial costs))8 If the plaintiff's settlement demand

is rejected by the defendant, the plaintiff then decides whether to go to

trial or to drop the suit. For simplicity, both parties are assumed to have

perfect information (including about each other's litigation costs). Let

     s —    plaintiff's    settlement demand,

  a(a) —    plaintiff's    settlement cost (0 C      a(a) < a),'9
      a   — defendant's    settlement cost (0 <      fi C b).
It is assumed that a is increasing in a (a plaintiff's trial cost), end that

the gap between a and a also is increasing in a. These assumptions would be

satisfied, for example, if a plaintiff's settlement cost is a constant

fraction of his trial cost.

      First observe that, as before, a plaintiff will bring a suit if and only



        This assumption is not as special as it may appear; results
qualitatively similar to those discussed in this article generally would occur
if the injurer made a take-it-or-leave-it settlement offer (but see note 23
below).

        It will be seen that decoupling liability always is socially valuable
when settlement costs are positive, whereas if settlement costs are zero,
there are some circumstances in which decoupling liability is socially
valuable and other circumstances in which it is not needed. The assumption
that settlement costs are positive is made both to avoid the additional
complexity of having to distinguish between these two sets of circumstances
and because it is the more realistic assumption.

     £9 When there can be no confusion, a(a) will be written simply as a.

                                        -   II   -
if his trial cost is less than his trial award: a < x, This result can be

explained as follows. If a is less than x, then clearly the plaintiff would

bring a suit even if it were to result in a trial; since a settlement makes

him at least as well off as the trial outcome (otherwise he would not agree to

the settlement), his incentive to sue is at least as great if the suit might

result in a settlement. If a is greater than x, then the plaintiff would not

bring a suit if it were to result in a trial. The defendant, knowing this,

will reject any settlement demand; and the plaintiff will then drop the suit.

In other words, if the plaintiff's trial cost exceeds his award at trial, he

cannot obtain a settlement from the defendant because his threat to sue is not

credible. Thus, the plaintiff wilL bring a suit if and only if a C x.

        Given a suit, next consider whether a settlement is feasible, If the

plaintiff goes to trial his net gain is x -              a, the award less his trial cost.
If he settles, his net gain is s -          a, the settlement amount less his
settlement cost. Thus, the plaintiff will prefer to settle if 5                    -a   X   .   a

or, equivalently, s       x   . (a    a) 20   If the defendant goes to trial his

total   payment is y +   b,   the payment to the government plus his trial cost,
whereas if   he   settles his total payment is s + a.             the   settlement amount plus
his   settlement cost. Thus, the defendant will prefer to settle provided

  + ? 'C y + b or s 'C y + (b -      ji).   Consequently, a settlement will be feasible

if

(6)                       x-    (a - a)       y+    (b    . a).
        If the plaintiff's award is less than or equal to the defendant's

payment (x    y), then (6) always will be satisfied. But if the plaintiff's


     20 There is no loss of generality in assuming that the plaintiff prefers
to settle when $ — x - (a - a). An analogous statement applies below to the
defendant.

                                               12
award exceeds the defendant's payment Cx >             y)    a settlement might not be

feasible -

        When a settlement is feasible, a settlement will occur and will equal

(7)                              s —
This   is because it is in the plaintiff's interest to make his take-it-or-

leave-it settlement demand as high as possible, provided it will be acceptable

to the defendant, If a settlement is not feasible --                 that   is, if (6) does not
hold --   then   a suit will result in a trial.2'

        Now consider the injurer's choice of care. If a suit results in a

trial, the injurer's total payment is y +             b.    If a suit results in a

settlement, the injurer's total payment is s +              P or,   using (7), y +   b.   In

other words, the injurer pays y + b whenever he is sued, regardless of whether

the suit goes to trial or settles. This is because the plaintiff's settlement

demand makes the injurer indifferent between going to trial and settling,

Thus, since the plaintiff's suit decision and the injurer's total payment is

the same as in the basic model, the injurer's choice of care is determined as

in the basic model, according to (1).

        Before describing the social problem, it is necessary to define a

threshold level of the plaintiff's trial cost -              - denoted      - - such that a

trial will occur if the plaintiff's trial cost is below ,                   and a settlement

will occur if the plaintiff's trial cost is above 22 Intuitively, one



     2! In most economic models of litigation, a trial can occur only if there
is asymmetric information (or a difference of opinion) about the plaintiff's
probability of prevailing or the magnitude of the harm. Here, even though the
parties' have perfect information, a trial might occur because of the
decoupling of liability (when the plaintiff's award sufficiently exceeds the
defendant's payment).

       22 The precise definition of i   is   contained in the appendix.

                                        -    13   -
would expect such an i        to exist since the higher the plaintiff's trial cost,

the greater the benefit to the plaintiff of settling. In general, i may be

zero -   - in   which case a suit always will result in a settlement -             - or     A may
exceed the plaintiff's award, x --         in   which case a suit always will result in

a trial. For purposes of discussion here, i-is assumed to be positive and

less than x; then i      is   defined by the level of the plaintiffs trial cost that

satisfies with equality the condition for a settlement to be feasible (6):

(8)                       x -    (i-a(A))       —    y+(b    -fi).

         The social problem now can be written as

                                    A                    x
(9)          KIN c +   p(cflt   +   J (a + b)f(a)da +        (a(a)   +    #)f(a)da],
             x,y                    0                    a

where c is determined by x and y according to (I)-, A                is   determined by x and y

according to (8), and y         m. The first integral in (9) is the parties'

expected trial costs and the second integral is their expected settlement

costs.




5. Optimal Decoupling in the Extended Model

         There are two natural cases to consider, depending on whether the

settlement can be observed and decoupled by the court (in addition to the

trial outcome being decoupled).

         5.1 Settlements Cannot be Decoupled

         The principal result to be demonstrated in this case is that the optimal

payment by the defendant at trial remains as high as possible: y* — m.                       A

general proof of this proposition (without any assumptions about A)                    is
contained in the appendix. An informal argument will be presented here.

         The structure of the argument is similar to that used to prove the


                                            -   14   -
corresponding result in the basic model. Suppose that the optimal value of y

were less than m and that the optimal value of x is positive. This would lead

to some level of care, chosen by the injurer according to (I). Now raise y

and lower x so that F(x)[y +      b]   and therefore the injurer's care, is held

constant. Since in the social problem (9) the sum of the injurer's cost of

care and the victi&s expected loss is unaffected, the only question concerns

what happens to the parties' expected trial costs and expected settlement

costs.

         With x lower, the range of the plaintiff's trial cost, a, over which a

suit will be     brought becomes smaller. Because the suits that are discouraged
are those that would have settled (since i             is   assumed to be less than x), this

effect of lowering x reduces expected settlement costs. Also, for those suits

that are still brought, raising y and lowering x towers i,               the   threshold level

of the plaintiff's trial cost below which a suit results in a trial (see (8)).

So expected trial costs fall too. Since raising y and lowering x reduces both

settlement costs and trial costs, the original y less than m could not have

been optimal.

         The proof that y" — m in the extended model may be compared with the

corresponding proof itt the basic model. In both models, lowering the

plaintiff's award x is beneficial because it discourages costly suits; But in

the extended model there is the additional effect that raising y and lowering

x has on the trial-versus-settlement decision. This effect is beneficial

too --    for   by raising the defendant's trial payment and lowering the

plaintiff's trial award, the likelihood of a settlement is enhanced (the

defendant will be willing to pay nore in settlement and the plaintiff will be

willing to accept less).


                                          -   15   -
           Given y* — m, the optimal choice of x is determined in a way similar to

that discussed in the basic model. However, the marginal benefit of raising x

now is lower because the resulting fall in the probability of an accident

reduces expected settlement costs rather than expected trial costs (for suits

in which a       A). The marginal cost of raising x may be lower or higher. It

tends to be lower because, as x rises, the •marginal" plaintiff (one for whom

a —   x)   will settle rather than go to trial. But the marginal cost of raising

x tends to be higher because raising x makes settling less attractive for

"inframarginal" plaintiffs (see (6)). Thus, x* in the extended model ray        be
greater or less than x' in the basic model.

       The observations made in the basic model about the relationship between

x* and y* carry over essentially unchanged to the extended model. Thus, for

accidents with relatively low losses, x* will be less than y*, and for

accidents with relatively high losses, x* will be greater than y*.

           Finally, it might be wondered whether it is socially desirable to

discourage settlements when they cannot be decoupled, since they might

undermine the beneficial effects of decoupling the trial outcome. Given the

assumption that the plaintiff makes a take-it-or-leave-it settlement demand

resulting in a settlement at the upper end of the settlement range --      it   is

not desirable to discourage settlements. In essence, this is because the

injurer's incentive to take care then is not diminished by a settlement; and

since settlenents are less costly than trials, they are desirable.23


     23 However, if the defendant were to make a take.it.or-leave-it
settlement offer in our model, it might be socially desirable to discourage
settlements if they cannot be decoupled. For then settlements would occur at
the lower end of the settlement range; the injurer consequently would take
less care: and the lesser cost of settlements would have to be balanced
against their reduced deterrent effect. The potential undesirability of
settlements in the context of decoupling was first noted by Schwartz (1980, p.

                                         -   16
           5.2 Settlements Qj     k Decoupled
           It is assumed in this case that the court can observe the settlement

amount, s, and then award an additional amount to the plaintiff and/or make

the defendant pay an additional amount. Let

             —   additional   award to the victim if there is a settlement,

       y     —   additional   payment by the injurer if there is a settlement.

           The main point to be developed in this case is that if suits otherwise

would not settle, it is desirable to decouple settlements because suits can

thereby be encouraged to settle. It also will be shown that when decoupling

settlements is beneficial, the additional award to the victim, x'                •   exceeds   the

additional payment by the injurer, y' --            resulting   in, on balance, a transfer

to the parties from the government. As before, intuitive arguments will be

emphasized here, with formal proofs provided in the appendix.

           First note that even if settlements cannot be decoupled, all suits might

settle. In particular this will be true if x y + (b                -
                                                                       9),   since then a

settlement will be feasible regardless of a; see (6). Thus, decoupling

settlements can be valuable only when some suits otherwise would result in

trials, that is when

(10)                          x- (a-a) >
for some a, which implies that

(11)                              x >
If (11) holds, there will be a range of a, starting at zero, over which a suit

will result in a trial. Condition (11) will be assumed to hold for the

remainder of this section.24


1095).

       24 Note that this is equivalent to assuming that i           > 0.
                                           -   17   -
         To see how decoupling settlements can encourage suits to settle,

consider the feasibility of a settlement when both the trial outcome and the

settlement are decoupled. If the plaintiff goes to trial his net gain is
x -    a, whereas if he settles, his net gain is s - a +                                it'. The   plaintiff will

prefer to settle if s        x -      (a       -
                                                   a)   -   x'.    If the defendant goes to trial his

total payment is y +      b, whereas if he settles his total payment is s +                                /3   +   y'
The defendant will prefer to settle if s                          y 4- (b - /3)          - y.     Therefore, a

settlement will be feasible if

(12)                 it   - (a   -
                                     a)    -
                                                it'          y + (b   -
                                                                          /3)    -
                                                                                       y'.
        Given any x and y, it is straightforward to show that it'                                  and y' can be

chosen so that (12) is satisfied for all values of a.                                    If a — 0 (the value of

a least favorable to a settlement), any combination of it'                                    and y such that

(13)                         it,     - y'           it      - N + (b      -
                                                                                j3))
will satisfy (12), If a is positive, any combination of it' and y' satisfying

(13) will satisfy (12) as well.

        Observe that, using (11), (13) implies that it'                                - y'   must be positive and

sufficiently large. In other words, to encourage settlements when they

otherwise would not occur, the government must decouple settlements in such a

way as to provide a net transfer to the parties. This result should not be

surprising since a net transfer increases the attractiveness to the parties of

a settlement relative to a trial.

        Clearly, the optimal values of it'                   and y' are not uniquely determined.

Without loss of generality one can assume that (13) is satisfied with

equality.23 Even then, there are many combinations of x' and y' that will


     25 This assumption could be Justified on the grounds that raising
government revenue generally results in a deadweight burden, so it is better
to raise the smallest amount necessary.

                                                        -   is
assure a settlement. One solution is to set the additional payment by the

injurer equal to zero and then to supplement the settlement payment to the

victim by a positive amount (equal to x -        (y + (b   -
                                                               i1)]).
        Assuming x' and y' are chosen so as to guarantee a settlement, it can be

shown, once again, that y* — m,    Only the first steps of this argument will be

presented here.

        Because the plaintiff's settlement demand will be as high as possible

subject to its acceptability by the defendant, the settlement amount will

equal

(14)                       s — y + (b     -
                                              P) - y'.
The injurer's total payment as a result of the settlement is a +        j3   +   y'   or,

using (14), y +   b.   (The reason the injurer's total payment does not depend on

y' is that the payment of y' to the government reduces the settlement amount

by y'.) For now famiLiar reasons, it is optimal to set y as high as possible

so that x can be lowered, thereby reducing the incentive to sue. Since all

suits result in settlements (given x' and y'), this lowers the parties'

expected settlenent costs.

        The discussion thus far has assumed that the purpose of decoupling

settlements is to encourage settlements when they otherwise would not occur.

It is now straightforward to see that decoupling settlements for this reason

is socially desirable. When settlements are decoupLed, the injurer's total

payment as a result of a settlement was shown in the previous paragraph to be

y + b; this is the same as the total payment if the case goes to trial. Thus,

the decoupling of settlements does not affect the injurer's incentive to take




                                      -
                                          19 -
care, but it does lower litigation costs.

      Given y* — m, the determination of x* and the comparison of x* to y* are

essentially as described in the basic model.

      And since it was not desirable to discourage settlements when

settlements cannot be decoupled, it clearly is not desirable to discourage

them when they can be decoupled.



6. Concluding Remarks

      This section contains observations about: the applicability of our

analysis to a negligence rule; the relationship of the analysis to the

economic theory of public enforcement; the prior literature that discusses

decoupling liability; and the informational requirements of a system of

decoupling.

      (a) Applicability to a neglizence            In our model of decoupling, it

was assumed implicitly that the injurer's choice of care did not affect

whether he was liable. This is equivalent to assuming that the rule of

liability is strict liability. A natural question is whether the analysis of

decoupling also applies to a negligence rule - -   under   which the injurer is

liable only if he does not take some minimum level of care, referred to as the

standard of care.


     26 There is a potential detrimental effect from decoupling settlements.
A victim whose trial cost exceeds the trial award might nonetheless sue and
then settle with the injurer in order for the parties to obtain the net
transfer (x' - y')  from the government. However, since the injurer knows that
such a victim would drop the suit if the injurer rejects the victim's
settlement demand, the injurer would have to be       to settle the
suit - - either by the victim through a negative" settlement (s < 0) or by the
government through a Thegative" additional payment (y' < 0). Consequently,
such suits can be forestalled by a policy of decoupling settlements only if
the settlement amount is positive and by restricting the additional payment by
the injurer to be non-negative.

                                     -   20   -
      In theory decoupling liability would not be necessary under a

negligence rule for the following reason. If the standard of care corresponds

to the first-best level of care (the level of care that minimizes the sum of

the cost of care and the expected harm) and the level of liability for

violating the standard is high enough, the injurer vill meet the standard.

Then the victim will not sue since he would not prevail. Thus, in principle,

the first-best level of care could be attained without any litigation costs

being incurred. There would be no reason to decouple liability in these

circumstances.

      In practice, however, a negligence rule is likely to lead to some suits

for the following reasons. The injurer may be uncertain about what the

standard of care is, and therefore may choose a level of care that leads with

some probability to his being found negligent. Conversely, a court or a jury

may be uncertain about what level of care was chosen by the injurer, and

consequently may find him negligent with some probability. In general,

therefore, a negligence rule can be characterized as a schedule of the

probability of liability as a function of the injurer's care; the higher the

injurer's care, the lower the chance of his being found liable.

      Given this more realistic view of the negligence rule, it is

straightforward to see that the analysis of decoupling in this article applies

under a negligence rule as well. Whatever level of care results from the best

choice of coupled liability under a negligence rule, the same level of care

can be achieved with lower litigation costs by decoupling liability in the way

described here,

      (b) Relationship to the economic theory of public enforcement. The

analysis of decoupling liability in this article closely parallels the


                                    -   21   -
economic theory of public enforcement associated with Becker (1968). Becker

observed that the same amount of deterrence can be achieved by catching an

injurer infrequently and fining him severely as by catching him more often and

fining him less. He concluded that the best system of public enforcement

involves using the highest possible fine and a correspondingly low probability

of detection, since such a combination can achieve any given amount of

deterrence with the lowest investment in detection resources.

      The rationale for making the defendant's payment as high as possible in

a system of decoupled liability is, in essence, the same es Becker's rationale

for high fines in a system of public enforcement. Under public enforcement, a

high fine allows the probability of detection to be lowered; under decoupled

liability, a high payment allows the probability of a suit to be lowered. In

both cases, enforcement costs are saved. Thus, one could interpret our

analysis of decoupling as providing a private litigation analogue to Becker's

theory of public enforcement.

      Becker's theory of public enforcement has been criticized on the grounds

that severe fines -.   potentially   as high as an individual's wealth --   hardly
ever are imposed. An analogous criticism could be leveled against the theory

of decoupling liability proposed here. In both contexts, however, there are

additional considerations that could be taken into account in the analysis

that would lead to the conclusion that the optimal fine or the optimal payment

by the defendant is not as high as possible. For example, if injurers are

risk averse it generally is desirable to reduce the sanction and to increase

the probability of its imposition in order to lower risk-bearing costs.27



     27 For a review of other reasons why optimal sanctions are not at their
upper bound, see, for example, Carr-Hill and Stern (1979, pp. 281-295).

                                        -   22 -
      (c) Literature relevant to decoupling, The literature most relevant to

our analysis is concerned with the private enforcement of public

fines '- whereby the first private enforcer to discover and report the injurer

receives the fine. See, for example, Becker and Stigler (1974, pp. 13-16),

Landes and Posner (1975), and Polinsky (1980). Landes and Posner emphasized

that private enforcement would lead to socially excessive enforcement, and

that a tax on private enforcers therefore might be desirable. Polinsky showed

that private enforcement also could lead to too little enforcement and that a

subsidy to private enforcers might be needed. In other words, to use the

language of the present article, it may be desirable to "decouple the

injurer's payment and the enforcer's award, with the enforcer receiving either

less than or more than the fine.28

      The results just summarized were developed in a framework in which

anyone could become a private enforcer, not just the victim of the harm.

Thus, one could view our contribution as extending this analysis to a setting

that is more descriptive of private litigation systems --   in   which the victim

of the harm normally is the sole initiator of a suit.29

      Several other reasons have been advanced for decoupling Liability,

although they are unrelated to the rationale presented here. For example, if



     28 The literature referred to in this paragraph has been applied to
private antitrust enforcement in the articles cited in note 2 above. Although
those articles advocated decoupling liability and anticipated some of the
results demonstrated here, they did not analyze a formal model of decoupling
or systematically consider the possibility of settlements,

        Other recent articles concerned with private litigation have mentioned
a decoupling-type solution, The discussion that is closest in spirit to the
present analysis is by Hylton (1990, pp. 164-165 & 169-170). He assumes that
the award to the victim equals the victim's loss, and shows that the optimal
payment by the injurer exceeds this amount. See also Katz (1990, pp. 19-20)
and Polinsky and Shavell (1989, pp. 105-107).

                                     -   23
harms are nonmonetary (such as pain and suffering), there is a conflict

between optimally compensating victims and optimally deterring injurers. In

terms of risk-allocation; the victim should be awarded relatively little

(assuming his marginal utility of money is not much affected). in terms of

deterrence, however, the injurer should be made to pay an amount reflecting

how much the victim values preventing the harm from occurring in the first

place. Thus, only by decoupling liability is it possible to achieve both

optimal compensation and optimal deterrence)°

      (d) Informational requirements. If a government agency were to attempt

to optimally design a decoupled system of liability, a substantial amount of

information would be required. The agency would need to know how changes in

the plaintiff's award would affect his incentive to sue; how changes in the

probability of suit would affect the injurer's choice of care; how this choice

would affect the sum of the cost of care and the expected harm; and whether a

suit would result in a trial or a settlement.

      Although the information required to implement an ideal decoupling

system is substantial, two points should be kept in mind. First, the agency

does not have to know with great precision everything referred to in the

previous paragraph. It simply has to have some estimate .-         possibly    quite

imperfect -   - of   the required information. Second, essentially .th in
information   would be needed      determine         ptimal level of counled

liability. Thus, if it is worthwhile to select the level of coupled liability

on the basis of how liability affects care and litigation, then it is better



     30 This point is widely recognized in the literature on liability. See,
for example, Spence (1977) and Shavell (1987, pp. 228-235). Additional
arguments for decoupling liability have been discussed, for example, by
Shavell (1987, pp. 29-30 & 142-144).

                                        -   24   -
to use that information to design a system of decoupled liability.

      In practice, rather than attempting to determine the ideal
                                                                   decoupling
system, it may be preferable to develop relatively simple rules of thumb. For

exampte, one rule might be to treat cases differently on the basis of the size

of the loss. For low-loss cases, the plaintiff could be awarded some fraction

of what the defendant pays (in order to discourage excessive litigation), and

for high-loss cases the plaintiff could be awarded some multiple of what the

defendant pays.3'




        The rationale for this suggestion is based on the observation in
section 2 that x* c y* if the loss is sufficiently low, and x > y* if the
loss is sufficiently high.

                                   -   25   -
Appendix

       proposition 1: When settlements are possible but cannot be decoupled,

the optimal payment by the defendant at trial is as high as possible: yt —                           in.

       Proof: First define (x, y) —nin(i(x, y), x). where à(x, y) solves for

a in

(Al)                   x -   (a   -
                                      a(a))         —    y   + (b -

if x > y + (b - 0),   and â(x. y) — 0 otherwise. Since £x, y) Is increasing in

x and decreasing in y (in the weak sense), so is i. For a plaintiff with

a < i, a suit resulting in a trial occurs and litigation costs a + b are

incurred; for a plaintiff with A            a < x, a suit resulting in a settlement

occurs and settlement costs a + 0 are incurred; and for a plaintiff with

a   x, a suit does not occur.

       The social problem can be written as:

                                      x
            MIN    c + p(c)[t + 5         [a(a)     + /IJf(a)da
           c,x,y                      0
(A2)
                                              A(x,y)
                                              + 5 (a         -
                                                                 a(a)   + b -   a]f(a)dal
                                                0

subject to

(A3)                  c c argxain c + p(c)F(x)[y + b],

(A4)                                        y       in.
       To prove that the second constraint (Al.) is binding, suppose to the

contrary that at the optimal choice (x0, y0). Yo < m. Now consider an

alternative choice (x1, Yi with Yo 'C y1                     in and F(x1)[y1 + b] —     F(x0)(y0   + bi.

Thus, x1 < x0. It follows from the construction of the new pair (x1, Yt) that

the choice of the level of care c remains unchanged. But the value of the

objective function (expected social cost) Is lower under the new pair


                                                -   26
           y1), since the first term involving an integral in (A2) is
                                                                                                           strictly
    increasing in x, and the second term involving an integral is
                                                                                                       weakly
 increasing in x and weakly decreasing in y (since a                                  is     weakly increasing in x
 and weakly decreasing in y).

            Remark: It was assumed in section 4 of the text that                                   was positive and
 less than x. In that case, A — A.                            The.proof here does not impose any

assumptions on a.

            Proposition Z: When settlements are possible and can be decoupled:                                        (i)

Decoupling settlements is valuable only if some suits otherwise would not

settle (i.e., only if x >                  y + (b       -    $3)); (ii) When decoupling settlements is

valuable, optimal decoupling of settlements requires a minimum net transfer                                                 to

the parties from the government (at least equal to x -                                       [y + (b   -
                                                                                                           $3)] >   0);
(iii) The optimal payment by the defendant at trial is y* — is.

           Proof:     Let       z   denote the settlement subsidy to the two parties. (In

terms of the notation of section 5.2, z •x'                            - y';         the allocation of the

subsidy does not matter.) To prove (i) and (ii), it suffices to show that the

optimal policy involves a subsidy z — 0 if x                                   y +    (b -    $3), and
z      x   -
               ft +   (b    -
                                B))    if x >       y + (b   - $3).


           Analogously          to the proof of Proposition I, define i(x, y, z)

     min(A(x, y, z), x), where A(x, y, z) solves for a in

(AS)                                  x - (a    -
                                                    a(a))     —   y + (b   -
                                                                               $3)   +   z
if x >      y + (b     -   $3), and A(x, y, z) — 0 otherwise. The social problem can be
written as:




                                                               27 -
                                             'C
              MIN        C   + p(c)[t    +    J [a(a)          +   flJf(a)da
            c,x,y,z                          0
(A6)

                                                      +    J [a        -
                                                                            0(a) +       b    -
                                                                                                  P]f(a)da]
                                                           0

subject to (P3) and (A4). Since                       is weakly increasing in x and weakly

decreasing in y, y* —           m   (or the same reason as before, proving (iii).

        Observe that the choice of the subsidy z does not affect the level of

care c chosen by the injurer. Thus, if x >                                 y + (b    .
                                                                                             U), any z
x -    (y + (b   -   j3)J > 0   minimizes expected social cost by letting

i(x, y, z) — 0: and if x y +                 (b   -   U). since              i — 0 anyway, z — 0 is optimal

(but not uniquely).




                                                       -   28      -
References

Becker, Gary S      Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach," Journal p1

      Political Economy, Vol. 76, No. 2 (March-April 1968), pp. 169-217.

Becker, Gary S., and George J. Stigler, "Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and

      Compensation of Enforcers," Journal ni           Legal Studies, Vol. 3, No. I

      (January 1974), pp. 1-18.

Carr-Hill, R. A., and N. H. Steni, Crime, Ihi           Police   and Criminal Statistics

      (London: Academic Press, 1979).

Hylton, Keith N., "The Influence of Litigation Costs on Deterrence Under

      Strict Liability and Under Negligence1" International Review of Ja              n4
      Econànics. Vol. 10, No. 2 (September 1990), pp. 161-171.
Katz, Avery, "The Effect of Frivolous Lawsuits on the Settlement of

      Litigation." International Review p1 Ia           n4 Economics,    Vol. 10, No. 1

      (May 1990), pp. 3-27.

Landes, William M. , and Richard A. Posner, "The Private Enforcement of Law,"

      Journal of Legal Studies, Vol. 4. No. 1 (January 1975), pp. 1-46.

Polinsky, A. Mitchell, "Private Versus Public Enforcement of Fines." Journal

      p1 Lesal   Studies,   Vol. 9, No. 1 (January 1980), pp. 105-127.

Polinsky, A. Mitchell, "Detrebling versus Decoupling Antitrust Damages:

      Lessons from the Theory of Enforcement," Georgetown Law Jouttal, Vol.

      74, No. 4 (April 1986), pp. 1231-1236.

Polinsky, A. Mitchell, and Daniel L. Rubinfeld, "The Welfare Implications of

      Costly Litigation for the Level of Liability," Journal of Legal Studies,

      Vol. 17, No. 1 (January 1988), pp. 151-164.

Polinsky, A, Mitchell, and Steven Shavell, "Legal Error, Litigation, and the

      Inentive to Obey the Law,"      Journal        f , Economics,      and Organization,


                                        -   29   -
      Vol. 5, No. 1 (Spring 1989). pp. 99-108.

Salop, Steven C., and Lawrence J. White, 'Economic Analysis of Private

      Antitrusc Litigation,' Georgetown Law Journal, Vol. 74, No. 4 (April

      1986), pp. 1001-1064.

Schwartz, Warren F., "An Overview of the Economics of Antitrust

      Enforcement," Georgetown La! Journal, Vol. 68, No. 5 (June 1980), pp.

      1075-1102.

Schwartz, Warren F., Private Enforcement f       Antitrust 1a3j: An

      Economic Critioue (Washington D.C.: American Enterprise Institute,

      1981).

Shavell, Steven, Economic Analysis 21 Accident L& (Cambridge: Harvard

     University Press, 1987).

Spence, A, Michael, "Consumer Misperceptions, Product Failure and Producer

     Liability," Review 21 Econonic Studies, Vol. 94, No. 3 (October 1977),

     pp. 561-572.




                                      30 -
